--- page 1 ---
Summary Guide for
Asthma Management
and Prevention
For Adults, Adolescents and Children 6–11 Years
Summary Guide for
Asthma Management
and Prevention
For Adults, Adolescents and Children 6–11 Years
A Summary Guide for Health Professionals  |  Updated 2024 
Based On The Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention
©2024 Global Initiative for Asthma 
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 2 ---
A Summary Guide for Health Professionals  |  Updated 2024 
Based On The Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention
©2024 Global Initiative for Asthma 
GINA Science Committee
Chair: Helen Reddel, MBBS PhD
GINA Board of Directors
Chair: Arzu Yorgancioğlu, MD
GINA Dissemination Working Group
Chair: Mark L Levy,  MBChB
GINA Program
Rebecca Decker, BS, MSJ
Kristi Rurey, AS
Suggested citation: Global Initiative for Asthma. Asthma management and prevention for adults, adolescents and children 
6–11 years (2024). A summary guide for healthcare providers. Published December 2024. Available from: ginasthma.org
This summary guide is a summary of the Global Strategy for 
Asthma Management and Prevention 2024 Update 2024
(the full 2024 GINA Report). The full report (available from ginasthma.org/reports) contains the references for statements 
about medical evidence.
More GINA resources are available from ginasthma.org.
The reader acknowledges that this report is intended as an evidence-based strategy for asthma diagnosis and
management, for the use of health professionals and policy-makers. It is based, to the best of our knowledge, on current best evidence 
and medical knowledge and practice at the date of publication. When assessing and treating patients, health professionals are strongly 
advised to use their own professional judgment, and to take into account local and national regulations and guidelines. GINA cannot 
be held liable or responsible for inappropriate health care associated with the use of this document, including any use which is not in 
accordance with applicable local or national regulations or guidelines.
2024 Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention
For Adults, Adolescents and Children 6–11 Years
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 3 ---
3
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Table of Contents
Abbreviations  ..........................................................................................................................................................  4
Introduction  .............................................................................................................................................................  5
Asthma facts  ...........................................................................................................................................................  6
Definitions  ...............................................................................................................................................................  6
Diagnosing asthma  .................................................................................................................................................  7
Assessing asthma  ................................................................................................................................................... 11
Managing asthma: general principles  .....................................................................................................................  15
Choosing asthma medication for adults and adolescents  ......................................................................................  
 21
Choosing asthma medication for children 6–11 years  ............................................................................................  29
Managing asthma in specific populations or contexts  ............................................................................................  
 34
Managing asthma exacerbations  ............................................................................................................................  36
Reference tables  .....................................................................................................................................................  41
Acknowledgements  .................................................................................................................................................  49
Tables and Figures
Figure 1. Diagnosing asthma in clinical practice (adults, adolescents and children 6–11 years)  ...........................  7
Table 1. Criteria for asthma diagnosis (adults, adolescents and children 6–11 years)  ...........................................  8
Table 2. Assessment of asthma control in adults, adolescents and children 6–11 years  .......................................  12
Figure 2. Investigating asthma in a patient who has poor symptom control or exacerbations despite treatment  ..  14
Figure 3. Choosing the best inhaler with the patient  ...............................................................................................  17
Figure 4. The asthma management cycle of shared decision-making  ...................................................................  18
Table 3. Suggested initial treatment for adults and adolescents with asthma  ........................................................  22
Figure 5. Treatment steps for adults and adolescents  ............................................................................................  24
Figure 6. Track 1 (preferred) treatment Steps 1–4 for adults and adolescents  ......................................................  26
Figure 7. Track 2 (alternative) treatment Steps 1–4 for adults and adolescents  ....................................................  27
Table 4. Suggested initial treatment for children with asthma  ................................................................................  30
Figure 8. Treatment steps for children 6–11 years  .................................................................................................  32
Figure 9. Management of asthma exacerbations in primary care  ..........................................................................  39
Table 5. List of asthma medication classes and medicines  ....................................................................................  41
Table 6.  Low, medium and high daily metered doses of inhaled corticosteroids  ...................................................  47
Table 7.  Anti-inflammatory relievers (AIR) and MART– recommended inhalers and doses  ..................................  48
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 4 ---
4
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Abbreviations
COPD 
COVID-19 
DPI 
FEV1 
FVC 
GERD 
HIV/AIDS 
ICS 
ICS-LABA 
LABA 
LAMA 
LMICs 
LTRA 
PEF 
pMDI 
SABA 
Anti-inflammatory reliever (combination of ICS and a bronchodilator)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Coronavirus disease due to SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus
Dry-powder inhaler
Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (measured by spirometry) Forced 
vital capacity
Gastroesophageal re lux disease
Human immunode iciency virus/acquired immunode iciency syndrome 
Inhaled corticosteroid
Combination of an inhaled corticosteroid and a long-acting beta2-agonist 
Long-acting beta2-agonist
Long-acting muscarinic antagonist
Low- and middle-income countries
Leukotriene receptor antagonist
Maintenance-and-reliever therapy with combination ICS-formoterol
Peak expiratory flow
Pressurized metered-dose inhaler
Short-acting beta2-agonist
AIR
MART
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 5 ---
5
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Introduction
Asthma is a serious global health problem.
Approximately 300 million people around the world have asthma. It is becoming more prevalent in many economically 
developing countries.
Asthma is a growing problem for patients, communities and healthcare systems. It interferes with people’s work, education 
and family life, especially when children have asthma. Around the world, asthma still kills people, including young people. 
Approximately 96% of people who die from asthma are in low-income or middle-income countries.
The Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) was established to increase awareness about asthma among healthcare
providers, public health authorities and communities, to improve medical care for people with asthma, and to help prevent 
asthma. GINA works with many people around the world to achieve these goals. GINA contributors are listed on page 49.
GINA publishes information and recommendations on asthma care, based on the latest medical evidence.
GINA also promotes international collaboration on asthma research.
The Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention (the GINA Report) provides comprehensive information 
on asthma management, which can be adapted for local healthcare systems and for individual patients. It is based on 
strong scientific evidence and provides practical advice for healthcare providers. The GINA
  Report is updated every year, 
based on a systematic review of new medical evidence (original research and systematic reviews).
 
The full 2024 GINA Report and other resources are available from ginasthma.org/reports.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 6 ---
6
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Asthma Facts
Asthma is a common chronic (long-term) disease. It causes respiratory symptoms and can restrict people’s activity. 
Many people with asthma have infrequent symptoms, but some have frequent or severe symptoms. Asthma can be a 
substantial problem for families and communities.
Asthma can be serious. People with asthma can have exacerbations (also called flare-ups or asthma attacks), which 
can be mild or severe. Severe asthma exacerbations require urgent health care and can cause death. 
Asthma can be treated effectively. Most patients can achieve good long-term control of their asthma with treatment 
that includes inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). ‘Well-controlled asthma’ means that the person does not have serious asthma 
exacerbations, they do not have troublesome asthma symptoms during the day or night, they have normal lung function or 
almost normal lung function, and they are able to lead active lives, including exercise.
All adults, adolescents and children aged 6–11 years should receive treatment that includes ICS. These medicines 
greatly reduce the frequency and severity of asthma symptoms, the risk of exacerbations, and the risk of death from
asthma.
Asthma treatment should be carefully selected for each patient. Healthcare providers should consider each person’s 
level of symptom control, their risk factors for exacerbations, and their type of asthma (‘phenotype’). They should also
consider the effectiveness and safety of the available medications, the cost to the payer or patient, and their
environmental impact, and whether the patient can use the inhaler correctly. If more than one suitable inhaler is available, 
the patient should participate in choosing.
Definitions
Asthma: a chronic (long-term) respiratory disease with many variations (phenotypes), usually characterized by chronic 
airway inflammation. Asthma causes respiratory symptoms that get better or worse at different times. Symptoms include
wheezing, difficult breathing, chest tightness and cough. These symptoms can be mild or severe, frequent or infrequent. 
When a person with asthma has symptoms, the flow of air out of their lungs is reduced. It is difficult to breathe out
because the airways become narrower (bronchoconstriction), the airway walls become thicker, and there is more mucus. 
In people with untreated asthma, expiratory airflow decreases more often and much more than in people without asthma.
Triggers: anything that can cause asthma symptoms, or make symptoms worse. Triggers include viral respiratory
infections, allergens in the air at home or work (for example, house dust mite, pets, pollens, or cockroach particles),
tobacco smoke, exercise, and stress. These are more likely to cause asthma symptoms when asthma is not already
controlled by treatment. Some medicines (for example, beta-blockers) can cause asthma symptoms or exacerbations.
In some patients, aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs cause asthma symptoms or exacerbations.
Asthma exacerbation (also called asthma flare-up or asthma attack): acute or sub-acute (sudden or gradual) worsening 
in symptoms (shortness of breath, cough, wheezing, or chest tightness) and lung function, compared with the person’s 
usual condition. Exacerbations are often triggered by viral upper respiratory tract infection, exposure to pollen or pollution, 
or poor adherence to ICS treatment, but they can also occur in people without any of these risk factors. Severe
exacerbations can be fatal, even in people with infrequent symptoms. The risk of severe exacerbations is greatly reduced 
by taking ICS-containing treatment.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 7 ---
7
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Diagnosing Asthma
Asthma has two defining features (Figure 1, Table 1) : 
 • A history of typical respiratory symptoms that are variable, meaning that they are sometimes more frequent and   
   more severe than at other times, AND
 • V ariable expiratory airflow limitation. However, in people with asthma for many years, airflow limitation may   
   become permanent.
Symptoms can include wheeze, difficult breathing, a feeling of tightness in the chest, and cough.
Physical examination is often normal. Wheezing may be heard, especially during forced expiration.
GINA 2024 – DIAGNOSTIC FLOW-CHART
Treat for asthma with  
ICS-containing treatment 
See Boxes 4-5 & 4-11
Treat for alternative 
diagnosis
Refer for higher 
level advice
If other diagnoses are  
unlikely, treat empirically with 
ICS-containing treatment  
(Boxes 4-5 & 4-11)
See Boxes 1-3 and 1-4  
for diagnostic approach in 
patients already on ICS
Repeat during 
symptoms 
or consider 
additional tests 
(Box 1-2)
YES
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
NO
Patient with chronic or  
recurrent respiratory symptoms
Are symptoms typical 
of asthma?
Detailed history/examination
Do history/examination 
support diagnosis of asthma?
Is patient already taking 
ICS treatment? 
Does the patient have  
severely uncontrolled 
respiratory symptoms/ 
signs? (see Box 9-4) 
Is spirometry or PEF  
available and feasible? 
Perform lung function  
test(s) as in Box 1-2, e.g. 
spirometry or PEF before 
 and after bronchodilator
Is variable expiratory airflow 
limitation confirmed?
Review response in 
1-3 months, including PEF
or spirometry if available
Have symptoms (and
lung function if available) 
improved?
Further history and tests for 
alternative diagnoses
Is alternative diagnosis 
confirmed?
ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; PEF: peak expiratory flow. Box numbers refer to the full 2024 GINA Report.
FIGURE 1. Diagnosing asthma in clinical practice (adults, adolescents and children 6–11 years)
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 8 ---
8
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
TABLE 1. Criteria for asthma diagnosis (adults, adolescents and children 6–11 years)
The diagnosis of asthma should be confirmed, and the evidence should be documented in the patient's medical
record. To confirm the diagnosis of asthma, there should be a history of typical variable respiratory symptoms and
evidence of variable expiratory airflow limitation (current or previous). If patients are already taking ICS treatment,
additional tests may be needed to confirm the diagnosis of asthma (see page 9 and GINA 2024 Box 1-4).
1. A history of variable respiratory symptoms
Typical asthma symptoms are wheeze, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and/or cough.
These features support the diagnosis of asthma:
• The person’s symptoms vary in frequency and intensity.
• Symptoms often occur or worsen at night or when the person wakes up.
• Symptoms are often triggered by exercise, laughter, allergens, or cold air.
• Symptoms often occur or worsen when the person has a viral respiratory infection.
2. Evidence of variable expiratory airflow limitation
Any of these features indicates excessive variability in expiratory lung function:
• Significant bronchodilator responsiveness (also called reversibility) measured with spirometry by 
comparing FEV1 before and after inhaled bronchodilator(a) (or PEF if spirometry not available)(b) (d)
Adults: FEV1 or FVC increases by ≥12% and by ≥200 mL from the pre-bronchodilator value (or PEF increases by ≥20%) 
Children: FEV1 increases by ≥12% of the predicted value (or PEF increases by ≥15%)
• Excessive average daily variability in PEF over 2 weeks(c)
Adults: >10%
Children: >13%
• Significant response to ICS treatment for 4 weeks
Adults: FEV1 or FVC increases by ≥12% and by ≥200 mL (or PEF increases by ≥20%(b)) from measurements recorded     
            before ICS treatment started
Children: FEV1 increases by ≥12% of the predicted value (or PEF increases by ≥15%)(b)
• Positive bronchial challenge test(e)
• Excessive variation in lung function between visits(f)
Adults:
 FEV1 changes between visits by ≥12% and by ≥200 mL (or PEF† by ≥20%)
Children: FEV1 changes between visits by ≥12% (or PEF by ≥15%)(g)
FEV1: forced expiratory volume in 1 second measured by spirometry; FVC: forced vital capacity measured by spirometry;
PEF: peak expiratory flow
Notes:
a. Measure change by comparing spirometry 10–15 minutes before and after 200-400 mcg salbutamol (albuterol). Responsiveness is more likely to
be significant if bronchodilators are withheld before test: short-acting beta2 agonists for ≥4 hours, formoterol or salmeterol for ≥24 hours, vilanterol or
indacaterol for ≥48 hours.
b. PEF is less reliable than spirometry, but can be used if spirometry is not available.
c. To calculate average daily variability:
1. Measure PEF morning and night for 1–2 weeks using same PEF meter (each time, measure PEF 3 times and record only the highest).
2. Calculate daily variability each day: (difference between morning and evening PEF) divided by ([morning PEF plus evening PEF] divided by 2).
3. Add daily variability scores for all days and divide by number of days.
d. In a person with asthma, bronchodilator response may not be present during a viral respiratory infection.
e. Standardized challenge with methacholine, hyperventilation, hypertonic saline, mannitol, or exercise
f. Good specificity but poor sensitivity for the diagnosis of asthma
g. Use the same peak flow meter and record highest of three readings each time.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 9 ---
9
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
A previous diagnosis of asthma should be confirmed 
In primary care, many patients (25–35%) with a diagnosis of asthma may not actually have asthma. If the criteria for 
asthma (Table 1) have not already been recorded, the patient’s asthma diagnosis should be confirmed by objective tests. 
If the patient does not show variable expiratory airflow limitation, consider other investigations. For example, if 
lung function is normal, repeat the bronchodilator response test when the patient has symptoms, or after stopping 
bronchodilators, such as SABA or long-acting beta
2-agonist (LABA), for the following times before the test (if safe):
 • No short-acting beta2-agonist (SABA) for more than 4 hours
 • No ICS-LABA  combination for more than 24 hours, if prescribed for twice daily use (e.g. ICS formoterol,
   ICS-salmeterol)
 • No ICS-LABA  combination for more than 36 hours, if prescribed for once daily use (e.g. ICS vilanterol,
   ICS-indacaterol)
 • No long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) for 36–48 hours.
How to confirm the diagnosis of asthma in patients taking ICS 
If the patient is already taking medication that contains ICS and has frequent symptoms, and their lung function is less 
than 70% predicted, consider increasing treatment to the next step (pages 23 and 30), then measure lung function again
3 months later. If symptoms and lung function improve, this confirms the diagnosis of asthma. 
If the patient has few symptoms and their lung function is greater than 70% predicted, consider stepping down
ICS-containing treatment before measuring lung function again. Ensure that the patient has a written asthma action plan 
(page 21) and monitor asthma carefully.
For more information about confirming the diagnosis of asthma, see full 2024 GINA Report Box 1-4 and Box 1-5.
Diagnosing asthma in specific populations 
Patients with persistent cough but no other respiratory symptoms: In some children and adults, cough may be the 
only symptom of asthma, and the patient may not have bronchodilator responsiveness. Cough-variant asthma is
characterized by cough and airway hyperresponsiveness detected by bronchial provocation testing. It should be treated 
with ICS-containing medication, like other asthma phenotypes. Other common causes of persistent dry cough include 
chronic upper airway cough syndrome (‘postnasal drip’), chronic sinusitis, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), 
treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, inducible laryngeal obstruction (often called vocal cord 
dysfunction), and eosinophilic bronchitis.
Occupational asthma and work-aggravated (work-exacerbated) asthma: If a patient’s asthma started in adulthood, 
ask if there are allergens or irritants in the air at work or at home, and whether their asthma is better when they are away 
from these places. The diagnosis must be confirmed with objective tests. The patient should be referred to a specialist (if 
available) without delay. The cause must be identified, and the patient’s exposure to the cause must be stopped immediately.
Pregnant women: Ask all pregnant women, and those planning pregnancy, whether they have asthma. Advise pregnant 
women with asthma that it is important to use ICS-containing treatment during pregnancy for their baby’s health, as well 
as their own health. If the diagnosis of asthma has not been objectively confirmed, start or continue ICS-containing
treatment, and wait until after delivery to confirm the diagnosis. Do not stop or reduce ICS-containing treatment, and do 
not do bronchial provocation testing during pregnancy.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 10 ---
10
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Older adults: Asthma may be under-diagnosed in older adults due to poor perception of airflow limitation, the belief that 
breathlessness is normal in old age, lack of fitness, or reduced activity. Breathlessness due to heart failure or ischemic 
heart disease can also be mistakenly attributed to asthma. If patients have a history of smoking or exposure to biomass 
fuel, consider the possibility of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) as a co-occurring or alternative diagnosis.
Patients with persistent airflow limitation: If a patient has airflow limitation that does not respond to bronchodilator 
(Table 1), try to distinguish between asthma with persistent airflow limitation and COPD, by analyzing their medical history, 
pattern of symptoms, and past medical records. If a patient has clinical features consistent with both asthma and COPD, 
or the diagnosis is uncertain, refer them to a specialist.
COPD: Patients can have asthma and COPD at the same time. This is called “asthma+COPD” or “asthma-COPD
overlap”. It is more common among smokers and the elderly. Asthma+COPD is not a specific disease and probably has 
several causes. Asthma+COPD has worse outcomes than asthma or COPD alone.
Patients with a diagnosis of COPD who also have asthma (or a history of asthma) should be treated with ICS-containing 
treatment. Their risk of hospitalization or death is higher if they receive only bronchodilators.
Diagnosis of asthma in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs): In some LMICs the differential diagnosis of 
asthma often includes other endemic respiratory disease such as tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS-associated lung diseases, and 
parasitic or fungal lung diseases. Practical strategies for asthma diagnosis, based on history and clinical findings, have 
been developed and tested in LMICs. These are less precise than diagnosis based on spirometry, but they help identify 
patients with probable asthma who need treatment.
If spirometry is unavailable or unaffordable, peak expiratory flow (PEF) meters can be used to detect variable expiratory 
airflow limitation to confirm the diagnosis of asthma (Figure 1, Table 1, pages 7 & 8). To avoid underdiagnosis and
overdiagnosis of asthma in LMICs, health workers need much greater access to spirometry and PEF meters, and need 
training to use them.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 11 ---
11
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Assessing asthma
Assess each person’s asthma at every visit. The most important times to reassess asthma are after an exacerbation, and 
when the patient needs a new prescription for asthma medication. Also assess each person’s asthma at least once every 
year, even if they have no symptoms.
How to assess asthma control 
Asthma control means how much asthma is affecting the person’s health or their risk of future health problems, on their 
current asthma treatment.
Asthma control includes both:
 • Control of asthma symptoms (Table 2A, page 12) – assess symptom control at every opportunity. People with   
   poorly controlled asthma symptoms have a high risk of exacerbations. Symptoms are also a burden for patients.
 • Control of risk factors (Table 2B, page 12) – identify features that increase the patient’s future risk of having
   exacerbations (flare-ups, attacks), loss of lung function, or medication side-effects. Assess risk factors at
   diagnosis and then periodically , including after the patient has had an exacerbation.
Lung function: Measure lung function with spirometry (or with a PEF meter, if spirometry is not possible). Measure lung 
function before starting ICS treatment, 3–6 months later, and then at least once every 1–2 years. Measure lung function 
more often in people with a high risk of exacerbations and people with risk factors for lung function decline (Table 2B).
If a patient has few symptoms despite poor lung function, or good lung function despite frequent symptoms, investigate for 
underlying conditions.
Treatment issues: Document the patient’s current treatment. Ask about side-effects. Check inhaler technique by
watching the patient use their inhaler. Check adherence to treatment by asking the patient how often they take their
medicines and whether they have any problems. Check that the patient has a written asthma action plan (page 21).
Ask the patient about their goals and preferences for asthma treatment.
Assess multimorbidity: Check whether any other medical conditions are causing symptoms, affecting quality of life, or 
making asthma harder to control (for example, rhinitis, rhinosinusitis, gastroesophageal reflux disease, obesity, obstructive 
sleep apnea, or depression and anxiety).
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 12 ---
12
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
TABLE 2. Assessment of asthma control in adults, adolescents and children 6–11 years
A. Assess symptom control 
In the past 4 weeks, has the patient had:
Daytime symptoms more than twice/week?
Any night waking due to asthma?
SABA* reliever needed more than twice/week?
Any activity limitation due to asthma?
*Only for patients using SABA reliever (not ICS-formoterol reliever). Do not include SABA taken before exercise.
B. Assess risk factors
B.1. Risk factors for exacerbations
Uncontrolled asthma symptoms (important risk factor)
Other factors that increase risk of exacerbations, even if the person has few asthma symptoms
• Over-use of SABA (≥3 x 200-dose canisters/year)†
• Inadequate ICS (no ICS, poor adherence, incorrect inhaler technique)
• Medical conditions (obesity, chronic rhinosinusitis, GERD, confirmed food allergy) or pregnancy
• Exposure to allergens (if sensitized), smoking, vaping, air pollution
• Major psychological or socioeconomic problems
• Poor lung function (especially if FEV
1 <60% predicted), large FEV1 response to bronchodilator
• Type 2 inflammatory markers (higher blood eosinophil level, high FeNO in adults with allergic asthma on ICS)
• Severe exacerbation in past year or lifetime history of intubation or ICU admission for asthma
B.2. Risk factors for developing persistent airflow limitation
• History of preterm birth, low birth weight and rapid infant weight gain, frequent productive cough
• Lack of ICS treatment in patient with a history of severe exacerbations
• Exposure to tobacco smoke or noxious chemicals
• Low initial FEV
1
• High eosinophil levels in sputum or blood
B.3. Risk factors for side-effects of medication
• Systemic effects: frequent OCS, long-term high-dose and/or potent ICS, P450 inhibitors‡
• Local effects: high-dose and/or potent ICS, poor inhaler technique
Level of asthma symptom control
Well
controlled
Partly
controlled
Uncontrolled
None
of these
1–2
of these
3–4 
of these
}
FeNO: fractional exhaled nitric oxide; FEV1: Forced expiratory volume in 1 second; GERD: gastroesophageal reflux disease;
ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; OCS: oral corticosteroids; SABA: short-acting beta2-agonist; ICU: intensive care unit
† Also increases risk of asthma death, especially if very high use (≥1 canister per month)
‡ Cytochrome P450 inhibitors such as ritonavir, ketoconazole, itraconazole may increase systemic exposure to some types of ICS and 
some long-acting beta2-agonists
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 13 ---
13
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
How to assess asthma severity 
Asthma severity usually means the level of treatment needed to control a person’s symptoms and to prevent
exacerbations. Severity can be assessed after several months of treatment.
Difficult-to-treat asthma is asthma that is uncontrolled despite prescribing of medium- or high-dose ICS with a second 
controller (usually a LABA) or with maintenance OCS, or that requires high-dose treatment to maintain good symptom 
control and reduce the risk of exacerbations. It does not mean a ‘difficult patient’. In many cases, asthma may appear to 
be difficult to treat because of modifiable factors such as incorrect inhaler technique, poor adherence, smoking or
comorbidities, or because the diagnosis is incorrect.
Asthma is severe if it is still uncontrolled despite good adherence with high-dose ICS-LABA and management of
contributory factors, or if the patient needs high-dose ICS-LABA to maintain good asthma control.
Asthma is mild if it can be well controlled with ICS-formoterol taken as needed (page 26), or with low-dose ICS taken 
daily. 
However, the term “mild asthma” is often understood or used differently than this in the community. Many people with 
infrequent asthma symptoms think that their asthma is mild and that they do not need ICS treatment because they have 
not had any severe attacks. Therefore, you should explain that people with infrequent or mild asthma symptoms can have 
severe or fatal exacerbations if they are treated only with SABA. Explain that treatment with low-dose ICS or as-needed 
low-dose ICS-formoterol reduces the risk of severe exacerbations by half to two-thirds, compared with SABA alone.
How to investigate uncontrolled asthma 
Most patients can achieve good asthma control with treatment that contains ICS, but some patients do not. In these
cases, look for the cause (Figure 2) before changing the treatment. Always check inhaler technique and adherence first.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 14 ---
14
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
FIGURE 2. Investigating asthma in a patient who has poor symptom control or exacerbations  
           despite treatment
GERD: gastroesophageal reflux disease; ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; NSAID: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; Track 1: see page 26.
Box numbers refer to full GINA 2024 report.
• W atch patient use their inhaler(s), check against inhaler checklist.
Show correct method, and recheck, up to 3 times. Re-check each visit.
• Have empathic discussion to identify poor adherence with maintenance treatment, e.g. “Many
patients don’t use their inhaler as prescribed. In the last 4 weeks, how many days a week have
you taken it?” (0 days, 1, 2, 3 etc) and/or: “Do you find it easier to remember your inhaler in the
morning or the evening?”  Ask about beliefs, cost of medications, and refill frequency.
Watch patient using 
their inhaler
Discuss adherence and 
barriers to use
• If no evidence of variable airflow limitation on spirometry or other testing (Box 1-2), consider
halving ICS dose and repeating lung function after 2–3 weeks (Boxes 1-4, 1-5); check
patient has action plan. Consider referring for challenge test.
Confirm the diagnosis 
of asthma
If possible, remove  
potential risk factors
Assess and manage 
comorbidities
• For adults/adolescents, switch to GINA Track 1, if available, to reduce exacerbations and
simplify regimen (Boxes 4-3, 4-6)
• Check for risk factors or inducers such as smoking, beta-blockers or NSAIDs, or occupational
or domestic allergen exposure (Box 2-2), and address as possible (Box 3-5).
• Check for and manage comorbidities (e.g. rhinitis, obesity, GERD, obstructive sleep apnea,
depression/anxiety) that may be contributing to symptoms or exacerbations
• Consider short-term (3–6 months) step-up to next treatment level or alternative option
on present level (Boxes 4-6, 4-12).
• Use shared decision-making, and balance potential benefits and risks
Consider treatment 
step-up
Refer for expert advice
• If asthma still uncontrolled after 3–6 months on high dose ICS-LABA, or with ongoing
risk factors, refer for expert advice
• Refer earlier than 6 months if asthma very severe or difficult to manage, or if doubts
about diagnosis, or if occupational asthma is suspected.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 15 ---
15
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Managing asthma: general principles
The long-term goals of asthma management are to control symptoms (long-term, not just in recent days/weeks) and to 
prevent exacerbations, airway damage, and medication side-effects. The aim is to achieve the best possible outcomes 
for the patient. Also ask the patient about their own goals and preferences for their asthma treatment.
Children with pre-school wheezing often have clinical remission of these symptoms by school-age or adolescence, but 
this does not mean it is cured, as it often recurs. Risk factors for persistence of childhood asthma include allergy features, 
a family history of asthma or allergy, later onset of symptoms, wheezing without colds, and maternal smoking or tobacco 
smoke exposure.
Some patients with severe asthma demonstrate clinical remission while taking biologic therapy. Predictors of remission in 
these patients include fewer symptoms, better lung function, little multimorbidity, earlier asthma onset, and no or lower 
maintenance OCS use at baseline.
Essential asthma medicines 
Make sure that every patient’s medication includes ICS (or a combination medication that contains ICS) to reduce 
their risk of serious exacerbations, even if symptoms are infrequent (see page 21 for options in adults and adolescents 
and page 29 for options in children 6–11 years).
ICS-containing medication should be started as soon as possible after diagnosis, for these reasons: 
• Any patient can have severe exacerbations, even those whose asthma seems to be mild.
• ICS-containing medication markedly reduces risk of asthma hospitalizations and death. It is very effective in
preventing severe exacerbations, reducing symptoms, improving lung function, and preventing exercise-induced
bronchoconstriction, even in patients with mild asthma.
• Early treatment with low-dose ICS is associated with better lung function than starting when symptoms have
been present for more than 2–4 years.
• Patients who have a severe exacerbation when not taking ICS have worse long-term lung function than those
who have started ICS.
Every patient needs a reliever containing a rapid-acting bronchodilator to use whenever they have asthma symptoms. 
The reliever can be either ICS-formoterol, ICS-SABA or SABA. Low-dose ICS-formoterol is the preferred reliever because 
it reduces the risk of severe exacerbations, compared with treatment regimens with SABA
 reliever (see page 21 for 
options in adults and adolescents and page 29 for options in children 6–1
1 years).
For safety, GINA recommends that asthma should not be treated solely with as-needed SABA. Most patients with 
asthma have airway inflammation, even if they have only intermittent or infrequent symptoms. SABA-only treatment is 
associated with increased risk of exacerbations, worse lung function, and increased risk of death due to asthma. Regular 
use of SABA increases allergic responses and airway inflammation, and reduces the bronchodilator response to SABA. 
Over-use of SABA (for example, ≥3 x 200-dose canisters dispensed in a year) is associated with an increased risk of 
severe exacerbations. Dispensing of ≥12 SABA canisters (possibly less) in a year is associated with increased risk of 
death due to asthma. Home use of nebulized SABA is also associated with an increased risk of asthma death.
For more information on asthma medicines see the list of asthma medication classes and medicines on page 41.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 16 ---
16
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Principles of selecting treatment 
There are different treatment recommendations for adults/adolescents (page 21) and children aged 6–11 years (page 29). 
See the full 2024 GINA Report for recommendations about children aged 5 years and younger.
For each age group, GINA provides “preferred” treatment options and “alternative” treatment options. Preferred asthma 
treatments are the treatments that were most effective in clinical trials, particularly for reducing exacerbations, and/or are 
more convenient for patients.
To choose the best treatment for an individual patient, also consider their risk factors, their other medical conditions, the 
type of asthma they have, their personal goals for their asthma treatment, their ability to use different types of inhalers 
correctly, whether they are likely to adhere to treatment, the cost of medication, and its environmental impact.
GINA treatment options for each age group are shown as “steps”. The step number indicates a level of intensity: Step 5 
has more medicines and higher doses than Step 1. The best step for an individual patient, at any time, depends on
current asthma control (page 12) and on asthma severity (page 13). T
 reatment can be stepped down or up.
Principles of choosing and using inhalers 
Inhaled medicines are essential for effective asthma management. Make sure each patient uses their inhaler effectively. 
Incorrect use is very common. It contributes to poor symptom control and exacerbations, and increases the risk of local 
adverse effects. 
Choose the medication and the most appropriate device for the patient before prescribing (Figure 3). Consider physical 
problems such as arthritis, the patient’s skills, and cost. Patients using ICS in a pressurized metered-dose inhaler should 
use a spacer. Consider the environmental impact of the inhaler.
Train patients to use inhalers correctly. Obtain a checklist for each type of inhaler you prescribe, and learn correct
technique so you can show patients.
Check inhaler technique at every opportunity. Ask the patient to show you how they use the inhaler, and use a checklist 
for the specific device to identify any errors.
Correct errors by physically demonstrating the correct technique, paying attention to incorrect steps. Check the patient’s 
technique again, up to 2–3 times if necessary.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 17 ---
17
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
FIGURE 3. Choosing the best inhaler with the patient
pMDI: pressurized metered-dose inhaler
For this patient, which is the right class of medication? 
Consider exacerbation risk reduction, symptom control,. adverse effects 
If different reliever and controller inhalers are needed, consider 
questions below for both 
Which of these 
inhalers can the 
patient use correctly 
after training? 
Test technique often: 
faulty technique + more 
symptoms. more urgent 
health care, and greater 
environmental burden 
For these 
medications, 
which inhalers are 
currently available 
to the patient? 
Consider local availability, 
access. number of inhalers 
and cost to patient (higher 
cost+ non-adherence+ 
more exacerbations) 
OPTIMAL 
INHALER 
SELECTION 
Safest and best 
for the patient and 
for the planet 
Follow-up: Is 
the patient satisfied 
with the medication(s) 
and inhaler(s)? 
Consider all of 
above steps 
Which of these 
inhalers has the 
lowest environmental 
impact? 
Consider manufacturing, 
propellant (for pMDls). 
and potential for 
recycling 
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 18 ---
18
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Assess, adjust treatment, review response  
To minimize risk and control symptoms, assess each patient’s asthma, adjust their treatment, and review the response. 
Repeat this cycle continuously (Figure 4).
Asthma control can change, so ICS-containing treatment is periodically adjusted by the healthcare provider or patient/
parent/caregiver. Treatment can be increased day-to-day, short term or for several months. Treatment can be reduced 
when good asthma control has been achieved and maintained for 2–3 months (see page 28 and page 34). 
Every time the treatment is changed, reassess symptom control, exacerbations, side-effects, and lung function, and ask 
the patient (or parent/caregiver) if they are satisfied with their treatment.
In general, asthma should be reviewed 1–3 months after starting treatment, then every 3–12 months (every 4–6 weeks 
during pregnancy). After an exacerbation, review within 1 week. The frequency of review also depends on the patient’s 
previous symptom control, their risk factors, their response to initial treatment, and their ability and willingness to manage 
asthma using an action plan.
Review asthma frequently if a patient has risk factors for a fatal exacerbation, such as other relevant medical conditions, 
previous near-fatal asthma (ever), a very severe exacerbation in the last year, currently using or recently stopped oral 
corticosteroids, over-use of SABA, especially if dispensed more than 1 canister (200 doses) per month.
FIGURE 4. The asthma management cycle of shared decision-making
Symptoms 
Exacerbations
Side-effects
Lung function
Comorbidities
Patient (and parent/
caregiver) satisfaction
Confirmation of diagnosis if necessary 
Symptom control & modifiable  
risk factors
Comorbidities
Inhaler technique & adherence
Patient (and parent/caregiver) preferences 
and goals
Treatment of modifiable risk factors 
and comorbidities
Non-pharmacological strategies 
Asthma medications including ICS
Education & skills training, action plan
ASSESS
 
REVIEW
ADJUST
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 19 ---
19
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Managing risk factors 
Treat risk factors (Table 2, page 12), including other medical conditions that interfere with asthma or asthma treatment.
There is consistent, high-quality evidence that these strategies can reduce the risk of exacerbations:
• Guided self-management. Teach patients to monitor their symptoms and/or PEF, give them a written asthma 
action plan (page 21), and review asthma regularly.
• T reatment regimens that include ICS. For all patients, prescribe treatment that includes ICS. This includes 
ICS-formoterol taken as needed for asthma symptoms, ICS taken every day, or combination ICS-LABA taken 
every day (see options for adults/adolescents on pages 26–27 and options for children on page 30). For adults 
and adolescents, GINA Track 1 with ICS-formoterol reliever (page 26) reduces the risk of severe exacerbations, 
compared with using a SABA reliever.
• A voiding tobacco smoke. Advise and help patients to quit smoking/vaping, and to avoid other people’s smoke/
vapes. Advise parents not to smoke or vape in rooms or cars that children use.
• Management of conf rmed food allergy. Advise appropriate food avoidance and ensure patient has injectable 
epinephrine for anaphylaxis.
• Referral to a specialist center. If available, refer patients with severe asthma for detailed assessment and 
consideration of add-on biologic medications and/or sputum-guided treatment.
• School-based programs that include asthma self-management skills.
Non-pharmacological treatment 
In addition to medications, other therapies and strategies may help control symptoms and reduce risk (see the full 2024 
GINA Report for details).
There is consistent, high-quality evidence to support some strategies, for example:
• Advice about smoking cessation. At every visit, strongly encourage smokers to quit. Provide access to
counselling and resources. Advise parents/caregivers not to smoke in rooms or cars used by children with asthma.
• Physical activity. Encourage people with asthma to do regular physical activity for its general health benefits; it
may also slightly improve asthma control and lung function. Advise patients how to manage exercise-induced
bronchoconstriction.
• Investigation for occupational asthma. Ask all patients with adult-onset asthma about their work history.
Identify sensitizers in the workplace and remove them as soon as possible. Refer for expert advice, if available.
• Managing aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease. Always ask about previous reactions before prescribing
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, including aspirin.
Allergens may contribute to asthma symptoms in sensitized patients, but allergen avoidance is not recommended for other 
people with asthma. Allergen avoidance strategies are often complex and expensive, and there are no validated methods 
for identifying those who are likely to benefit.
Some common triggers for asthma symptoms, such as exercise and laughter, should not be avoided. Others, such as viral 
respiratory infections and stress, are difficult to avoid and must be managed when they occur.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 20 ---
20
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Check and improve adherence to asthma treatment 
Many patients do not take their asthma medications as prescribed. Poor adherence may be unintentional (for example, 
due to forgetfulness, cost, or misunderstanding) and/or intentional (for example, due to belief that the medicine is
unnecessary, fear of side-effects, cultural issues, or cost).
If ICS-containing maintenance treatment is prescribed but the patient does not take it regularly, they may be using only 
SABA reliever. SABA-only treatment results in poor symptom control and increases the risk of exacerbations.
Identify patients with adherence problems:
 • Show empathy when asking patients about their treatment use, for example: “Most patients don’t take their
   inhaler exactly as prescribed. In the last 4 weeks, how many days a week have you been taking it? 0 days a   
	 		 week, 	 or 	 1, 	 or 	 2 	 days 	 …?”, 	 or 	 “Do 	 you 	 find 	 it 	 easier 	 to 	 remember 	 your 	 inhaler 	 in 	 the 	 morning 	 or 	 night?” 
 • Check medication usage, from prescription date, inhaler date/dose counter , dispensing records.
 • Ask patients about attitudes and beliefs about asthma and medications .
Studies have shown improved adherence with these strategies:
 • Shared decision-making for medication and dose choice
 • Electronic inhaler reminders for missed doses
 • Comprehensive asthma education with home visits by asthma nurses
 • Healthcare providers reviewing feedback about their patients’  dispensing records
 • An automated voice recognition program with telephone messages triggered when refills are due or overdue
 • Direct observation of children taking maintenance asthma treatment at school.
Educate patients and caregivers about asthma 
Give patients, parents and caregivers information that they can understand clearly.
Explain:
 • Why they need long-term treatment for asthma
 • How to use the inhaler correctly
 • How to use their written asthma action plan
 • How to monitor symptoms and/or peak flow
 • Why they need regular medical review for asthma.
To manage asthma effectively, health providers and patients need to work together. When healthcare providers are trained 
to communicate well, patients with asthma may be more satisfied with their health care, be less restricted by their asthma, 
and have fewer emergency visits for asthma.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 21 ---
21
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Provide a written asthma action plan 
Give all patients (or parents/caregivers) a written asthma action plan, so they can recognize worsening asthma and act 
appropriately. The plan can be handwritten, printed, digital or pictorial – not just spoken instructions. It must be suitable
for the person’s level of asthma control, and their ability to understand health information and follow the instructions.
The written asthma action plan should include:
• The patient’s usual asthma medications
• When to increase inhaled medications and how to do this (page 36)
• When to start oral corticosteroids, if needed
• How to get urgent medical care if symptoms continue or worsen.
Action plans can be based on symptoms and/or (in adults) PEF.
Choosing asthma medication for adults and adolescents
Starting treatment 
Adults and adolescents with asthma should not be treated with SABA alone. They should all receive ICS-containing 
treatment. The optimal treatment that should be started immediately after diagnosis of asthma depends on the patient’s 
history and current symptoms (Table 3). Most adults and adolescents should start with low-dose ICS-containing treatment 
(page 47). The preferred treatment options use ICS-formoterol as the patient’s reliever, instead of SABA (page 23). This is 
called anti-inflammatory reliever therapy (AIR).
Before starting treatment:
• Record evidence for the diagnosis of asthma
• Document symptom control and risk factors
• Assess lung function, when possible
• Train the patient to use the inhaler correctly, and check their technique
• Schedule a follow-up visit.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 22 ---
22
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
TABLE 3. Suggested initial treatment for adults and adolescents with asthma
Clinical features Preferred (GINA Track 1) Alternatives (GINA Track 2)
Infrequent asthma symptoms (for 
example, 1–2 days/week or less)
Low-dose ICS-formoterol taken as 
needed
Low-dose ICS taken whenever 
SABA is taken for asthma
symptoms (combination or separate 
inhalers)
Asthma symptoms less than 3–5 
days/week, with normal or mildly 
reduced lung function
Low-dose ICS-formoterol taken as 
needed
Regular daily low-dose ICS, plus 
SABA as needed
Asthma symptoms most days,
waking due to asthma once a week 
or more, or low lung function
Low-dose ICS-formoterol
maintenance-and-reliever therapy 
(MART)
Regular daily low-dose ICS-LABA, 
plus SABA or ICS-SABA as needed
Regular daily medium-dose ICS, 
plus SABA or ICS-SABA as needed
Daily asthma symptoms, waking 
at night with asthma once a week 
or more, with low lung function, or 
current smokers
Medium-dose ICS-formoterol MART Regular daily medium- or high-dose 
ICS-LABA, plus SABA or ICS-SABA 
as needed
Regular daily high-dose ICS plus 
SABA as needed
During acute asthma exacerbation Treat exacerbation (page 37). Start 
medium-dose ICS-formoterol MART
Treat exacerbation (page 37). Start 
regular daily medium- or high-dose 
ICS-LABA, plus SABA as needed
ICS: inhaled corticosteroids; MART: maintenance-and-reliever therapy with ICS-formoterol; SABA: short-acting beta2-agonist. See page 
48 for medications and doses for AIR/MART. See page 47 for total daily ICS doses for patients using a SABA or ICS-SABA reliever.
GINA Track 1 is preferred because it reduces the risk of severe exacerbations compared with treatment with a SABA
reliever, and it is simpler. Check local regulatory and payer criteria.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 23 ---
23
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Adjusting treatment:
treatment tracks for adults and adolescents
After the patient has started treatment, reassess asthma at every visit, adjust treatment if necessary, and review the
response to treatment. 
There are two approaches to asthma treatment for adults and adolescents (Figure 5):
 • The preferred treatment, in which the reliever is low-dose ICS-formoterol (“Track 1”, page 26). 
 • Alternative treatment regimens in which the reliever is SABA, or a combination of ICS and SABA (ICS-SABA)    
   (“Track 2”, page 27).
GINA recommends Track 1 because there is strong evidence that it reduces the risk of severe exacerbations, compared 
with Track 2, with similar symptom control. Track 1 is also simpler, because it requires only one medication and one
inhaler technique across treatment steps 1–4.
Within each track, treatment can be stepped up or down, using the same reliever at each step. A patient can switch from 
one track to another, if needed. At each step, there are also some other controller options with less evidence for efficacy 
and safety, or with specific indications.
If a patient’s asthma is not well controlled, check adherence, inhaler technique, risk factors and comorbidities first, before 
stepping up treatment or changing to a different medication at the same step. If asthma has been well controlled for 3 
months or more, consider stepping down.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 24 ---
24 Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention                                                                              © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
FIGURE 5. Treatment steps for adults and adolescents
HDM SLIT: house dust mite sublingual immunotherapy; ICS: inhaled corticosteroids; Ig: immunoglobulin; IL: interleukin; LAMA: long-acting muscarinic antagonist; 
LTRA: leukotriene receptor antagonist; OCS: oral corticosteroid; SABA: short-acting beta2-agonist; TSLP: thymic stromal lymphopoietin; *Anti-inflammatory reliever; 
†If prescribing LTRA, advise patient/caregiver about risk of neuropsychiatric adverse effects. See page 48 for information about doses of ICS-formoterol and frequency of use.
RELIEVER: As-needed ICS-SABA*, or as-needed SABA
RELIEVER: As-needed low-dose ICS-formoterol*
GINA 2024 – Adults & adolescents 
12+ years
Personalized asthma management 
Assess, Adjust, Review  
for individual patient needs Symptoms
Exacerbations
Side-effects 
Lung function
Comorbidities
Patient satisfaction
Confirmation of diagnosis if necessary 
Symptom control & modifiable  
risk factors 
Comorbidities
Inhaler technique & adherence Patient 
preferences and goals
Treatment of modifiable risk factors  
and comorbidities
Non-pharmacological strategies
Asthma medications including ICS (as below)
Education & skills training
ADJUST
REVIEW
ASSESS
TRACK 1: PREFERRED 
CONTROLLER and RELIEVER
Using ICS-formoterol as the 
reliever* reduces the risk of 
exacerbations compared with  
using a SABA reliever, and is a 
simpler regimen
Other controller options (limited 
indications, or less evidence for 
efficacy or safety – see text)
STEPS 1 – 2
As-needed-only low dose ICS-formoterol
STEP 3
Low dose 
maintenance 
ICS-formoterol
STEP 4
Medium dose 
maintenance 
ICS-formoterol
STEP 5
Add-on LAMA
Refer for assessment 
of phenotype. Consider 
high dose maintenance 
ICS-formoterol,  
± anti-IgE, anti-IL5/5R, 
anti-IL4Rα, anti-TSLP
Low dose ICS whenever SABA taken*,  
or daily LTRA†, or add HDM SLIT
Medium dose ICS, or  
add LTRA†, or add  
HDM SLIT
Add LAMA or add LTRA†  
or add HDM SLIT, or switch 
to high dose ICS-only
Add azithromycin (adults) or  
add LTRA†. As last resort 
consider adding low dose  
OCS but consider side-effects
STEP 1
Take ICS whenever 
SABA taken*
STEP 2
Low dose  
maintenance ICS
STEP 3
Low dose 
maintenance 
ICS-LABA
STEP 4
Medium/high dose 
maintenance  
ICS-LABA
STEP 5
Add-on LAMA
Refer for assessment 
of phenotype. Consider 
high dose maintenance 
ICS-LABA, ± anti-IgE,
anti-IL5/5R, anti-IL4Rα, 
anti-TSLP
TRACK 2: Alternative 
CONTROLLER and RELIEVER
Before considering a regimen  
with SABA reliever, check if the 
patient is likely to adhere to daily 
controller treatment
See GINA 
severe 
asthma guide
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 25 ---
26
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Track 1 treatment options for adults and adolescents 
In Track 1, across all steps, the patient takes low-dose ICS-formoterol whenever needed to relieve asthma symptoms
(Figure 6). Patients can also use low-dose ICS-formoterol before exercise or before or during exposure to allergens,
if needed. The same ICS-formoterol is also used for the patient’s maintenance treatment in Steps 3–5.
FIGURE 6. Track 1 (preferred) treatment Steps 1–4 for adults and adolescents
ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; SABA: short acting beta2-agonist. See page 48 for ICS-formoterol doses and frequency of use.
Steps 1–2: The recommended treatment is low-dose ICS-formoterol taken whenever needed to relieve asthma
symptoms. In clinical trials this treatment reduced the risk of emergency room visits or hospitalizations by about two-thirds 
compared with SABA alone, and by over one-third compared with low dose ICS (plus SABA as needed for asthma
symptoms), in patients who previously used SABA alone, low-dose ICS, or a leukotriene receptor antagonist.
In Steps 3–5, patients take combination ICS-formoterol as daily maintenance treatment, and they take extra doses of 
the same medication when they have asthma symptoms. This is called “maintenance-and-reliever therapy” (MART) with 
ICS-formoterol. In patients with or without a history of severe exacerbations, MART
  reduces the risk of severe
exacerbations, with a similar level of symptom control, compared with other maintenance treatments (including ICS-LABA 
and higher-dose ICS) plus as-needed SABA. (Note: ICS-LABA inhalers that do not include formoterol cannot be used as 
MART.)
Recommended doses for ICS-formoterol combinations at all steps are shown in the reference table on page 48.
See the full 2024 GINA Report for a summary of evidence supporting each option.
Step 5 options for adults and adolescents with severe asthma are shown on pages 28–29.
TRACK 1, Steps 1–4: PREFERRED CONTROLLER and RELIEVER for adults and adolescents. 
Using ICS-formoterol as an anti-inflammatory reliever (AIR), with or without maintenance ICS-formoterol, 
reduces the risk of exacerbations compared with using a SABA reliever, and is a simpler regimen, with a 
single medication across treatment steps.
STEPS 1 – 2
As-needed-only low dose 
ICS-formoterol reliever
STEP 3
Low dose maintenance  
and reliever therapy (MART) 
with ICS formoterol
STEP 4
Medium dose  
maintenance and reliever 
therapy (MART) using  
low-dose ICS-formoterol
STEP 5
Refer for expert 
assessment, 
phenotyping,  
and add-on  
treatment for  
severe asthma
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 26 ---
27
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Track 2 treatment options for adults and adolescents 
In Track 2 the reliever is as-needed SABA or ICS-SABA (Figure 7). This is an alternative approach when ICS-formoterol is 
not available. Track 2 may also be considered if a patient has stable asthma and no exacerbations with their maintenance 
ICS-containing treatment, they take it regularly, and they prefer to continue with this treatment.
FIGURE 7. Track 2 (alternative) treatment Steps 1–4 for adults and adolescents
AIR: anti-inflammatory reliever; ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; LABA: long-acting beta2-agonist;
SABA: short acting beta2-agonist. See page 47 for ICS doses.
In Step 1, the patient uses a SABA when symptoms occur and takes a low dose of ICS at the same time. This can be 
done by using a combination inhaler that contains ICS and SABA, or the patient can take a low dose of ICS immediately 
after using SABA, every time they have symptoms.
In Steps 2–5, the patient takes maintenance ICS-containing medication every day, plus SABA as needed to relieve
symptoms. In Steps 3–5, adults (≥ 18 years) can use a combination of ICS and SABA in a single inhaler  as their reliever 
(if available) instead of SABA. This reduces the risk of exacerbations, compared with using a SABA reliever.
At any step, patients can also take their reliever before exercise, if needed.
There is strong evidence that taking ICS every day, even at a low dose, substantially reduces the risks of severe
exacerbations, hospitalizations and death due to asthma, improves symptoms, and reduces exercise-induced
bronchoconstriction, compared with SABA-only treatment. Even in patients with symptoms one day per week or less,
the risk of severe exacerbations is halved, compared with using SABA alone.
Before prescribing a regimen with SABA reliever, consider whether the patient is likely to use ICS correctly. A patient with 
low adherence will be exposed to SABA-only treatment and have a higher risk of exacerbations. A maintenance-and-
reliever regimen with ICS-formoterol (T
rack 1) would be safer for such patients.
See page 47 for inhaled corticosteroid doses. See the full 2024 GINA Report for a summary of evidence supporting each option.
Note: ICS-formoterol should not be used as reliever for patients using daily ICS-LABA with a different (non-formoterol) LABA.
TRACK 2, Steps 1–4: Alternative CONTROLLER and RELIEVER for adults 
and adolescents. 
Before considering a regimen with SABA reliever, check if the patient is likely to adhere to daily ICS 
treatment. If controller and reliever are in different types of inhaler device, or if changing steps requires 
a change in device, train patient in correct inhaler technique.
STEP 1
Take ICS whenever 
SABA taken*
STEP 3
Low dose 
maintenance 
ICS-LABA
STEP 4
STEP 4
Medium/high dose 
maintenance  
ICS-LABA
STEP 5
Refer for expert 
assessment, 
phenotyping,  
and add-on 
treatment for 
severe asthma
RELIEVER: as-needed ICS-SABA*, or as-needed SABA
STEP 2
Low dose 
maintenance 
ICS
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 27 ---
28
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Other treatment options for some adults and adolescents 
Some other treatment options may be available in some countries, that either have specific indications, or have less
evidence for efficacy or safety compared with the main treatments shown in T rack 1 and 2. 
Specific allergen immunotherapy: If an adult or adolescent has house dust mite allergy, and their asthma is not well 
controlled by treatment that includes ICS, consider adding house dust mite sublingual immunotherapy. Do not use
sublingual immunotherapy if forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV
1) is ≤70% predicted. See the full 2024 GINA
Report for information on immunotherapy with other antigens.
Long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA): Compared with ICS-LABA, add-on LAMA slightly improves lung function 
and slightly reduces the risk of exacerbations, but there is no clinically important reduction in symptoms such as
breathlessness. Before considering add-on LAMA for patients with exacerbations, increase ICS dose to at least medium, 
or switch to MART. Currently available LAMAs include tiotropium in a separate mist inhaler (patients ≥6 years) and
combination inhalers containing ICS, LABA and a LAMA (patients ≥18 years) including beclometasone-formoterol-
glycopyrronium, fluticasone furoate-vilanterol-umeclidinium, and mometasone-indacaterol-glycopyrronium. 
Leukotriene receptor antagonists: These include montelukast, pranlukast, zafirlukast and zileuton. They are less
effective than daily ICS, particularly for preventing exacerbations. Montelukast has been associated with risk of serious 
mental health effects.
Stepping down treatment when asthma is well controlled 
When good asthma control has been maintained for 2–3 months, consider stepping down treatment. The aims are to find 
the lowest treatment step that controls both symptoms and exacerbations, and to minimize side-effects.
Choose an appropriate time for step-down (no respiratory infection, patient not travelling, not pregnant). Assess risk
factors for exacerbation, including history of previous exacerbations or emergency department visits for asthma, and low 
lung function (see Table 2, page 12).
Record symptom control and lung function before stepping down, provide a written asthma action plan, monitor closely, 
and plan a follow-up visit.
Reduce the ICS dose by 25–50% by changing to an inhaler with a lower strength of the same ICS or by reducing the 
frequency of inhalations (see Box 4-13 in the full 2024 GINA Report for information on how to step down from different 
treatments). Review asthma after each step-down, and wait 2–3 months to confirm asthma is stable before stepping down 
again. Do not completely stop ICS in adults or adolescents with asthma.
Step 5: managing severe asthma in adults and adolescents 
If a patient has uncontrolled symptoms and/or exacerbations despite Step 4 treatment, assess causes and optimize
treatment. Refer the patient for expert assessment, including assessment of severe asthma inflammatory phenotype,
comorbidities, risk factors, and for potential add-on treatment. If sputum eosinophil count is available, this test may be 
useful to guide treatment in patients with moderate–severe asthma.
High-dose ICS-LABA can be considered, but it increases the risk of side effects, including adrenal suppression
(see Chapter 8 of the full 2024 GINA Report for details).
Long-acting muscarinic antagonists can be used in addition to maintenance ICS-LABA treatment, but the potential
reduction in severe exacerbations is small (page 28).
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 28 ---
29
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Biologic treatment can be added to maximal treatment, if available and affordable. Options include:
 • Anti-immunoglobin E (subcutaneous omalizumab) for severe allergic asthma 
 • Anti-interleukin 5 or anti-interleukin 5 receptor alpha for severe eosinophilic asthma. Options include intravenous  
   reslizumab for patients aged ≥18 years, subcutaneous mepolizumab for patients aged ≥ 6 years, and
   subcutaneous benralizumab for patients aged ≥ 12 years.
 • Anti-interleukin 4 receptor alpha (subcutaneous dupilumab) for severe eosinophilic asthma/asthma with Type 2   
   airway inflammation or patients who need maintenance oral corticosteroids
 • Anti-thymic stromal lymphopoietin (subcutaneous tezepelumab) for severe asthma.
See list of asthma medications on page 41. Always check local eligibility criteria for specific add-on treatments.
Maintenance oral corticosteroids should only be used as a last resort, and at the lowest possible dose, because
short-term and long-term systemic side-effects are common and serious.
For more information, see the full 2024 GINA Report or the GINA booklet Difficult-to-treat and severe asthma in
adolescent and adult patients, available at ginasthma.org.
Non-recommended treatments 
Maintenance oral corticosteroids should only be used as a last resort.
GINA does not recommend oral salbutamol or oral theophylline.
Choosing asthma medication for children 6–11 years
Starting asthma treatment   
Children aged 6–11 years with asthma should not be treated with SABA alone; they should all receive ICS-containing 
treatment. The optimal treatment that should be started immediately after diagnosis of asthma depends on the child’s 
asthma history and current symptoms (Table 4).
Before starting treatment:
 • Record evidence for the diagnosis of asthma
 • Document symptom control and risk factors (see Table 2)
 • Assess lung function, when possible
 • Train the child and parents to use the inhaler correctly, and check their technique
 • Schedule a follow-up visit.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 29 ---
30
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
TABLE 4. Suggested initial treatment for children with asthma
Clinical features Preferred
Infrequent asthma symptoms
(for example, 1–2 days/week or less)
Low-dose ICS taken whenever SABA is taken for asthma
symptoms (combination or separate inhalers)
Asthma symptoms 2–5 days per week Low-dose ICS maintenance (daily) treatment, plus SABA as needed
Asthma symptoms most days, waking 
due to asthma once a week or more
Options:
    • Low-dose maintenance ICS, plus SABA as needed
    • Medium-dose maintenance ICS, plus SABA as needed
    • Very-low-dose ICS-formoterol maintenance-and-reliever therapy      
      (MART)
Asthma symptoms every day, waking 
at night once or more a week, and low 
lung function
Options:
    • Medium-dose maintenance ICS-LABA, plus SABA as needed
    • Low-dose ICS-formoterol MART
During acute asthma exacerbation Treat exacerbation (page 37).
Start treatment with one of these options:
    • 
Low-dose or medium-dose maintenance ICS-LABA, plus SABA as  
      needed
    • Very-low-dose or low-dose ICS-formoterol MART.
ICS: inhaled corticosteroids; LABA: long-acting beta2-agonist; MART: maintenance-and-reliever therapy with ICS-formoterol; SABA: 
short-acting beta2-agonist. See page 48 for formulations and doses used for MART in children. See page 47 for ICS doses for
maintenance ICS-containing treatment. Check local regulatory and payer criteria.
Adjusting treatment: treatment steps for children 6–11 years 
After the child has started treatment, reassess asthma at every visit, adjust treatment if necessary, and review the
response to treatment. If a patient’s asthma is not well controlled, check adherence, inhaler technique, risk factors and
comorbidities first, before stepping up treatment or changing to a different medication at the same step (page 32). If
asthma has been well controlled for 3 months or more, consider stepping down.
In Step 1, the child uses a SABA when symptoms occur and takes a low dose of ICS at the same time.
In Steps 2–5 the child takes maintenance ICS-containing treatment every day. ICS, even at a low dose, reduces the risk 
of severe exacerbations, improves lung function, and reduces symptoms, compared with no ICS.
In Step 2, the child takes a low total dose of ICS every day, plus SABA as needed for symptoms.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 30 ---
31
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
In Steps 3–4, the child takes ICS or ICS-LABA every day, plus reliever as needed. There are several options:
 • The child takes ICS as daily maintenance treatment, plus SABA as needed for symptoms.
 • The child takes combination ICS-LABA as daily maintenance treatment, plus SABA as needed for symptoms.
 • The child takes combination ICS-formoterol as daily maintenance treatment, and they take extra doses of the   
   same medication when they have asthma symptoms. This is called “maintenance-and-reliever therapy” (MART).
   ICS-formoterol is the only ICS-LABA  that can be used for MART. 
Recommended doses for ICS-formoterol combinations are shown in the table on page 48. See page 47 for total daily ICS 
doses for children using a SABA reliever. See the full 2024 GINA report for a summary evidence supporting each option.
If a child needs Step 4 treatment to control asthma, refer them to a pediatric asthma expert.
Step 5 options for children with severe asthma are shown on page 34.
At any step, the child can also take their reliever (SABA or ICS-formoterol) before exercise, if needed. For children
prescribed MART, their ICS-formoterol reliever can also be taken before or during exposure to allergens, to prevent and 
relieve symptoms. 
After referral – other treatments for children 6–11 years 
If the child’s asthma is not well-controlled on Step 3 or 4 treatment despite good adherence and correct inhaler technique, 
they should be referred for expert advice, if available. 
Medication options that may be considered for some children after referral include: 
Add-on long-acting muscarinic antagonist: At Step 4, tiotropium in a separate mist inhaler can be added to recom-
mended treatment.
High-dose ICS-LABA: At Step 4, the dose may be increased to high pediatric dose (see Table 6 on page 47),
but first consider the risk of side-effects.
Leukotriene antagonist: A leukotriene antagonist can be added to recommended treatment. Montelukast has been
associated with risk of serious mental health effects in some children.
Specific allergen immunotherapy: If a child with asthma has ragweed allergy, consider adding ragweed sublingual
immunotherapy before and during the ragweed season. Do not use sublingual immunotherapy if forced expiratory volume 
in 1 second (FEV
1) is <80% predicted. See the full 2024 GINA Report for information on allergen immunotherapy with 
other antigens.
Non-recommended treatments 
Maintenance oral corticosteroids should only be used as a last resort.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 31 ---
32 Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention                                                                             © GINA  2024   www.ginasthma.org
FIGURE 8. Treatment steps for children 6–11 years
ICS: inhaled corticosteroids; Ig: immunoglobulin; IL: interleukin; LABA: long-acting beta2-agonist; LTRA: leukotriene receptor antagonist; MART: maintenance-and-reliever therapy 
with ICS-formoterol; OCS: oral corticosteroid; SABA: short-acting beta2-agonist; TSLP: thymic stromal lymphopoietin; *Anti-inflammatory reliever; †If prescribing LTRA, advise
patient/caregiver about risk of neuropsychiatric adverse effects. See reference table on page 48 for MART doses. See reference table on page 47 for total daily ICS doses.
As last resort, 
consider add-on
low dose OCS, but 
consider side-effects
PREFERRED 
CONTROLLER
to prevent exacerbations 
and control symptoms
Other controller options 
(limited indications, or  
less evidence for efficacy 
or safety)
RELIEVER 
STEP 1
Low dose ICS 
taken whenever 
SABA taken*
GINA 2024 – Children 6–11 years
Personalized asthma management: 
Assess, Adjust, Review
Asthma medication options: 
Adjust treatment up and down for  
individual child’s needs
STEP 2
Daily low dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) 
(see table of ICS dose ranges for children)
Daily leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA†), or
low dose ICS taken whenever SABA taken*
STEP 3
Low dose ICS-LABA, 
OR medium dose 
ICS, OR  
very low dose 
ICS-formoterol 
maintenance and 
reliever (MART)
STEP 4
Refer for expert 
advice,  
OR medium  
dose ICS-LABA, 
OR low dose  
ICS-formoterol
maintenance and 
reliever therapy 
(MART) 
STEP 5
Refer for 
phenotypic 
assessment 
± higher dose 
ICS-LABA or 
add-on therapy, 
e.g. anti-IgE,
anti-IL4Rα,
anti-IL5
Add tiotropium 
or add LTRA
†
Low dose 
ICS + LTRA
†
As-needed SABA (or ICS-formoterol reliever* in MART in Steps 3 and 4)
Symptoms 
Exacerbations
Side-effects
Lung function
Comorbidities
Child and parent/
caregiver satisfaction
Confirmation of diagnosis if necessary
Symptom control & modifiable 
risk factors 
Comorbidities
Inhaler technique & adherence
Child and parent/caregiver preferences and goals
Treatment of modifiable risk factors 
& comorbidities
Non-pharmacological strategies
Asthma medications including ICS 
Education & skills training
ADJUST
REVIEW
ASSESS
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 32 ---
34
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Stepping down treatment when asthma is well controlled 
When good asthma control has been achieved and maintained for 2–3 months, consider stepping down treatment. The 
aims are to find the lowest treatment step that controls both symptoms and exacerbations, and to minimize side-effects.
Step 5: managing severe asthma in children 
If a child has uncontrolled symptoms and/or exacerbations despite good inhaler technique and good adherence with Step 
4 treatment, refer them to a pediatric asthma expert if available for phenotypic assessment and review of factors
contributing to symptoms and/or exacerbations.
Add-on treatments that may be considered for children with severe asthma include: 
Tiotropium can be added to other recommended treatments
Biologic treatment added to other recommended treatments. Options for children include:
• Anti-immunoglobin E (subcutaneous omalizumab) for severe allergic asthma
• Anti-interleukin 5 (subcutaneous mepolizumab) for severe eosinophilic asthma
• Anti-interleukin 4 receptor alpha (subcutaneous dupilumab) for severe eosinophilic asthma/asthma with Type 2
airway inflammation.
See table of asthma medication classes on page 41 for more details. Always check local eligibility criteria for specific
add-on treatments.
Managing asthma in specific populations or contexts
Occupational asthma 
If asthma was caused by airborne irritants or allergens in the workplace, ICS treatment should be started immediately. 
For suspected occupational asthma, refer the patient as soon as possible for expert care, if available. Exposure to the 
cause should be eliminated.
Pregnancy 
Asthma control often changes during pregnancy, so asthma should be monitored every 4–6 weeks. All pregnant women 
with asthma should receive treatment that includes ICS, because asthma exacerbations are associated with increased 
risk of pre-term delivery, low birth weight and increased perinatal mortality, and these risks are reduced by ICS. Usual 
asthma treatment should not be stopped. ICS and beta2-agonists are not associated with increased risk of fetal 
abnormalities. Treat exacerbations as for non-pregnant adults, to avoid fetal hypoxia.
Allergic rhinitis and chronic rhinosinusitis 
Allergic rhinitis is very common among people with asthma. It should be treated with intranasal corticosteroids as well as 
treating asthma.
Chronic rhinosinusitis, especially if associated with nasal polyps, is associated with more severe asthma. Treatment of 
allergic rhinitis or chronic rhinosinusitis reduces nasal symptoms, but may not improve asthma control. Some biologic 
treatments (anti-immunoglobulin E, anti-interleukin 4 receptor alpha, anti-interleukin 5, and anti-interleukin 5 receptor 
alpha) improve nasal symptoms in patients with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps and asthma (see the full 2024 
GINA Report).
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 33 ---
35
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Obesity 
Asthma is more difficult to control in people with obesity. Include weight reduction in the treatment plan for obese patients 
with asthma; even 5–10% weight loss can improve asthma control.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) 
Asymptomatic GERD is unlikely to cause poor asthma control. Symptomatic reflux should be treated, but patients with 
poorly controlled asthma should not be treated with anti-reflux therapy unless they also have symptomatic reflux.
The elderly 
Comorbidities and their treatment may complicate asthma management. Consider all other medicines the person is
taking, and check for side-effects. When choosing medications and inhaler devices, consider factors like arthritis,
eyesight, inspiratory flow, and complexity of treatment regimens, and the environmental impact of the inhaler.
Aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD) 
A history of asthma exacerbation after taking aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) strongly 
suggests AERD. Patients with AERD often have severe asthma and nasal polyposis. If the history clearly suggests AERD, 
advise the patient to avoid all nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Challenge testing can confirm the diagnosis, but this 
should only be done in a specialized center with resuscitation facilities. In some patients, addition of a leukotriene receptor 
antagonist to ICS-containing treatment improves lung function and reduces symptoms. (Note: there are concerns about 
risk of neuropsychiatric side effects with montelukast.) Desensitization is sometimes effective, but this must only be done 
under specialist care; there is a significantly increased risk of adverse effects such as asthma exacerbation, gastritis and 
gastrointestinal bleeding.
Food allergy and anaphylaxis 
Food allergy may cause anaphylaxis but is rarely a trigger for asthma symptoms. Food allergy must be assessed by
specialist testing, because confirmed food allergy is a risk factor for asthma-related death. Good asthma control is
essential. Ensure patients (and parents/caregivers) have an anaphylaxis plan, know how to avoid the allergen, and know 
how to use injectable epinephrine.
Surgery in patients with asthma  
If possible, surgery should be done when the patient has good asthma control. Ensure that ICS-containing treatment is 
continued throughout the peri-operative period. For patients on long-term high-dose ICS, and patients who have used oral 
corticosteroids for more than 2 weeks in the previous 6 months, hydrocortisone should be administered during the
operation to reduce the risk of adrenal crisis.
Managing asthma during the COVID-19 pandemic 
People with well-controlled asthma do not have a higher risk of severe COVID-19 or COVID-19-related death than the 
general population. However, people with severe asthma exacerbations (people who recently needed oral corticosteroids 
for asthma, and people hospitalized with severe asthma) have a higher risk of death due to COVID-19.
When COVID-19 is circulating in the community, advise patients to continue taking their prescribed asthma medications, 
including ICS, even if they have a COVID-19 infection. Make sure that every patient has a written asthma action plan. 
Advise people with asthma to keep up to date with COVID-19 vaccines according to local advice.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 34 ---
36
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Avoid using nebulizers for patients with COVID infection or a high probability of infection. To deliver SABA for acute
asthma in adults and children, use a pressurized metered-dose inhaler and spacer, with a mouthpiece or tightly fitting face 
mask, if needed. Avoid spirometry in patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19. Follow infection control protocols for 
other procedures.
Before prescribing antiviral therapies for COVID-19, consult local prescribing guidelines, and check carefully for potential 
interactions with asthma therapy.
For details, see the full 2024 GINA Report. More information is available from the World Health Organization and the US 
Centers for Disease Control.
Managing asthma exacerbations
An exacerbation is an acute or subacute worsening in symptoms and lung function, compared with the patient’s usual 
status; some patients’ initial presentation of asthma may be with an exacerbation. Exacerbations are usually due to a viral 
upper respiratory tract infection, exposure to pollen or pollution, or poor adherence to inhaled corticosteroid treatment, but 
can also occur in people without any of these risk factors.
An exacerbation is regarded as moderate if it is troublesome for the patient and requires a change in treatment. An 
exacerbation is regarded as severe if urgent treatment is needed to prevent hospitalization or death. Severe 
exacerbations can be fatal, even in people with previously infrequent symptoms.
When talking to patients about exacerbations, use a word they can understand, e.g. attack, flare-up.
The management of worsening asthma and exacerbations is a continuum from self-management by the patient
(or parent/caregiver) with a written asthma action plan, through to management of severe symptoms in primary care,
the emergency department, and in hospital.
All patients should have a written asthma action plan. Examples of action plan templates for T
rack 1 are available at 
https://www.jaci-inpractice.org/article/S2213-2198(21)01128-4/fulltext and
https://www.nationalasthma.org.au/health-professionals/asthma-action-plans/asthma-action-plan-library.
How to increase inhaled medication in a written asthma action plan 
For patients using low-dose ICS-formoterol reliever (adults/adolescents using Track 1 treatment, and children 6–11 
years using MART): advise the patient to take extra doses of their ICS-formoterol inhaler whenever needed for symptom 
relief. If using MART, they should also continue their usual doses of maintenance ICS-formoterol. They should get medical 
care if symptoms are rapidly getting worse, or are not improving after 2–3 days, or if they need more than the total daily 
maximum (see page 48 for usual and maximal doses).
Note: Patients whose maintenance treatment is ICS-LABA with a non-formoterol LABA should not use ICS-formoterol as 
their reliever; they should instead use SABA or ICS-SABA as their reliever.
For patients using ICS-SABA reliever (adults/adolescents using Track 2 treatment): advise the patient to take extra 
doses of ICS-SABA (2 inhalations of budesonide-salbutamol 100/100 mcg [delivered dose 80/90 mcg] each time) for 
symptom relief, and continue their usual maintenance ICS-containing treatment. They should get medical care if they are 
rapidly deteriorating, or are not improving after 2–3 days, or if they need ICS-SABA more than 6 times in any day.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 35 ---
37
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Patients using SABA reliever (adults/adolescents using Track 2 treatment, and children 6–11 years): advise the patient 
to take SABA when needed for symptom relief, and to increase their ICS-containing maintenance treatment (if prescribed) 
for at least 1–2 weeks. For adults, consider increasing maintenance ICS dose to 4 times usual dose for 1–2 weeks. 
The patient should get medical care if they need SABA again within 3 hours, or if asthma symptoms are worsening rapidly 
or are not improving. 
Use of oral corticosteroids in written asthma action plans 
For most patients, the written asthma action plan should give instructions for when and how to start oral corticosteroid 
treatment. A short course of oral corticosteroid is often used in these situations:
• Asthma symptoms are getting worse over 2–3 days, despite using more reliever
• Asthma symptoms are rapidly getting worse
• Lung function is low (FEV1 <60% of predicted value, PEF <60% of personal best)
• Symptoms are worsening in person with a history of sudden severe exacerbations.
Usual doses are:
• Adults: prednisolone 40–50 mg each morning for 5–7 days
• Children: prednisolone 1–2 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg, each morning for 3–5 days.
If an oral corticosteroid is used for less than 2 weeks, it is not necessary to reduce the dose at the end of treatment before 
stopping it.
If patients are provided with a prescription for oral corticosteroids for use as part of their asthma action plan, they should 
be told to contact their doctor if they start taking the medications. Advise patients about common side-effects, including 
sleep disturbance, increased appetite, reflux, and mood changes. 
Oral corticosteroids can be life-saving during severe asthma exacerbations, but there is more and more evidence that the 
risk of side-effects increases with each course. The need for courses of oral corticosteroids can be reduced by optimizing 
inhaled therapy, including attention to inhaler technique and adherence, and by switching to Track 1 therapy with
ICS-formoterol, if available.
Managing exacerbations in primary or acute care 
Figure 9 (page 39) summarizes assessment and management of asthma exacerbations in adults, adolescents and 
children 6–11 years in primary care.
Assess severity of the exacerbation while starting SABA and oxygen: check for anaphylaxis and assess dyspnea, 
respiratory rate, pulse rate, oxygen saturation* and lung function (for example, PEF).
Consider alternative causes of acute breathlessness (for example, heart failure, upper airway dysfunction, inhaled 
foreign body, pulmonary embolism).
Arrange immediate transfer to an acute care facility if there are signs of severe exacerbation (see Figure 9). Immediately 
give inhaled SABA, inhaled ipratropium bromide, oxygen and systemic corticosteroids. Transfer to intensive care if the 
patient is drowsy, confused, or has a silent chest.
*Pulse oximetry may overestimate oxygen saturation in a hypoxemic patient with dark skin color.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 36 ---
38
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Start bronchodilator treatment with repeated doses of SABA (usually by pressurized metered-dose inhaler and spacer) 
and controlled flow oxygen, if needed and available. Inhaled albuterol (salbutamol) is the most common bronchodilator 
used to treat acute asthma. High-dose budesonide-formoterol was as effective and safe as high-dose salbutamol in
studies in patients with FEV
1 >30% predicted treated in emergency departments. In acute care facilities, consider
intravenous magnesium sulfate if the patient has an inadequate response to intensive initial treatment.
Start oral corticosteroids: Adults: prednisolone 40–50 mg each morning for 5–7 days. Children: prednisolone
1–2 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg, each morning for 3–5 days. See full GINA 2024 report for other corticosteroid options..
Titrate oxygen, if needed, to maintain target saturation of 93–95%* in adults and adolescents (94–98%* in children
6–12 years).
Do not routinely perform chest X-ray or blood gases, or routinely prescribe antibiotics. 
Do not use sedatives.
Monitor closely: Check symptoms and oxygen saturation frequently. Measure lung function after 1 hour. Titrate treatment 
according to response. Transfer to higher-level care if patient’s condition worsens or symptoms fail to respond.
Decide whether to hospitalize the patient based on clinical status, symptoms and lung function, response to treatment, 
recent and history of exacerbations, and their ability to manage at home.
Before discharge, arrange ongoing treatment to reduce the chance of another exacerbation:
• Prescribe regular maintenance treatment that includes ICS: For adults and adolescents, the preferred  
 treatment is ICS-formoterol MART, if available. If not, prescribe regular daily medium- or high-dose ICS-LABA. 
 For children 6–11 years, the treatment options are low-dose ICS-LABA plus SABA as needed, medium-dose 
 
ICS plus SABA as needed, or MART. See Table 7 for MART doses for adults and children, and see Table 6 for 
 
low, medium and high-dose ICS if used with as-needed SABA.
• Reduce reliever use to as-needed: tell patient (or parent/caregiver) to use reliever only as needed for        
 symptoms (not regularly), so they can tell if asthma is worsening or improving.
• Check inhaler technique and adherence.
• Provide an interim written asthma action plan.
Arrange follow-up: if possible, within 2–7 days for adults and adolescents, and within 1–2 working days for children. 
Consider early referral for specialist advice after hospitalization, or for patients with repeated emergency visits for asthma.
*Pulse oximetry may overestimate oxygen saturation in a hypoxemic patient with dark skin color.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 37 ---
39
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
FIGURE 9. Management of asthma exacerbations in primary care
PEF: peak expiratory flow; ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; pMDI: pressurized metered-dose inhaler; SABA: short-acting beta2-agonist
(doses are for salbutamol).
TRANSFER TO ACUTE 
CARE FACILITY
 While waiting: give SABA, 
ipratropium bromide,  
O2, systemic corticosteroid
CONTINUE TREATMENT with SABA as needed
ASSESS RESPONSE AT 1 HOUR (or earlier)
IMPROVING
MILD or MODERATE
Talks in phrases, prefers  
sitting to lying, not agitated
Respiratory rate increased
Accessory muscles not used
Pulse rate 100–120 bpm
O
2 saturation (on air) 90–95%
PEF >50% predicted or best
START TREATMENT
SABA 4–10 puffs by pMDI + spacer,  
repeat every 20 minutes for 1 hour
Prednisolone: adults 40-50 mg,  
children 1–2 mg/kg, max. 40 mg
Controlled oxygen (if available): target 
saturation 93–95% (children: 94–98%)
FOLLOW UP within 2–7 days (1–2 days for children) 
Review symptoms and signs: Is the exacerbation resolving? Should prednisone be continued?
Reliever: reduce to as-needed. ICS-containing controller: continue higher dose for short term (1–2 weeks)  
or long term (3 months), depending on background to exacerbation. Adults/adolescents: switch to GINA Track 
1 with ICS-formoterol if available (Fgure 5)
Risk factors: check and correct modifiable risk factors that may have contributed to exacerbation, including 
inhaler technique and adherence. Refer for expert advice if >1–2 exacerbations in a year.
Action plan: Is it understood? Was it used appropriately? Does it need modification?
ASSESS FOR DISCHARGE
Symptoms improved, not needing SABA
PEF improving, and >60-80% of personal  
best or predicted
Oxygen saturation >94% room air
Resources at home adequate
ARRANGE at DISCHARGE
Reliever: as needed, not regularly
Controller: start, or step up ICS therapy (Track 1 
preferred). Check inhaler technique, adherence
Prednisolone: continue, usually for 5–7 days  
(3-5 days for children) 
Follow up: within 2–7 days (1–2 days for children)
WORSENING
WORSENING
SEVERE
Talks in words, sits hunched  
forwards, agitated
Respiratory rate >30/min
Accessory muscles in use
Pulse rate >120 bpm
O
2 saturation (on air) <90%
PEF ≤50% predicted or best
Patient presents with acute or sub-acute asthma exacerbationPRIMARY CARE  
ASSESS the PATIENT
Is it asthma?
Factors for asthma-related death?
Severity of exacerbation? (consider worst feature)
URGENT
LIFE-THREATENING
Drowsy, confused  
or silent chest
Box 4-3
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 38 ---
40
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Follow-up after an exacerbation 
All patients must be followed up regularly by a healthcare provider until symptoms and lung function return to normal.
Reassess long-term treatment. For adults and adolescents, consider changing to Track 1 (page 26) with ICS-formoterol 
reliever to reduce the risk of another exacerbation. Check adherence to ICS containing medications. Make sure the 
patient/parent/caregiver understands the purposes of asthma medications, and check if they are using the inhaler 
correctly
. Review the written asthma action plan.
Ask what the patient/parent/caregiver thinks may have caused the exacerbation. Check risk factors for exacerbations, 
such as smoking, allergen exposure, regular use or over-use of SABA (see Table 2).
Consider referring patients for expert advice after hospitalization for severe asthma or recurring acute asthma.
Refer patients who have had more than 1 or 2 exacerbations/year despite medium-dose or high-dose ICS-LABA.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 39 ---
41
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Reference tables
Anti-inflammatory reliever medications
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Beclometasone-formoterol or budesonide-formoterol
Low-dose combination ICS-formoterol
Inhaled: pressurized metered-dose inhaler or dry-powder inhaler
Used as reliever (without maintenance treatment) for adults and adolescents at GINA Track 1 Steps 
1–2, instead of SABA. Reduces emergency visits/hospitalizations by 65% compared with SABA 
alone, and by 37% compared with daily ICS plus as-needed SABA.
Used as the reliever for patients prescribed maintenance-and-reliever therapy with ICS-formoterol 
(adults and adolescents at GINA Track 1 Steps 3–5, children 6–11 at GINA Steps 3–5). Reduces the 
risk of severe exacerbations, compared with using SABA as reliever, with similar symptom control.
Can be used before exercise to prevent exercise-induced bronchoconstriction. Can be used before 
or during allergen exposure to prevent and relieve asthma symptoms.
More information:
Track 1 treatment options for adults and adolescents (page 26)
Adjusting treatment: treatment steps for children 6–11 years (page 30)
See: ICS in combination with long-acting beta
2-agonist bronchodilator (ICS-LABA), below
Low-dose combination ICS-SABA
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Budesonide-salbutamol (albuterol), beclometasone-salbutamol
Inhaled: pressurized metered-dose inhaler or dry-powder inhaler
Reliever (instead of SABA) for adults and adolescents in GINA Track 2. Maximum 6 doses, each of 
2 inhalations of 80 mcg budesonide with 90 mcg albuterol, in any day.
Cannot be used for maintenance-and-reliever therapy (MART). There are no studies of
as-needed-only use of budesonide-salbutamol in Steps 1–2
Not recommended for children
See:
Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), below
Short-acting inhaled beta
2-agonist bronchodilators (SABA), below
TABLE 5. List of asthma medication classes and medicines
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 40 ---
42
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Medications for maintenance treatment (every day, medium or long term)
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Beclometasone, budesonide, ciclesonide, fluticasone propionate, fluticasone furoate, mometasone, 
triamcinolone
Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
ICS in combination with a long-acting beta2-agonist bronchodilator (ICS-LABA)
Inhaled: pressurized metered-dose inhaler or dry-powder inhaler
Medications that contain ICS are the most effective anti-inflammatory medications for asthma. ICSs 
reduce symptoms, increase lung function, reduce airway hyperresponsiveness, improve quality of 
life, and reduce the risk of exacerbations, asthma-related hospitalizations and death.
Potency and bioavailability varies between ICS. Most of the clinical benefit is achieved at low doses 
(page 47).
Most patients do not experience side-effects.
Local: oropharyngeal candidiasis, dysphonia. Risk of candidiasis is reduced by rinsing mouth with 
water and spitting it out after inhaling the medication. Risk of dysphonia and candidiasis with pMDI 
is reduced by using a spacer.
Systemic: osteoporosis, cataract, glaucoma with long-term use of high doses. 
Risk of some systemic adverse effects, such as adrenal suppression, may increase if patient uses 
medications that inhibit cytochrome P450 (for example, ketoconazole, ritonavir, itraconazole, 
erythromycin, clarithromycin).
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Beclometasone-formoterol, budesonide-formoterol, fluticasone furoate-vilanterol, fluticasone propionate 
formoterol, fluticasone propionate-salmeterol, mometasone-formoterol, mometasone-indacaterol
Inhaled: pressurized metered-dose inhaler or dry-powder inhaler
When a low daily dose of ICS fails to achieve good control of asthma despite correct technique and 
good adherence, addition of LABA to maintenance ICS improves symptoms, lung function and
reduces exacerbations. ICS-LABA is more effective than doubling the dose of ICS. Two regimens 
are available: 
1. Maintenance-and-reliever therapy (MART): combination of beclometasone or budesonide with
formoterol used for both maintenance and reliever treatment (see Anti-inflammatory reliever
medications, above, and doses in Table 7, page 48)
2. ICS-LABA as maintenance treatment, plus SABA (or ICS-SABA) as reliever.
For adults and adolescents, MART is preferred (GINA Track 1) because it reduces exacerbations 
compared with the same or higher dose of ICS-LABA maintenance plus as-needed SABA reliever, 
and is a simpler regimen.
See:
Track 1 treatment options for adults and adolescents (page 26)
Track 2 treatment options for adults and adolescents (page 27)
Adjusting treatment: treatment steps for children 6–11 years (page 32)
Doses in reference tables on page 47 and page 48
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 41 ---
43
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
ICS in combination with a long-acting beta2-agonist bronchodilator (ICS-LABA) - CONTINUED
Adverse effects LABA: tachycardia, headache, muscle cramps. LABA should not be used without ICS in patients 
with asthma (or asthma+COPD).  
ICS: See Inhaled corticosteroids (above)
Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA)
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Montelukast, pranlukast, zafirlukast, zileuton
Oral: tablets
Target one part of the inflammatory pathway in asthma. Sometimes used as maintenance therapy, 
mainly in children. However, LTRA is less effective than low-dose ICS, and ICS plus LTRA is less 
effective than ICS-LABA.
Zileuton and zafirlukast: elevated liver function tests
Montelukast: concerns about risk of serious behavioral and mood changes, including suicidal
ideation in adults and children – discuss with patients/parents/caregivers
Add-on maintenance medications
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Patients aged ≥6 years: tiotropium by mist inhaler, in addition to maintenance ICS-LABA treatment
Patients aged ≥18 years: combination ICS-LABA-LAMA inhalers (beclometasone-formoterol-
glycopyrronium, fluticasone furoate-vilanterol-umeclidinium, mometasone-indacaterol-glycopyrronium)
Long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) – check local eligibility criteria
Inhaled: pressurized metered-dose inhaler, dry-powder inhaler, or mist inhaler
Can be added to other treatment for patients with uncontrolled asthma despite ICS-LABA. Consider 
adding at Step 5 (or Step 4, but weaker evidence for benefit as add-on to low-dose ICS-LABA).
Adding LAMA to ICS-LABA improves lung function by a small amount (but not symptoms or quality 
of life), and reduces exacerbations by a small amount. For patients with exacerbations, increase ICS 
to at least medium dose before adding a LAMA. 
Uncommon: dry mouth, urinary retention
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 42 ---
44
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Anti-immunoglobin E  – check local eligibility criteria
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Patients aged ≥6 years: omalizumab
Subcutaneous injection: syringe or pen device (self-injection may be an option)
Can be added to other treatment for patients with severe allergic asthma uncontrolled on high-dose 
ICS-LABA (see local product information and payer advice for other indications)
Common: minor reactions at injection site
Rare: anaphylaxis
Anti-interleukin 5 and anti-interleukin 5 receptor alpha – check local eligibility criteria
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Patients aged ≥6 years: mepolizumab
Patients aged ≥12 years: benralizumab
Patients aged ≥18 years: reslizumab
Subcutaneous injection: mepolizumab, benralizumab (self-injection may be an option)
Intravenous infusion: reslizumab
Can be added to other treatment for patients with severe eosinophilic asthma uncontrolled on high-
dose ICS-LABA (see local product information and payer advice for other indications). Maintenance 
oral corticosteroid dose can be significantly reduced with benralizumab and mepolizumab. 
Common: headache, minor reactions at injection site
Anti-interleukin 4 receptor alpha – check local eligibility criteria
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Patients aged ≥6 years: dupilumab
Subcutaneous injection: syringe or pen device (self-injection may be an option)
Can be added to other treatment for patients with severe eosinophilic asthma or Type 2 airway
inflammation, if asthma is uncontrolled on high-dose ICS-LABA, or for patients requiring
maintenance oral corticosteroids (see local product information and payer advice for other
indications). Not advised for patients with current or past blood eosinophils ≥1500/microliter.
Common: minor reactions at injection site
Uncommon: transient blood eosinophilia (4–13% of patients) 
Rare: eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis after reducing or stopping oral corticosteroids 
while on dupilumab
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 43 ---
45
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Anti-thymic stromal lymphopoietin (anti-TSLP) – check local eligibility criteria
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Patients aged ≥12 years: tezepelumab
Subcutaneous injection: syringe or pen device (self-injection may be an option)
Can be added to other treatment for patients with severe asthma that is uncontrolled on high-dose 
ICS-LABA
Common: minor reactions at injection site
Rare: anaphylaxis
Systemic corticosteroids
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, hydrocortisone, dexamethasone
Oral (tablets or liquid), intramuscular injection, or intravenous injection
Short-term use for severe acute exacerbations: effective for preventing short-term recurrence of
severe asthma exacerbations. Treatment usually oral 5–7 days in adults, 3–5 days in children.
If used for >2 weeks, reduce dose gradually before stopping. After an exacerbation, optimize
inhaled therapy to reduce risk of needing another course.
Long-term use: avoid due to risk of serious adverse effects, except as a last resort, and only if
asthma cannot be controlled by other treatments. Check and manage adverse effects. Refer patient 
for specialist review.
Short courses: sepsis, thromboembolism, sleep disturbance, gastroesophageal reflux, increased 
appetite, hyperglycemia, mood changes. Multiple short courses increase later risk of diabetes,
osteoporosis, cataract, glaucoma, heart failure and other conditions.
Maintenance use: adverse effects include cataract, glaucoma, hypertension, diabetes, adrenal
suppression, osteoporosis
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 44 ---
46
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Short-acting bronchodilator reliever medications
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Salbutamol (albuterol), terbutaline
Short-acting inhaled beta2-agonist bronchodilators (SABA)
Inhaled: pressurized metered-dose inhaler or dry-powder inhaler (also solution for nebulization or 
injection)
Quick relief of asthma symptoms and bronchoconstriction, and for pretreatment before exercise. 
SABAs should be used only when needed (not regularly) at the dose needed to relieve symptoms.
Use without ICS not recommended due to risk of severe exacerbations and asthma-related death 
(page 15).
Commonly used for treatment of severe exacerbations in primary care and emergency departments.
Short-term: tremor, tachycardia with initial use
Regular or frequent use: tolerance results in increased airway hyperresponsiveness, reduced
bronchodilator effect, and increased airway inflammation. Excess use, or poor response, indicates 
poor asthma control and risk of exacerbations. Dispensing of 3 or more 200-dose canisters per year 
is associated with increased risk of exacerbations, and dispensing of 12 or more canisters per year 
is associated with a markedly increased risk of death.
Short-acting antimuscarinic antagonists (anticholinergics)
Medications
Delivery
Use in asthma
Adverse effects
Ipratropium bromide, oxitropium bromide
May be in combination inhaler with SABA
Inhaled: pressurized metered-dose inhaler or dry-powder inhaler; nebulizer
Short-term use in acute care for severe exacerbations: ipratropium plus SABA reduces risk of
hospital admission acute asthma, compared with SABA alone
As-needed use as reliever: less effective than SABA, with slower onset of action
Dry mouth, bitter taste. Should be used with caution in patients with narrow-angle glaucoma.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 45 ---
47
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Inhaled corticosteroid 
Beclometasone dipropionate (pMDI)      200–500        >500–1000  >1000
Beclometasone dipropionate (DPI or pMDI, extrafine particle)   100–200        >200–400   >400
Budesonide (DPI or pMDI)       200–400        >400–800   >800
Ciclesonide (pMDI, extrafine particle)       80–160         >160–320   >320
Fluticasone furoate (DPI)           100       200
Fluticasone propionate (DPI)       100–250        >250–500   >500
Fluticasone propionate (pMDI)       100–250        >250–500    >500
Mometasone furoate (DPI)        Depends on DPI device
Mometasone furoate (pMDI)                   200–400      400
Total daily ICS dose (mcg)
Low Medium High
Inhaled corticosteroid 
Beclometasone dipropionate (pMDI)     100–200        >200–400    >400
Beclometasone dipropionate (pMDI, extrafine particle)     50–100        >100–200    >200
Budesonide (DPI)       100–200        >200–400    >400
Budesonide (nebules)       250–500        >500–1000  >1000
Ciclesonide (pMDI, extrafine particle)          80             >80–160    >160
Fluticasone furoate (DPI)                50         –
Fluticasone propionate (DPI)        50–100        >100–200    >200
Fluticasone propionate (pMDI)        50–100        >100–200    >200
Mometasone furoate (pMDI)          100     200
Total daily ICS dose (mcg)
Low Medium High
Adults and adolescents
Children 6–11 years
DPI: dry-powder inhaler; ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; pMDI: pressurized metered-dose inhaler*
Notes:
This table shows suggested total daily ICS doses for low dose, medium dose and high dose, not dose equivalence. The table shows metered doses.
Available doses, regulatory approval, labelling and clinical guidelines may differ between countries. Check the manufacturer’s product Information
carefully if using new or generic products, or products containing a LAMA. Different preparations of a particular ICS molecule may not be clinically
equivalent. For example, mometasone doses change when LAMA is added to ICS-LABA.
A low daily dose of ICS provides most of the clinical benefit for most patients. Some patients have less response to ICS and may need a medium dose 
if asthma is uncontrolled despite good adherence and correct inhaler technique with a low dose. High doses of ICS are rarely needed. Long-term use of 
high doses of ICS increases the risk of local and systemic side-effects.
*A spacer should be used for ICS by pMDI. All the pMDIs listed in this table contain an HFA propellant. New propellants with a lower environmental 
impact are under development. 
TABLE 6. Low, medium and high daily metered doses of inhaled corticosteroids
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 46 ---
48
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Age
(years)
AIR: anti-inflammatory reliever; DPI: dry-powder inhaler; MART: maintenance-and-reliever therapy; pMDI: pressurized metered-dose 
inhaler
*Children: budesonide-formoterol is not recommended for Step 5 MART in children. There are no studies of budesonide-formoterol 
AIR-only at Steps 1–2 in children.
#If a patient needs to take more than this number of inhalations in a day, they should seek medical attention the same day.
†Adults: There are no studies of beclometasone-formoterol for as-needed-only treatment
‡For MART with beclometasone-formoterol, GINA suggests patients can use up to 12 inhalations total in one day if needed, based on 
extensive formoterol safety data, including from studies of budesonide-formoterol
For more inhaler options, see Box 4-8 in the full 2024 GINA Report
For as-needed use of ICS-formoterol, patients should take one inhalation whenever needed for symptom relief. If
symptoms have not improved after a few minutes, another dose can be taken. Patients do not need to wait a certain
number of hours before taking more reliever doses, but they should not take more than the maximum total number of 
inhalations in a single day. Most patients need far less than this. If a patient feels that they need more doses than the
recommended maximum total in any day, they should seek medical advice the same day. ICS-formoterol can also be 
taken before exercise or allergen exposure, instead of a SABA reliever.
Inhaler: metered dose per
inhalation [delivered dose]
in micrograms
GINA
Step
Dosing Maximum
total in any
one day
#
6–11
12–17
≥ 18
Budesonide-formoterol 100/6
[80/4.5] DPI*
Budesonide-formoterol 200/6
[160/4.5] DPI or pMDI
Budesonide-formoterol 200/6
[160/4.5] DPI or pMDI
Beclometasone-formoterol
100/6 DPI†
Beclometasone-formoterol
100/6 pMDI
†
Step 3
Step 4
Step 1–2 
Step 3
Steps 4–5
Step 1–2 
Step 3
Steps 4–5
Step 3
Steps 4–5
MART: 1 inhalation once daily plus 1 as needed
MART: 1 inhalation twice daily plus 1 as needed
AIR-only: 1 inhalation as needed
MART: 1 inhalation twice (or once) daily plus 1 as needed
MART: 2 inhalations twice daily plus 1 as needed
AIR-only: 1 inhalation as needed
MART: 1 inhalation twice (or once) daily plus 1 as needed
MART: 2 inhalations twice daily plus 1 as needed
MART: 1 inhalation twice (or once) daily plus 1 as needed
MART: 2 inhalations twice daily plus 1 as needed
8 inhalations
in any day
12 inhalations 
in any day
12 inhalations 
in any day
12 inhalations 
in any day‡
TABLE 7. Anti-inflammatory relievers (AIR) and MART– recommended inhalers and doses
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 47 ---
49
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention © GINA 2024   www.ginasthma.org
Acknowledgements
The activities of the Global Initiative of Asthma are supported by the work of members of the GINA Board of Directors and 
Committees (listed below), and by the sale and licensing of GINA products.
GINA Science Committee (2023-2024)
Helen Reddel,* Australia, Chair; Leonard Bacharier, USA; Eric Bateman, South Africa.; Matteo Bonini, Italy;              
Arnaud Bourdin, France; Christopher Brightling, UK; Guy Brusselle, Belgium; Roland Buhl, Germany; Jeffrey Drazen, USA; 
Francine M. Ducharme, Canada; Liesbeth Duijts, The Netherlands; Louise Fleming, UK; Hiromasa Inoue,* Japan;         
Alan Kaplan, Canada; Fanny Wai-san Ko, Hong Kong; Refiloe Masekela, South Africa; Paulo Pitrez, Brazil;                    
Sundeep Salvi, India; Aziz Sheikh, UK; Min Zhang, China.
GINA Board of Directors (2023–2024)
Arzu Yorgancioglu*, Turkey, 
 Chair; Keith Allan*, UK; Eric Bateman, South Africa; Guy Brusselle, Belgium;
Muhwa Jeremiah Chakaya, Kenya; Alvaro Cruz*, Brazil; Hiromasa Inoue*, Japan; Jerry Krishnan, USA;
Mark Levy*, United Kingdom; Helen Reddel,* Australia
GINA Dissemination Working Group (2023–2024)
Mark Levy, UK, Chair; other members indicated by asterisks (*) above
GINA Advocates 
Representatives from Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe and Oceania
(listed at https://ginasthma.org/about-us/gina-advocates) 
GINA Program
Executive Director: Rebecca Decker, USA, Program Director: Kristi Rurey, USA
Editorial and research assistance
Charu Grover, Jenni Harman
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE


--- page 48 ---
Visit the GINA website at www.ginasthma.org
©2024 Global Initiative for Asthma 
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE
