Recommendations | Colorectal cancer | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Colorectal cancer
Colorectal cancer 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG151 
Published: 
29 January 2020
Last updated: 
15 December 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Reduction in risk of colorectal cancer in people with Lynch syndrome
1.2 Information for people with colorectal cancer
1.3 Management of local disease
1.4 Molecular biomarkers to guide systemic anticancer therapy
1.5 Management of advanced or metastatic colorectal cancer
1.6 Ongoing care and support
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Health and social care professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
Improving supportive and palliative care for adults with cancer 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
People's experience in adult social care services 
Alcohol-use disorders: prevention 
Depression in adults with a chronic physical health problem 
Overweight and obesity management 
Shared decision making 
Tobacco: preventing uptake, promoting quitting and treating dependence 
Workplace health 
1.1 Reduction in risk of colorectal cancer in people with Lynch syndrome 
1.1.1 
Consider aspirin, to be taken daily and for a period of more than 2 years, to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer in people with Lynch syndrome. 
In January 2020 this was an off-label use of aspirin. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
NICE has produced a patient decision aid to support discussions about taking aspirin . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on prevention of colorectal cancer in people with Lynch syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A1: effectiveness of aspirin in the prevention of colorectal cancer in people with Lynch syndrome . 
1.2 Information for people with colorectal cancer 
1.2.1 
Give people information on all treatment options for colorectal cancer available to them, including: 
surgery, radiotherapy, systemic anticancer therapy or palliative care 
the potential benefits, risks, side effects and implications of treatments, for example, possible effects on bowel and sexual function (see also recommendation 1.6.2 in the section on management of low anterior resection syndrome ), quality of life and independence. 
1.2.2 
Advise people with colorectal cancer of possible reasons why their treatment plan might need to change during their care, including: 
changes from laparoscopic to open surgery or curative to non-curative treatment, and why this change may be the most suitable option for them 
the likelihood of having a stoma, why it might be necessary and for how long it might be needed. 
1.2.3 
If recovery protocols (such as 'enhanced recovery after surgery', ERAS) are used, explain to people with colorectal cancer what these involve and their value in improving their recovery after surgery. 
1.2.4 
Ensure that appropriate specialists discuss possible side effects with people who have had surgery for colorectal cancer, including: 
altered bowel, urinary and sexual function 
physical changes, including anal discharge or bleeding. 
If relevant, have a trained stoma professional provide information on the care and management of stomas and on learning to live with a stoma. 
1.2.5 
Emphasise to people the importance of monitoring and managing side effects during non-surgical treatment to try to prevent permanent damage (for example, monitoring prolonged sensory symptoms after platinum-based chemotherapy treatment, which can be a sign that the dose needs to be reduced to minimise future permanent peripheral neuropathy). 
1.2.6 
Give people who have had treatments for colorectal cancer information about possible short-term, long-term, permanent and late side effects which can affect quality of life, including: 
pain 
altered bowel, urinary or sexual function 
nerve damage and neuropathy 
mental and emotional changes, including anxiety, depression, chemotherapy-related cognitive impairment, and changes to self-perception and social identity . 
1.2.7 
Help people prepare for discharge after treatment for colorectal cancer by giving them advice on: 
adapting physical activity to maintain their quality of life 
diet, including advice on foods that can cause or contribute to bowel problems such as diarrhoea, flatulence, incontinence and difficulty in emptying the bowels 
stopping smoking (see the NICE guideline on tobacco: preventing uptake, promoting quitting and treating dependence ) 
how long their recovery might take 
how, when and where to seek help if side effects become problematic. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information for people with colorectal cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E3: information needs of people prior, during and after treatment for colorectal cancer . 
1.3 Management of local disease 
Acute left-sided large bowel obstruction 
1.3.1 
Consider stenting for people presenting with acute left-sided large bowel obstruction who are going to have treatment with palliative intent. 
1.3.2 
Offer either stenting or emergency surgery for people presenting with acute left-sided large bowel obstruction if potentially curative treatment is suitable for them. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on acute left-sided large bowel obstruction . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C9: effectiveness of stenting for acute large bowel obstruction . 
People with rectal cancer 
Treatment for people with early rectal cancer (cT1-T2, cN0, M0) 
1.3.3 
Offer one of the treatments shown in table 1 to people with early rectal cancer ( cT1-T2, cN0, M0 ) after discussing the implications of each treatment and reaching a shared decision with the person about the best option. 
Table 1 Treatment choices for early rectal cancer (cT1-T2, cN0, M0), and implications of each treatment 
- 
Transanal excision (TAE), including transanal minimally invasive surgery (TAMIS) and transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEMS) 
Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) 
Total mesorectal excision (TME) 
Type of procedure 
Endoscopic/Surgery 
Endoscopic 
Surgery 
Minimally invasive procedure 
Yes 
Yes 
Possible 
Resection of bowel (may have more impact on sexual and bowel function) 
No 
No 
Yes 
Stoma needed (a permanent or temporary opening in the abdomen for waste to pass through) 
No 
No 
Possible 
General anaesthetic needed (and the possibility of associated complications) 
Yes 
No, conscious sedation 
Yes 
Able to do a full thickness excision (better chance of removing cancerous cells and more accurate prediction of lymph node involvement) 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Removal of lymph nodes (more accurate staging of the cancer so better chance of cure) 
No 
No 
Yes 
Conversion to more invasive surgery needed if complication 
Possible 
Possible 
Possible 
Further surgery needed depending on histology 
Possible 
Possible 
Usually no 
Usual hospital stay 
1 to 2 days 
1 to 2 days 
5 to 7 days 
External scarring 
No 
No 
Yes 
Possible complications include (in alphabetical order) 
Abdominal pain 
Bleeding 
Mild anal incontinence 
Perirectal abscess/sepsis and stricture (narrowing) 
Perforation 
Suture line dehiscence (wound reopening) 
Urinary retention 
Abdominal pain 
Bleeding 
Bloating 
Perforation 
Adhesions 
Anastomotic leak (leaking of bowel contents into the abdomen) 
Anastomotic stricture (narrowing at internal operation site) 
Bleeding 
Incisional hernia (hernia where the surgical incision was made) 
Injury to neighbouring structures 
Pelvic abscess 
Urinary retention 
Some of the potential complications shown in the table were identified from the evidence review, others are based on the committee's expertise and experience. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on treatment for people with early rectal cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C1: treatment for early rectal cancer . 
Preoperative treatment for people with rectal cancer 
1.3.4 
Do not offer preoperative radiotherapy to people with early rectal cancer ( cT1-T2 cN0, M0 ), unless as part of a clinical trial. 
1.3.5 
Offer preoperative radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy to people with rectal cancer that is cT1-T2, cN1-N2, M0 , or cT3-T4, any cN, M0 . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on preoperative treatment for people with rectal cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C1: treatment for early rectal cancer and evidence review C2: preoperative radiotherapy and chemoradiotherapy for rectal cancer . 
Surgery for people with rectal cancer 
1.3.6 
Offer surgery to people with rectal cancer ( cT1-T2, cN1-N2, M0 , or cT3-T4, any cN, M0 ) who have a resectable tumour. 
1.3.7 
Inform people with a complete clinical and radiological response to neoadjuvant treatment who wish to defer surgery that there is a risk of recurrence, and there are no prognostic factors to guide selection for deferral of surgery. For those who choose to defer, encourage their participation in a clinical trial and ensure that data is collected via a national registry. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgery for people with rectal cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C4: deferral of surgery in people having neoadjuvant therapy for rectal cancer . 
Surgical technique for people with rectal cancer 
1.3.8 
Offer laparoscopic surgery for rectal cancer. 
Laparoscopic resection is recommended as an alternative to open resection for treating rectal cancer when both techniques are considered suitable. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on laparoscopic surgery (TA105, 2006) . 
1.3.9 
Consider open surgery if clinically indicated, for example by locally advanced tumours, multiple previous abdominal operations or previous pelvic surgery. 
1.3.10 
Consider robotic surgery only within established programmes that have appropriate audited outcomes. 
1.3.11 
Consider transanal total mesorectal excision (TME) surgery only in the context of research, in line with NICE's HealthTech guidance on transanal total mesorectal excision for rectal cancer . [amended 2021] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgical technique for people with rectal cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C3: optimal surgical technique for rectal cancer . 
People with locally advanced or recurrent rectal cancer 
1.3.12 
Consider referring people with locally advanced primary or recurrent rectal cancer that might potentially need multi-visceral or beyond-TME surgery to a specialist centre to discuss exenterative surgery. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on locally advanced or recurrent rectal cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C5: effectiveness of exenterative surgery for locally advanced or recurrent rectal cancer . 
Surgical volumes for rectal cancer operations 
1.3.13 
Hospitals performing major resection for rectal cancer should perform at least 10 of these operations each year. 
1.3.14 
Individual surgeons performing major resection for rectal cancer should perform at least 5 of these operations each year. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgical volumes for rectal cancer operations . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F1: surgical volumes and outcomes for rectal cancer . 
Adjuvant systemic anticancer therapy for people with rectal cancer 
1.3.15 
For people with stage 3 rectal cancer ( pT1-4, pN1-2, M0 ) treated with short-course radiotherapy or no preoperative treatment, offer: 
capecitabine in combination with oxaliplatin (CAPOX) for 3 months, or if this is not suitable 
either: 
oxaliplatin in combination with 5-fluorouracil and folinic acid (FOLFOX) for 3 to 6 months, or 
single-agent fluoropyrimidine (for example, capecitabine) for 6 months. 
Base the choice on the person's histopathology (for example pT1-T3 and pN1 , and pT4 and/or pN2 ), performance status, personal preferences, any comorbidities and age. 
In August 2025, the use of some treatments was off label: 
capecitabine in combination with oxaliplatin (though CAPOX is common in UK clinical practice) 
capecitabine and FOLFOX as adjuvant treatment in rectal cancer. 
See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on duration of adjuvant chemotherapy for people with colorectal cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C8: optimal duration of adjuvant chemotherapy for colorectal cancer . 
People with colon cancer 
Preoperative treatment for people with colon cancer 
1.3.16 
Consider preoperative systemic anticancer therapy for people with cT4 colon cancer. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on preoperative treatment for people with colon cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C7: preoperative chemotherapy for non-metastatic colon cancer . 
Surgical technique for people with colon cancer 
1.3.17 
Laparoscopic resection is recommended as an alternative to open resection for treating colon cancer when both techniques are considered suitable. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on laparoscopic surgery (TA105, 2006) . 
Adjuvant systemic anticancer therapy for people with colon cancer 
1.3.18 
For people with stage 3 colon cancer ( pT1-4, pN1-2, M0 ), offer: 
capecitabine in combination with oxaliplatin (CAPOX) for 3 months, or if this is not suitable 
either: 
oxaliplatin in combination with 5-fluorouracil and folinic acid (FOLFOX) for 3 to 6 months, or 
single-agent fluoropyrimidine (for example, capecitabine) for 6 months. 
Capecitabine monotherapy and oxaliplatin in combination with 5-fluorouracil and folinic acid are recommended as options for the adjuvant treatment of stage 3 (Dukes' C) colon cancer. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on capecitabine and oxaliplatin (TA100, 2006) . 
Base the choice on the person's histopathology (for example pT1-T3 and pN1 , and pT4 and/or pN2 ), performance status, personal preferences, any comorbidities and age. 
In August 2025, the use of some treatments was off label: 
capecitabine in combination with oxaliplatin (though CAPOX is common in UK clinical practice) 
capecitabine for 3 months' duration of adjuvant treatment. 
See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on duration of adjuvant chemotherapy for people with colorectal cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C8: optimal duration of adjuvant chemotherapy for colorectal cancer . 
1.4 Molecular biomarkers to guide systemic anticancer therapy 
Also see NICE's HealthTech guidance on molecular testing strategies for Lynch syndrome in people with colorectal cancer . 
1.4.1 
Test for RAS and BRAF V600E mutations in all people with metastatic colorectal cancer suitable for systemic anticancer treatment. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on molecular biomarkers to guide systemic anticancer therapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B1: use of molecular biomarkers to guide systemic therapy . 
1.5 Management of advanced or metastatic colorectal cancer 
Systemic anticancer therapy for untreated advanced or metastatic colorectal cancer 
High MSI or MMR deficiency disease 
1.5.1 
Nivolumab with ipilimumab is recommended as an option for untreated unresectable or metastatic colorectal cancer with high microsatellite instability (MSI) or mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on nivolumab plus ipilimumab (TA1065, 2025) . 
1.5.2 
Pembrolizumab is recommended as an option for untreated metastatic colorectal cancer with high MSI or MMR deficiency. It should be stopped after 2 years or earlier if disease progresses. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on pembrolizumab (TA709, 2021) . 
EGFR-expressing, RAS wild-type disease 
1.5.3 
Cetuximab is recommended as an option for untreated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-expressing, RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer in combination with: 
5-fluorouracil, folinic acid and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) or 
5-fluorouracil, folinic acid and irinotecan (FOLFIRI). 
For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on cetuximab (TA439, 2017) . 
RAS wild-type disease 
1.5.4 
Panitumumab is recommended as an option for untreated RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer in combination with: 
FOLFOX or 
FOLFIRI. 
For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on panitumumab (TA439, 2017) . 
Other systemic anticancer therapy for untreated disease 
1.5.5 
Bevacizumab (originator and biosimilars) with fluoropyrimidine-based chemotherapy is recommended as an option for untreated metastatic colorectal cancer when targeted treatments or immunotherapy are unsuitable, and chemotherapy would otherwise be offered. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on bevacizumab (TA1136, 2026) . 
1.5.6 
Capecitabine is recommended as an option for untreated metastatic colorectal cancer. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on capecitabine (TA61, 2003) . 
Systemic anticancer therapy for previously treated advanced or metastatic colorectal cancer 
Other treatment options may also be available for second-line treatment. See the NHS England Cancer Drug Fund list . 
High MSI or MMR deficiency disease 
1.5.7 
Nivolumab with ipilimumab is recommended as an option for treating metastatic colorectal cancer with high MSI or MMR deficiency after fluoropyrimidine-based combination chemotherapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on nivolumab with ipilimumab (TA716, 2021) . 
1.5.8 
Pembrolizumab is recommended as an option for treating unresectable or metastatic colorectal cancer with high MSI or MMR deficiency after fluoropyrimidine-based combination chemotherapy, only if nivolumab with ipilimumab cannot be used. It should be stopped at 2 years of uninterrupted treatment, or earlier if the cancer progresses. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on pembrolizumab (TA914, 2023) . 
BRAF V600E mutation-positive disease 
1.5.9 
Encorafenib with cetuximab is recommended as an option for treating BRAF V600E mutation-positive metastatic colorectal cancer after previous systemic treatment. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on encorafenib plus cetuximab (TA668, 2021) . 
Other systemic anticancer therapy for previously treated disease 
1.5.10 
Bevacizumab (originator and biosimilars) with fluoropyrimidine-based chemotherapy is recommended as an option for second-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer when targeted treatments or immunotherapy are unsuitable, and chemotherapy would otherwise be offered. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on bevacizumab (TA1136, 2026) . 
1.5.11 
For medicines recommended as options for metastatic colorectal cancer previously treated with fluoropyrimidine-based chemotherapy, anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapy or anti-EGFR therapy, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
trifluridine–tipiracil with bevacizumab, after 2 systemic treatments (TA1008, 2024) 
fruquintinib, after 2 systemic treatments, if trifluridine–tipiracil with bevacizumab is not suitable (TA1079, 2025) 
regorafenib (TA866, 2023) 
trifluridine–tipiracil (TA405, 2016) . 
1.5.12 
For medicines not recommended for previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
aflibercept in combination with irinotecan and fluorouracil-based therapy after oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy (TA307, 2014) 
cetuximab monotherapy or combination chemotherapy and panitumumab monotherapy after first-line chemotherapy (TA242, 2012) . 
Neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase (NTRK) fusion-positive solid tumours 
1.5.13 
Larotrectinib is recommended as an option through the Cancer Drugs Fund for treating locally advanced or metastatic NTRK fusion-positive solid tumours when there are no other satisfactory treatment options. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on larotrectinib (TA630, 2020) . 
People with an asymptomatic primary tumour 
1.5.14 
Consider surgical resection of the primary tumour for people with incurable metastatic colorectal cancer who are receiving systemic anticancer therapy and have an asymptomatic primary tumour. Discuss the implications of the treatment options with the person before making a shared decision (see table 2). 
Table 2 Factors to take into account when considering resection of the asymptomatic primary tumour 
Option 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Resection of the asymptomatic primary tumour 
Possible improvement in overall survival rate (based on low-quality evidence from research) 
Avoidance of primary tumour-related symptoms such as obstruction, perforation, bleeding and pain 
Around 5 in 100 people will have severe postoperative complications (based on moderate-quality evidence from research) 
Systemic therapy still needed, and may be delayed if surgical complications occur 
No resection (systemic anticancer therapy only) 
Avoids surgery and the potential for postoperative complications 
Around 20 in 100 people will develop primary tumour-related symptoms such as obstruction, perforation, bleeding and pain that need surgery (based on low-quality evidence from research) 
Advantages and disadvantages in table 2 are based on committee expertise unless otherwise indicated. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on asymptomatic primary tumour . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D1: surgery for asymptomatic primary tumour . 
People with metastatic colorectal cancer in the liver 
1.5.15 
Consider resection, either simultaneous or sequential, after discussion by a multidisciplinary team with expertise in resection of disease in all involved sites. 
1.5.16 
Consider perioperative systemic anticancer therapy if liver resection is a suitable treatment. 
1.5.17 
Consider chemotherapy with local ablative techniques for people with colorectal liver metastases that are unsuitable for liver resection after discussion by a specialist multidisciplinary team. 
1.5.18 
Do not offer selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) as first-line treatment for people with colorectal liver metastases that are unsuitable for local treatment. See NICE's HealthTech guidance on selective internal radiation therapy for unresectable colorectal metastases in the liver , which recommends that SIRT should only be offered: 
with special arrangements for clinical governance, consent, and audit or research to people who are chemotherapy intolerant or who have liver metastases that are refractory to chemotherapy 
in the context of research to people who can have chemotherapy. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on metastatic colorectal cancer in the liver . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D2a: treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer in the liver amenable to treatment with curative intent and evidence review D2b: optimal combination and sequence of treatments in patients presenting with metastatic colorectal cancer in the liver not amenable to treatment with curative intent . 
People with metastatic colorectal cancer in the lung 
1.5.19 
Consider metastasectomy, ablation or stereotactic body radiation therapy for people with lung metastases that are suitable for local treatment, after discussion by a multidisciplinary team that includes a thoracic surgeon and a specialist in non-surgical ablation. 
1.5.20 
Consider biopsy for people with a single lung lesion to exclude primary lung cancer. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on metastatic colorectal cancer in the lung . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D3: treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer in the lung amenable to local treatment . 
People with metastatic colorectal cancer in the peritoneum 
1.5.21 
For people with colorectal cancer metastases limited to the peritoneum: 
offer systemic anticancer therapy, and 
within a multidisciplinary team, discuss referral to a nationally commissioned specialist centre to consider cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC). 
See also NICE's HealthTech guidance on cytoreductive surgery with HIPEC for peritoneal carcinomatosis . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on metastatic colorectal cancer in the peritoneum . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D4: local and systemic treatments for metastatic colorectal cancer isolated in the peritoneum . 
1.6 Ongoing care and support 
Follow-up for detection of local recurrence and distant metastases 
1.6.1 
For people who have had potentially curative surgical treatment for non-metastatic colorectal cancer, offer follow-up for detection of local recurrence and distant metastases for the first 3 years. Follow-up should include serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on follow-up for detection of local recurrence and distant metastases . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E1: follow-up to detect recurrence after treatment for non-metastatic colorectal cancer . 
Management of low anterior resection syndrome 
1.6.2 
Give information on low anterior resection syndrome (LARS) to people who will potentially have sphincter-preserving surgery. Advise them to seek help from primary care if they think they have symptoms of LARS, such as: 
increased frequency of stool 
urgency with or without incontinence of stool 
feeling of incomplete emptying of the bowels 
fragmentation of stool (passing small amounts little and often) 
difficulty in differentiating between gas and stool. 
1.6.3 
Assess people with symptoms of LARS using a validated patient-administered questionnaire (for example, the Low Anterior Resection Syndrome score (LARS score), at the European Society of Coloproctology ). 
1.6.4 
Offer treatment (such as dietary management, laxatives, anti-bulking agents, anti-diarrhoeal agents, or anti-spasmodic agents) in primary care to people with bowel dysfunction symptoms associated with LARS. Seek advice from secondary care if the treatment is not successful. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on management of low anterior resection syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E2: optimal management of low anterior resection syndrome . 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines terms that have been used in a specific way for this guideline. For general definitions, please see the NICE glossary . 
Beyond-TME surgery 
Beyond total mesorectal excision (TME) surgery is when the tumour extends beyond what is achievable to resect by TME and needs more extensive surgery to achieve clear margins. 
Major resection for rectal cancer 
Major resection for rectal cancer means a surgical operation when part or all of the rectum is removed, including anterior resection and abdominoperineal resection. 
Recovery protocols 
Recovery protocols, such as 'enhanced recovery after surgery' (ERAS), are perioperative care pathways designed to promote early recovery for patients undergoing major surgery by optimising the person's health before surgery and maintaining health and functioning after surgery. 
Social identity 
Social identity is about changes to people's concept of themselves as a result of either their cancer, or the long-term side effects from treatment. For example, it could cover changes from being a previously fit person to someone who has physical or mental health problems, from being someone with the expectation of years to live to someone with a limited life expectancy, or the change from being a carer to becoming cared for. 
TNM classification 
This guideline uses the tumour, node, metastasis (TNM) classification developed by the Union for Interventional Cancer Control (UICC) to describe the stage of the cancer. Please refer to The TNM Classification of Malignant Tumours, 8th Edition for further information. In this guideline early rectal cancer is defined as cT1-2, cN0, M0. cTNM refers to clinical classification based on evidence acquired before treatment, for example imaging, physical examination and endoscopy. pTNM refers to pathological classification based on histopathology. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
