Overview | Healthcare-associated infections: prevention and control in primary and community care | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Healthcare-associated infections
Healthcare-associated infections: prevention and control in primary and community care 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG139 
Published: 
28 March 2012
Last updated: 
15 February 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers preventing and controlling healthcare-associated infections in children, young people and adults in primary and community care settings. It provides a blueprint for the infection prevention and control precautions that should be applied by everyone involved in delivering NHS care and treatment. 
In February 2017 , w e updated recommendations on safe use and disposal of sharps to link to relevant legislation, and added a safety alert on chlorhexidine to recommendations on vascular access devices. 
In February 2017 a footnote was added to recommendation 1.1.4.2  linking to Health and Safety (Sharp Instruments in Healthcare) Regulations 2013. A footnote was also added to recommendations 1.4.3.1 , 1.4.3.8 , 1.4.4.1  and 1.4.4.11  linking to a safety alert on chlorhexidine. Other footnotes were updated with references to revised or replaced British Standards and other regulations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
hand decontamination 
use of personal protective equipment 
safe use and disposal of sharps 
waste disposal 
long-term urinary catheters 
enteral feeding 
vascular access devices   
Who is it for? 
Commissioners and providers 
Healthcare professionals working in primary and community care settings, including ambulance services, schools and prisons 
Children, young people and adults receiving healthcare for which standard infection-control precautions apply in primary and community care, and their families and carers 
Is this guideline up to date? 
We checked this guideline in January 2017 . We identified no major studies that will affect the recommendations in the next 3 to 5 years. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG2 (June 2003). 
This guideline was previously called infection: prevention and control of healthcare-associated infections in primary and community care. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Infection prevention and control 
Next page 
Key priorities for implementation 
Back to top
