Overview | Lyme disease | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Bites and stings
Lyme disease
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG95 
Published: 
11 April 2018
Last updated: 
17 October 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing Lyme disease. It aims to raise awareness of when Lyme disease should be suspected and ensure that people have prompt and consistent diagnosis and treatment. It does not cover preventing Lyme disease. 
Last reviewed: 17 October 2018 
We corrected the information in table 2 relating to treatments for Lyme carditis in children aged 9 to 12 who are haemodynamically unstable. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
being aware of Lyme disease 
symptoms and history taking 
which tests to use and when 
treatment with antibiotics 
treatment and support for ongoing symptoms 
managing Lyme disease in pregnant women and their babies 
information for people with Lyme disease 
See a  visual summary of the recommendations on testing for Lyme disease. 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals including GPs, nurses, specialists and microbiologists 
Commissioners and providers 
People with Lyme disease, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Lyme disease 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
