Overview | Behaviour change: digital and mobile health interventions | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Lifestyle and wellbeing
Behaviour change
Behaviour change: digital and mobile health interventions
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG183 
Published: 
07 October 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Overview 
This guideline covers interventions that use a digital or mobile platform to help people eat more healthily, become more active, stop smoking, reduce their alcohol intake or practise safer sex. The interventions include those delivered by text message, apps, wearable devices or the internet. The guideline only includes those that are delivered by the technology itself and not by healthcare professionals using technology to deliver interventions. 
NICE has also produced guidelines covering general approaches to behaviour change and individual approaches to behaviour change . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
developing digital and mobile health interventions 
commissioning digital and mobile health interventions 
using digital and mobile health interventions 
interventions for  diet and physical activity 
interventions for smoking 
interventions for alcohol use 
interventions for unsafe sexual behaviour 
Who is it for? 
Local policy makers and commissioners 
Individuals, groups or organisations wishing to work or working with health and social care service providers 
Designers and providers of digital and mobile health interventions and programmes 
Behaviour change practitioners 
Trained staff working in health and social care services who have contact with the general public 
People who want to improve their health-related behaviours (concerning diet and physical activity, smoking, alcohol use and safer sex), their families or carers, and other members of the public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guideline. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Promoting health and preventing premature mortality in black, Asian and other minority ethnic groups 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
