Context | Lower urinary tract symptoms in men: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Urological conditions
Lower urinary tract symptoms
Lower urinary tract symptoms in men: management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG97 
Published: 
23 May 2010
Last updated: 
03 June 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Context 
Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) comprise storage, voiding and post-micturition symptoms affecting the lower urinary tract. There are many possible causes of LUTS, such as abnormalities or abnormal function of the prostate, urethra, bladder or sphincters. In men, the most common cause is benign prostate enlargement (BPE), which obstructs the bladder outlet. BPE happens when the number of cells in the prostate increases, a condition called benign prostatic hyperplasia. Other conditions that can cause LUTS include detrusor muscle weakness or overactivity, prostate inflammation (prostatitis), urinary tract infection, prostate cancer and neurological disease. 
LUTS in men are best categorised into voiding, storage or post-micturition symptoms to help define the source of the problem. Voiding symptoms include weak or intermittent urinary stream, straining, hesitancy, terminal dribbling and incomplete emptying. Storage symptoms include urgency, frequency, urgency incontinence and nocturia. The major post-micturition symptom is post-micturition dribbling, which is common and bothersome. Although LUTS do not usually cause severe illness, they can considerably reduce quality of life and may point to serious pathology of the urogenital tract. 
LUTS are a major burden for the ageing male population. Age is an important risk factor for LUTS and the prevalence of LUTS increases as men get older. Bothersome LUTS can occur in up to 30% of men older than 65 years. This is a large group potentially requiring treatment. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Recommendations for research 
Back to top
