Overview | Self-harm: assessment, management and preventing recurrence | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Self-harm
Self-harm: assessment, management and preventing recurrence 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG225 
Published: 
07 September 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessment, management and preventing recurrence for children, young people and adults who have self-harmed. It includes those with a mental health problem, neurodevelopmental disorder or learning disability and applies to all sectors that work with people who have self-harmed. 
In this guideline, self-harm is defined as intentional self-poisoning or injury, irrespective of the apparent purpose. The guideline does not cover repetitive, stereotypical self-injurious behaviour (such as head banging). 
Last reviewed: 16 August 2024 
We simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines (for example, the  NICE guideline on service user experience in adult mental health ). This is a presentational change only, and no changes to practice are intended. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG16 (published July 2004) and NICE guideline CG133 (published November 2011). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
information and support 
consent and confidentiality 
safeguarding 
involving family members and carers 
psychosocial assessment and care by mental health professionals 
risk assessment tools and scales 
assessment and care by healthcare professionals and social care practitioners 
assessment and care by professionals from other sectors 
admission to and discharge from hospital 
initial aftercare after an episode of self-harm 
interventions for self-harm 
supporting people to be safe after self-harm 
safer prescribing and dispensing 
training  and  supervision 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals and social care practitioners, commissioners and providers 
Staff in educational settings 
Third sector organisations 
The criminal justice system 
People using self-harm services, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Suicide prevention 
Self‑harm 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
