Key priorities for implementation | Donor milk banks: service operation | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Postnatal care
Donor milk banks: service operation
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG93 
Published: 
24 February 2010
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Quality assurance
Screening and selecting donors
Handling donor milk at the milk bank
Tracking and tracing
Key priorities for implementation 
Quality assurance 
Use Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) principles in all quality assurance processes. 
Validate, calibrate and maintain all equipment used in donor milk handling and processing and keep records of this. Ensure that the equipment is used according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
All milk bank staff should have ongoing training that is relevant to their job and is recorded. Training should cover good practice and should ensure that each staff member: 
is competent in performing their job 
understands the technical processes relevant to their job 
understands how the milk bank is organised and how its health and safety and quality systems work 
understands the regulatory, legal and ethical aspects of their work. 
All donor milk administered in the NHS should be from milk banks that can demonstrate adherence to the NICE guidance on the operation of donor milk banks. 
Screening and selecting donors 
Follow the stepped screening process detailed in recommendations 1.12 to 1.21 when recruiting donors. 
Do not routinely repeat serological tests while the donor is donating milk. 
Handling donor milk at the milk bank 
Before pasteurisation, test a sample from each batch of pooled donor milk for microbial contamination and discard if samples exceed a count of: 
10 5 colony-forming units (CFU)/ml for total viable microorganisms or 
10 4 CFU/ml for Enterobacteriaceae or 
10 4 CFU/ml for Staphylococcus aureus. 
Regularly test pasteurised donor milk for microbial contamination. Base the testing schedule on the volume and throughput of milk. Test: 
either at least once a month or every 10 cycles, depending on which comes first 
and 
on an ad-hoc basis if any new processes, equipment or staff are introduced, or if there are concerns about any part of the process. 
Tracking and tracing 
At all stages, donor milk containers should be labelled clearly for identification. Clearly identify milk that is ready to be used. 
Only supply donor milk to hospitals or neonatal units that agree to comply with the tracking procedures for milk outlined by the milk bank. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Previous page 
Introduction 
Back to top
