Overview | Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD): assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Liver conditions
Chronic liver disease
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD): assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG49 
Published: 
06 July 2016
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers how to identify the adults, young people and children with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) who have advanced liver fibrosis and are most at risk of further complications. It outlines the lifestyle changes and pharmacological treatments that can manage NAFLD and advanced liver fibrosis. 
Last reviewed: 24 October 2024 
We checked this guideline and are updating it. See the guideline in development page for progress on the update. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
The guideline includes recommendations on: 
identifying groups at higher risk of NAFLD 
diagnosing NAFLD in children and young people , and referring them to tertiary care 
identifying adults, young people and children with advanced liver fibrosis 
lifestyle modifications for NAFLD 
pharmacological treatment for advanced liver fibrosis 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers of healthcare 
People with NAFLD, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Liver disease 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
