Overview | Spinal metastases and metastatic spinal cord compression | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Complications of cancer
Spinal metastases and metastatic spinal cord compression
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG234 
Published: 
06 September 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers recognition, referral, investigation and management of spinal metastases and metastatic spinal cord compression (MSCC). It is also relevant for direct malignant infiltration of the spine and associated cord compression. It aims to improve early diagnosis and treatment to prevent neurological injury and improve prognosis. 
Last reviewed: 19 March 2026 
We simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines. This is a presentational change only, and no changes to practice are intended. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG75 (November 2008). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
organising and delivering services 
information and support 
recognising spinal metastases or MSCC 
immobilisation and imaging investigations 
mobilisation and assessment of spinal stability 
pain management and corticosteroid therapy 
radiotherapy and invasive interventions 
rehabilitation and supportive care 
See visual summaries on the recommendations for: 
spinal metastases: initial assessment and management 
spinal metastases: radiotherapy and invasive interventions 
metastatic spinal cord compression: initial assessment and management 
metastatic spinal cord compression: radiotherapy and invasive interventions 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals working in primary, secondary and tertiary care, palliative care and hospices 
Cancer alliances (or equivalent local partnerships) 
Commissioners of metastatic spinal cord preventative, diagnostic and treatment services (including integrated care boards and NHS England specialised commissioning) 
Voluntary sector organisations 
People with suspected or diagnosed spinal metastases, direct malignant infiltration of the spine or MSCC, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Spinal metastases and metastatic spinal cord compression 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
