Overview | Rheumatoid arthritis in adults: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Musculoskeletal conditions
Arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis in adults: management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG100 
Published: 
11 July 2018
Last updated: 
12 October 2020
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing rheumatoid arthritis. It aims to improve quality of life by ensuring that people with rheumatoid arthritis have the right treatment to slow the progression of their condition and control their symptoms. People should also have rapid access to specialist care if their condition suddenly worsens. 
NICE has also produced technology appraisal guidance on drug treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. 
Last reviewed: 19 November 2024 
We added links to relevant NICE technology appraisal guidance in the section on further pharmacological management . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
We reviewed the evidence and do not plan to update this guideline. See the surveillance decision for more details .   
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG79 (February 2009). 
Next review:  This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
investigations following diagnosis 
treat-to-target strategy  and  initial pharmacological management 
symptom control  and  monitoring 
It also includes recommendations on: 
investigations for diagnosis and  referral from primary care 
non-pharmacological management and  the multidisciplinary team 
communication and education 
timing and referral for surgery 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with rheumatoid arthritis and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Rheumatoid arthritis in over 16s 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
