10 Reducing the risk of epilepsy-related death including sudden unexpected death in epilepsy | Epilepsies in children, young people and adults | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Epilepsy
Epilepsies in children, young people and adults
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG217 
Published: 
27 April 2022
Last updated: 
30 January 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
1 Diagnosis and assessment of epilepsy 
2 Information and support 
3 Referral to tertiary specialist services 
4 Principles of treatment, safety, monitoring and withdrawal 
5 Treating epileptic seizures in children, young people and adults 
6 Treating childhood-onset epilepsies 
7 Treating status epilepticus, repeated or cluster seizures, and prolonged seizures 
8 Non-pharmacological treatments 
9 Psychological, neurobehavioural, cognitive and developmental comorbidities in epilepsy 
10 Reducing the risk of epilepsy-related death including sudden unexpected death in epilepsy 
11 Service provision and transition 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
10.1 Risk factors
10.2 Interventions
10 Reducing the risk of epilepsy-related death including sudden unexpected death in epilepsy 
10.1 Risk factors 
10.1.1 
Be aware that epilepsy is associated with an increased risk of premature death, including a risk of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). 
10.1.2 
Be aware that potentially modifiable risk factors for SUDEP include: 
non-adherence to medication 
alcohol and drug misuse 
having focal to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures or generalised tonic-clonic seizures 
having uncontrolled seizures 
living alone 
sleeping alone without supervision. 
10.1.3 
Be aware that the risk of epilepsy-related death is increased in people with: 
previous brain injury 
previous central nervous system infection 
metastatic cancer 
previous stroke 
abnormal neurological examination findings. 
10.1.4 
Discuss with people with epilepsy, and their families and carers if appropriate, their individual risk of epilepsy-related death, including SUDEP, from the time of diagnosis onwards. For young children, this discussion should be with the child's parents or carers. Discussion should include: 
supporting them to understand the risks of epilepsy-related death, including SUDEP 
exploring and agreeing ways to reduce the risks. 
10.1.5 
Discuss the risk of SUDEP with people who have seizures during sleep and, if appropriate, include their families and carers. Provide information on minimising risks, including taking their medication as prescribed. 
10.2 Interventions 
10.2.1 
Discuss the possibility of introducing or increasing night-time supervision, for example, a parent or carer may wish to use a night monitor for people with epilepsy who have seizures during sleep and have been assessed to be at higher risk of epilepsy-related death. 
10.2.2 
Support people with epilepsy to take their medications as prescribed to reduce seizures. Explain that uncontrolled seizures increase the risk of epilepsy-related death, particularly for people with generalised tonic-clonic seizures or focal to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures. Follow the recommendations in NICE's guideline on medicines adherence . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on reducing the risk of epilepsy-related death including sudden unexpected death in epilepsy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in the following evidence reviews: 
evidence review 17: prediction of death, including SUDEP, in people with epilepsy 
evidence review 18: modifiable risk factors for epilepsy related mortality 
evidence review 19: reducing the risk of seizure-related mortality, including SUDEP . 
Next page 
11 Service provision and transition 
Previous page 
9 Psychological, neurobehavioural, cognitive and developmental comorbidities in epilepsy 
Back to top
