Recommendations | Hyperparathyroidism (primary): diagnosis, assessment and initial management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Parathyroid disorders
Hyperparathyroidism (primary): diagnosis, assessment and initial management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG132 
Published: 
23 May 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
1.1 Diagnostic testing in primary care
1.2 Testing and assessment in secondary care
1.3 Referral for surgery
1.4 Surgical management
1.5 Non-surgical management
1.6 Monitoring
1.7 Pregnancy
1.8 Information and support
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations and has information about prescribing medicines (including off‑label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity) and safeguarding. 
1.1 Diagnostic testing in primary care 
Measuring albumin-adjusted serum calcium 
1.1.1 
Measure albumin-adjusted serum calcium for people with any of the following features, which might indicate primary hyperparathyroidism: 
symptoms of hypercalcaemia , such as thirst, frequent or excessive urination, or constipation 
osteoporosis or a previous fragility fracture (for recommendations on assessing the risk of fragility fracture in people with osteoporosis, see the NICE guideline on osteoporosis ) 
a renal stone (for recommendations on assessing and managing renal stones, see the NICE guideline on renal and ureteric stones ) 
an incidental finding of elevated albumin-adjusted serum calcium (2.6 mmol/litre or above). 
1.1.2 
Consider measuring albumin-adjusted serum calcium for people with chronic non-differentiated symptoms . 
1.1.3 
Do not measure ionised calcium when testing for primary hyperparathyroidism. 
1.1.4 
Repeat the albumin-adjusted serum calcium measurement at least once if the first measurement is either: 
2.6 mmol/litre or above or 
2.5 mmol/litre or above and features of primary hyperparathyroidism are present. 
Base the decision to carry out further repeat measurements on the level of albumin-adjusted serum calcium and the person's symptoms. 
Measuring parathyroid hormone 
1.1.5 
Measure parathyroid hormone (PTH) for people whose albumin-adjusted serum calcium level is either: 
2.6 mmol/litre or above on at least 2 separate occasions or 
2.5 mmol/litre or above on at least 2 separate occasions and primary hyperparathyroidism is suspected. 
1.1.6 
When measuring PTH, use a random sample and do a concurrent measurement of the albumin-adjusted serum calcium level. 
1.1.7 
Do not routinely repeat PTH measurement in primary care. 
1.1.8 
Seek advice from a specialist with expertise in primary hyperparathyroidism if the person's PTH measurement is either: 
above the midpoint of the reference range and primary hyperparathyroidism is suspected or 
below the midpoint of the reference range with a concurrent albumin-adjusted serum calcium level of 2.6 mmol/litre or above. 
1.1.9 
Do not offer further investigations for primary hyperparathyroidism if: 
the person's PTH is within the reference range but below the midpoint of the reference range and 
their concurrent albumin-adjusted serum calcium level is below 2.6 mmol/litre. 
1.1.10 
Look for alternative diagnoses, including malignancy, if the person's PTH is below the lower limit of the reference range. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on diagnostic testing in primary care . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: indications for diagnostic testing and evidence review B: diagnostic tests . 
1.2 Testing and assessment in secondary care 
Measuring vitamin D 
1.2.1 
For people with a probable diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism, measure vitamin D and offer vitamin D supplements if needed. 
Excluding familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia 
1.2.2 
To differentiate primary hyperparathyroidism from familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia, measure urine calcium excretion using any one of the following tests: 
24-hour urinary calcium excretion 
random renal calcium:creatinine excretion ratio 
random calcium:creatinine clearance ratio. 
Assessment after diagnosis 
1.2.3 
For people with a confirmed diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism: 
assess symptoms and comorbidities 
measure eGFR (estimated glomerular filtration rate) or serum creatinine 
do a DXA (dual-energy X‑ray absorptiometry) scan of the lumbar spine, distal radius and hip 
do an ultrasound scan of the renal tract. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on testing and assessment in secondary care . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: indications for diagnostic testing and evidence review B: diagnostic tests . 
1.3 Referral for surgery 
1.3.1 
Refer people with a confirmed diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism to a surgeon with expertise in parathyroid surgery if they have: 
symptoms of hypercalcaemia such as thirst, frequent or excessive urination, or constipation or 
end-organ disease (renal stones, fragility fractures or osteoporosis) or 
an albumin-adjusted serum calcium level of 2.85 mmol/litre or above. 
1.3.2 
Consider referral to a surgeon with expertise in parathyroid surgery for people with a confirmed diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism even if they do not have the features listed in recommendation 1.3.1. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on referral for surgery . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: indications for surgery . 
1.4 Surgical management 
Preoperative imaging 
1.4.1 
Offer preoperative imaging (usually ultrasound) to people having surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism if it will inform the surgical approach. 
1.4.2 
Consider a second preoperative imaging modality (usually a sestamibi scan) if it will further guide the surgical approach. 
1.4.3 
Do not offer more preoperative imaging if the first-modality (usually ultrasound) and second-modality scans (usually a sestamibi scan) do not identify an adenoma or are discordant. 
1.4.4 
Proceed with surgery, performed by a surgeon with expertise in 4‑gland exploration, even if preoperative imaging has not identified an adenoma. 
1.4.5 
If preoperative imaging shows an ectopic adenoma, refer the person to a centre with the relevant expertise. 
Type of surgery 
1.4.6 
Offer a choice of either 4‑gland exploration or focused parathyroidectomy to people whose preoperative imaging shows a single adenoma in the neck. Discuss the choice of surgery with the person, and explain: 
what happens during each type of surgery 
how well each type of surgery works 
what types of anaesthesia are used 
how long each type of surgery is likely to take 
how large the resulting scars are likely to be 
the risks of each type of surgery. 
1.4.7 
Offer 4‑gland exploration to people who have had preoperative imaging that does not identify a single adenoma. 
1.4.8 
Consider 4‑gland exploration for people having surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism whose first-modality and second-modality scans are discordant. 
Intraoperative PTH monitoring 
1.4.9 
Do not use intraoperative PTH monitoring in first-time parathyroid surgery. 
Follow-up after surgery 
1.4.10 
Measure albumin-adjusted serum calcium and PTH before discharge after surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism to provide baseline information for later follow‑up. 
1.4.11 
Measure albumin-adjusted serum calcium 3 to 6 months after surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism to confirm whether surgery has been successful. 
1.4.12 
If albumin-adjusted serum calcium is within the reference range 3 to 6 months after surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism, regard the surgery as successful. Monitor albumin-adjusted serum calcium once a year. See the section on monitoring . 
Unsuccessful surgery 
1.4.13 
For people who have had unsuccessful surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism: 
conduct a multidisciplinary team (MDT) review at a specialist centre that includes: 
initial findings from surgery 
previous imaging and histology 
the clinical and biochemical indications for repeat surgery 
offer monitoring as set out in the section on monitoring . 
1.4.14 
If repeat surgery is performed for primary hyperparathyroidism, it should be done at a centre with expertise in reoperative parathyroid surgery. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgical management . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: surgical localisation (for the recommendations on preoperative imaging) 
evidence review E: surgical interventions (for the recommendations on type of surgery) 
evidence review F: management options in failed primary surgery (for the recommendations on unsuccessful surgery) 
evidence review I: monitoring (for the recommendations on follow‑up after surgery). 
1.5 Non-surgical management 
Calcimimetics 
In May 2019, the use of cinacalcet after unsuccessful surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism was off label. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.5.1 
Consider cinacalcet for people with primary hyperparathyroidism if surgery has been unsuccessful, is unsuitable or has been declined, and if their albumin-adjusted serum calcium level is either: 
2.85 mmol/litre or above with symptoms of hypercalcaemia or 
3.0 mmol/litre or above with or without symptoms of hypercalcaemia. 
1.5.2 
For people whose initial albumin-adjusted serum calcium level is 2.85 mmol/litre or above with symptoms of hypercalcaemia, base decisions on whether to continue treatment with cinacalcet on how well it reduces symptoms. 
1.5.3 
For people whose initial albumin-adjusted serum calcium level is 3.0 mmol/litre or above, base decisions on whether to continue treatment with cinacalcet on how well it reduces either symptoms or albumin-adjusted serum calcium level. 
Bisphosphonates 
1.5.4 
Consider a bisphosphonate to reduce fracture risk for people with primary hyperparathyroidism and increased fracture risk. 
1.5.5 
Do not offer bisphosphonates for chronic hypercalcaemia of primary hyperparathyroidism. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on non-surgical management . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review F: management options in failed primary surgery 
evidence review G: calcimimetics 
evidence review H: bisphosphonates . 
1.6 Monitoring 
1.6.1 
Offer monitoring to all people diagnosed with primary hyperparathyroidism, as set out in table 1. 
Table 1 Monitoring for people with primary hyperparathyroidism 
People who have had successful parathyroid surgery 
People who have not had parathyroid surgery, or whose surgery has not been successful 
Measure albumin-adjusted serum calcium once a year. 
Measure albumin-adjusted serum calcium and estimated glomerular filtration rate or serum creatinine once a year, unless the person is taking cinacalcet. (In May 2019, cinacalcet was off label for use after unsuccessful surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines .) 
If the person is taking cinacalcet, offer monitoring as set out in the summary of product characteristics. 
If the results of monitoring raise concerns, follow the recommendation on repeating the measurement in the section on measuring albumin-adjusted serum calcium . 
If the person has osteoporosis, seek specialist opinion according to local pathways on monitoring. 
Consider a dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry scan at diagnosis and every 2 to 3 years. 
If the results of monitoring raise concerns, follow the recommendation on referring people with features listed in the section on referral for surgery . 
If the person has renal stones, seek specialist opinion according to local pathways on monitoring. 
Offer ultrasound of the renal tract at diagnosis, when presenting and if a renal stone is suspected (for recommendations on assessing and managing renal stones, see the NICE guideline on renal and ureteric stones ). 
If the results of monitoring raise concerns, follow the recommendation on referring people with features listed in the section on referral for surgery . 
For people who have had parathyroid surgery for multigland disease, or have disease that recurs after successful surgery, seek specialist endocrine opinion on monitoring. 
For women who are pregnant, see the section on pregnancy . 
For all people with primary hyperparathyroidism, assess cardiovascular risk and fracture risk in line with the NICE guidelines on cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on monitoring . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: management options in failed primary surgery and evidence review I: monitoring . 
1.7 Pregnancy 
Care before pregnancy 
1.7.1 
Offer parathyroid surgery to women who have primary hyperparathyroidism and are considering pregnancy. 
Care during pregnancy 
1.7.2 
Discuss the management of primary hyperparathyroidism for pregnant women with a MDT in a specialist centre, and refer the woman for specialist care if needed. The MDT should include: 
an obstetrician 
a physician with expertise in primary hyperparathyroidism 
a surgeon 
a midwife 
an anaesthetist. 
1.7.3 
Do not offer cinacalcet to pregnant women with primary hyperparathyroidism. 
1.7.4 
Do not offer a bisphosphonate to pregnant women with primary hyperparathyroidism. 
1.7.5 
Be aware that women with primary hyperparathyroidism are at increased risk of hypertensive disease in pregnancy. For recommendations on diagnosing and managing hypertension in pregnant women, see the NICE guideline on hypertension in pregnancy . 
1.7.6 
Consult a specialist centre MDT for advice on monitoring for pregnant women with primary hyperparathyroidism. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on pregnancy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: pregnancy . 
1.8 Information and support 
1.8.1 
Follow the recommendations on enabling people to actively participate in their care in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . 
1.8.2 
Give people with primary hyperparathyroidism information about the condition, including: 
what primary hyperparathyroidism is 
what the parathyroid glands do 
causes of primary hyperparathyroidism 
symptoms 
diagnosis, including diagnosis if calcium or PTH levels are normal 
prognosis 
possible effects on daily life 
possible long-term effects. 
1.8.3 
Give people information about treatments for primary hyperparathyroidism that includes: 
the surgical and non-surgical treatments that are available 
how well the treatments are likely to work 
the advantages and disadvantages of each treatment, including possible complications and side effects 
why these particular treatments are being offered 
why other treatments are not advised. 
1.8.4 
Give advice on how to reduce the symptoms of primary hyperparathyroidism and prepare for surgery or other treatment, including: 
exercise 
diet 
hydration 
pain relief 
what to expect after treatment, recovery time and return to daily activities, including return to work. 
1.8.5 
Discuss ongoing care and monitoring for primary hyperparathyroidism, explaining the type and frequency of monitoring that will be offered and the purpose of each. See the section on monitoring . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information and support . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: patient information . 
Terms used in this guideline 
Advice from a specialist 
This may be a referral or a telephone call to a specialist. 
Chronic non-differentiated symptoms 
Long-term symptoms that could have a number of different causes. Some of these symptoms are experienced by people with primary hyperparathyroidism, but they can also be symptoms of other conditions. Examples include fatigue, mild confusion, bone, muscle or joint pain, anxiety, depression, irritability, low mood, apathy, insomnia, frequent urination, increased thirst and digestive problems. 
Hypercalcaemia 
A high level of calcium in the blood, defined as an albumin-adjusted serum calcium level of 2.6 mmol/litre or above. Although hypercalcaemia often causes few or no symptoms, some people feel unusually thirsty, need to urinate frequently or become constipated. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
