Recommendations for research | Vitamin B12 deficiency in over 16s: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Vitamin B12 deficiency in over 16s: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG239 
Published: 
06 March 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Vitamin B12 replacement 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of vitamin B12 replacement for vitamin B12 deficiency, including the dose, frequency and route of administration? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on managing vitamin B12 deficiency . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: vitamin B12 replacement and self-administration . 
2 Diagnosing vitamin B12 deficiency 
What are the long-term outcomes for people with suspected vitamin B12 deficiency when comparing testing of total B12 (serum cobalamin), active B12 (serum holotranscobalamin), serum methylmalonic acid (MMA) or plasma homocysteine? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on thresholds for initial test results . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: diagnosis . 
3 Self-administration 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of self-administration of vitamin B12 replacement injections for deficiency compared with administration by a healthcare professional? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on self-administration of vitamin B12 replacement . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: vitamin B12 replacement and self-administration . 
4 Identifying the cause of vitamin B12 deficiency 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of pepsinogen, gastrin, parietal cell antibodies and CobaSorb in identifying the cause of vitamin B12 deficiency in people with negative anti-intrinsic factor antibody test results? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on identifying the cause of vitamin B12 deficiency . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: identifying cause . 
5 Follow up 
What should be included in a follow-up review for people with vitamin B12 deficiency, including people with autoimmune gastritis? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on ongoing care and follow up . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: follow up . 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Risk factors – medicines 
Which medicines increase the risk of vitamin B12 deficiency? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on recognising vitamin B12 deficiency . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: risk factors and signs and symptoms . 
7 Risk factors – diet 
Which dietary factors increase the risk of vitamin B12 deficiency? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on recognising vitamin B12 deficiency . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: risk factors and signs and symptoms . 
8 Identifying the cause of vitamin B12 deficiency 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of reflex anti-intrinsic factor antibody testing versus clinician-requested anti-intrinsic factor antibody testing? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on identifying the cause of vitamin B12 deficiency . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: identifying cause . 
9 Monitoring for gastric cancer 
What monitoring should be offered to people with autoimmune gastritis to identify gastric cancer? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on monitoring for gastric cancer in people with suspected or confirmed autoimmune gastritis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: monitoring for gastric cancer . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
