Appendix: Assessing depression and its severity | Depression in adults with a chronic physical health problem: recognition and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Depression
Depression in adults with a chronic physical health problem: recognition and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG91 
Published: 
28 October 2009
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix: Assessing depression and its severity 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Appendix: Assessing depression and its severity 
In this guideline, the assessment of depression is based on the criteria in DSM‑IV. Assessment should include the number and severity of symptoms, duration of the current episode, and the course of the illness. 
Key symptoms: 
persistent sadness or low mood and/or 
marked loss of interests or pleasure. 
At least one of these, most days, most of the time for at least 2 weeks. 
If any of above present, ask about associated symptoms: 
disturbed sleep (decreased or increased compared to usual) 
decreased or increased appetite and/or weight 
fatigue or loss of energy 
agitation or slowing of movements 
poor concentration or indecisiveness 
feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt 
suicidal thoughts or acts. 
Then ask about duration and associated disability, past and family history of mood disorders, and availability of social support 
1. Factors that favour general advice and active monitoring: 
four or fewer of the above symptoms with little associated disability 
symptoms intermittent, or less than 2 weeks' duration 
recent onset with identified stressor 
no past or family history of depression 
social support available 
lack of suicidal thoughts. 
2. Factors that favour more active treatment in primary care: 
five or more symptoms with associated disability 
persistent or long-standing symptoms 
personal or family history of depression 
low social support 
occasional suicidal thoughts. 
3. Factors that favour referral to mental health professionals: 
inadequate or incomplete response to 2 or more interventions 
recurrent episode within 1 year of last one 
history suggestive of bipolar disorder 
patient with depression or relatives request referral 
more persistent suicidal thoughts 
self-neglect. 
4. Factors that favour urgent referral to specialist mental health services 
actively suicidal ideas or plans 
psychotic symptoms 
severe agitation accompanying severe symptoms 
severe self-neglect. 
Depression definitions 
Subthreshold depressive symptoms: Fewer than 5 symptoms of depression. 
Mild depression: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of the 5 required to make the diagnosis, and symptoms result in only minor functional impairment. 
Moderate depression: Symptoms or functional impairment are between 'mild' and 'severe'. 
Severe depression: Most symptoms, and the symptoms markedly interfere with functioning. Can occur with or without psychotic features. 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Recommendations for research 
Back to top
