Context | Barrett's oesophagus and stage 1 oesophageal adenocarcinoma: monitoring and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Oesophageal cancer
Barrett's oesophagus and stage 1 oesophageal adenocarcinoma: monitoring and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG231 
Published: 
08 February 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Context 
Barrett's oesophagus is a condition in which squamous cells at the lower end of the lining of the oesophagus are replaced with columnar cells. It can be a precursor to oesophageal adenocarcinoma. Barrett's oesophagus is more common in older age groups, men, people who are white and people who are overweight. The risk of progression to cancer is low. Fewer than 1% of people with Barrett's oesophagus develop oesophageal adenocarcinoma each year. 
However, oesophageal adenocarcinoma has a poor prognosis because of late presentation, and its incidence is increasing possibly related to more people being overweight or obese. Effective treatments for Barrett's oesophagus could reduce the number of people presenting late with adenocarcinoma and improve overall outcomes. 
NICE published a guideline on ablative therapy for Barrett's oesophagus (CG106) in 2010, which included people with high-grade dysplasia only. The British Society of Gastroenterology published guidance in 2013 on managing Barrett's oesophagus and related early neoplasia. This emphasised the importance of minimum data set reporting, including length of Barrett's segments and also the requirement that dysplasia is confirmed by 2 gastrointestinal pathologists. An update to the 2010 NICE guideline was needed because of new evidence on chemoprevention, managing Barrett's oesophagus with low-grade dysplasia and evolving practice in stage 1 adenocarcinoma. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
