Recommendations for research | Low back pain and sciatica in over 16s: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Musculoskeletal conditions
Low back pain
Low back pain and sciatica in over 16s: assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG59 
Published: 
30 November 2016
Last updated: 
11 December 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Pharmacological therapies 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of opioids for the management of acute sciatica? [2020] 
2 Pharmacological therapies 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of antidepressants for the management of sciatica? [2020] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendations for research, see the rationale section on pharmacological management of sciatica . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: pharmacological management of sciatica . 
3 Pharmacological therapies 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of benzodiazepines for the management of acute low back pain? [2016] 
4 Pharmacological therapies 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of codeine with and without paracetamol for the management of acute low back pain? [2016] 
5 Radiofrequency denervation 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of radiofrequency denervation for chronic low back pain in the long term? [2016] 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Epidurals 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of image-guided compared with non-image-guided epidural injections for people with acute sciatica? [2016] 
7 Spinal fusion 
Should people with low back pain be offered spinal fusion as a surgical option? [2016] 
Full details of the 2016 recommendations for research are in the full guideline . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
