Recommendations | Thyroid cancer: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Thyroid cancer
Thyroid cancer: assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG230 
Published: 
19 December 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Information and support
1.2 Assessment and diagnosis
1.3 Initial treatment of differentiated thyroid cancer
1.4 Ongoing treatment with thyroid-stimulating hormone suppression for differentiated thyroid cancer
1.5 Post-thyroidectomy monitoring of differentiated thyroid cancer
1.6 Follow-up of differentiated thyroid cancer
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
Shared decision making 
1.1 Information and support 
Information for people with suspected thyroid cancer 
1.1.1 
Explain to people with suspected thyroid cancer: 
that not all lumps, nodules or swellings in the thyroid are cancer 
what the diagnostic pathway involves and what tests they may need. 
Information for people having surgery 
1.1.2 
Offer people with suspected or confirmed thyroid cancer, and their family and carers if appropriate, information on what hemithyroidectomy or total thyroidectomy involves. Explain the benefits and risks of treatment, including long-term implications such as: 
the effects of having part or all of your thyroid removed 
the potential for and possible consequences of: 
hypothyroidism and the subsequent need for lifelong thyroid hormone replacement 
the need for treatment for low parathyroid hormone 
voice change and swallowing disorders. 
Information for people with thyroid cancer 
1.1.3 
Do not refer to thyroid cancer as a 'good cancer' because many people do not find this reassuring and it can cause them to feel that their diagnosis is unimportant. 
1.1.4 
Consider further appointments if they will benefit a person's psychological wellbeing, even if they are not indicated for physical reasons. 
1.1.5 
At follow up, give people with thyroid cancer, and their family and carers if appropriate, information on: 
follow up and how it is likely to be done 
what thyroglobulin is, how it is measured and why 
lifelong thyroid hormone replacement 
lifelong monitoring of thyroid function 
when to seek advice from a healthcare professional, who that healthcare professional should be and how to contact them. 
Information for people having radioactive iodine 
1.1.6 
Offer people with suspected or confirmed thyroid cancer, and their family and carers if appropriate, the following information on the benefits, and short- and long-term risks of, radioactive iodine (RAI) : 
the aim of RAI is to destroy any residual thyroid tissue, including tissue that may be malignant, and to allow for effective monitoring for recurrence by a blood test 
precautions may be needed when taking RAI which may temporarily affect conception, pregnancy, breastfeeding and fertility 
although uncommon, there is the potential for dry mouth and salivary gland inflammation, both of which are temporary in most people 
there is a potential but very low risk of RAI causing new primary second cancers. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information and support . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review R: information, education and support needed by people with suspected and confirmed thyroid cancer, and their families and carers . 
1.2 Assessment and diagnosis 
Follow the recommendation on referral for suspected thyroid cancer in the NICE guideline on suspected cancer . 
Blood tests 
Follow the recommendations on thyroid function tests in the NICE guideline on thyroid disease . 
1.2.1 
Do not use calcitonin testing to assess thyroid nodules unless there is a reason to suspect medullary thyroid cancer (MTC), such as a family history or a nodule with an appearance on ultrasound that suggests MTC. 
1.2.2 
Do not routinely measure thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPO). 
1.2.3 
Consider measuring TPO when interpreting indeterminate cytopathology. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on blood tests . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: indications for blood tests . 
Ultrasound 
See the section on investigating thyroid enlargement in the NICE guideline on thyroid disease , and follow the recommendation on referral for suspected thyroid cancer in the NICE guideline on suspected cancer . 
1.2.4 
Offer greyscale ultrasound with an established system for grading ultrasound appearance as the initial diagnostic test when investigating thyroid nodules for malignancy. 
Management options based on ultrasound results 
1.2.5 
Offer fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) to people who meet the threshold using an established system for grading ultrasound appearance. 
1.2.6 
Consider FNAC or active surveillance when: 
ultrasound results do not meet the threshold for FNAC on ultrasound grading alone and 
there are other reasons for clinical concern. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on ultrasound . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: ultrasound accuracy and threshold of nodule size and classification . 
FNAC testing 
Performing and reporting FNAC 
1.2.7 
Use ultrasound guidance when performing fine needle aspiration cytology. 
This recommendation has been incorporated from NICE's guideline on thyroid disease . 
1.2.8 
Use liquid-based cytology, direct smear or both when processing FNAC samples. 
1.2.9 
Use the Royal College of Pathologists modification of the British Thyroid Association (BTA) reporting system for thyroid cytology specimens to report cytology results. 
1.2.10 
Consider rapid on-site evaluation of FNAC adequacy rates to improve the diagnostic yield of samples if the Thy1 (inadequate) rate for the centre or individual healthcare professionals is higher than 15% (when Thy1c is excluded). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on performing and reporting FNAC . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: diagnostic accuracy of fine needle aspiration cytology . 
Management and further sampling after initial FNAC 
1.2.11 
Use the initial FNAC results to determine further management and sampling options, as shown in table 1. 
Table 1 Management options after initial FNAC 
Initial FNAC result 
Management and further sampling 
Thy1 (inadequate) 
Offer repeat sampling 
Consider core-needle biopsy (CNB) or fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) with rapid on-site evaluation (ROSE) as the first choice 
Consider FNAC alone if ROSE is unavailable and CNB is unavailable or inappropriate 
Consider diagnostic hemithyroidectomy if the repeat sample is also Thy1 
Thy1c (cystic lesion) 
Offer repeat sampling with FNAC 
Consider diagnostic hemithyroidectomy if the repeat sample is also Thy1c and the ultrasound appearances are concerning 
Thy2 and Thy2c (benign) 
Consider repeat ultrasound 
Offer repeat sampling with FNAC if the second ultrasound also reaches the threshold for FNAC 
Consider CNB as an alternative to FNAC 
Discharge people if there is no evidence of malignancy after all investigations are complete, unless there are other reasons for clinical concern 
Thy3a (atypia, neoplasia possible) 
Offer repeat sampling 
Consider CNB (or FNAC if CNB unavailable or inappropriate) 
Consider diagnostic hemithyroidectomy or active surveillance if repeated samples are still Thy3a 
Thy3f (suggesting follicular neoplasm) 
Consider diagnostic hemithyroidectomy 
Thy4 (suspicion of malignancy) and Thy5 (malignant) 
Offer diagnostic hemithyroidectomy, or treatment with therapeutic hemithyroidectomy or total thyroidectomy 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on management and further sampling after initial FNAC . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: efficacy of repeat FNAC, active surveillance or discharge and evidence review F: molecular testing . 
Radioisotope scans 
1.2.12 
Do not routinely use radioisotope scans for the initial diagnosis of thyroid cancer. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on radioisotope scans . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: radioisotope scans . 
Imaging for further staging 
1.2.13 
Do not routinely use cross-sectional imaging (CT or MRI) for people with T1 or T2 disease and no other indications. 
1.2.14 
Consider CT of neck and chest, or MRI of neck and CT of chest for people with T3 or T4 thyroid cancer or any N1 or M1 thyroid cancer or other clinical suspicion of metastases. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on imaging for further staging . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: imaging for further staging . 
1.3 Initial treatment of differentiated thyroid cancer 
Surgery and active surveillance for primary tumours 
1.3.1 
Offer hemithyroidectomy or total thyroidectomy to people with: 
differentiated thyroid tumours larger than 1 cm or 
multifocal disease ( T1a [m] to T2N0M0 ). 
1.3.2 
Offer total thyroidectomy to people who have: 
a T3 or T4 stage primary tumour 
regional lymph node involvement (N1) 
adverse pathological features 
distant metastatic disease (M1). 
1.3.3 
Offer completion thyroidectomy to people who have had a hemithyroidectomy if it is indicated on review of the histological features of the initial specimen. 
1.3.4 
Consider hemithyroidectomy or active surveillance for people with a solitary microcarcinoma (T1a) without evidence of nodal involvement. 
Surgery for nodal disease 
1.3.5 
Offer a compartment-orientated lateral neck dissection for people with structural nodal disease in the lateral neck. 
1.3.6 
Consider a preventive ipsilateral central neck dissection when doing the compartment-orientated lateral neck dissection for people with structural nodal disease in the lateral neck. 
1.3.7 
Offer a compartment-orientated central neck dissection for people with structural nodal disease in the central neck. 
1.3.8 
Do not offer preventive central or lateral neck dissection (except in the circumstances in recommendation 1.3.7). 
Surgery during pregnancy 
1.3.9 
Consider delaying surgery until after pregnancy, taking into account the: 
risk of delaying surgery 
risk to the pregnancy 
rate of disease progression. 
1.3.10 
The obstetrician, surgeon and endocrinologist should discuss the factors in recommendation 1.3.9 and jointly decide with the person whether to delay surgery. 
1.3.11 
When surgery cannot be delayed until after pregnancy, do it during the second trimester, if possible. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgery and active surveillance for primary tumours . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: initial treatments for differentiated thyroid cancer . 
Thyrotropin alfa 
1.3.12 
Offer thyrotropin alfa for pretherapeutic stimulation for people with thyroid cancer (including those with distant metastases; see recommendation 1.3.13) who are having RAI ablation. 
In December 2022 this use of thyrotropin alfa as a treatment for thyroid cancer for people with distant metastases was off-label. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.13 
Use thyrotropin alfa with caution for people with thyroid cancer who have brain or spinal metastases, because there is a risk of clinically significant tumour flare. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on thyrotropin alfa . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: thyrotropin alfa . 
RAI for initial ablation 
1.3.14 
Offer RAI to people who have had a total or completion thyroidectomy based on the criteria in the recommendations on offering total thyroidectomy in the section on surgery and active surveillance for primary tumours . 
1.3.15 
Do not offer RAI to people with T1a or T1b tumours, including those with multifocal disease, unless there are adverse features, regional lymph node involvement, or evidence of other metastatic disease. 
1.3.16 
Consider RAI for people with T2 disease who have had a total or completion thyroidectomy, but whose cancer does not show any of the features in the recommendations on offering total thyroidectomy in the section on surgery and active surveillance for primary tumours . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on RAI for initial ablation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: radioactive iodine versus no radioactive iodine . 
RAI activity for initial ablation 
1.3.17 
Consider RAI with an activity for initial ablation of 3.7 GBq for people: 
with high-risk features, such as T4, N1b or M1 disease or aggressive subtypes or 
who should avoid multiple ablations because they have one or more of the following characteristics: 
significant comorbidities such as cardiovascular disease 
mobility issues 
complex social concerns. 
1.3.18 
Offer RAI with an activity for initial ablation of 1.1 GBq for people who are not having 3.7 GBq. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on RAI activity . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: activity of radioactive iodine after thyroidectomy . 
External beam radiotherapy 
1.3.19 
Consider external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) if there is: 
macroscopic disease after surgery or 
local disease that is unlikely to be controlled with RAI . 
1.3.20 
Consider EBRT for symptom control for people having palliative care. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on external beam radiotherapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: external beam radiotherapy versus no external beam radiotherapy . 
1.4 Ongoing treatment with thyroid-stimulating hormone suppression for differentiated thyroid cancer 
When to offer thyroid-stimulating hormone suppression 
1.4.1 
Do not offer thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) suppression to people who: 
do not meet the threshold for RAI (see the section on RAI for initial ablation ) 
have significant comorbidities that mean low TSH levels should be avoided. 
1.4.2 
Offer thyroid hormone at doses that will suppress TSH to below 0.1 mIU/litre to people who have had total or completion thyroidectomy and RAI. 
1.4.3 
Continue TSH suppression until follow-up review at 9 to 12 months after initial treatment has been completed. 
Assessing and managing response to TSH suppression 
1.4.4 
Use dynamic risk stratification to determine further management at 9 to 12 months after completion of initial RAI ablation, as follows: 
Reduce TSH suppression to achieve a TSH level of between 0.3 mIU/litre and 2.0 mIU/litre, and continue this for life for people who have an excellent response to treatment. 
Continue TSH suppression to achieve a TSH level of between 0.1 mIU/litre and 0.5 mIU/litre for people who have an intermediate response to initial treatment. 
1.4.5 
Continue to suppress TSH to less than 0.1 mIU/litre for people who have biochemical or structural evidence of persistent or recurrent disease. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on thyroid-stimulating hormone suppression . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: TSH suppression versus no TSH suppression . 
Long-term duration of TSH suppression 
1.4.6 
Offer a review to people who have had ongoing TSH suppression for more than 10 years. Decide whether the TSH suppression can be reduced after an individualised assessment of risks and benefits, and explain that: 
lifelong suppression is not necessary unless they have high-risk or metastatic disease 
reducing TSH suppression may lower the risk of developing bone and cardiac problems. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on long-term duration of TSH suppression . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review N: duration of TSH suppression . 
1.5 Post-thyroidectomy monitoring of differentiated thyroid cancer 
Measuring thyroglobulin and thyroglobulin antibodies 
1.5.1 
When measuring thyroglobulin and thyroglobulin antibodies, take into account that: 
the presence of thyroglobulin antibodies, above the laboratory threshold, can interfere with the measurement of thyroglobulin levels 
detectable thyroglobulin levels for people without thyroglobulin antibodies suggest the presence of residual thyroid tissue, or residual or recurrent thyroid cancer. 
1.5.2 
Offer thyroglobulin measurement alongside measurement of thyroglobulin antibodies for people with differentiated thyroid cancer who have had total or completion thyroidectomy and RAI . Measure at: 
3- to 6-month intervals in the first 2 years after RAI ablation and 
6- to 12-month intervals thereafter. 
1.5.3 
Consider further investigations if a person has had total thyroidectomy and RAI, and: 
has detectable thyroglobulin levels without thyroglobulin antibodies 
investigations have not shown recurrent or residual cancer in the presence of detectable thyroglobulin without thyroglobulin antibodies, and now the thyroglobulin levels without thyroglobulin antibodies are rising. 
1.5.4 
Consider further investigations if a person has: 
had a total thyroidectomy without RAI and 
rising thyroglobulin levels without thyroglobulin antibodies. 
1.5.5 
Do not routinely measure thyroglobulin levels for people who have not had total or completion thyroidectomy. 
1.5.6 
Consider further investigations: 
when thyroglobulin antibodies are first detected above the laboratory threshold or 
at any point if the levels of thyroglobulin or thyroglobulin antibodies are rising. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on measuring thyroglobulin and thyroglobulin antibodies . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review O: measurement of thyroglobulin . 
Stimulated thyroglobulin and highly sensitive thyroglobulin testing 
1.5.7 
Consider either a stimulated thyroglobulin test or highly sensitive thyroglobulin test if thyroglobulin is undetectable on a standard assay for people who have: 
had a total or completion thyroidectomy and RAI and 
no evidence of structural persistent disease. 
1.5.8 
Consider the following if using a stimulated thyroglobulin test: 
less frequent follow-up, when appropriate, and more relaxed TSH suppression if stimulated thyroglobulin is below 1 microgram/litre (low risk) 
continuing TSH suppression if stimulated thyroglobulin is between 1  and 10 microgram/litre (indeterminate risk) 
further investigations and treatment if stimulated thyroglobulin is 10 microgram/litre or more and there is no resectable disease. 
1.5.9 
Consider the following if using a highly sensitive assay that can detect thyroglobulin levels lower than 0.2 microgram/litre: 
less frequent follow-up, when appropriate, and more relaxed TSH suppression if the thyroglobulin level is lower than 0.2 microgram/litre 
stimulated thyroglobulin, which can be helpful in separating people into lower- and higher-risk groups if the thyroglobulin level is between 0.2  and 1 microgram/litre. 
1.5.10 
Use caution when interpreting results in the presence of thyroglobulin antibodies because they may cause false-positive or negative findings. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on stimulated thyroglobulin and highly sensitive thyroglobulin testing . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review P: stimulated or highly sensitive thyroglobulin assays . 
1.6 Follow-up of differentiated thyroid cancer 
1.6.1 
Do not routinely follow up people with thyroid cancer who have a solitary microcarcinoma ( T1a ) that has been surgically removed. 
1.6.2 
Consider an ultrasound at 6 to 12 months initially then annual clinical follow-up for up to 5 years for people with T1a (m) or T1b stage or greater thyroid cancer, who have had a hemithyroidectomy or total thyroidectomy without RAI . 
1.6.3 
Consider a risk-stratified approach to follow-up for any person who has had total or completion thyroidectomy and RAI, as shown in table 2. 
Table 2 Risk-stratified follow-up for people who have had a total or completion thyroidectomy and RAI 
Risk group 
Follow-up 
Low risk (no evidence of disease on imaging and thyroglobulin of less than 0.2 microgram/litre, or stimulated thyroglobulin of less than 1 microgram/litre) 
Consider (at least annually) 2 to 5 years follow-up with thyroglobulin testing 
Use ultrasound if needed 
Medium risk (thyroglobulin between 0.2 and 1.0 microgram/litre, or stimulated thyroglobulin of between 1 and 10 microgram/litre) 
Consider (at least annually) 5 to 10 years follow-up with thyroglobulin testing 
Use ultrasound if needed 
High risk (thyroglobulin of greater than 1.0 microgram/litre, or stimulated thyroglobulin of greater than 10 microgram/litre) 
Consider (at least annually) 10 years follow-up with thyroglobulin testing 
Use ultrasound if needed 
Anyone with biochemical or structural evidence of disease 
Consider (at least annually) lifelong follow-up with thyroglobulin testing 
Use ultrasound if needed 
1.6.4 
Discuss at the multidisciplinary team meeting any person who has had a total or completion thyroidectomy and RAI and has evidence of structural persistent disease. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on follow-up . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q: length and frequency of follow up . 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline. 
Active surveillance 
Active surveillance involves monitoring the person's thyroid cancer with periodic appointments that include investigations such as blood tests and ultrasound. The duration and frequency of further appointments and investigations should be a clinical decision that considers the risks for the person. 
Completion thyroidectomy 
A completion thyroidectomy relates to when someone who has had a hemithyroidectomy has the rest of their thyroid gland removed. In this guideline, recommendations related to treatment and monitoring for total thyroidectomy also apply to people who have had a completion thyroidectomy. 
Dynamic risk stratification 
Following initial risk assessment at diagnosis, the risk of recurrence is re-assessed at follow-up by evaluating the person's response to treatment. This re-evaluation of risk constitutes a 'dynamic risk stratification' allowing the follow-up strategy to be modified according to risk. This is an established system and the response to treatment is based on measurement of serum thyroglobulin (and anti‑thyroglobulin antibody) and ultrasound imaging. 
Radioactive iodine (RAI) 
A radioactive form of iodine used to treat thyroid cancer by killing thyroid cells and thyroid cancer cells after surgery. It is usually taken in a capsule or liquid. 
Thyroid cytology specimens 
This guideline uses the Royal College of Pathologists guidance on the reporting of thyroid cytology specimens published in 2016 (see table 3 ) for recommendations related to reporting fine-needle aspiration cytology results. 
Table 3 Royal College of Pathologists thyroid cytology categories 
Thy category 
Description 
Thy1 
Inadequate or non-diagnostic 
Thy1: inadequate 
Thy1c: cystic lesion 
Thy2 
Benign or non-neoplastic 
Thy3 
Indeterminate or neoplasm possible 
Thy3A: neoplasm possible (atypical features) 
Thy3F: follicular neoplasm 
Thy4 
Suspicious of malignancy 
Thy5 
Malignant 
TNM classification 
A system to describe the amount and spread of renal cell carcinoma in the body. T describes the size of the tumour and any spread of cancer into nearby tissue. N describes spread of cancer to nearby lymph nodes. M describes metastasis, which is the spread of cancer to other parts of the body.   
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
