Recommendations | Physical health of people in prison | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Physical health of people in prison 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG57 
Published: 
02 November 2016
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Assessing health
1.2 Communication and coordination
1.3 Promoting health and wellbeing
1.4 Managing medicines
1.5 Monitoring chronic conditions
1.6 Managing deteriorating health and health emergencies
1.7 Continuity of healthcare
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Assessing health 
First-stage health assessment at reception into prison 
1.1.1 
At first reception into prison, a healthcare professional (or trained healthcare assistant under the supervision of a registered nurse) should carry out a health assessment for every person. Do this before the person is allocated to their cell. As part of the assessment, identify: 
any issues that may affect the person's immediate health and safety before the second-stage health assessment 
priority health needs to be addressed at the next clinical opportunity. 
1.1.2 
Ensure continuity of care for people transferring from one custodial setting to another (including court, the receiving prison or during escort periods) by, for example: 
accessing relevant information from the patient clinical record, prisoner escort record and cell sharing risk assessment 
checking medicines and any outstanding medical appointments. 
1.1.3 
Take into account any communication needs or difficulties the person has (including reading and writing ability), and follow the principles in NICE's guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . 
1.1.4 
The first-stage health assessment should include the questions and actions in table 1. It should cover: 
physical health 
alcohol use 
substance misuse 
mental health 
self-harm and suicide risk. 
Table 1 Questions for first-stage health assessment 
Topic 
Questions 
Actions 
Prison sentence 
1. Has the person committed murder, manslaughter or another offence with a long sentence? 
Yes: refer the person for mental health assessment by the prison mental health in-reach team if necessary. 
No: record no action needed. 
Prescribed medicines 
2. Is the person taking any prescribed medicines (for example, insulin) or over-the-counter medicines (such as creams or drops)? If so: 
what are they 
what are they for 
how do they take them? 
Yes: document any current medicines being taken and generate a medicine chart. 
Refer the person to the prescriber for appropriate medicines to be prescribed, to ensure continuity of medicines. 
If medicines are being taken, ensure that the next dose has been provided (see recommendations 1.7.10 and 1.7.11 in the section on continuity of medicines ). 
Let the person know that medicines reconciliation will take place before the second-stage health assessment. 
No: record no action needed. 
Physical injuries 
3. Has the person received any physical injuries over the past few days, and if so: 
what were they 
how were they treated? 
Yes: assess severity of injury, any treatment received and record any significant head, abdominal injuries or fractures. 
Document any bruises or lacerations observed on a body map . 
In very severe cases, or after GP assessment, the person may need to be transferred to an external hospital. Liaise with prison staff to transfer the person to the hospital emergency department by ambulance. 
If the person has made any allegations of assault, record negative observations as well (for example, 'no physical evidence of injury'). 
No: record no action needed. 
Other health conditions 
4. Does the person have any of the following: 
allergies, asthma, diabetes, epilepsy or history of seizures 
chest pain, heart disease 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
tuberculosis, sickle cell disease 
hepatitis B or C virus, HIV, other sexually transmitted infections 
learning disabilities 
neurodevelopmental disorders 
physical disabilities? 
Ask about each condition listed. 
Yes: make short notes on any details of the person's condition or management. For example, 'Asthma – on Ventolin 1 puff daily'. 
Make appointments with relevant clinics or specialist nurses if specific needs have been identified. 
No: record no action needed. 
Other health conditions 
5. Are there any other health problems the person is aware of that have not been reported? 
Yes: record the details and check with the person that no other physical health complaint has been overlooked. 
No: record no action needed. 
Other health conditions 
6. Are there any other concerns about the person's health? 
Yes: make a note of any other concerns about physical health. This should include any health-related observations about the person's physical appearance (for example, weight, pallor, jaundice, gait or frailty). 
Refer the person to the GP or relevant clinic. 
No: note 'Nil'. 
Additional question for women 
7. Does the woman have reason to think she is pregnant, or would she like a pregnancy test? 
If the woman is pregnant, refer to the GP and midwife. 
If there is reason to think the woman is pregnant, or would like a pregnancy test: provide a pregnancy test. Record the outcome. If positive, make an appointment for the woman to see the GP and midwife. 
No: record response. 
Living arrangements, mobility and diet 
8. Does the person need help to live independently? 
Yes: note any needs. Liaise with the prison disability lead in reception about: 
the location of the person's cell 
further disability assessments the prison may need to carry out. 
No: record response. 
Living arrangements, mobility and diet 
9. Do they use any equipment or aids (for example, walking stick, hearing aid, glasses, dentures, continence aids or stoma)? 
Yes: remind prison staff that all special equipment and aids the person uses should follow them from reception to their cell. 
No: record response. 
Living arrangements, mobility and diet 
10. Do they need a special medical diet? 
Yes: confirm the need for a special medical diet. Note the medical diet the person needs and send a request to catering. Refer to appropriate clinic for ongoing monitoring. 
No: record response. 
Past or future medical appointments 
11. Has the person seen a doctor or other healthcare professional in the past few months? If so, what this was for? 
Yes: note details of any recent medical contact. Arrange a contact letter to get further information from the person's doctor or specialist clinic. Note any ongoing treatment the person needs and make appointments with relevant clinics, specialist nurses, GP or other healthcare staff. 
No: record no action needed. 
Past or future medical appointments 
12. Does the person have any outstanding medical appointments? If so, who are they with, and when? 
Yes: note future appointment dates. Ask healthcare administrative staff to manage these appointments or arrange for new dates and referral letters to be sent if the person's current hospital is out of the local area. 
No: record no action needed. 
Alcohol and substance misuse 
13. Does the person drink alcohol, and if so: 
how much do they normally drink? 
how much did they drink in the week before coming into custody? 
Urgently refer the person to the GP or an alternative suitable healthcare professional if: 
they drink more than 15 units of alcohol daily or 
they are showing signs of withdrawal or 
they have been given medication for withdrawal in police or court cells. 
No: record response. 
Alcohol and substance misuse 
14. Has the person used street drugs in the last month? If so, how frequently? 
When did they last use: 
heroin 
methadone 
benzodiazepines 
amphetamine 
cocaine or crack 
novel psychoactive substances 
cannabis 
anabolic steroids 
performance and image enhancing drugs? 
Yes: refer the person to substance misuse services if there are concerns about their immediate clinical management and they need immediate support. Take into account whether: 
they have taken drugs intravenously 
they have a positive urine test for drugs 
their answers suggest that they use drugs more than once a week 
they have been given medication for withdrawal in police or court cells. 
If the person has used intravenous drugs, check them for injection sites. Refer them to substance misuse services if there are concerns about their immediate clinical management and they need immediate support. 
No: record response. 
Problematic use of prescription medicines 
15. Has the person used prescription or over-the-counter medicines in the past month: 
that were not prescribed or recommended for them or 
for purposes or at doses that were not prescribed? 
If so, what was the medicine and how did they use it (frequency and dose)? 
Yes: refer the person to substance misuse services if there are concerns about their immediate clinical management and they need immediate support. 
No: record response. 
Mental health 
16. Has the person ever seen a healthcare professional or service about a mental health problem (including a psychiatrist, GP, psychologist, counsellor, community mental health services, alcohol or substance misuse services or learning disability services)? 
If so, who did they see and what was the nature of the problem? 
Yes: refer the person for a mental health assessment if they have previously seen a mental health professional in any service setting. 
No: record response. 
Mental health 
17. Has the person ever been admitted to a psychiatric hospital, and if so: 
when was their most recent discharge 
what is the name of the hospital 
what is the name of their consultant? 
Yes: refer the person for a mental health assessment. 
No: record response. 
Mental health 
18. Has the person ever been prescribed medicine for any mental health problems? If so: 
what was the medicine 
when did they receive it 
when did they take the last dose 
what is the current dose (if they are still taking it) 
when did they stop taking it? 
Yes: refer the person for a mental health assessment if they have taken medicine for mental health problems. 
No: record response 
Self-harm and suicide risk 
19. Is the person: 
feeling hopeless or 
currently thinking about or planning to harm themselves or attempt suicide? 
Yes: refer the person for an urgent mental health assessment. Open an Assessment, Care in Custody and Teamwork (ACCT) plan if: 
there are serious concerns raised in response to questions about self-harm, including thoughts, intentions or plans, or observations (for example, the patient is very withdrawn or agitated) or 
the person has a history of previous suicide attempts. 
Be aware and record details of the impact of the sentence on the person, changes in legal status and first imprisonment, and the nature of the offence (for example, murder, manslaughter, offence against the person and sexual offences). 
No: record response. 
Self-harm and suicide risk 
20. Has the person ever tried to harm themselves, and if so: 
do they have a history of suicide attempts 
was this inside or outside prison 
when was the most recent incident 
what was the most serious incident? 
Yes: refer the person for a mental health assessment if they have ever tried to harm themselves. 
No: record response. 
Following the first-stage health assessment 
1.1.5 
Give the person advice about how to contact prison health services and book GP appointments in the future. 
1.1.6 
Ask the person for consent to transfer their medical records from their GP to the prison healthcare service (see the section on continuity of healthcare on entry to prison for more information about transfer of medical records). 
1.1.7 
Enter in the person's medical record: 
all answers to the reception health assessment questions 
health-related observations, including those about behaviour and mental state (including eye contact, body language, rapid, slow or strange speech, poor hygiene, strange thoughts) 
details of any action taken. 
1.1.8 
Carry out a medicines reconciliation (in line with NICE's guideline on medicines optimisation ) before the second-stage health assessment. See recommendation 1.4.1 in the section on access to medicines and recommendation 1.7.10 in the section on continuity of medicines for recommendations on risk assessments for in-possession medicines and ensuring continuity of medicine. 
Tuberculosis screening within 48 hours 
The recommendations in this section have been adapted from the NICE guideline on tuberculosis (TB). 
1.1.9 
Healthcare professionals in prisons should ensure people coming into prison are screened for TB within 48 hours of arrival. 
1.1.10 
Report all suspected and confirmed TB cases to the local multidisciplinary TB team within 1 working day. 
1.1.11 
If a case of TB is confirmed: 
Arrange for the local multidisciplinary TB team to visit within 5 working days. 
Contact the local Public Health England unit and multidisciplinary TB team to arrange a contact investigations exercise. They should also consider using mobile X‑ray to check for further cases. 
1.1.12 
Put contingency, liaison and handover plans in place to ensure continuity of care before a person being treated for TB is transferred between prisons or released. Any other agencies working with the person should also be involved in this planning. 
Second-stage health assessment within 7 days 
1.1.13 
A healthcare professional (for example, a registered general nurse) should carry out a second-stage health assessment for every person in prison. Do this within 7 days of the first-stage health assessment, and include as a minimum: 
reviewing the actions and outcomes from the first-stage health assessment 
asking the person about: 
any previous misuse of alcohol, use of drugs or improper use of prescription medicine 
if they have ever suffered a head injury or lost consciousness, and if so: 
how many times this has happened 
whether they have ever been unconscious for more than 20 minutes 
whether they have any problems with their memory or concentration 
smoking history 
the date of their last sexual health screen 
any history of serious illness in their family (for example, heart disease, diabetes, epilepsy, cancer or chronic conditions) 
their expected release date, and if less than 1 month plan a pre-release health assessment: see recommendation 1.7.5 in the section on before release from prison 
whether they have ever had a screening test (for example, a cervical screening test or mammogram) 
whether they have, or have had, any gynaecological problems 
measuring and recording the person's height, weight, pulse, blood pressure and temperature, and carrying out a urinalysis. 
1.1.14 
Review the person's first- and second-stage health assessment records, medical history, GP and vaccination records and: 
Refer the person to the GP or a relevant clinic if further assessment is needed. See, for example, recommendations on identifying people for full formal risk assessment in the NICE guideline on cardiovascular disease or the recommendation on risk assessment in NICE's guideline on type 2 diabetes . 
Arrange a follow-up appointment if needed. 
1.1.15 
Consider using the Correctional Mental Health Screen for Men (CMHS‑M) or Women (CMHS‑W) to identify possible mental health problems if: 
the person's history, presentation or behaviour suggests they may have a mental health problem 
the person's responses to the first-stage health assessment suggest they may have a mental health problem 
the person has a chronic physical health problem with associated functional impairment 
concerns have been raised by other agencies about the person's abilities to participate in the criminal justice process. 
1.1.16 
When using the CMHS‑M or CMHS‑W with a transgender person, use the measure that is in line with their preferred gender identity. 
1.1.17 
If there is other evidence supporting the likelihood of mental health problems, or a man scores 6 or more on the CMHS‑M, or a woman scores 4 or more on the CMHS‑W: 
a practitioner who is trained to perform an assessment of mental health problems should conduct further assessment or 
a practitioner who is not trained to perform an assessment of mental health problems should refer the person to an appropriately trained professional for further assessment. 
1.1.18 
Offer people tailored health advice based on their responses to the assessment questions. This should be in a variety of formats (including face-to-face). It should include advice on: 
alcohol (see  NICE's guideline on alcohol-use disorders ) 
substance misuse (see  NICE's guideline on drug misuse in over 16s ) 
exercise (see recommendations on exercise in the section on promoting health and wellbeing ) 
diet (see recommendation 1.3.5 on diet in the section on promoting health and wellbeing ) 
stopping smoking (see recommendation 1.3.6 on stopping smoking in the section on promoting health and wellbeing ) 
sexual health (see recommendations 1.3.7 and 1.3.8 on sexual health in the section on promoting health and wellbeing ). 
1.1.19 
Offer the person advice, with supporting literature if appropriate, on: 
how to contact prison health services and book GP appointments or other clinics, for example, dental, optician, chiropodist, substance misuse and recovery services 
where to find health information that is accessible and understandable 
how to attend or get a referral to attend any health-promoting activities in the future (see the section on promoting health and wellbeing ) 
medicines adherence (see recommendation 1.4.7 in the section on access to medicines ). 
1.1.20 
Enter in the person's medical record: 
all answers to the second-stage health assessment questions 
health-related observations 
details of any action taken. 
1.1.21 
Plan a follow-up healthcare review at a suitable time based on clinical judgement, taking into account the age of the person and length of their sentence. For people who may be in prison for less than 1 month, see recommendation 1.7.5 in the section on before release from prison . 
Health checks and screening 
1.1.22 
Ensure that there is a system and processes in place to carry out and refer to other assessments in line with recommendations in NICE guidelines. 
Hepatitis B and C 
The recommendations in this section have been adapted from the NICE guideline on hepatitis B and C testing . 
1.1.23 
Prison healthcare services (working with the NHS lead for hepatitis) should ensure that: 
all people are offered a hepatitis B vaccination when entering prison (for the vaccination schedule, refer to the UK Health Security Agency's Green Book ) 
all people are offered access to confidential testing for hepatitis B and C when entering prison and during their detention 
people who test for hepatitis B or C receive the results of the test, regardless of their location, when they become available 
results from hepatitis B and C testing are provided to the person's community-based GP, if consent is given. 
HIV 
The recommendations in this section have been adapted from the NICE guideline on HIV testing . 
1.1.24 
Offer all people HIV testing when entering prison. 
1.1.25 
Primary care providers should ensure annual HIV testing is part of the integrated healthcare offered to men who are known to have sex with men. 
1.1.26 
Provide information on HIV testing and discuss why it is recommended (including to those who indicate that they may wish to decline the test). 
1.1.27 
Conduct post-test discussions, including giving positive test results and delivering post-test and general health promotion interventions. 
1.1.28 
Recognise illnesses that may signify primary HIV infection and clinical indicator diseases that often coexist with HIV. 
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) 
The recommendations in this section have been adapted from the NICE guideline on reducing STIs . 
1.1.29 
Identify people at high risk of STIs using their sexual history. Opportunities for risk assessment may arise during consultations on contraception, pregnancy or abortion, and when carrying out a cervical smear test or offering an STI test. Risk assessment could also be carried out during routine care or when a new patient registers. 
1.1.30 
Have structured, one-to-one discussions with people at high risk of STIs (if trained in sexual health), or arrange for these discussions to take place with a trained practitioner. 
Other health checks and screening 
1.1.31 
Offer people equivalent health checks to those offered in the community, for example: 
the NHS health check programme 
learning disabilities annual health check 
relevant NHS screening programmes, such as those for abdominal aortic aneurysm and bowel, breast and cervical cancer. 
1.2 Communication and coordination 
1.2.1 
Ensure that the different teams (including prison staff) that manage a person's care in prison communicate with one another to coordinate care. 
1.2.2 
Share information with other health and social care staff, offender supervisors and probation providers who are involved in the person's care in prison if necessary for the person's care. 
1.2.3 
Ensure that people with complex health and social care needs have a lead care coordinator responsible for managing their care. Ensure that the person and all healthcare and prison staff know who this is. 
1.2.4 
Share relevant information about people with complex needs with prison staff using prison record systems in line with legislation and national guidance. This should include information about any high-level risks, such as: 
risk of self-harm 
risk to others 
communicable diseases 
epilepsy 
diabetes 
allergies 
deteriorating health conditions 
learning disabilities. 
1.2.5 
Review people in prison with complex health and social care needs. Ensure that if a person is supported by a multidisciplinary team , the teams meet regularly to plan and coordinate ongoing management. These should be facilitated by primary care. 
1.2.6 
Document all health and social care patient interactions and any information related to health and social care in the person's primary care patient record. 
1.3 Promoting health and wellbeing 
General health advice 
1.3.1 
Consider using peer support and mentoring to help promote a healthy lifestyle while in prison. 
1.3.2 
Offer people in prison tailored health information in a variety of formats, including face-to-face. Include advice about: 
exercise 
diet 
stopping smoking 
sexual health 
personal hygiene, including oral hygiene. 
Exercise 
1.3.3 
Encourage people to be physically active. Offer them information about: 
the benefits of exercise 
what exercise facilities are provided, where they are and how they can use them, for example: 
going to the gym 
using the exercise yard 
exercises that can be done in the cell. 
1.3.4 
Offer people information and advice in line with recommendations in the NICE guidelines on: 
physical activity: brief advice for adults in primary care 
physical activity: exercise referral schemes 
overweight and obesity managementity (see the sections on preventing overweight, obesity and central adiposity , and physical activity ). 
Diet 
1.3.5 
Offer people information about: 
the benefits of a healthy diet 
healthier food options available in the prison. 
See the section on dietary approaches in the NICE guideline on overweight and obesity management . 
Stopping smoking 
1.3.6 
Offer people in prison information about: 
the risks of smoking 
support available to stop as part of smoking cessation services (for example, nicotine patches and motivational support). 
See the NICE guideline on tobacco: preventing uptake, promoting quitting and treating dependence . 
Sexual health 
1.3.7 
Offer people in prison information about sexually transmitted infections and available sexual health services. 
1.3.8 
Ensure that people in prison have discreet access to condoms, dental dams and water-based lubricants without the need to ask for them. 
1.4 Managing medicines 
Access to medicines 
1.4.1 
Carry out an individual risk assessment to determine if the person can hold their medicines in-possession . Allow people in prison to hold all medicine in-possession unless the person does not pass the risk assessment. 
1.4.2 
Directly observe the administration of all schedule 2 and 3 medicines (also see NICE's guideline on controlled drugs ) and medicines for tuberculosis (see NICE guideline on tuberculosis ). 
1.4.3 
Directly observe the administration of any medicine that is not in-possession. 
1.4.4 
Work with prison staff to ensure a system is in place to: 
supervise the administering of medicines not held in-possession to maximise adherence 
allow timings of medicines doses to align with the prescribed dose regime 
reduce diversion (passing medicines on to other people) 
protect confidentiality. 
See the section on supporting adherence in the NICE guideline on medicines adherence . 
1.4.5 
Review and (if necessary) repeat a person's risk assessment for in-possession medicine if the person's circumstances change. Involve a multidisciplinary team if needed, including prison staff and the person. Examples of when the risk assessment should be repeated include: 
if carrying out a medicines review 
if a person is considered able to manage their own medicines after a period of having medicines not in-possession 
if there is a medicine safety incident, including evidence of self-harm 
if someone has raised security concerns (for example, about bullying, diversion or hoarding) 
if the person has not been taking their prescribed medicines 
if there is concern about the person's ability to self-medicate 
when following the Assessment Care in Custody and Teamwork care planning approach 
if the person is transferred to or from a segregation unit. 
1.4.6 
Consider providing storage for in-possession medicine in prison cells, for example, a lockable cupboard. 
1.4.7 
Give people in prison information and education about medicines adherence (see the section on patient involvement in decisions about medicines in the NICE guideline on medicines adherence ). 
1.5 Monitoring chronic conditions 
1.5.1 
Monitor people with chronic conditions in accordance with the following NICE guidelines: 
chronic heart failure 
chronic kidney disease 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
epilepsies 
hypertension 
acute coronary syndromes 
type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes . 
See also the NICE quality standard on asthma . 
1.5.2 
Monitor people with chronic conditions that need specialist management in line with relevant NICE guidelines (for example, NICE's guidelines on hepatitis B [chronic] and colorectal cancer ). 
1.5.3 
Consider more frequent monitoring for older people and people with chronic conditions (such as diabetes) who are serving longer prison sentences. 
1.6 Managing deteriorating health and health emergencies 
1.6.1 
Ensure a local protocol is available for responding to and managing situations in which a person's health quickly deteriorates, or in a health emergency. This could include, for example: 
essential training for front-line prison staff, including the first person likely to be on the scene in an emergency 
processes to enable healthcare staff to reach a person in prison quickly, such as how to gain access to their cell 
processes to ensure a person can be quickly seen by a healthcare professional if their health deteriorates quickly 
availability of emergency equipment, such as emergency grab bags 
recording the actions and observations taken by prison and healthcare staff when assessing people with rapidly deteriorating health or in an emergency situation, such as: 
updating a person's care plan or 
recommendations for immediate follow-up 
a clear care plan for supporting people with rapidly deteriorating health 
guidance on sharing information between prison staff and healthcare staff, such as details on standardised clinical handovers and follow-up. 
1.6.2 
Ensure prison and healthcare staff are made aware of people who have underlying chronic conditions and allergies: 
if the person agrees (in line with the local information-sharing policies) 
in emergencies, in line with the duty of healthcare staff to share relevant confidential patient data. 
1.7 Continuity of healthcare 
On entry into prison 
1.7.1 
Arrange for the person's medical records to be transferred from primary and secondary care to the prison healthcare team on the person's entry to prison (see recommendation 1.1.6 in the section on following the first-stage health assessment ). 
1.7.2 
Primary and secondary care services should provide information from the person's medical records to the prison healthcare team that is: 
relevant 
in the person's best interests. 
Transit between custodial settings 
1.7.3 
Ensure continuity of care between custodial settings, including court, the receiving prison or during escort periods by, for example: 
providing access to relevant information from the patient record 
providing any medicines (including controlled drugs) – see also the section on continuity of medicines 
issuing an FP10 prescription. 
Before release from prison 
1.7.4 
Carry out a pre-release health assessment for people with complex needs. This should be led by primary healthcare and involve multidisciplinary team members and the person. It should take place at least 1 month before the date the person is expected to be released. 
1.7.5 
For people who may be in prison for less than 1 month, plan pre-release health assessments during the second-stage health assessment (see recommendation 1.1.13 in the section on second-stage health assessment within 7 days for details of this assessment). 
1.7.6 
Include the following in the care summary and post-release action plan for all people: 
any significant health events that affected the person while they were in prison, for example: 
new diagnoses 
hospital admissions 
instances of self-harm 
any health or social care provided in prison 
details of any ongoing health and social care needs, including: 
medicines they are taking (see also recommendations 1.7.12 to 1.7.14 in the section on continuity of medicines ) 
mental health or substance misuse 
future health and social care appointments, including appointments with: 
secondary and tertiary care 
mental health services 
substance misuse and recovery services 
social services. 
1.7.7 
Give the person a copy of the care summary and post-release plan. 
1.7.8 
Help people who are being released from prison to find and register with a community GP if they were not previously registered with one. 
1.7.9 
Before the person is released, liaise with services that will be providing care and support to them after they leave prison. This should include (as needed): 
primary care 
secondary and tertiary specialist services (for example, HIV, TB, oncology) 
mental health or learning disability services 
substance misuse services 
National Probation Service 
community rehabilitation company (CRC) 
social services 
family or carers 
external agencies such as home care. 
Continuity of medicines 
1.7.10 
Ensure the person can keep taking their medicines after coming into prison. 
1.7.11 
Give critical medicines in a timely way to prevent harm from missed or delayed doses. Use the examples of critical medicines in table 2 in conjunction with clinical judgement and any safety alerts. 
Table 2 Examples of critical medicines where timeliness of administration is crucial to prevent harm from missed and delayed doses 
Area 
Medicines 
Cardiovascular system 
Anticoagulants 
Nitrates 
Respiratory system 
Adrenoceptor agonists 
Antimuscarinic bronchodilators 
Adrenaline for allergic emergencies 
Central nervous system 
Anti-epileptic drugs 
Drugs used in psychoses and related disorders 
Drugs used in parkinsonism and related disorders 
Drugs used to treat substance misuse 
Infections 
As clinically indicated, such as anti-infectives or anti-retrovirals 
Endocrine system 
Corticosteroids 
Drugs used in diabetes 
Obstetrics, gynaecology and urinary tract disorders 
Emergency contraceptives 
Malignant disease and immunosuppression 
Drugs affecting the immune response 
Sex hormones and hormone antagonists in malignant disease – depot preparations 
Nutrition and blood 
Parenteral vitamins B and C 
Eye 
Corticosteroids and other anti-inflammatory preparations 
Local anaesthetics 
Mydriatics and cycloplegics 
Glaucoma treatment 
Based on UKMi NPSA Rapid Response Report: Reducing harm from omitted and delayed medicines in hospital . Revised January 2016. 
This table contains examples only and should be used in conjunction with clinical judgement. It is important to assess each person on an individual basis. 
1.7.12 
Hold a one-to-one discussion with the person to agree a plan for how they will take their medicine after their release from prison. This should include education about taking prescribed medicines. 
1.7.13 
Consider carrying out a medicines review for people who are assessed as needing extra support to manage their medicines on release or transfer from prison. For example: 
people with TB, HIV, diabetes, substance misuse or mental health problems 
people with neurodevelopmental disorders or learning disabilities 
people receiving end of life care 
older people 
people serving long-term sentences. 
1.7.14 
When a person is discharged or transferred from prison, give them a minimum of 7 days' prescribed medicines or an FP10 prescription, based on a risk assessment. 
1.7.15 
Set up a process to ensure that people being discharged or transferred at short notice from prison are given a supply of their medicines or an FP10 prescription. 
1.7.16 
For recommendations on care for people moving from prison to another care setting, see the section on medicines-related communication systems in the NICE guideline on medicines optimisation . 
Terms used in this guideline 
Body map 
A diagram of the body on which physical injuries can be recorded. 
Diversion 
The transfer of any prescription medicines from the person for whom they were prescribed to another person for misuse. 
FP10 
A prescription form. People who are released from prison unexpectedly can take an FP10 to a community pharmacy to receive their medicines free of charge until they can arrange to see their GP or register with a new GP. 
Grab bags 
Medical emergency bags containing equipment and medication for dealing with common medical emergencies. The equipment may include dressings, automated external defibrillator and oxygen. It may also include medicine, for example, for treating allergic reactions (anaphylaxis). 
In-possession 
Medicine is said to be held in-possession if a person (usually in a prison or other secure setting) is responsible for holding and taking it themselves. 
Medicines reconciliation 
The process of identifying an accurate list of a person's current medicines and comparing them with the current list in use, recognising any discrepancies, and documenting any changes, thereby resulting in a complete list of medicines, accurately communicated. Adapted from definition by the Institute for Healthcare Improvement . 
Multidisciplinary team 
A group of professionals from different disciplines who each provide specific support to a person, working as a team. In prison settings, a multidisciplinary team may include physical and mental health professionals, prison staff, National Probation Service and/or community rehabilitation company (CRC) representatives, chaplains and staff from other agencies, such as immigration services and social care staff. 
Prison 
Her Majesty's prison establishments, including young offender institutions. 
Street drugs 
Substances taken for a non-medical purpose (for example, mood-altering, stimulant or sedative effects). 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
