Overview | Menopause: identification and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Gynaecological conditions
Menopause
Menopause: identification and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG23 
Published: 
12 November 2015
Last updated: 
15 April 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Implementation 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers identifying and managing menopause, including in people with premature ovarian insufficiency. It aims to improve the consistency of support and information provided to people experiencing menopause. 
For information on related topics, see our women's and reproductive health summary page . 
Last reviewed: 15 April 2026 
We amended our advice on when to seek help for vaginal bleeding while taking systemic HRT in the section on starting HRT . See the update information for details. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
individualised care , and providing information and support 
identifying perimenopause and menopause 
discussing management options with people aged 40 or over 
managing symptoms associated with menopause in people aged 40 or over 
effects of hormone replacement therapy on specific health outcomes in people aged 40 or over 
diagnosing and managing premature ovarian insufficiency in people under 40 
starting and stopping hormone replacement therapy for anyone 
reviewing treatment for anyone 
See the discussion aid on the incidence of medical conditions with and without HRT and a 2-page visual summary on genitourinary (GU) symptoms associated with menopause .  
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals who care for women, trans men and non-binary people registered female at birth with menopause-associated symptoms 
Women, trans men, and non-binary people registered female at birth with menopause-associated symptoms, their families or carers, and the public. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called menopause: diagnosis and management. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Menopause 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
