Context | Gout: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Musculoskeletal conditions
Arthritis
Gout: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG219 
Published: 
09 June 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Context 
Gout is a type of arthritis caused by monosodium urate crystals forming inside and around joints, resulting in sudden flares of severe pain, heat and swelling. Any joint can be affected but gout is most common in distal joints, such as big toes, knees and ankles, and fingers. 
Between 2 and 3 in every 100 people in the UK have gout. It usually occurs in men over 30 and women after menopause, and is more common in men than women. Long-term complications of gout include joint damage and renal stones. Almost 25% of people with gout have chronic kidney disease (CKD) stages 3 to 5 (glomerular filtration rate [GFR] categories G3 to G5). 
Gout is most often managed in primary care without specialist rheumatological input. Flares are usually treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, colchicine or corticosteroids. However, most people have further flares. They can be prevented by taking medicines to reduce serum urate levels (such as allopurinol or febuxostat). 
However, only one-third of people with gout have these medicines and they are used effectively (lowering serum urate level to the target) by only one-third of people who take them. People with CKD also often have contraindications to medicines used to manage gout. 
Diagnosing gout and differentiating gout from other types of arthritis is not always straightforward and the best method of diagnosis is often unclear. There is a need to improve the diagnosis and management of gout and the quality of life for people with gout. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
