Overview | Autism spectrum disorder in under 19s: recognition, referral and diagnosis | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Autism
Autism spectrum disorder in under 19s: recognition, referral and diagnosis
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG128 
Published: 
28 September 2011
Last updated: 
20 December 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Appendix: Features suggesting possible autism 
Overview 
This guideline covers recognising and diagnosing autism spectrum disorder in children and young people from birth up to 19 years. It also covers referral. It aims to improve the experience of children, young people and those who care for them. 
This guideline should be used alongside our guidelines on autism spectrum disorder in under 19s: support and management and autism spectrum disorder in adults: diagnosis and management . 
Last reviewed: 14 June 2021 
We found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. We are monitoring important initiatives in progress that may affect future service delivery. We will regularly review their potential impact on our autism guidelines. See the surveillance decision for more details. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
local pathway for recognition, referral and diagnostic assessment of possible autism 
recognising children and young people with possible autism 
referring children and young people to the autism team 
autism diagnostic assessment for children and young people 
medical investigations 
communicating the results from the autism diagnostic assessment 
information and support for families and carers 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Autistic children and young people, children and young people who may be autistic, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called autism diagnosis in children and young people: recognition, referral and diagnosis of children and young people on the autism spectrum. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Autism 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
