Identifying and assessing overweight, obesity and central adiposity | Overweight and obesity management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diet, nutrition and obesity
Overweight and obesity management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG246 
Published: 
14 January 2025
Last updated: 
08 January 2026
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
General principles of care 
Preventing overweight, obesity and central adiposity 
Identifying and assessing overweight, obesity and central adiposity 
Discussing results and referral 
Behavioural overweight and obesity management interventions 
Physical activity and diet 
Medicines and surgery 
Digital technologies for delivering multidisciplinary weight-management services to adults 
Planning and delivering overweight and obesity services and interventions 
Monitoring and evaluating services and interventions 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.8 Specific advice for people from ethnic minority backgrounds
1.9 Identifying and assessing overweight and obesity in adults
1.10 Identifying and assessing overweight and obesity in children and young people
Identifying and assessing overweight, obesity and central adiposity 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Health and social care professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
Babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare 
Decision making and mental capacity 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines optimisation 
Multimorbidity 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
People's experience in adult social care services 
Service user experience in adult mental health 
Shared decision making 
Transition from children's to adults' services . 
Read this guideline alongside: 
NICE guidelines on behaviour change: digital and mobile health interventions , behaviour change: individual approaches , eating disorders , and looked after children and young people 
the National Obesity Audit 
Public Health England's Whole systems approach to obesity 
the UK Chief Medical Officers' physical activity guidelines 
the NHS Eatwell guide 
the Childhood obesity: applying All Our Health guidance . 
1.8 Specific advice for people from ethnic minority backgrounds 
1.8.1 
Ensure healthcare professionals are aware that people from some ethnic minority backgrounds are prone to central adiposity and so are at an increased risk of chronic weight-related health conditions at a lower BMI. [2025] 
1.8.2 
Ensure people from these ethnic minority backgrounds (and the families and carers of children and young people from these backgrounds) are aware that they are prone to central adiposity and so are at an increased risk of chronic weight-related health conditions at a lower BMI. Explain these risks in an inclusive and non-stigmatising way. [2025] 
1.8.3 
Use existing community networks for people from ethnic minority backgrounds to share information on the increased risks these groups face at a lower BMI. See recommendation 1.9.11 for information about these risks . See NICE's guideline on community engagement: improving health and wellbeing and reducing health inequalities . [2025] 
See also the section on classifying overweight, obesity and central adiposity in adults . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on specific advice for people from ethnic minority backgrounds . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: identifying overweight and obesity in children, young people and adults . 
1.9 Identifying and assessing overweight and obesity in adults 
When to take and record measurements in adults 
1.9.1 
Avoid attributing all symptoms to overweight or obesity (diagnostic overshadowing). If the person is presenting with another health problem or condition (such as hip pain), address this problem or condition first before deciding whether it is appropriate to ask permission to discuss weight. [2025] 
1.9.2 
Ask for permission each time before discussing overweight, obesity or central adiposity and before taking measurements. See the section on discussion, communication and follow up for steps to think about before discussing overweight, obesity and central adiposity and how to ensure discussions are sensitive and non-judgemental. [2025] 
1.9.3 
If permission is given, use suitable opportunities to measure and record a person's: 
height 
weight 
waist circumference in people with BMI below 35 kg/m 2 so that waist-to-height ratio can be calculated. 
Opportunities could include registration with a GP, routine consultation for long-term conditions, and other routine health checks. [2025] 
1.9.4 
Ensure that records are kept up to date and shared between providers, if possible and with permission, for people who have self-referred to overweight and obesity management interventions. [2025] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on when to take and record measurements in adults . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: identifying overweight and obesity in children, young people and adults . 
How to take measurements in adults 
1.9.5 
Encourage adults with a BMI below 35 kg/m² to: 
measure their own waist-to-height ratio to assess central adiposity 
seek advice and further clinical assessments (such as a cardiometabolic risk factor assessment) from a healthcare professional if the measurement indicates an increased health risk. 
Explain to people that to accurately measure their waist and calculate their own waist-to-height ratio, they should follow the advice in box 1. [2022] 
1.9.6 
Direct people to resources that give advice on how to measure waist circumference and waist-to-height ratio, such as the video guide on the NHS obesity page . See recommendations 1.9.10 and 1.9.11 in the section on classifying overweight, obesity and central adiposity in adults for how to interpret waist-to-height ratio. [2022] 
Box 1 Method for people to measure their own waist and calculate their waist-to-height ratio 
Measure 
Find the bottom of the ribs and the top of the hips. 
Wrap a tape measure around the waist midway between these points (this will be just above the belly button) and breathe out naturally before taking the measurement. 
Calculate 
Measure waist circumference and height in the same units (either both in centimetres, or both in inches). If you know your height in feet and inches, convert it to inches (for example, 5 feet 7 inches is 67 inches). 
Divide waist measurement by height measurement. For example: 
38 inches divided by 67 inches = waist-to-height ratio of 0.57 or 
96.5 cm divided by 170 cm = waist-to-height ratio of 0.57. 
For adults, see also the NHS obesity webpage for more information and a video showing how to do this. For children and young people aged 5 years and over, see the NHS waist-to-height ratio calculator . 
Measures of overweight, obesity and central adiposity in adults 
1.9.7 
Use BMI as a practical measure of overweight and obesity (see the NHS BMI calculator for adults ). Interpret it with caution because it is not a direct measure of central adiposity. [2022] 
1.9.8 
In adults with BMI below 35 kg/m 2 , measure and use their waist-to-height ratio, as well as their BMI, as a practical estimate of central adiposity and use these measurements to help to assess and predict health risks (for example, type 2 diabetes, hypertension or cardiovascular disease). [2022] 
1.9.9 
Do not use bioimpedance as a substitute for BMI as a measure of general adiposity in adults. [2006, amended 2014] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2022 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on how to take measurements and measures of overweight, obesity and central adiposity in adults . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in  evidence review CG189 A: accuracy of anthropometric measures in assessing health risks associated with overweight and obesity in adults . 
Classifying overweight, obesity and central adiposity in adults 
1.9.10 
Classify the degree of overweight or obesity in adults as follows, if they are not in the groups covered by recommendation 1.9.11: 
healthy weight : BMI 18.5 kg/m 2 to 24.9 kg/m 2 
overweight: BMI 25 kg/m 2 to 29.9 kg/m 2 
obesity class 1: BMI 30 kg/m 2 to 34.9 kg/m 2 
obesity class 2: BMI 35 kg/m 2 to 39.9 kg/m 2 
obesity class 3: BMI 40 kg/m 2 or more. 
Use clinical judgement when interpreting the healthy weight category because a person in this category may nevertheless have central adiposity. See Public Health England's guidance on obesity and weight management for people with learning disabilities for information on reasonable adjustments that may need to be made. [2022] 
1.9.11 
People with a South Asian, Chinese, other Asian, Middle Eastern, Black African or African–Caribbean background are prone to central adiposity and their cardiometabolic risk occurs at lower BMI, so use lower BMI thresholds as a practical measure of overweight and obesity: 
overweight: BMI 23 kg/m 2 to 27.4 kg/m 2 
obesity: BMI 27.5 kg/m 2 or above. 
For people in these groups, obesity classes 2 and 3 are usually identified by reducing the thresholds highlighted in recommendation 1.9.10 by 2.5 kg/m 2 . [2022] 
1.9.12 
Interpret BMI with caution in adults with high muscle mass because it may be a less accurate measure of central adiposity in this group. [2022] 
1.9.13 
Interpret BMI with caution in people aged 65 and over, taking into account comorbidities, conditions that may affect functional capacity and the possible protective effect of having a slightly higher BMI when older. [2022] 
1.9.14 
Classify the degree of central adiposity based on waist-to-height ratio as follows: 
healthy central adiposity: waist-to-height ratio 0.4 to 0.49, indicating no increased health risks 
increased central adiposity: waist-to-height ratio 0.5 to 0.59, indicating increased health risks 
high central adiposity: waist-to-height ratio 0.6 or more, indicating further increased health risks. 
These classifications can be used for people with a BMI under 35 kg/m 2 of both sexes and all ethnicities, including adults with high muscle mass. 
The health risks associated with higher levels of central adiposity include type 2 diabetes, hypertension and cardiovascular disease. [2022] 
1.9.15 
When talking to a person about their waist-to-height ratio, explain that they should try and keep their waist to less than half their height (so a waist-to-height ratio of under 0.5). [2022] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2022 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on classifying overweight, obesity and central adiposity in adults . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in  evidence review CG189 A: accuracy of anthropometric measures in assessing health risks associated with overweight and obesity in adults . 
Assessing and managing comorbidities in adults 
1.9.16 
After the initial assessment of overweight or obesity, identify any comorbidities and other factors that may affect or be affected by the person's weight. Take into account the timing of the assessment, the degree of overweight or obesity, and the results of previous assessments. [2006] 
1.9.17 
Start managing comorbidities as soon as they are identified; do not wait until the person has lost weight. [2006] 
1.10 Identifying and assessing overweight and obesity in children and young people 
When to take and record measurements in children and young people 
1.10.1 
Ensure there are processes to identify children and young people with overweight and obesity in addition to the National Child Measurement Programme and the Healthy Child Programme, particularly for children and young people outside the age groups covered by these programmes, and children not in mainstream state education. [2025] 
1.10.2 
Avoid attributing all symptoms to overweight or obesity (diagnostic overshadowing). If the child or young person is presenting with another health problem or condition (such as asthma) address this problem or condition first before deciding whether it is appropriate to ask permission to discuss weight. [2025] 
1.10.3 
Ask the family or carer and the child or young person for permission before discussing overweight, obesity or central adiposity and before taking measurements. (Also see NICE's guideline on babies, children and young people's experiences of healthcare .) [2025] 
1.10.4 
If there is a suitable opportunity, ask permission to record an up-to-date measure of a child or young person's height and weight. Potentially suitable opportunities could include routine health checks and non-urgent appointments (such as immunisation appointments). See the section on general principles of care for steps to take before discussing overweight and obesity and on ensuring discussions are sensitive and non-judgemental. [2025] 
1.10.5 
Consider measuring the waist circumference of children and young people aged 5 years and over and calculating their waist-to-height ratio to predict health risks associated with central adiposity. See recommendation 1.10.10 on using waist-to-height ratios in children and young people aged 5 years and over to classify the degree of central adiposity, and see box 1 for how to measure waist-to-height ratio. [2025] 
1.10.6 
Ensure that records are kept up to date, if possible, for children and young people and their family and carers who have self-referred to overweight and obesity management interventions. [2025] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on when to take and record measurements in children and young people . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: identifying overweight and obesity in children, young people and adults . 
Measures of overweight, obesity and central adiposity in children and young people 
1.10.7 
Use BMI as a practical estimate of overweight and obesity in children and young people, and ensure that charts used are: 
appropriate for children and young people and 
adjusted for age and sex. 
Interpret BMI with caution because it is not a direct measure of central adiposity. Use the NHS BMI healthy weight calculator , Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health UK-World Health Organization (WHO) growth charts and BMI charts to plot and classify BMI centile. The childhood and puberty close monitoring (CPCM) form can also be used for continued BMI monitoring in children aged 2 and over, especially if puberty is either premature or delayed. Refer to special BMI growth charts for children and young people with Down's syndrome , if needed. [2022, amended 2025] 
1.10.8 
Do not use bioimpedance as a substitute for BMI as a measure of general adiposity in children and young people. [2006, amended 2014] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2022 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on measures of overweight, obesity and central adiposity in children and young people . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review CG189 B: accuracy of anthropometric measures in assessing health risks associated with overweight and obesity in children and young people . 
Classifying overweight, obesity and central adiposity in children and young people 
1.10.9 
Classify the degree of overweight or obesity in children and young people using the following classifications: 
overweight: BMI 91st centile + 1.34 standard deviations (SDs) 
clinical obesity: BMI 98th centile + 2.05 SDs 
severe obesity: BMI 99.6th centile + 2.68 SDs. 
Use clinical judgement when interpreting BMI below the 91st centile, especially the healthy weight category in BMI charts because a child or young person in this category may nevertheless have central adiposity. [2022] 
1.10.10 
Classify the degree of central adiposity based on waist-to-height ratio in children and young people aged 5 years and over as follows: 
healthy central adiposity: waist-to-height ratio 0.4 to 0.49, indicating no increased health risk 
increased central adiposity: waist-to-height ratio 0.5 to 0.59, indicating increased health risk 
high central adiposity: waist-to-height ratio 0.6 or more, indicating further increased health risk. 
These classifications can be used for children and young people aged 5 years and over of both sexes and all ethnicities. 
The health risks associated with higher central adiposity levels include type 2 diabetes, hypertension and cardiovascular disease. [2022, amended 2026] 
1.10.11 
When talking to a child or young person aged 5 years or over, and their families and carers, explain that they should try and keep their waist to less than half their height (so a waist-to-height-ratio of under 0.5). [2022, amended 2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2022 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on classifying overweight, obesity and central adiposity in children and young people . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review CG189 B: accuracy of anthropometric measures in assessing health risks associated with overweight and obesity in children and young people . 
Assessing and managing comorbidities in children and young people 
1.10.12 
After the initial assessment of overweight or obesity, identify any comorbidities and other factors that may affect or be affected by the person's weight. Take into account the timing of the assessment, the degree of overweight or obesity, and the results of previous assessments. [2006] 
1.10.13 
Consider assessing comorbidities for children with a BMI at or above the 98th centile. [2006] 
1.10.14 
Start managing comorbidities as soon as they are identified; do not wait until the child or young person has lost weight. [2006] 
Next page 
Discussing results and referral 
Previous page 
Preventing overweight, obesity and central adiposity 
Back to top
