Overview | Physical health of people in prison | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Physical health of people in prison 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG57 
Published: 
02 November 2016
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing, diagnosing and managing physical health problems of people in prison. It aims to improve health and wellbeing in the prison population by promoting more coordinated care and more effective approaches to prescribing, dispensing and supervising medicines. 
Recommendations on ongoing mental health care are included in NICE’s guideline on mental health of adults in contact with the criminal justice system , which published in February 2017. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
assessing a person’s health when they come into prison 
managing and supervising medicines 
promoting health and wellbeing in prison 
how to manage health emergencies and support people with rapidly deteriorating health 
Who is it for? 
Practitioners and managers working in prisons or young offender institutions 
Providers of care and support to people in prisons or young offender institutions 
People in prisons or young offender institutions, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Physical health of people in prisons 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
