Recommendations | Cataracts in adults: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Eye conditions
Cataracts in adults: management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG77 
Published: 
26 October 2017
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
1.1 Patient information
1.2 Referral for cataract surgery
1.3 Preoperative assessment and biometry
1.4 Intraocular lens selection
1.5 Preventing wrong lens implant errors
1.6 Surgical timing and technique
1.7 Anaesthesia
1.8 Preventing and managing complications
1.9 Postoperative assessment
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Patient information 
1.1.1 
Give people with cataracts, and their family members or carers (as appropriate), both oral and written information. Information should be tailored to the person's needs, for example, in an accessible format. For more guidance on giving information to people and discussing their preferences, see the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services , particularly recommendations 1.2.12 and 1.2.13 on capacity and consent. For guidance on eye tests for people living with dementia, see the section on sensory impairment in the NICE guideline on dementia . 
At referral for cataract surgery 
1.1.2 
At referral for cataract surgery, give people information about: 
cataracts: 
what cataracts are 
how they can affect vision 
how they can affect quality of life 
cataract surgery: 
what it involves and how long it takes 
possible risks and benefits 
what support might be needed after surgery 
likely recovery time 
likely long-term outcomes, including the possibility that people might need spectacles for some tasks 
how vision and quality of life may be affected without surgery. 
Before cataract surgery 
1.1.3 
At the preoperative outpatient appointment, review and expand on the topics in recommendation 1.1.2, and give people information about: 
the refractive implications of different intraocular lenses (see recommendation 1.5.3) 
types of anaesthesia 
the person's individual risk of complications during or after surgery (for example, the risk of postoperative retinal detachment in people with high myopia; also see recommendations 1.3.10 and 1.3.11) 
what to do and what to expect on the day of cataract surgery 
what to do and what to expect after cataract surgery 
what support might be needed after surgery 
medicines after surgery (for example, eye drops) and medicines that people may be already taking (for example, anticoagulants) 
the refractive implications after previous corneal refractive surgery, if appropriate (see recommendation 1.3.6) 
bilateral simultaneous cataract surgery, if appropriate (also see recommendations 1.6.3 and 1.6.4). 
On the day of cataract surgery 
1.1.4 
On the day of surgery, before the operation, give people information about: 
their position on the list 
what to expect during and after surgery. 
1.1.5 
On the day of surgery, after the operation, give people information about: 
what visual changes to expect 
signs and symptoms of potential complications to look out for 
any restrictions on activities, for example, driving 
possible problems and who to contact 
emergency situations and who to contact 
eye drops 
pain management 
their next appointment and who they will see. 
After cataract surgery 
1.1.6 
At the first appointment after cataract surgery, give people information about: 
eye drops 
what to do if their vision changes 
who to contact if they have concerns or queries 
when it is appropriate to get new spectacles and how to do so 
second-eye cataract surgery if there is a cataract in the non-operated eye 
arrangements for managing ocular comorbidities. 
1.2 Referral for cataract surgery 
1.2.1 
Base the decision to refer a person with a cataract for surgery on a discussion with them (and their family members or carers, as appropriate) that includes: 
how the cataract affects the person's vision and quality of life 
whether 1 or both eyes are affected 
what cataract surgery involves, including possible risks and benefits 
how the person's quality of life may be affected if they choose not to have cataract surgery 
whether the person wants to have cataract surgery. 
1.2.2 
Do not restrict access to cataract surgery on the basis of visual acuity. 
1.3 Preoperative assessment and biometry 
Biometry techniques 
1.3.1 
Use optical biometry to measure the axial length of the eye for people having cataract surgery. 
1.3.2 
Use ultrasound biometry if optical biometry: 
is not possible or 
does not give accurate measurements. 
1.3.3 
Use keratometry to measure the curvature of the cornea for people having cataract surgery. 
1.3.4 
Consider corneal topography for people having cataract surgery: 
who have abnormally flat or steep corneas 
who have irregular corneas 
who have significant astigmatism 
who have had previous corneal refractive surgery or 
if it is not possible to get an accurate keratometry measurement. 
Biometry formulas 
1.3.5 
For people who have not had previous corneal refractive surgery, use 1 of the following to calculate the intraocular lens power before cataract surgery: 
If the axial length is less than 22.00 mm, use Haigis or Hoffer Q. 
If the axial length is between 22.00 and 26.00 mm, use Barrett Universal II if it is installed on the biometry device and does not need the results to be transcribed by hand. Use SRK/T if not. 
If the axial length is more than 26.00 mm, use Haigis or SRK/T. 
1.3.6 
Advise people who have had previous corneal refractive surgery that refractive outcomes after cataract surgery are difficult to predict, and that they may need further surgery if they do not want to wear spectacles for distance vision. 
1.3.7 
If people have had previous corneal refractive surgery, adjust for the altered relationship between the anterior and posterior corneal curvature. Do not use standard biometry techniques or historical data alone. 
1.3.8 
Surgeons should think about modifying a manufacturer's recommended intraocular lens constant, guided by learning gained from their previous deviations from predicted refractive outcomes. 
Second-eye prediction 
1.3.9 
Consider using 50% of the first-eye prediction error in observed refractive outcome to guide calculations for the intraocular lens power for second-eye cataract surgery. 
Risk stratification 
1.3.10 
Consider using a validated risk stratification algorithm for people who have been referred for cataract surgery, to identify people at increased risk of complications during and after surgery. 
1.3.11 
Explain the results of the risk stratification to the person, and discuss how it may affect their decisions. 
1.3.12 
To minimise the risk of complications during and after surgery, ensure that surgeons in training are closely supervised when they perform cataract surgery in: 
people who are at high risk of complications or 
people for whom the impact of complications would be especially severe (for example, people with only 1 functional eye). 
1.3.13 
Explain to people who are at risk of developing a dense cataract that there is an increased risk of complications if surgery is delayed and the cataract becomes more dense. 
1.4 Intraocular lens selection 
1.4.1 
Please note: the recommendations around lens design and material have been removed to allow for further consideration. 
1.4.2 
Do not offer multifocal intraocular lenses for people having cataract surgery. 
1.4.3 
Offer monovision for use after cataract surgery to people who have either anisometropia or monovision preoperatively and would like to remain with it. 
1.4.4 
Please note: the recommendations around lens design and material have been removed to allow for further consideration. 
Addressing pre-existing astigmatism 
1.4.5 
Consider on‑axis surgery or limbal-relaxing incisions to reduce postoperative astigmatism. 
1.5 Preventing wrong lens implant errors 
Before cataract surgery 
1.5.1 
Before the preoperative biometry assessment, ensure that the person's correct medical notes are used by confirming the person's: 
name 
address and 
date of birth. 
1.5.2 
Immediately after the preoperative biometry assessment: 
check that the biometry results include the person's name, address, date of birth and hospital number 
either 
use electronic data transfer to upload the biometry results to an electronic health record or 
securely fix the printed biometry results to the person's medical notes 
do not transcribe the results by hand. 
1.5.3 
At the preoperative assessment: 
discuss the refractive implications of different intraocular lenses with the person 
base the choice of intraocular lens on the person's chosen refractive outcome 
record the discussion and the person's choices in their medical notes. 
On the day of cataract surgery 
1.5.4 
The person's medical notes, including biometry results, must be available in theatre on the day of the cataract surgery. 
1.5.5 
Use a checklist based on the World Health Organization (WHO) surgical safety checklist , modified to include the following cataract surgery checks, to ensure that: 
the person's identity has been confirmed and matches information in: 
the consent form 
the biometry results and 
the person's medical notes 
the eye to be operated on has been checked and clearly marked 
there is only 1 intraocular lens in the theatre, that matches the person's selected lens type and prescription 
at least 1 additional identical intraocular lens is in stock 
alternative intraocular lenses are in stock in case the selected lens needs to be changed if there are complications during surgery 
at least 2 members of the team, including the surgeon, have previously checked the appropriateness, accuracy and consistency of all: 
formulas 
calculations and 
intraocular lens constants. 
1.5.6 
Before giving the person anaesthetic, ensure that: 
there is only 1 intraocular lens in the theatre, that matches the person's selected lens type and prescription 
at least 1 additional identical intraocular lens is in stock 
alternative intraocular lenses are in stock in case the selected lens needs to be changed if there are complications during surgery. 
1.5.7 
Immediately before the operation, the surgeon should: 
confirm the person's identity and ensure that the correct medical notes are being used, especially if using electronic patient records 
refer to the printed biometry results, not to transcribed information in the person's medical notes 
refer to the person's medical notes to check which refractive outcome they preferred 
verify that the correct intraocular lens has been selected and is available in theatre. 
Occurrence of wrong lens implant errors 
1.5.8 
If a wrong lens is implanted, refer to NHS England's Never Events policy , and together with the whole multidisciplinary team: 
undertake a root-cause analysis to determine the reasons for the incident 
establish strategies and implementation tools to stop it from happening again. 
1.6 Surgical timing and technique 
Laser-assisted cataract surgery 
1.6.1 
Only use femtosecond laser-assisted cataract surgery as part of a randomised controlled trial that includes collection of resource-use data, comparing femtosecond laser-assisted cataract surgery with ultrasound phacoemulsification. 
Bilateral surgery 
1.6.2 
Offer second-eye cataract surgery using the same criteria as for the first-eye surgery (see referral for cataract surgery ). 
1.6.3 
Consider bilateral simultaneous cataract surgery for: 
people who are at low risk of ocular complications during and after surgery or 
people who need to have general anaesthesia for cataract surgery but for whom general anaesthesia carries an increased risk of complications or distress. 
1.6.4 
Discuss the potential risks and benefits of bilateral simultaneous cataract surgery with people, which should include: 
the potential immediate visual improvement in both eyes 
how it will not be possible to choose a different intraocular lens based on the outcome in the first eye 
the risk of complications in both eyes during and after surgery that could cause long-term visual impairment 
the likely need for additional support after the operation. 
1.7 Anaesthesia 
1.7.1 
Offer sub‑Tenon's or topical (with or without intracameral) anaesthesia for people having cataract surgery. 
1.7.2 
If both sub‑Tenon's and topical (with or without intracameral) anaesthesia are contraindicated, consider peribulbar anaesthesia. 
1.7.3 
Do not offer retrobulbar anaesthesia for people having cataract surgery. 
1.7.4 
Consider sedation, administered by an experienced ophthalmic anaesthetist, as an adjunct to anaesthesia for people if, for example: 
they have high levels of anxiety 
they have postural or musculoskeletal problems 
surgery is expected to take longer than usual. 
1.7.5 
Consider hyaluronidase as an adjunct to sub‑Tenon's anaesthesia, particularly if trying to stop the eye moving during surgery. 
1.8 Preventing and managing complications 
Floppy iris syndrome 
1.8.1 
Consider intracameral phenylephrine to increase pupil size in people at risk of floppy iris syndrome. 
Capsular tension rings 
1.8.2 
Do not use capsular tension rings in routine, uncomplicated cataract surgery. 
1.8.3 
Consider using capsular tension rings for people with pseudoexfoliation. 
Endophthalmitis 
1.8.4 
Use preoperative antiseptics in line with standard surgical practice. 
1.8.5 
Use intracameral cefuroxime during cataract surgery to prevent endophthalmitis. 
1.8.6 
Use commercially prepared or pharmacy-prepared intracameral antibiotic solutions to prevent dilution errors. 
Cystoid macular oedema 
1.8.7 
Consider topical steroids in combination with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): 
after cataract surgery for people at increased risk of cystoid macular oedema, for example, people with diabetes or uveitis 
to manage cystoid macular oedema. 
1.8.8 
Offer topical steroids and/or NSAIDs after cataract surgery to prevent inflammation and cystoid macular oedema. 
Posterior capsule rupture 
1.8.9 
When dealing with posterior capsule rupture, follow a protocol that covers: 
removing vitreous from the wound and anterior chamber 
minimising traction on the retina 
removing lens fragments in the posterior chamber or vitreous cavity 
removing soft lens matter 
implications for any lens insertion. 
Postoperative eye protection 
1.8.10 
Offer eye protection for people whose eye shows residual effects of anaesthesia at the time of discharge after cataract surgery. 
1.9 Postoperative assessment 
1.9.1 
Commissioners and service providers should ensure that the following are in place: 
Processes that identify complications after surgery and ensure that there is prompt access to specialist ophthalmology services. 
Processes to ensure that the UK Minimum Cataract Dataset for National Audit is completed. 
Arrangements so that healthcare professionals discuss second-eye cataract surgery with people who have a cataract in their non-operated eye. 
1.9.2 
Consider collecting patient visual function and quality-of-life data for entry into an electronic dataset. 
1.9.3 
Do not offer in‑person, first-day review to people after uncomplicated cataract surgery. 
Next page 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
