Procedures used during in vitro fertilisation (IVF) | Fertility problems: assessment and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Fertility
Fertility problems: assessment and treatment
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG257 
Published: 
31 March 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Principles of care 
Initial advice to people concerned about delays in conception 
Advice about factors that can affect fertility 
Defining infertility and initial assessment 
Investigation of fertility problems and management strategies 
Management of male factor fertility problems 
Management of female factor fertility problems 
Unstimulated intrauterine insemination (IUI) 
Unexplained fertility problems in people trying to conceive through unprotected vaginal sexual intercourse 
Access criteria for in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Procedures used during in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) 
Donor insemination 
Oocyte donation 
Fertility preservation for medical indications 
Long-term safety of assisted reproductive technologies 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.40 Pre-treatment
1.41 Endometrial receptivity testing
1.42 Immunological treatments
1.43 Pituitary suppression and controlled ovarian stimulation
1.44 Monitoring during ovarian stimulation
1.45 Triggering ovulation and luteal phase support
1.46 Preventing ovulation hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS)
1.47 Oocyte retrieval
1.48 Embryo selection strategies
1.49 Embryo transfer strategies
Procedures used during in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
1.40 Pre-treatment 
For recommendations on pre-treatment, see part B on pre-treatment therapies in the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) guideline on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI (update 2025) . 
1.40.1 
Do not offer endometrial scratch as a pre-treatment means of improving the outcome of IVF. [2026] 
1.40.2 
Do not offer hysteroscopy as a pre-treatment means of improving the outcome of IVF. If uterine or endometrial abnormalities are suspected, see recommendation 1.18.16 in the section on investigation of suspected tubal and uterine abnormalities . [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2026 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on pre-treatment . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review P: endometrial scratch as a treatment add-on 
evidence review C: screening hysteroscopy . 
1.41 Endometrial receptivity testing 
1.41.1 
Do not offer endometrial receptivity testing as a treatment add-on for embryo transfer. This includes both gene expression analysis (for example, endometrial receptivity array) and microbiological analysis (for example, endometrial microbiome metagenomic analysis, analysis of infectious chronic endometritis). [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on endometrial receptivity testing . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: endometrial receptivity testing . 
1.42 Immunological treatments 
1.42.1 
Do not use immunological agents, including intralipids, intravenous immunoglobulins or steroids (glucocorticoids), as part of fertility treatment. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on immunological treatments . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q: immune therapies as a treatment add-on . 
1.43 Pituitary suppression and controlled ovarian stimulation 
For recommendations on pituitary suppression and controlled ovarian stimulation, see part C on pituitary suppression and ovarian stimulation in the ESHRE guideline on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI (update 2025) . 
1.44 Monitoring during ovarian stimulation 
For recommendations on monitoring during ovulation stimulation, see part E on monitoring in the ESHRE guideline on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI (update 2025) . 
1.45 Triggering ovulation and luteal phase support 
For recommendations on triggering ovulation and luteal phase support, see part F on triggering ovulation and luteal support in the ESHRE guideline on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI (update 2025) . 
1.46 Preventing ovulation hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) 
For recommendations on preventing ovulation hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS), see part G on prevention of OHSS in the ESHRE guideline on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI (update 2025) . 
1.46.1 
Clinics providing ovarian stimulation with gonadotrophins should have protocols in place for preventing, diagnosing and managing OHSS. [2004] 
1.47 Oocyte retrieval 
1.47.1 
Offer conscious sedation for transvaginal retrieval of oocytes because it is a safe and acceptable method of providing analgesia. [2004] 
1.47.2 
Do not offer follicle flushing before oocyte retrieval if there are at least 3 follicles, because this procedure does not increase the number of oocytes retrieved or pregnancy rates, and it increases the duration of oocyte retrieval and associated pain. [2004] 
For recommendations on surgical sperm retrieval, see the section on management of male factor fertility problems . 
1.48 Embryo selection strategies 
1.48.1 
Do not offer pre-implantation genetic testing for aneuploidy (PGT‑A) as part of fertility treatment to improve live birth rates. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on embryo selection strategies . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review N: pre-implantation genetic testing for aneuploidy as a fertility treatment add-on 
evidence review O: embryo selection guided by continuous time-lapse sequence as a treatment add-on . 
1.49 Embryo transfer strategies 
1.49.1 
Do not offer assisted hatching, because it has not been shown to improve pregnancy rates. [2004] 
1.49.2 
Offer ultrasound-guided embryo transfer during IVF because this improves pregnancy rates. [2004] 
1.49.3 
Replacement of embryos into a uterine cavity with an endometrium of less than 5 mm thickness is unlikely to result in a pregnancy and is therefore not recommended. [2004] 
1.49.4 
Provide information that bed rest of more than 20 minutes' duration following embryo transfer does not improve the outcome of IVF treatment. [2004] 
1.49.5 
Evaluate embryo quality, at both cleavage and blastocyst stages, according to the Association of Reproductive and Clinical Scientists (ARCS) and UK National External Quality Assessment Service (UK NEQAS) Embryo Grading Scheme . [2013, amended 2026] 
1.49.6 
When considering the number of fresh or frozen embryos to transfer in IVF treatment: 
maternal age under 37 years: 
in the first full IVF cycle, use single embryo transfer 
in the second full IVF cycle, use single embryo transfer if 1 or more top-quality embryos are available; consider using 2 embryos if no top-quality embryos are available 
in the third full IVF cycle, transfer no more than 2 embryos 
maternal age 37 to 39 years: 
in the first and second full IVF cycles, use single embryo transfer if there are 1 or more top-quality embryos; consider double embryo transfer if there are no top-quality embryos 
in the third full IVF cycle, transfer no more than 2 embryos 
maternal age 40 to 41 years, consider double embryo transfer. [2013, amended 2026] 
1.49.7 
If IVF treatment is with donor eggs, use an embryo transfer strategy that is based on the age of the donor. [2013] 
1.49.8 
Do not transfer more than 2 embryos during any 1 cycle of IVF treatment. [2013] 
1.49.9 
Where a top-quality blastocyst is available, use single embryo transfer. [2013] 
1.49.10 
When considering double embryo transfer, discuss the risks of multiple pregnancy associated with this strategy. [2013] 
1.49.11 
Offer cryopreservation to store any remaining good-quality embryos after embryo transfer. [2013] 
1.49.12 
Advise women, and trans men and non-binary people with female reproductive organs who have regular ovulatory cycles that the likelihood of a live birth after replacement of frozen–thawed embryos is similar for embryos replaced during natural cycles and hormone-supplemented cycles. [2013] 
Next page 
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) 
Previous page 
Access criteria for in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Back to top
