Overview | Sinusitis (acute): antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Ear, nose and throat conditions
Sinusitis (acute): antimicrobial prescribing 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG79 
Published: 
27 October 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Background 
Recommendations 
Symptoms and signs 
Summary of the evidence 
Other considerations 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline sets out an antimicrobial prescribing strategy for acute sinusitis. It aims to limit antibiotic use and reduce antimicrobial resistance. Acute sinusitis is usually caused by a virus, lasts for about 2 to 3 weeks, and most people get better without antibiotics. Withholding antibiotics rarely leads to complications. 
We have also produced a NICE guideline on antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use . 
Last reviewed: 18 April 2019 
We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. For more information, see the surveillance decision . 
This guideline partially updates and replaces NICE guideline CG69 (Published July 2008).  
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
See a  2-page visual summary of the recommendations, including tables to support prescribing decisions. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
managing symptoms , including advice when an antibiotic is not needed and the use of corticosteroids and nasal sprays 
choice of antibiotic  when a back-up or immediate prescription is needed 
self-care 
Who is it for? 
Health professionals 
People with acute sinusitis and their families and carers. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guidance. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Acute respiratory infection in over 16s: initial assessment and management including virtual wards (hospital at home) 
Next page 
Background 
Back to top
