Recommendations | Varicose veins: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Varicose veins
Varicose veins: diagnosis and management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG168 
Published: 
24 July 2013
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Information for people with varicose veins
1.2 Referral to a vascular service
1.3 Assessment and treatment in a vascular service
1.4 Management during pregnancy
Recommendations 
The following guidance is based on the best available evidence. The full guideline gives details of the methods and the evidence used to develop the guidance. 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Information for people with varicose veins 
1.1.1 
Give people who present with varicose veins information that includes: 
An explanation of what varicose veins are. 
Possible causes of varicose veins. 
The likelihood of progression and possible complications, including deep vein thrombosis, skin changes, leg ulcers, bleeding and thrombophlebitis. Address any misconceptions the person may have about the risks of developing complications. 
Treatment options, including symptom relief, an overview of interventional treatments and the role of compression. 
Advice on: 
weight loss (for guidance on weight management, see the NICE guideline on overweight and obesity management ) 
light to moderate physical activity 
avoiding factors that are known to make their symptoms worse if possible 
when and where to seek further medical help. 
1.1.2 
When discussing treatment for varicose veins at the vascular service tell the person: 
What treatment options are available. 
The expected benefits and risks of each treatment option. 
That new varicose veins may develop after treatment. 
That they may need more than 1 session of treatment. 
That the chance of recurrence after treatment for recurrent varicose veins is higher than for primary varicose veins. 
A vascular service is a team of healthcare professionals who have the skills to undertake a full clinical and duplex ultrasound assessment and provide a full range of treatment. 
1.2 Referral to a vascular service 
1.2.1 
Refer people with bleeding varicose veins to a vascular service immediately. 
1.2.2 
Refer people to a vascular service if they have any of the following. 
Symptomatic primary or symptomatic recurrent varicose veins. Symptomatic veins are veins found in association with troublesome lower limb symptoms (typically pain, aching, discomfort, swelling, heaviness and itching). 
Lower‑limb skin changes, such as pigmentation or eczema, thought to be caused by chronic venous insufficiency. 
Superficial vein thrombosis (characterised by the appearance of hard, painful veins) and suspected venous incompetence. 
A venous leg ulcer (a break in the skin below the knee that has not healed within 2 weeks). 
A healed venous leg ulcer. 
1.3 Assessment and treatment in a vascular service 
Assessment 
1.3.1 
Use duplex ultrasound to confirm the diagnosis of varicose veins and the extent of truncal reflux, and to plan treatment for people with suspected primary or recurrent varicose veins. 
Interventional treatment 
1.3.2 
For people with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux: 
Offer endothermal ablation (see NICE's interventional procedures guidance on radiofrequency ablation of varicose veins and endovenous laser treatment of the long saphenous vein ). 
If endothermal ablation is unsuitable, offer ultrasound‑guided foam sclerotherapy (see NICE's interventional procedures guidance on ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy for varicose veins ). 
If ultrasound‑guided foam sclerotherapy is unsuitable, offer surgery. 
If incompetent varicose tributaries are to be treated, consider treating them at the same time. 
1.3.3 
If offering compression bandaging or hosiery for use after interventional treatment, do not use for more than 7 days. 
Non-interventional treatment 
1.3.4 
Do not offer compression hosiery to treat varicose veins unless interventional treatment is unsuitable. 
1.4 Management during pregnancy 
1.4.1 
Give pregnant women presenting with varicose veins information on the effect of pregnancy on varicose veins. 
1.4.2 
Do not carry out interventional treatment for varicose veins during pregnancy other than in exceptional circumstances. 
1.4.3 
Consider compression hosiery for symptom relief of leg swelling associated with varicose veins during pregnancy. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Key priorities for implementation 
Back to top
