Overview | Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease in children and young people: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Digestive tract conditions
Gastro-oesophageal reflux, including Barrett's oesophagus
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease in children and young people: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG1 
Published: 
14 January 2015
Last updated: 
09 October 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and resources 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing gastro-oesophageal reflux disease in children and young people (under 18s). It aims to raise awareness of symptoms that need investigating and treating, and to reassure parents and carers that regurgitation is common in infants under 1 year. 
Last reviewed:  9 October 2019 
We added information on PPI and H2RA licensing for use in children, and amended advice to clarify when metoclopramide, domperidone or erythromycin can be offered. 
Next review: This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
diagnosis and investigation 
initial management 
drug treatment 
enteral tube feeding 
surgery 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Children and young people with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called gastro-oesophageal reflux disease: recognition, diagnosis and management in children and young people. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Gastro-oesophageal reflux in children and young people 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
