Recommendations for research | Falls: assessment and prevention in older people and in people 50 and over at higher risk | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Falls: assessment and prevention in older people and in people 50 and over at higher risk
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG249 
Published: 
29 April 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Wearable technologies for falls risk assessment 
How accurate are wearable technologies in identifying risk of falls? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on falls risk prediction tools . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: methods of assessment . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on comprehensive falls assessment . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: methods of assessment . 
2 Environmental interventions in hospital inpatient settings 
Do interventions addressing the ward environment reduce the risk of falls in hospital inpatient settings? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on interventions to reduce the risk of falls – hospital inpatient settings . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: interventions for prevention of falls in hospital settings . 
3 Supervision interventions in hospital inpatient settings 
Does enhanced supervision lead to a reduction in the incidence of falls in hospital inpatient settings? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on interventions to reduce the risk of falls – hospital inpatient settings . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: interventions for prevention of falls in hospital settings . 
4 Interventions for people in residential care settings with dementia 
What interventions that address behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia are most effective in reducing the incidence of falls in care home residents with dementia? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on interventions to reduce the risk of falls – residential care settings . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: interventions for prevention of falls in residential care settings . 
5 Assistive technologies 
Do assistive technologies in community settings reduce the incidence of falls? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on interventions to reduce the risk of falls – community settings . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence reviews F1 and F2: interventions for prevention of falls in community settings . 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Environmental interventions in residential care settings 
Do interventions addressing the residential care home environment reduce the risk of falls? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on interventions to reduce the risk of falls – residential care settings . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: interventions for prevention of falls in residential care settings . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
