Implementation | Sunlight exposure: risks and benefits | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Skin cancer
Sunlight exposure: risks and benefits 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG34 
Published: 
09 February 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Supporting information for practitioners 
Who should take action? 
Implementation 
Context 
The committee's discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Approaches in different settings
Training
Evaluation
Need more help?
Other guidance and policies
Implementation 
This section highlights 3 areas of the guideline that were identified as a focus for implementation. It outlines possible activities and also gives information on resources or practical examples that could support implementation. 
Approaches in different settings 
All messages conveyed should be in line with supporting information for practitioners . 
Managers and practitioners with a duty of care 
Managers and health, public health and social care practitioners who have a duty of care for others (for example, in the workplace, education, or residential or day care settings) could develop a policy to address the risks and benefits of sunlight exposure. This could: 
Outline the benefits of such a policy. For example, in the case of employers this could be fewer days absence because of sunburn or other adverse effects ( Health and Safety Executive Sun protection: advice for employers of outdoor workers ). 
Cover the needs of all at‑risk groups (see recommendation 1.1.1 ). 
Tailor advice according to skin type and age. 
Tailor advice according to needs and circumstances. This includes people for whom English is not a first language, from lower socioeconomic groups, with specific cultural needs, or with a disability. 
Encourage people to manage their own risk, for example, by covering up with suitable clothing or seeking shade. 
The policy could also state that sun‑awareness information should: 
Help people and their carers identify their own potential risks and benefits from sunlight exposure and the protective measures they should take. 
Adopt a balanced approach and avoid scaremongering. 
Be conveyed using a range of approaches, for example, one‑to‑one as well as in groups. 
Be clearly displayed in communal locations including pharmacies, airports, schools, travel vaccination clinics and appropriate leisure and sporting events. 
Be available in a variety of formats, including formats that are suitable for people with a disability. 
Use skin‑type charts. A range of charts are available, such as those produced by Cancer Research UK and the British Association of Dermatologists . 
Early years, education and leisure 
Managers and staff in early years, education and leisure environments could develop a policy on how to protect children and young people's skin when they are outside for more than a brief period in strong sunlight. This includes those working in preschool settings, primary and secondary schools. 
A comprehensive policy would: 
Encourage children and young people to cover up with suitable clothing (including a wide‑brimmed hat), to spend time in the shade and to wear sunscreen to protect themselves when the sun is strong. 
Encourage parents and carers to provide children and young people with suitable clothing, as well as sunscreen. Make it clear that spending time in the shade and wearing suitable clothing are as important as using sunscreen. 
Be consistent with child protection and safeguarding policies, for example, by specifying who should help children and young people cover up with suitable clothing or apply sunscreen, and when. 
Outline the need to take children and young people's individual characteristics, for example, their skin type , into account. A range of charts are available, such as those produced by Cancer Research UK or and the British Association of Dermatologists . 
Raise awareness of the risks and benefits of sunlight exposure among children and young people, their parents and carers. For example, by making it clear that children and young people should never be allowed to burn and should be made aware of how important it is to protect their skin. 
Provide children and young people, their parents and carers with timely information (for example, during the spring and summer holiday season) on the risks and benefits of sunlight exposure in play and leisure environments. For detail on how the information should be displayed see recommendations 1.1.8 to 1.1.13 . 
Managers and staff might also want to think about using practical, classroom‑based activities, for example, in personal, social, health and education lessons covering health or diversity. A range of organisations provide information for schools, such as Cancer Research UK and the Personal Social Health and Economic Association . 
Workplaces 
Employers, managers and relevant practitioners in the public, private, voluntary and community sectors could: 
Implement a policy on sunlight exposure to help meet their responsibilities under the Health and Safety at Work Act . Note: sunlight exposure is an occupational hazard for people working outdoors. 
Incorporate information on sunlight exposure into routine practice and health and safety training. 
Provide advice according to people's occupation and role. 
Train employees to understand the risks and benefits of sunlight exposure and encourage basic self‑checks for mole or skin changes. 
Use existing resources for the target audience where available. For example, the Institution of Occupational Safety and Health has developed a sun‑safety film for construction workers. 
Residential and day care services 
Managers and practitioners who work in residential or day care settings could: 
Develop, implement and monitor activities to address the risks and benefits of sunlight exposure. 
Provide advice to children, young people, adults and their carers on protecting their skin and enjoying the sun safely. 
Provide advice on vitamin D supplements as necessary (see NICE's guideline on vitamin D: supplement use in specific population groups .) 
Training 
Health Education England, Public Health England, clinical commissioning groups and local authorities could work together to consider the training needs of health, public health and social care practitioners in relation to sun exposure. This could be part of their registration and post‑registration training and continuing professional development. Training could cover: 
The health risks and benefits of sunlight exposure. This includes the impact of a range of variables including environmental, biological and behavioural factors (see supporting information for practitioners ). 
The importance of conveying consistent, tailored messages to the public (see supporting information for practitioners ). 
Evaluation 
Public Health England and directors of public health could: 
Evaluate policies, strategies and media campaigns (local and national) to protect the public from over‑ or underexposure to sunlight. This includes the effect of both one‑to‑one and group‑based prevention activities. This could be done by working with commissioners and senior managers in local authorities and the NHS, council leaders, elected members, public health teams, local businesses and voluntary and community organisations. 
Use a range of measures of knowledge, attitudes, awareness and behaviour (see NICE's guideline on behaviour change: general approaches ). 
Need more help? 
Further resources are available from NICE that may help to support implementation: 
annual indicators for use in the Quality and Outcomes Framework (QOF) for the UK 
uptake data about guideline recommendations and quality standard measures 
shared learning case studies . 
Other guidance and policies 
The guideline should be implemented alongside other guidance and regulations: 
Department of Health and Social Care Equity and excellence: liberating the NHS 
Department of Health and Social Care Healthy lives, healthy people: our strategy for public health in England 
NHS England Achieving world class cancer outcomes: a strategy for England 2015 to 2020 
Department of Health and Social Care Public health outcomes framework for England 2013 to 2016 
Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN) Update on vitamin D 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Who should take action? 
Back to top
