Recommendations for research | Pneumonia: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Pneumonia: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG250 
Published: 
02 September 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1 Microbiological tests
2 Follow-up chest imaging
3 Adjunctive corticosteroids
4 Prediction tools for under 18s in primary care
5 Assessment tools for hospital-acquired pneumonia
Recommendations for research 
1 Microbiological tests 
Which microbiological test, or group of tests, can aid decision making around safely reducing inappropriate antibiotic prescribing in people with suspected pneumonia, community or hospital-acquired? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on microbiological tests . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: microbiological tests . 
2 Follow-up chest imaging 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of follow-up chest imaging for adults discharged from hospital after treatment for pneumonia? Which people should be offered follow-up chest imaging and when should it be done? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on follow-up chest imaging . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: chest X-ray . 
3 Adjunctive corticosteroids 
In people hospitalised with community-acquired pneumonia or hospital-acquired pneumonia, what is the most effective and cost-effective corticosteroid treatment (as an adjunct to antibiotics), including dose, duration, and route of administration, and does the pathogen involved have an impact on efficacy? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on corticosteroids . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: corticosteroids . 
4 Prediction tools for under 18s in primary care 
In children and young people presenting to primary care with signs and symptoms of pneumonia, what is the most accurate and cost-effective clinical prediction tool to identify under 18s who require referral to secondary care for assessment, treatment and admission? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on prediction tools for under 18s in primary care . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: prediction tools for babies, children and young people . 
5 Assessment tools for hospital-acquired pneumonia 
In people with hospital-acquired pneumonia, what is the most clinically effective and cost-effective assessment tool or method for stratifying disease severity? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on assessment tools for hospital-acquired pneumonia . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: early warning scores . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
