Recommendations | Colorectal cancer prevention: colonoscopic surveillance in adults with ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease or adenomas | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Colorectal cancer
Colorectal cancer prevention: colonoscopic surveillance in adults with ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease or adenomas
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG118 
Published: 
23 March 2011
Last updated: 
20 September 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
People with inflammatory bowel disease
People with adenomas
Continuing or stopping surveillance
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should also follow our guidance on: 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
Shared decision making 
The following guidance is based on the best available evidence. The full guideline gives details of the methods and the evidence used to develop the guidance. 
People with inflammatory bowel disease 
1.1.1 
Offer colonoscopic surveillance to people with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) whose symptoms started 10 years ago and who have either: 
ulcerative colitis (but not proctitis alone) or 
Crohn's colitis involving more than one segment of colon. 
1.1.2 
Offer a baseline colonoscopy with chromoscopy and targeted biopsy of any abnormal areas to people with IBD for whom colonoscopic surveillance is being considered to determine their risk of developing colorectal cancer (see box 1). 
Box 1 Risk of developing colorectal cancer in people with IBD 
Low risk: 
extensive but quiescent ulcerative colitis or 
extensive but quiescent Crohn's colitis or 
left-sided ulcerative colitis (but not proctitis alone) or Crohn's colitis of a similar extent. 
Intermediate risk: 
extensive ulcerative or Crohn's colitis with mild active inflammation that has been confirmed endoscopically or histologically or 
post-inflammatory polyps or 
family history of colorectal cancer in a first-degree relative aged 50 years or over. 
High risk: 
extensive ulcerative or Crohn's colitis with moderate or severe active inflammation that has been confirmed endoscopically or histologically or 
primary sclerosing cholangitis (including after liver transplant) or 
colonic stricture in the past 5 years or 
any grade of dysplasia in the past 5 years or 
family history of colorectal cancer in a first-degree relative aged under 50 years. 
1.1.3 
Offer colonoscopic surveillance to people with IBD as defined in recommendation 1.1.1 based on their risk of developing colorectal cancer (see box 1), determined at the last complete colonoscopy: 
low risk: offer colonoscopy at 5 years 
intermediate risk: offer colonoscopy at 3 years 
high risk: offer colonoscopy at 1 year. 
1.1.4 
For people with IBD who have been offered colonoscopic surveillance, continue to use colonoscopy with chromoscopy as the method of surveillance. 
1.1.5 
Offer a repeat colonoscopy with chromoscopy if any colonoscopy is incomplete. Consider whether a more experienced colonoscopist is needed. 
People with adenomas 
See the recommendations in the British Society of Gastroenterology's guidelines on post-polypectomy and post-colorectal cancer resection surveillance . 
Continuing or stopping surveillance 
1.1.6 
After receiving the results of each surveillance test: 
discuss with the person the potential benefits, limitations and risks of ongoing surveillance 
base a decision to stop surveillance on potential benefits for the person, their preferences and any comorbidities. 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline. 
Adenomas 
This term is used in the guideline, but other terms have been used in the clinical studies included in the evidence review, for example 'polyps' or 'adenomatous polyps.' 
First-degree relative 
Mother, father, daughter, son, sister or brother. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
