Context | Obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder: treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Anxiety
Obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder: treatment 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG31 
Published: 
29 November 2005
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix A: Technical detail on the criteria for audit 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Context 
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterised by the presence of either obsessions or compulsions, but commonly both. The symptoms can cause significant functional impairment and/or distress. An obsession is defined as an unwanted intrusive thought, image or urge that repeatedly enters the person's mind. Compulsions are repetitive behaviours or mental acts that the person feels driven to perform. A compulsion can either be overt and observable by others, such as checking that a door is locked, or a covert mental act that cannot be observed, such as repeating a certain phrase in one's mind. 
It is thought that 1% to 2% of the population have OCD, although some studies have estimated 2% to 3%. 
Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) is characterised by a preoccupation with an imagined defect in one's appearance, or in the case of a slight physical anomaly, the person's concern is markedly excessive. BDD is characterised by time consuming behaviours such as mirror gazing, comparing particular features to those of others, excessive camouflaging tactics to hide the defect, skin picking and reassurance seeking. 
It is thought that 0.5% to 0.7% of the population have BDD. 
The recommendations in this guideline were graded according to the quality of the evidence they were based on. The gradings are available in the full guideline and are not shown in this web version. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Appendix A: Technical detail on the criteria for audit 
Back to top
