Context | Headaches in over 12s: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Headaches
Headaches in over 12s: diagnosis and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG150 
Published: 
19 September 2012
Last updated: 
03 June 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Context 
Headaches are one of the most common neurological problems presented to GPs and neurologists. They are painful and debilitating for individuals, an important cause of absence from work or school and a substantial burden on society. 
Headache disorders are classified as primary or secondary. The aetiology of primary headaches is not well understood and they are classified according to their clinical pattern. The most common primary headache disorders are tension‑type headache, migraine and cluster headache. Secondary headaches are attributed to underlying disorders and include, for example, headaches associated with medication overuse, giant cell arteritis , raised intracranial pressure and infection. Medication overuse headache most commonly occurs in those taking medication for a primary headache disorder. The major health and social burden of headaches is caused by primary headache disorders and medication overuse headache. 
This guideline makes recommendations on the diagnosis and management of the most common primary headache disorders in young people (aged 12 years and older) and adults. Many people with headache do not have an accurate diagnosis of headache type. Healthcare professionals can find the diagnosis of headache difficult, and both people with headache and their healthcare professionals can be concerned about possible underlying causes. Improved recognition of primary headaches will help the generalist clinician to manage headaches more effectively, allow better targeting of treatment and potentially improve quality of life and reduce unnecessary investigations for people with headache. 
In 2015, we reviewed the evidence on the prophylactic treatment of headaches and updated or added new recommendations. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
