Overview | Intermediate care including reablement | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Intermediate care including reablement 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG74 
Published: 
22 September 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Overview 
This guideline covers referral and assessment for intermediate care and how to deliver the service. Intermediate care is a multidisciplinary service that helps people to be as independent as possible. It provides support and rehabilitation to people at risk of hospital admission or who have been in hospital. It aims to ensure people transfer from hospital to the community in a timely way and to prevent unnecessary admissions to hospitals and residential care.  
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
core principles of intermediate care, including reablement 
supporting infrastructure 
assessment of need for intermediate care 
referral into intermediate care  and entering the service 
delivering intermediate care 
transition from intermediate care 
training and development 
Who is it for? 
Health and social care practitioners who deliver intermediate care and reablement in the community and in bed-based settings 
Other practitioners who work in voluntary and community services, including home care, general practice and housing 
Health and social care practitioners in acute inpatient settings 
Commissioners and providers 
Adults using intermediate care and reablement services, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Intermediate care including reablement 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
