Other considerations | Impetigo: antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Impetigo: antimicrobial prescribing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG153 
Published: 
26 February 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendation for research 
Rationales 
Context 
Summary of the evidence 
Other considerations 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Medicines safety
Medicines adherence
Resource implications
Other considerations 
Medicines safety 
As with all antibiotics, extended or recurrent use of topical fusidic acid or mupirocin may increase the risk of developing antimicrobial resistance. See the BNF for more information. 
About 10% of the general population claim to have a penicillin allergy; this is often because of a skin rash that occurred while taking a course of penicillin as a child. Fewer than 10% of people who think they are allergic to penicillin are truly allergic. See the NICE guideline on drug allergy: diagnosis and management for more information. 
People with a history of immediate hypersensitivity to penicillins may also react to cephalosporins and other beta‑lactam antibiotics ( BNF, November 2019 ). 
Macrolides should be used with caution in people with a predisposition to QT interval prolongation ( BNF, November 2019 ). 
See the summaries of product characteristics for information on contraindications, cautions, drug interactions and adverse effects of individual medicines. 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines adherence may be a problem for some people taking antibiotics that need frequent dosing or longer treatment duration (see the NICE guideline on medicines adherence ). 
Resource implications 
Recommended antibiotics are available as generic formulations. See the Drug Tariff for costs. 
The incremental cost of hydrogen peroxide 1% cream is estimated to be around £3.50 more per person, when compared with current treatment options for people with localised non-bullous impetigo who are not systemically unwell or at risk of complications. We expect the population that will be eligible for this treatment will not be greater than around 125,000 people per year, with the biggest incidence occurring in children. 
See the evidence review for more information. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Summary of the evidence 
Back to top
