Recommendations for research | Atrial fibrillation: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Heart rhythm conditions
Atrial fibrillation: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG196 
Published: 
27 April 2021
Last updated: 
30 June 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Using this guideline 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
As part of the 2021 update, the guideline committee made 4 new research recommendations (marked [2021] ). Research recommendations retained from the 2014 guideline are labelled [2014] . 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Tests to diagnose persistent atrial fibrillation 
What is the diagnostic accuracy of key index tests (such as the KardiaMobile heart monitor (AliveCor), MyDiagnostik, Microlife BP monitors, iPhone plethysmography and pulse palpation) compared with the gold standard of 12‑lead ECG in people with risk factors for or symptoms of atrial fibrillation? [2021] 
Why the committee made the recommendation for research 
The evidence did not support changing the recommended diagnostic tests to either replace 12‑lead ECG as the test to confirm persistent atrial fibrillation or replace pulse palpation as the initial step for persistent atrial fibrillation in a 2‑step strategy. The committee clarified that 12‑lead ECG should be used as the test to confirm atrial fibrillation, to prevent the use of less accurate ECG devices, such as mobile and lead‑I ECG devices. The committee agreed that, although the evidence showed that accuracy varied, there was some evidence that new devices were accurate and showed promise. It was noted that NICE has produced diagnostics guidance on lead-I ECG devices for detecting symptomatic atrial fibrillation using single time point testing in primary care . The committee made a research recommendation on tests to diagnose persistent atrial fibrillation to encourage further high‑quality research in this area to guide future practice. 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: accuracy of tests for detection . 
2 Tests to diagnose paroxysmal atrial fibrillation 
What is the diagnostic accuracy of key index tests compared with the gold standard of prolonged ambulatory monitoring in people suspected of having paroxysmal atrial fibrillation? [2021] 
Why the committee made the recommendation for research 
The committee agreed that the evidence on tests to detect paroxysmal atrial fibrillation was not clear enough to warrant a change in practice from the 2014 recommendation. However, the evidence did show that longer durations of detection increased accuracy. The committee made a research recommendation on tests to diagnose paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: accuracy of tests for detection . 
3 Stopping anticoagulation after ablation 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of stopping anticoagulation in people whose atrial fibrillation has resolved after ablation? [2021] 
Why the committee made the recommendation for research 
There was limited evidence on whether to continue anticoagulation or to stop it and switch to aspirin after successful treatment of atrial fibrillation by catheter ablation. The committee agreed that the evidence was insufficient and that there was too much uncertainty in the results to make a recommendation based on the evidence. The committee therefore developed research recommendations on stopping anticoagulation after ablation and stopping anticoagulation after resolution of postoperative atrial fibrillation to encourage further research. 
The committee was concerned about the potential withdrawal of anticoagulation in people who had not had ablation or cardiac surgery for atrial fibrillation, but in whom sinus rhythm is now present and atrial fibrillation is no longer detectable. In particular, the committee noted that paroxysmal atrial fibrillation is not always detectable. Based on their experience, the committee made a consensus‑based recommendation to ensure that decisions about stopping anticoagulation in this population are based on formal risk assessment of stroke and bleeding risks and patient preference. 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: discontinuing anticoagulation in people whose atrial fibrillation has resolved . 
4 Stopping anticoagulation after resolution of postoperative atrial fibrillation 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of stopping anticoagulation in people whose postoperative atrial fibrillation after cardiac surgery has resolved? [2021] 
Why the committee made the recommendation for research 
There was limited evidence on whether to continue anticoagulation or to stop it and switch to aspirin after successful treatment of atrial fibrillation by catheter ablation. The committee agreed that the evidence was insufficient and that there was too much uncertainty in the results to make a recommendation based on the evidence. The committee therefore developed research recommendations on stopping anticoagulation after ablation and stopping anticoagulation after resolution of postoperative atrial fibrillation to encourage further research. 
The committee was concerned about the potential withdrawal of anticoagulation in people who had not had ablation or cardiac surgery for atrial fibrillation, but in whom sinus rhythm is now present and atrial fibrillation is no longer detectable. In particular, the committee noted that paroxysmal atrial fibrillation is not always detectable. Based on their experience, the committee made a consensus‑based recommendation to ensure that decisions about stopping anticoagulation in this population are based on formal risk assessment of stroke and bleeding risks and patient preference. 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: discontinuing anticoagulation in people whose atrial fibrillation has resolved . 
5 Cognitive behavioural therapy for people with atrial fibrillation 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of cognitive behavioural therapy compared with usual care for people with newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation? [2014] 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Rate-control drug treatment for people aged 75 and over with atrial fibrillation 
What is the comparative effectiveness of the 3 main drug classes used for rate control (beta‑blockers, calcium‑channel blockers and digoxin) in people aged 75 and over with atrial fibrillation in controlling symptoms, improving quality of life and reducing morbidity and mortality? [2014] 
7 Stroke risk assessment 
Can routine data from UK primary care databases clarify stroke risk in people with atrial fibrillation according to baseline risk factors and treatment? [2014] 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
