Recommendations | Urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse in women: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Gynaecological conditions
Uterine prolapse
Urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse in women: management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG123 
Published: 
02 April 2019
Last updated: 
24 June 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and resources 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Organisation of specialist services
1.2 Collecting data on surgery and surgical complications
1.3 Assessing urinary incontinence
1.4 Non-surgical management of urinary incontinence
1.5 Surgical management of stress urinary incontinence
1.6 Assessing pelvic organ prolapse
1.7 Non-surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse
1.8 Surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse
1.9 Surgery for women with both stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse
1.10 Assessing complications associated with mesh surgery
1.11 Managing complications associated with mesh surgery
Terms used in this guideline
Additional information
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Organisation of specialist services 
Local multidisciplinary teams 
1.1.1 
Local multidisciplinary teams (MDTs) for women with primary stress urinary incontinence, overactive bladder or primary prolapse should: 
review the proposed treatment for all women offered invasive procedures for primary stress urinary incontinence, overactive bladder or primary prolapse 
review the proposed management for women with primary stress urinary incontinence, overactive bladder or primary prolapse if input from a wider range of healthcare professionals is needed 
work within an established clinical network that has access to a regional MDT. [2019] 
Note: In 2018, NHS England consulted on specialised gynaecology surgery and complex urogynaecology conditions service specifications . 
1.1.2 
Local MDTs for women with primary stress urinary incontinence, overactive bladder or primary prolapse should include: 
2 consultants with expertise in managing urinary incontinence in women and/or pelvic organ prolapse 
a urogynaecology, urology or continence specialist nurse 
a pelvic floor specialist physiotherapist 
and may also include: 
a member of the care of the elderly team 
an occupational therapist 
a colorectal surgeon. [2019] 
1.1.3 
Members of the local MDT (listed in recommendation 1.1.2) should attend all local MDT meetings. [2019] 
Regional multidisciplinary teams 
1.1.4 
Regional MDTs that deal with complex pelvic floor dysfunction and mesh-related problems should review the proposed treatment for women if: 
they are having repeat continence surgery 
they are having repeat, same-site prolapse surgery 
their preferred treatment option is not available in the referring hospital 
they have coexisting bowel problems that may need additional colorectal intervention 
vaginal mesh for prolapse is a treatment option for them 
they have mesh complications or unexplained symptoms after mesh surgery for urinary incontinence or prolapse 
they are considering surgery and may wish to have children in the future. [2019] 
1.1.5 
Regional MDTs that deal with complex pelvic floor dysfunction and mesh-related problems should include: 
a subspecialist in urogynaecology 
a urologist with expertise in female urology 
a urogynaecology, urology or continence specialist nurse 
a pelvic floor specialist physiotherapist 
a radiologist with expertise in pelvic floor imaging 
a colorectal surgeon with expertise in pelvic floor problems 
a pain specialist with expertise in managing pelvic pain 
and may also include: 
a healthcare professional trained in bowel biofeedback and trans-anal irrigation 
a clinical psychologist 
a member of the care of the elderly team 
an occupational therapist 
a surgeon skilled at operating in the obturator region 
a plastic surgeon. [2019] 
1.1.6 
Regional MDTs that deal with complex pelvic floor dysfunction and mesh-related problems should have ready access to the following services: 
psychology 
psychosexual counselling 
chronic pain management 
bowel symptom management 
neurology. [2019] 
1.1.7 
Members of the regional MDT (listed in recommendation 1.1.5) should attend regional MDT meetings when their specific expertise is needed. [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on organisation of specialist services . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: effectiveness of multidisciplinary teams for the assessment and management of urinary incontinence or pelvic organ prolapse . 
1.2 Collecting data on surgery and surgical complications 
1.2.1 
Ask women having surgery for stress urinary incontinence or pelvic organ prolapse, or who have experienced complications related to these types of surgery, for their consent to enter the data listed in recommendation 1.2.2 in a national registry. Give each woman a copy of her data. [2019] 
1.2.2 
Providers must ensure that the following data are recorded in a national registry of surgery for urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse in women: 
the woman's NHS number 
hospital and consultant identifiers 
date and details of the procedure 
for procedures involving mesh, the mesh material, manufacturer, product unique identification code and type of sutures used 
for procedures involving colposuspension , the type of sutures used 
for procedures involving bulking agent, the bulking material, manufacturer and product unique identification code 
date and details of any investigation for complications 
date and details of any surgical or non-surgical intervention for complications. [2019] 
1.2.3 
The national registry of surgery for urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse in women must ensure that follow‑up data are collected on key short- and long-term (at least 5 years) outcomes, including: 
validated relevant outcome measures 
adverse events including pain 
suspected and confirmed mesh-related complications. [2019] 
1.2.4 
The national registry of surgery for urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse in women should report annually and be quality assured. [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on collecting data on surgery and surgical complications . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: surgical and physical management of stress urinary incontinence and evidence review I: surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse . 
1.3 Assessing urinary incontinence 
History taking and physical examination 
1.3.1 
At the initial clinical assessment, categorise the woman's urinary incontinence as stress urinary incontinence, mixed urinary incontinence or urgency urinary incontinence/overactive bladder. Start initial treatment on this basis. In mixed urinary incontinence, direct treatment towards the predominant symptom. [2006] 
1.3.2 
If stress incontinence is the predominant symptom in mixed urinary incontinence, discuss with the woman the benefit of non-surgical management and medicines for overactive bladder before offering surgery. [2013, amended 2019] 
1.3.3 
During the clinical assessment seek to identify relevant predisposing and precipitating factors and other diagnoses that may require referral for additional investigation and treatment. [2006] 
Assessing pelvic floor muscles 
1.3.4 
Undertake routine digital assessment to confirm pelvic floor muscle contraction before the use of supervised pelvic floor muscle training for the treatment of urinary incontinence. [2006, amended 2013] 
Urine testing 
1.3.5 
Undertake a urine dipstick test in all women presenting with urinary incontinence to detect the presence of blood, glucose, protein, leucocytes and nitrites in the urine. [2006] 
1.3.6 
If women have symptoms of urinary tract infection (UTI) and their urine tests positive for both leucocytes and nitrites, send a midstream urine specimen for culture and analysis of antibiotic sensitivities. Prescribe an appropriate course of antibiotic treatment pending culture results. See the NICE guideline on urinary tract infection (lower): antimicrobial prescribing for more information. [2006, amended 2019] 
1.3.7 
If women have symptoms of UTI and their urine tests negative for either leucocytes or nitrites, send a midstream urine specimen for culture and analysis of antibiotic sensitivities. Consider the prescription of antibiotics pending culture results. [2006] 
1.3.8 
If women do not have symptoms of UTI, but their urine tests positive for both leucocytes and nitrites, do not offer antibiotics without the results of midstream urine culture. [2006] 
1.3.9 
If a woman does not have symptoms of UTI and her urine tests negative for either leucocytes or nitrites, do not send a urine sample for culture because she is unlikely to have UTI. [2006] 
Assessing residual urine 
1.3.10 
Measure post-void residual volume by bladder scan or catheterisation in women with symptoms suggestive of voiding dysfunction or recurrent UTI. [2006] 
1.3.11 
Use a bladder scan in preference to catheterisation on the grounds of acceptability and lower incidence of adverse events. [2006] 
Symptom scoring and quality-of-life assessment 
1.3.12 
Use a validated urinary incontinence-specific symptom and quality-of-life questionnaire when therapies are being evaluated. [2006, amended 2019] 
Bladder diaries 
1.3.13 
Use bladder diaries in the initial assessment of women with urinary incontinence or overactive bladder. Encourage women to complete a minimum of 3 days of the diary covering variations in their usual activities, such as both working and leisure days. [2006] 
Pad testing 
1.3.14 
Do not use pad tests in the routine assessment of women with urinary incontinence. [2006] 
Urodynamic testing 
1.3.15 
Do not perform multichannel filling and voiding cystometry before primary surgery if stress urinary incontinence or stress-predominant mixed urinary incontinence is diagnosed based on a detailed clinical history and demonstrated stress urinary incontinence at examination. [2019] 
1.3.16 
After undertaking a detailed clinical history and examination, perform multichannel filling and voiding cystometry before surgery for stress urinary incontinence in women who have any of the following: 
urge-predominant mixed urinary incontinence or urinary incontinence in which the type is unclear 
symptoms suggestive of voiding dysfunction 
anterior or apical prolapse 
a history of previous surgery for stress urinary incontinence. [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on urodynamic testing . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: urodynamic assessment prior to primary surgery for stress urinary incontinence . 
Other tests of urethral competence 
1.3.17 
Do not use the Q‑tip, Bonney, Marshall and Fluid-Bridge tests in the assessment of women with urinary incontinence. [2006] 
Cystoscopy 
1.3.18 
Do not use cystoscopy in the initial assessment of women with urinary incontinence alone. [2006] 
Imaging 
1.3.19 
Do not use imaging (MRI, CT, X‑ray) for the routine assessment of women with urinary incontinence. Do not use ultrasound other than for the assessment of residual urine volume. [2006] 
Indications for referral to a specialist service 
1.3.20 
In women with urinary incontinence, indications for consideration for referral to a specialist service include: 
persisting bladder or urethral pain 
palpable bladder on bimanual or abdominal examination after voiding 
clinically benign pelvic masses 
associated faecal incontinence 
suspected neurological disease 
symptoms of voiding difficulty 
suspected urogenital fistulae 
previous continence surgery 
previous pelvic cancer surgery 
previous pelvic radiation therapy . [2006] 
1.3.21 
Follow the recommendations on referral for urinary tract cancer in the NICE guideline on suspected cancer , for women with haematuria or recurrent or persistent unexplained UTI. [2006, amended 2019] 
1.4 Non-surgical management of urinary incontinence 
Lifestyle interventions 
1.4.1 
Recommend a trial of caffeine reduction to women with overactive bladder. [2006] 
1.4.2 
Consider advising women with urinary incontinence or overactive bladder and a high or low fluid intake to modify their fluid intake. [2006] 
1.4.3 
Advise women with urinary incontinence or overactive bladder who have a BMI greater than 30 to lose weight. [2006] 
Physical therapies 
Pelvic floor muscle training 
1.4.4 
Offer a trial of supervised pelvic floor muscle training of at least 3 months' duration as first-line treatment to women with stress or mixed urinary incontinence. [2019] 
1.4.5 
Pelvic floor muscle training programmes should comprise at least 8 contractions performed 3 times per day. [2006] 
1.4.6 
Do not use perineometry or pelvic floor electromyography as biofeedback as a routine part of pelvic floor muscle training. [2006] 
1.4.7 
Continue an exercise programme if pelvic floor muscle training is beneficial. [2006] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on pelvic floor muscle training . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: lifestyle and conservative management options for pelvic organ prolapse . 
Electrical stimulation 
1.4.8 
Do not routinely use electrical stimulation in the treatment of women with overactive bladder. [2006] 
1.4.9 
Do not routinely use electrical stimulation in combination with pelvic floor muscle training. [2006] 
1.4.10 
Electrical stimulation and/or biofeedback should be considered for women who cannot actively contract pelvic floor muscles to aid motivation and adherence to therapy. [2006] 
Behavioural therapies 
1.4.11 
Offer bladder training lasting for a minimum of 6 weeks as first-line treatment to women with urgency or mixed urinary incontinence. [2006] 
1.4.12 
If women do not achieve satisfactory benefit from bladder training programmes, the combination of an overactive bladder medicine with bladder training should be considered if frequency is a troublesome symptom. [2006] 
Neurostimulation 
1.4.13 
Do not offer transcutaneous sacral nerve stimulation (surface electrodes placed above the sacrum, often known as transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation [TENS]) to treat overactive bladder in women. [2013] 
1.4.14 
Do not offer transcutaneous posterior tibial nerve stimulation for overactive bladder. [2013] 
1.4.15 
Do not offer percutaneous posterior tibial nerve stimulation (needles inserted close to the posterior tibial nerve) for overactive bladder unless: 
there has been a local MDT review and 
non-surgical management including overactive bladder medicine treatment has not worked adequately and 
the woman does not want botulinum toxin type A or percutaneous sacral nerve stimulation . [2013, amended 2019] 
In April 2019, most botulinum toxin type A preparations were off label for this indication. Evidence was only available for the licensed botulinum toxin type A preparation (BOTOX, Allergan). 
Absorbent containment products, urinals and toileting aids 
1.4.16 
Do not offer absorbent containment products, hand-held urinals or toileting aids to treat urinary incontinence. Offer them only: 
as a coping strategy pending definitive treatment 
as an adjunct to ongoing therapy 
for long-term management of urinary incontinence only after treatment options have been explored. [2019] 
1.4.17 
Offer a review at least once a year to women who are using absorbent containment products for long-term management of urinary incontinence. The review should cover: 
routine assessment of continence 
assessment of skin integrity 
changes to symptoms, comorbidities, lifestyle, mobility, medication, BMI, and social and environmental factors 
the suitability of alternative treatment options 
the efficacy of the absorbent containment product the woman is currently using and the quantities used. [2019] 
1.4.18 
Reviews for women who are using absorbent containment products for long-term management of urinary incontinence should be carried out by either: 
a registered healthcare professional who is trained in assessing continence and making referrals to specialist services or 
a non-registered healthcare worker, under the supervision of a registered healthcare professional who is trained in assessing continence and making referrals to specialist services. 
See indications for referral to a specialist service in this guideline . [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on absorbent containment products . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: treatment options for women using absorbent containment products . 
Catheters 
1.4.19 
Bladder catheterisation (intermittent or indwelling urethral or suprapubic) should be considered for women in whom persistent urinary retention is causing incontinence, symptomatic infections or renal dysfunction, and in whom this cannot otherwise be corrected. Healthcare professionals should be aware, and explain to women, that the use of indwelling catheters in urgency urinary incontinence may not result in continence. [2006] 
1.4.20 
Offer intermittent urethral catheterisation to women with urinary retention who can be taught to self-catheterise or who have a carer who can perform the technique. [2006] 
1.4.21 
Give careful consideration to the impact of long-term indwelling urethral catheterisation. Discuss the practicalities, benefits and risks with the woman or, if appropriate, her carer. Indications for the use of long-term indwelling urethral catheters for women with urinary incontinence include: 
chronic urinary retention in women who are unable to manage intermittent self-catheterisation 
skin wounds, pressure ulcers or irritations that are being contaminated by urine 
distress or disruption caused by bed and clothing changes 
where a woman expresses a preference for this form of management. [2006] 
1.4.22 
Indwelling suprapubic catheters should be considered as an alternative to long-term urethral catheters. Be aware, and explain to women, that they may be associated with lower rates of symptomatic UTI, 'bypassing', and urethral complications than indwelling urethral catheters. [2006] 
Products to prevent leakage 
1.4.23 
Do not use intravaginal and intraurethral devices for the routine management of urinary incontinence in women. Do not advise women to consider such devices other than for occasional use when necessary to prevent leakage, for example during physical exercise. [2006] 
Complementary therapies 
1.4.24 
Do not recommend complementary therapies for the treatment of urinary incontinence or overactive bladder. [2006] 
Medicines for overactive bladder 
1.4.25 
Before starting treatment with a medicine for overactive bladder, explain to the woman: 
the likelihood of the medicine being successful 
the common adverse effects associated with the medicine 
that some adverse effects of anticholinergic medicines , such as dry mouth and constipation, may indicate that the medicine is starting to have an effect 
that she may not see substantial benefits until she has been taking the medicine for at least 4 weeks and that her symptoms may continue to improve over time 
that the long-term effects of anticholinergic medicines for overactive bladder on cognitive function are uncertain. [2019] 
1.4.26 
When offering anticholinergic medicines to treat overactive bladder, take account of the woman's: 
coexisting conditions (such as poor bladder emptying, cognitive impairment or dementia) 
current use of other medicines that affect total anticholinergic load 
risk of adverse effects, including cognitive impairment. [2019] 
1.4.27 
For women who have a diagnosis of dementia and for whom anticholinergic medicines are an option, follow the recommendations on medicines that may cause cognitive impairment in the NICE guideline on dementia . [2019] 
Choosing medicine 
1.4.28 
Do not offer women flavoxate, propantheline or imipramine to treat urinary incontinence or overactive bladder. [2013] 
1.4.29 
Do not offer oxybutynin (immediate release) to older women who may be at higher risk of a sudden deterioration in their physical or mental health. [2013, amended 2019] 
1.4.30 
Offer an anticholinergic medicine to treat overactive bladder or mixed urinary incontinence in women, using the one with the lowest acquisition cost. [2019] 
1.4.31 
If the first anticholinergic medicine tried for overactive bladder or mixed urinary incontinence is not effective or well-tolerated, offer another anticholinergic medicine with a low acquisition cost (see additional information ). [2013] 
1.4.32 
For beta-3-adrenoceptor agonists recommended as options in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating the symptoms of overactive bladder if antimuscarinics (anticholinergics) are not suitable, do not work well enough or have unacceptable side effects, see the guidance on: 
vibegron (TA999, 2024) 
mirabegron (TA290, 2013) . 
1.4.33 
Offer a transdermal overactive bladder treatment to women unable to tolerate oral medicines. [2013] 
1.4.34 
The use of desmopressin may be considered specifically to reduce nocturia in women with urinary incontinence or overactive bladder who find it a troublesome symptom. Use particular caution in women with cystic fibrosis and avoid in those over 65 years with cardiovascular disease or hypertension. [2013] 
1.4.35 
Do not use duloxetine as a first-line treatment for women with predominant stress urinary incontinence. Do not routinely offer duloxetine as a second-line treatment for women with stress urinary incontinence, although it may be offered as second-line therapy if women prefer pharmacological to surgical treatment or are not suitable for surgical treatment. If duloxetine is prescribed, counsel women about its adverse effects. [2006] 
For guidance on safe prescribing of antidepressants (such as duloxetine) and managing withdrawal, see NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms . 
1.4.36 
Do not offer systemic hormone replacement therapy to treat urinary incontinence. [2006] 
1.4.37 
Offer vaginal oestrogen to women who have overactive bladder symptoms and genitourinary symptoms and signs associated with menopause . [2006] 
Reviewing medicine 
1.4.38 
Offer a face-to-face or telephone review 4 weeks after starting a new medicine for overactive bladder. Ask the woman if she is satisfied with the treatment and: 
if improvement is optimal, continue treatment 
if there is no or suboptimal improvement, or intolerable adverse effects, change the dose or try an alternative medicine for overactive bladder (see the recommendations for when the first medicine is not effective and offering a transdermal patch in the section on choosing medicines ), and review again 4 weeks later. [2013] 
1.4.39 
Offer a review before 4 weeks if the adverse events of a medicine for overactive bladder are intolerable. [2013] 
1.4.40 
Refer women who have tried taking medicine for overactive bladder, but for whom it has not been successful or tolerated, to secondary care to consider further treatment. [2013] 
1.4.41 
Offer a further face-to-face or telephone review if a medicine for overactive bladder or urinary incontinence stops working after an initial successful 4‑week review. [2013] 
1.4.42 
Offer a review in primary care to women who remain on long-term medicine for overactive bladder or urinary incontinence every 12 months, or every 6 months if they are aged over 75. [2013, amended 2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on medicines for overactive bladder . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: the risks to cognitive function for women taking anticholinergic drugs for overactive bladder . 
Invasive procedures for overactive bladder 
1.4.43 
For women with overactive bladder that has not responded to non-surgical management or treatment with medicine and who wish to discuss further treatment options: 
offer urodynamic investigation to determine whether detrusor overactivity is causing her overactive bladder symptoms and 
if detrusor overactivity is causing her overactive bladder symptoms, offer an invasive procedure in line with the recommendation on bladder wall injection in the section on botulinum toxin type A and the recommendation in the section on urinary diversion or 
if there is no detrusor overactivity, seek advice on further management from the local MDT in line with the recommendation on considering treatment with botulinum toxin type A in the section on botulinum toxin type A . [2013, amended 2019] 
Botulinum toxin type A injection 
See additional information on prescribing botulinum toxin type A. 
1.4.44 
After a local MDT review, offer bladder wall injection with botulinum toxin type A to women with overactive bladder caused by detrusor overactivity that has not responded to non-surgical management, including pharmacological treatments. [2019] 
1.4.45 
Consider treatment with botulinum toxin type A after a local MDT review for women with symptoms of overactive bladder in whom urodynamic investigation has not demonstrated detrusor overactivity, if the symptoms have not responded to non-surgical management and the woman does not wish to have other invasive treatments. [2019] 
1.4.46 
After a local MDT review, discuss the benefits and risks of treatment with botulinum toxin type A with the woman and explain: 
the likelihood of complete or partial symptom relief 
the process of clean intermittent catheterisation, the risks, and how long it might need to be continued 
the risk of adverse effects, including an increased risk of urinary tract infection 
that there is not much evidence about how long the injections work for, how well they work in the long term and their long-term risks. [2019] 
1.4.47 
Start treatment with botulinum toxin type A only if the woman is willing, in the event of developing significant voiding dysfunction: 
to perform clean intermittent catheterisation on a regular basis for as long as needed or 
to accept a temporary indwelling catheter if she is unable to perform clean intermittent catheterisation. [2013, amended 2019] 
1.4.48 
Use 100 units as the initial dose of botulinum toxin type A to treat overactive bladder in women. [2019] 
1.4.49 
Offer a face-to-face or telephone review within 12 weeks of the first treatment with botulinum toxin type A to assess the response to treatment and adverse effects, and: 
if there is good symptom relief, tell the woman how to self-refer for prompt specialist review if symptoms return, and offer repeat treatment as necessary 
if there is inadequate symptom relief, consider increasing subsequent doses of botulinum toxin type A to 200 units and review within 12 weeks 
if there was no effect, discuss with the local MDT. [2019] 
1.4.50 
If symptom relief has been adequate after injection of 100 units of botulinum toxin type A but has lasted for less than 6 months, consider increasing subsequent doses of botulinum toxin type A to 200 units and review within 12 weeks. [2019] 
1.4.51 
Do not offer botulinum toxin type B to women with overactive bladder. [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on botulinum toxin type A injection . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: management of overactive bladder . 
Percutaneous sacral nerve stimulation 
1.4.52 
Offer percutaneous sacral nerve stimulation to women after local or regional MDT review if their overactive bladder has not responded to non-surgical management including medicines and: 
their symptoms have not responded to botulinum toxin type A or 
they are not prepared to accept the risks of needing catheterisation associated with botulinum toxin type A. [2013, amended 2019] 
1.4.53 
Discuss the long-term implications of percutaneous sacral nerve stimulation with women including: 
the need for test stimulation and probability of the test's success 
the risk of failure 
the long-term commitment 
the need for surgical revision 
the adverse effects. [2013] 
1.4.54 
Tell women how to self-refer for prompt specialist review if symptoms return following a percutaneous sacral nerve stimulation procedure. [2013] 
Augmentation cystoplasty 
1.4.55 
Restrict augmentation cystoplasty for the management of idiopathic detrusor overactivity to women whose condition has not responded to non-surgical management and who are willing and able to self-catheterise. Preoperative counselling for the woman or her carer should include common and serious complications: bowel disturbance, metabolic acidosis, mucus production and/or retention in the bladder, UTI and urinary retention. Discuss the small risk of malignancy occurring in the augmented bladder. Provide life-long follow‑up. [2006, amended 2013] 
Urinary diversion 
1.4.56 
Urinary diversion should be considered for a woman with overactive bladder only when non-surgical management has failed, and if botulinum toxin type A, percutaneous sacral nerve stimulation and augmentation cystoplasty are not appropriate or are unacceptable to her. Provide life-long follow‑up. [2006, amended 2013] 
In April 2019, most botulinum toxin type A preparations were off label for this indication. Evidence was only available for the licensed botulinum toxin type A preparation (BOTOX, Allergan). 
1.5 Surgical management of stress urinary incontinence 
There is public concern about the use of mesh procedures . For all of the procedures recommended in this section, including mesh procedures, there is evidence of benefit but limited evidence on the long-term adverse effects. In particular, the true prevalence of long-term complications is unknown. 
1.5.1 
If a woman is thinking about a surgical procedure for stress urinary incontinence, use the NICE patient decision aid on surgery for stress urinary incontinence to promote informed preference and shared decision making. Discussion with the woman should include: 
the benefits and risks of all surgical treatment options for stress urinary incontinence that NICE recommends, whether or not they are available locally 
the uncertainties about the long-term adverse effects for all procedures, particularly those involving the implantation of mesh materials 
differences between procedures in the type of anaesthesia, expected length of hospital stay, surgical incisions and expected recovery period 
any social or psychological factors that may affect the woman's decision. [2013, amended 2019] 
1.5.2 
If non-surgical management for stress urinary incontinence has failed, and the woman wishes to think about a surgical procedure, offer her the choice of: 
colposuspension (open or laparoscopic) or 
an autologous rectus fascial sling . 
Also include the option of a retropubic mid-urethral mesh sling in this choice but see the recommendations in the section on mid-urethral mesh sling procedures for additional guidance on the use of mid-urethral mesh sling procedures for stress urinary incontinence. [2019] 
1.5.3 
Consider intramural bulking agents to manage stress urinary incontinence if alternative surgical procedures are not suitable for or acceptable to the woman. Explain to the woman that: 
these are permanent injectable materials 
repeat injections may be needed to achieve effectiveness 
limited evidence suggests that they are less effective than the surgical procedures listed in recommendation 1.5.2 and the effects wear off over time 
there is limited evidence on long-term effectiveness and adverse events. [2019] 
1.5.4 
If an intramural bulking agent is injected, give the woman written information about the bulking agent, including its name, manufacturer, date of injection, and the injecting surgeon's name and contact details. [2019] 
1.5.5 
If the woman's chosen procedure for stress urinary incontinence is not available from the consulting surgeon, refer her to an alternative surgeon. [2019] 
1.5.6 
Providers must ensure that data on surgical procedures for stress urinary incontinence are recorded in a national registry, as outlined in the section on collecting data on surgery and surgical complications in this guideline . [2019] 
Mid-urethral mesh sling procedures 
1.5.7 
When offering a retropubic mid-urethral mesh sling, advise the woman that it is a permanent implant and complete removal might not be possible. [2019] 
1.5.8 
If a retropubic mid-urethral mesh sling is inserted, give the woman written information about the implant, including its name, manufacturer, date of insertion, and the implanting surgeon's name and contact details. [2019] 
1.5.9 
When planning a retropubic mid-urethral mesh sling procedure, surgeons should: 
use a device manufactured from type 1 macroporous polypropylene mesh 
consider using a retropubic mid-urethral mesh sling coloured for high visibility, for ease of insertion and revision. [2013, amended 2019] 
1.5.10 
Do not offer a transobturator approach unless there are specific clinical circumstances (for example, previous pelvic procedures) in which the retropubic approach should be avoided. [2019] 
1.5.11 
Do not use the 'top‑down' retropubic mid-urethral mesh sling approach or single-incision sub-urethral short mesh sling insertion except as part of a clinical trial. [2019] 
Artificial urinary sphincters 
1.5.12 
Do not offer women an artificial urinary sphincter to manage stress urinary incontinence unless previous surgery has failed. [2006, amended 2019] 
1.5.13 
For women who have had an artificial urinary sphincter inserted: 
offer postoperative follow‑up and 
ensure access to review if needed. [2006, amended 2019] 
Procedures that should not be offered 
1.5.14 
Do not offer women the following procedures to treat stress urinary incontinence: 
anterior colporrhaphy 
needle suspension 
paravaginal defect repair 
porcine dermis sling 
the Marshall–Marchetti–Krantz procedure. [2019] 
Follow-up after surgery 
1.5.15 
Offer a follow‑up appointment within 6 months to all women who have had a surgical procedure to treat stress urinary incontinence. [2019] 
1.5.16 
For women who have had retropubic mid-urethral mesh sling surgery, the follow‑up appointment should include a vaginal examination to check for exposure or extrusion of the mesh sling. [2019] 
1.5.17 
Providers should ensure that women who have had surgery for stress urinary incontinence have access to further referral if they have recurrent symptoms or suspected complications. See also assessing complications associated with mesh surgery in this guideline . [2019] 
1.5.18 
For women whose primary surgical procedure for stress urinary incontinence has failed (including women whose symptoms have returned): 
seek advice on assessment and management from a regional MDT that deals with complex pelvic floor dysfunction or 
offer the woman advice about managing urinary symptoms if she does not wish to have another surgical procedure, and explain that she can ask for a referral if she changes her mind. [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgical management of stress urinary incontinence . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: surgical and physical management of stress urinary incontinence . 
1.6 Assessing pelvic organ prolapse 
1.6.1 
For women presenting in primary care with symptoms or an incidental finding of vaginal prolapse: 
take a history to include symptoms of prolapse, urinary, bowel and sexual function 
do an examination to rule out a pelvic mass or other pathology and to document the presence of prolapse (see the recommendations in the NICE guideline on suspected cancer about ovarian cancer and bladder cancer ) 
discuss the woman's treatment preferences with her, and refer if needed. [2019] 
1.6.2 
For women referred to secondary care for an unrelated condition who have incidental symptoms or an incidental finding of vaginal prolapse, consider referral to a clinician with expertise in prolapse. [2019] 
1.6.3 
For women who are referred for specialist evaluation of vaginal prolapse, perform an examination to: 
assess and record the presence and degree of prolapse of the anterior, central and posterior vaginal compartments of the pelvic floor, using the POP‑Q (Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification) system 
assess the activity of the pelvic floor muscles 
assess for thinning, drying or inflammation of the vaginal walls, loss of elasticity affecting the vaginal muscles and shortening of the vagina 
rule out a pelvic mass or other pathology. [2019] 
1.6.4 
For women with pelvic organ prolapse, consider using a validated pelvic floor symptom questionnaire to aid assessment and decision making. [2019] 
1.6.5 
Do not routinely perform imaging to document the presence of vaginal prolapse if a prolapse is detected by physical examination. [2019] 
1.6.6 
If the woman has symptoms of prolapse that are not explained by findings from a physical examination, consider repeating the examination with the woman standing or squatting, or at a different time. [2019] 
1.6.7 
Consider investigating the following symptoms in women with pelvic organ prolapse: 
urinary symptoms that are bothersome and for which surgical intervention is an option 
symptoms of obstructed defaecation or faecal incontinence (see the recommendations for baseline assessment of faecal incontinence in the NICE guideline on faecal incontinence in adults ) 
pain 
symptoms that are not explained by examination findings. [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on assessing pelvic organ prolapse . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: assessing pelvic organ prolapse . 
1.7 Non-surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse 
1.7.1 
Discuss management options with women who have pelvic organ prolapse, including no treatment, non-surgical treatment and surgical options, taking into account: 
the woman's preferences 
site of prolapse 
lifestyle factors 
comorbidities, including cognitive or physical impairments 
age 
desire for childbearing 
previous abdominal or pelvic floor surgery 
benefits and risks of individual procedures. [2019] 
Lifestyle modification 
1.7.2 
Consider giving advice on lifestyle to women with pelvic organ prolapse, including information on: 
losing weight, if the woman has a BMI greater than 30 kg/m 2 
minimising heavy lifting 
preventing or treating constipation. [2019] 
Topical oestrogen 
1.7.3 
Consider vaginal oestrogen for women with pelvic organ prolapse and genitourinary symptoms and signs associated with menopause . See recommendations on managing genitourinary symptoms in people with no history of breast cancer, and for those with a personal history of breast cancer in NICE's guideline on menopause . [2019] 
1.7.4 
Consider an oestrogen-releasing ring for women with pelvic organ prolapse and genitourinary symptoms and signs associated with menopause who have cognitive or physical impairments that might make vaginal oestrogen pessaries or creams difficult to use. [2019] 
Pelvic floor muscle training 
1.7.5 
Consider a programme of supervised pelvic floor muscle training for at least 16 weeks as a first option for women with symptomatic POP‑Q (Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification) stage 1 or stage 2 pelvic organ prolapse. If the programme is beneficial, advise women to continue pelvic floor muscle training afterwards. [2019] 
Pessaries 
1.7.6 
Consider a vaginal pessary for women with symptomatic pelvic organ prolapse, alone or in conjunction with supervised pelvic floor muscle training. [2019] 
1.7.7 
Refer women who have chosen a pessary to a urogynaecology service if pessary care is not available locally. [2019] 
1.7.8 
Before starting pessary treatment: 
consider vaginal oestrogen for genitourinary symptoms and signs associated with menopause 
explain that more than 1 pessary fitting may be needed to find a suitable pessary 
discuss the effect of different types of pessary on sexual intercourse 
describe complications including vaginal discharge, bleeding, difficulty removing pessary and pessary expulsion 
explain that the pessary should be removed at least once every 6 months to prevent serious pessary complications. [2019] 
1.7.9 
Offer women using pessaries an appointment in a pessary clinic every 6 months if they are at risk of complications, for example because of a physical or cognitive impairment that might make it difficult for them to manage their ongoing pessary care. [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on non-surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: lifestyle and conservative management options for pelvic organ prolapse . 
1.8 Surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse 
There is public concern about the use of mesh procedures . For all of the procedures recommended in this section, including mesh procedures, there is some evidence of benefit, but limited evidence on long-term effectiveness and adverse effects. In particular, the true prevalence of long-term complications is unknown. 
1.8.1 
Offer surgery for pelvic organ prolapse to women whose symptoms have not improved with or who have declined non-surgical treatment. [2019] 
1.8.2 
If a woman is thinking about a surgical procedure for pelvic organ prolapse, use a decision aid (use the NICE patient decision aids on surgery for uterine prolapse and surgery for vaginal vault prolapse where they apply) to promote informed preference and shared decision making. Discussion with the woman should include: 
the different treatment options for pelvic organ prolapse, including no treatment or continued non-surgical management 
the benefits and risks of each surgical procedure, including changes in urinary, bowel and sexual function 
the risk of recurrent prolapse 
the uncertainties about the long-term adverse effects for all procedures, particularly those involving the implantation of mesh materials 
differences between procedures in the type of anaesthesia, expected length of hospital stay, surgical incisions and expected recovery period 
the role of intraoperative prolapse assessment in deciding the most appropriate surgical procedure. [2019] 
1.8.3 
Do not offer surgery to prevent incontinence in women having surgery for prolapse who do not have incontinence. [2019] 
1.8.4 
Explain to women considering surgery for anterior or apical prolapse who do not have incontinence that there is a risk of developing postoperative urinary incontinence and further treatment may be needed. [2019] 
1.8.5 
If the woman's chosen procedure for pelvic organ prolapse is not available from the consulting surgeon, refer her to an alternative surgeon. [2019] 
1.8.6 
If mesh is to be used in prolapse surgery: 
explain to the woman about the type of mesh that will be used and whether or not it is permanent 
ensure that details of the procedure and its subsequent short- and long-term outcomes are recorded in a national registry (see the section on collecting data on surgery and surgical complications in this guideline ) 
give the woman written information about the implant, including its name, manufacturer, date of insertion, and the implanting surgeon's name and contact details. [2019] 
1.8.7 
Providers must ensure that data on surgical procedures for pelvic organ prolapse are recorded in a national registry, as outlined in the section on collecting data on surgery and surgical complications in this guideline . [2019] 
Surgery for uterine prolapse 
1.8.8 
Discuss the options for treatment (see recommendation 1.8.2 on using a decision aid ), including non-surgical options, hysterectomy and surgery that will preserve the uterus, with women who have uterine prolapse. [2019] 
1.8.9 
For women considering surgery for uterine prolapse: 
discuss the possible complications and the lack of long-term evidence on the effectiveness of the procedures 
use the NICE patient decision aid on surgery for uterine prolapse to discuss the benefits and risks of treatment, including non-surgical options. [2019] 
1.8.10 
For women with uterine prolapse who have no preference about preserving their uterus, offer a choice of: 
vaginal hysterectomy, with or without vaginal sacrospinous fixation with sutures or 
vaginal sacrospinous hysteropexy with sutures or 
Manchester repair . 
Also include the option of sacro-hysteropexy with mesh (abdominal or laparoscopic) in this choice but see recommendation 1.8.6 for specific guidance on the use of mesh in prolapse surgery. [2019] 
1.8.11 
For women with uterine prolapse who wish to preserve their uterus, offer a choice of: 
vaginal sacrospinous hysteropexy with sutures or 
Manchester repair, unless the woman may wish to have children in the future. 
Also include the option of sacro-hysteropexy with mesh (abdominal or laparoscopic) in this choice but see recommendation 1.8.6 for specific guidance on the use of mesh in prolapse surgery. [2019] 
1.8.12 
If a synthetic polypropylene mesh is inserted, the details of the procedure and its subsequent short- and long-term outcomes must be collected in a national registry (see the section on collecting data on surgery and surgical complications in this guideline ). [2019] 
1.8.13 
Ensure the proposed treatment is reviewed by a regional MDT (see the recommendation on MDTs reviewing proposed treatment in the section on regional multidisciplinary teams ) if the woman wishes to have children in the future. [2019] 
Surgery for vault prolapse 
1.8.14 
Discuss the options for treatment (see recommendation 1.8.2 on using a decision aid ), including non-surgical and surgical options, with women who have vault prolapse. [2019] 
1.8.15 
For women considering surgery for vault prolapse: 
discuss the possible complications and the lack of long-term evidence on the effectiveness of the procedures 
use the NICE patient decision aid on surgery for vaginal vault prolapse to discuss the benefits and risks of treatment, including non-surgical options. [2019] 
1.8.16 
Offer women with vault prolapse a choice of: 
vaginal sacrospinous fixation with sutures or 
sacrocolpopexy (abdominal or laparoscopic) with mesh. 
See recommendation 1.8.6 for specific guidance on the use of mesh in prolapse surgery. [2019] 
1.8.17 
If a synthetic polypropylene mesh is inserted, the details of the procedure and its subsequent short- and long-term outcomes must be collected in a national registry (see the section on collecting data on surgery and surgical complications in this guideline ). [2019] 
Colpocleisis for vault or uterine prolapse 
1.8.18 
Consider colpocleisis for women with vault or uterine prolapse who do not intend to have penetrative vaginal sex and who have a physical condition that may put them at increased risk of operative and postoperative complications. [2019] 
Surgery for anterior prolapse 
1.8.19 
Discuss the options for treatment (see recommendation 1.8.2 on using a decision aid ), including non-surgical and surgical options, with women who have anterior prolapse. [2019] 
1.8.20 
Offer anterior repair without mesh to women with anterior vaginal wall prolapse. [2019] 
1.8.21 
Recommendation withdrawn in June 2019. 
1.8.22 
Recommendation withdrawn in June 2019. 
June 2019: Recommendations 1.8.21 and 1.8.22, which related to the use of synthetic polypropylene or biological mesh insertion for women with recurrent anterior vaginal wall prolapse, have been withdrawn. Instead, please see NICE interventional procedures guidance 599 on transvaginal mesh repair of anterior or posterior vaginal wall prolapse , which says: 
'1.1 Current evidence on the safety of transvaginal mesh repair of anterior or posterior vaginal wall prolapse shows there are serious but well-recognised safety concerns. Evidence of long-term efficacy is inadequate in quality and quantity. Therefore, this procedure should only be used in the context of research. 
'1.2 All adverse events involving the medical devices (including the mesh) used in this procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. 
'1.3 Further research should include details of patient selection, long-term outcomes including complications, type of mesh used and method of fixation, and quality of life.' 
The replacement of the guideline recommendation with a cross-reference to IPG599 is to provide clarity regarding the relation of NG123 and IPG599 and to take account of a material change since publication in the availability of products CE-marked for the indication which was referred to in the guideline recommendations. 
Surgery for posterior prolapse 
1.8.23 
Offer posterior vaginal repair without mesh to women with a posterior vaginal wall prolapse. [2019] 
Follow-up after surgery 
1.8.24 
Offer women a review 6 months after surgery for pelvic organ prolapse. Ensure that the review includes a vaginal examination and, if mesh was used, check for mesh exposure. [2019] 
1.8.25 
Providers should ensure that women who have had surgery for pelvic organ prolapse have access to further referral if they have recurrent symptoms or suspected complications. Also see the section on assessing complications associated with mesh surgery in this guideline . [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse . 
1.9 Surgery for women with both stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse 
1.9.1 
Consider concurrent surgery for stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse in women with anterior and/or apical prolapse and stress urinary incontinence. [2019] 
1.9.2 
When considering concurrent surgery for stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse, discuss the options for treatment (see the recommendation on using the NICE decision aid in the section on surgical management of stress incontinence and in the section on surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse ) and explain to the woman: 
that there is uncertainty about whether the combined procedure is effective for treating stress urinary incontinence beyond 1 year, and that stress urinary incontinence might persist despite surgery 
the risk of complications related to having surgery for stress urinary incontinence at the same time as prolapse surgery compared with the risk of complications related to having sequential surgery. [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgery for women with both stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse and stress urinary incontinence . 
1.10 Assessing complications associated with mesh surgery 
1.10.1 
For women who report new-onset symptoms after having mesh surgery for urinary incontinence or pelvic organ prolapse, evaluate whether the symptoms might be caused by a mesh-related complication. These symptoms could include: 
pain or sensory change in the back, abdomen, vagina, pelvis, leg, groin or perineum that is: 
either unprovoked, or provoked by movement or sexual activity and 
either generalised, or in the distribution of a specific nerve, such as the obturator nerve 
vaginal problems including discharge, bleeding, painful sexual intercourse, or penile trauma or pain in sexual partners 
urinary problems including recurrent infection, incontinence, retention, or difficulty or pain during voiding 
bowel problems including difficulty or pain on defaecation, faecal incontinence, rectal bleeding or passage of mucus 
symptoms of infection, either alone or in combination with any of the symptoms outlined above. [2019] 
1.10.2 
Refer women with a suspected mesh-related complication to a urogynaecologist, urologist or colorectal surgeon for specialist assessment. [2019] 
1.10.3 
For women who are referred for specialist evaluation of a suspected mesh complication: 
take a history of all past surgical procedures for prolapse or incontinence using mesh, including the dates, type of mesh and site of mesh placement and the relationship of the symptoms to the surgical procedure(s) 
consider using a validated pelvic floor symptom questionnaire and a pain questionnaire to aid assessment and decision making 
perform a vaginal examination to: 
assess whether mesh is palpable, exposed or extruded 
localise pain and its anatomical relationship to mesh 
consider performing a rectal examination, if indicated, to assess for the presence of mesh perforation or fistula 
consider performing a neurological assessment to assess the distribution of pain, if present, sensory alteration or muscle weakness. [2019] 
1.10.4 
For women with a confirmed mesh-related complication or unexplained symptoms after a mesh procedure: 
refer to a consultant at a regional centre specialising in the diagnosis and management of mesh-related complications or 
if the woman has a vaginal exposure of mesh that is smaller than 1 cm 2 and no other symptoms, follow the recommendations on discussing topical oestrogen cream treatment and a follow-up appointment for those having topical oestrogen cream in the section on managing vaginal complications . [2019] 
1.10.5 
The responsible consultant should develop an individualised investigation plan for each woman with suspected or confirmed mesh-related complications, involving other members of the regional MDT if needed, and use table 1 in this guideline to inform decisions on possible investigations. [2019] 
1.10.6 
The responsible consultant must ensure that details of any confirmed mesh-related complications are: 
recorded in a national registry (see the section on collecting data on surgery and surgical complications in this guideline ) and 
reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). [2019] 
Table 1 Investigations for assessing suspected mesh-related complications 
Investigation 
Type of mesh 
Indications 
Benefits 
Risks 
Examination under anaesthesia 
All types of mesh 
Pain or suspected: 
vaginal or rectal exposure or extrusion 
sinus tract, urinary or bowel fistula 
Allows diagnosis when not revealed by awake examination or when an awake, examination is not tolerated 
Anaesthetic risk 
Cystourethro-scopy 
All types of mesh 
Suspected: 
urethral perforation 
bladder perforation 
fistula 
calculus on suture or mesh material 
Allows diagnosis by direct visualisation 
Aids management planning 
Anaesthetic risk and risk of urinary tract infection 
Sigmoidoscopy 
Abdominally, laparo-scopically or vaginally placed mesh for pelvic organ prolapse 
Suspected bowel perforation by mesh 
Allows diagnosis by direct visualisation 
Aids management planning 
Anaesthetic risk if carried out under anaesthesia 
Risk of bowel perforation 
Laparoscopy 
Abdominally or laparo-scopically placed mesh for pelvic organ prolapse 
Pain 
Suspected bowel entrapment around mesh 
Suspected adhesions secondary to mesh placement 
Allows diagnosis by direct visualisation 
Aids management planning 
Anaesthetic risk 
Risks of laparoscopy, including bowel injury 
MRI, protocolled and reported by a clinician with experience in interpreting mesh complications 
All types of mesh 
Suspected mesh infection 
Anatomical mapping of suspected fistula 
Anatomical mapping and mesh localisation to guide further surgery 
Back pain following abdominal mesh placement with mesh attachment to sacral promontory 
Identification of discitis or osteomyelitis 
Shows implanted material and complications nearby 
Shows location of mesh in relation to the vaginal wall and sacrum 
Generally regarded as safe, with a low risk of short- and long-term harms. Risk of contrast media injection 
Ultrasound scan (transperineal, transvaginal or translabial, or 3D), performed and reported by a clinician with experience in interpreting mesh complications 
Vaginally placed mesh to treat incontinence 
Pain 
Voiding dysfunction 
Suspected infection 
Suspected urethral mesh perforation 
Anatomical mapping to guide excision surgery 
Shows implanted material and local complications 
Identifies mid-urethral slings 
Shows location of mesh in relation to the vaginal wall and urethra 
Discomfort 
CT 
All types of mesh, although CT is not commonly used to show implanted material 
Suspected: 
urinary tract injury 
bowel injury 
bowel obstruction 
May be useful in assessing for urinary fistulae or bowel injury 
Potential radiation-related harms and risk of contrast media injection 
Fluoroscopic studies (cystography or contrast enema). Perform with water-soluble contrast media 
Fluoroscopic studies and CT may be used according to local preference and expertise 
All types of mesh 
Suspected urinary or bowel fistula 
Aids management planning 
Potential radiation-related harms 
Urinary flow studies and post-void residual volume assessment or cystometry 
All types of mesh 
Voiding dysfunction 
Urinary incontinence 
Aids management planning 
Urinary tract infection and radiation risks if fluoroscopy is used 
Neuro-physiology, including nerve conduction studies 
All types of mesh 
Suspected nerve injury 
Allows diagnosis of impaired nerve function 
Nerve conduction studies are difficult to perform and can induce more pain 
Note: Individualised investigation plans may include, but are not limited to, 1 or more of these investigations. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on assessing complications associated with mesh surgery . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: assessing mesh complications after pelvic floor mesh surgery . 
1.11 Managing complications associated with mesh surgery 
General considerations before removing mesh 
1.11.1 
If a woman who has had a mesh procedure to treat urinary incontinence or pelvic organ prolapse is thinking about having the mesh removed, discuss the decision with her and with a regional MDT. [2019] 
1.11.2 
When discussing surgery to remove mesh, explain to the woman that: 
there is limited evidence on the benefits of partial or complete removal compared with no mesh removal 
surgery to remove mesh can have significant complications including organ injury, worsening pain, and urinary, bowel and sexual dysfunction 
it is not certain that removing the mesh will relieve symptoms 
it might not be possible to remove all of the mesh 
removing only part of the mesh might be just as effective at improving symptoms as removing all of it 
urinary incontinence or prolapse can recur after the mesh has been removed. [2019] 
Managing vaginal complications 
1.11.3 
Discuss non-surgical treatment with topical oestrogen cream with women who have a single area of vaginal mesh exposure that is smaller than 1 cm 2 . [2019] 
1.11.4 
Offer a follow‑up appointment within 3 months to women with vaginal mesh exposure who choose treatment with topical oestrogen cream. [2019] 
1.11.5 
Consider partial or complete surgical removal of the vaginal portion of mesh for women: 
who do not wish to have treatment with topical oestrogen or 
if the area of vaginal mesh sling exposure is 1 cm 2 or larger or 
if there is vaginal mesh extrusion or 
if there has been no response to non-surgical treatment after a period of 3 months. [2019] 
1.11.6 
Offer imaging and further treatment to women who have signs of infection in addition to vaginal mesh exposure or extrusion. [2019] 
1.11.7 
Discuss with women who have vaginal complications after mesh sling surgery for stress urinary incontinence that: 
complete removal of the vaginal portion of mesh sling is associated with a greater risk of recurrence of stress urinary incontinence than partial removal 
partial removal is associated with a higher rate of further mesh sling extrusion 
complete removal might not be possible. [2019] 
1.11.8 
Explain to women who have vaginal complications after vaginally placed mesh for pelvic organ prolapse that: 
complete removal might not be possible 
complete removal has a higher risk of urinary tract or bowel injury than partial removal 
there may be a risk of recurrent prolapse. [2019] 
1.11.9 
Explain to women who have vaginal complications after abdominally placed mesh for pelvic organ prolapse that: 
removal is associated with a risk of urinary tract and bowel injury 
there is a risk of recurrent prolapse 
they might need abdominal surgery to remove the mesh 
complete removal might not be possible. [2019] 
1.11.10 
For women who have pain or painful sexual intercourse suspected to be related to previous mesh surgery: 
if specialist assessment indicates a mesh-related complication, seek advice from a regional MDT 
if assessment and investigation do not show a mesh abnormality such as vaginal extrusion or exposure, or an infection, consider non-surgical treatments such as pain management, vaginal oestrogen, dilators, counselling (including psychosexual counselling) and physiotherapy 
if pain does not respond to initial management, seek advice from a regional MDT. [2019] 
Managing urinary complications 
1.11.11 
Refer women who have mesh perforating the lower urinary tract to a centre for mesh complications for further assessment or management. [2019] 
1.11.12 
For women with urinary symptoms after mesh surgery for stress urinary incontinence or pelvic organ prolapse who are considering mesh removal surgery, explain that: 
urinary symptoms might not improve and new symptoms might occur after complete or partial removal of the mesh 
stress urinary incontinence might recur after mesh removal, and the risk of this happening is higher with complete than with partial mesh removal 
complete removal of the mesh might not be possible 
further treatment might be needed for mesh complications, or recurrent or persistent urinary symptoms 
there is a risk of adverse events such as urinary tract fistula. [2019] 
1.11.13 
Discuss division of mesh sling with women who have voiding difficulty after mesh sling surgery. [2019] 
1.11.14 
Refer women considering excision of mesh sling for persistent voiding dysfunction to a centre specialising in the diagnosis and management of mesh-related complications for assessment and management. [2019] 
1.11.15 
For women considering surgery to alleviate voiding symptoms caused by mesh surgery, explain that: 
the risk of recurrent stress urinary incontinence is higher after mesh excision than mesh division 
further surgery might be needed. [2019] 
Managing bowel symptoms 
1.11.16 
For women who present with functional bowel disorders after mesh surgery for pelvic organ prolapse, follow the recommendations in the NICE guideline on faecal incontinence in adults for women with faecal incontinence or locally agreed protocols for women with obstructed defecation . [2019] 
1.11.17 
For women with bowel complications that are directly related to mesh placement, such as erosion, stricture or fistula, discuss treatment with a regional MDT that has expertise in complex pelvic floor dysfunction and mesh-related problems. Use this discussion to formulate an individualised treatment plan with the woman. [2019] 
1.11.18 
Explain to women with bowel complications directly related to mesh placement that: 
complete removal might not be possible 
bowel symptoms might persist or recur after mesh removal 
they might need a temporary or permanent stoma after mesh removal. [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on managing complications associated with mesh surgery . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: management of mesh complications . 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines some of the terms that are used in this guideline. For other definitions, see the NICE glossary . 
Anticholinergic medicine 
A type of medicine (also called an antimuscarinic) used to treat overactive bladder. It reduces the activity of the bladder muscle by blocking chemical messengers to the nerves that control muscle movements. 
Augmentation cystoplasty 
A procedure to treat overactive bladder. The bladder is made larger by adding a piece of tissue from the intestines to the bladder wall. 
Autologous rectus fascial sling 
A type of sling used to treat stress urinary incontinence. It is made out of tissue from the woman's abdomen. The sling supports the tube that carries urine out of the body (the urethra). 
Botulinum toxin type A 
A treatment used for overactive bladder. It is injected into the wall of the bladder. 
Colpocleisis 
An operation to treat pelvic organ prolapse by closing the vagina. 
Colposuspension 
A type of surgery used to treat stress urinary incontinence. The neck of the bladder is lifted up and stitched in this position. 
Detrusor overactivity 
Involuntary bladder contractions seen during a cystometry test. They can be the cause of overactive bladder symptoms. 
Genitourinary symptoms and signs associated with menopause 
Symptoms include vulvovaginal dryness, pain with sex, vulvovaginal discomfort or irritation, and discomfort or pain when urinating. 
Signs include thinning, drying or inflammation of the vaginal walls, loss of elasticity affecting the vaginal muscles and shortening of the vagina. 
Intramural bulking agents 
Materials used to treat stress urinary incontinence. They are injected into the sides of the tube that carries urine out of the body (the urethra). This helps it remain closed so that urine is less likely to leak out. 
Manchester repair 
An operation used to treat uterine prolapse. The neck of the womb (the cervix) is shortened. It involves shortening the cervix (neck of the womb) and supporting the womb in its natural position. 
Mesh procedure 
An operation to insert plastic mesh to support tissues. Mesh procedures are used to treat stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse in women. 
Percutaneous sacral nerve stimulation 
A procedure used to treat overactive bladder. A device is implanted in the back to stimulate the nerves at the base of the spine. These nerves affect the bladder and surrounding muscles. 
Percutaneous posterior tibial nerve stimulation 
A procedure used to treat overactive bladder. A mild electric current is passed through a fine needle to stimulate a nerve in the leg. This nerve controls bladder function. 
Retropubic mid-urethral mesh sling 
A type of sling used to treat stress urinary incontinence. A strip of plastic is placed behind the tube that carries urine out of the body (the urethra) to support it in a sling. 
Sacrocolpopexy 
A type of surgery used to treat vaginal vault prolapse. Plastic mesh is used to attach the vagina to a bone at the bottom of the spine. 
Sacro-hysteropexy 
An operation to treat uterine prolapse. Plastic mesh is used to attach the womb (the uterus) to a bone at the bottom of the spine. 
Urinary diversion 
A type of surgery used to treat stress urinary incontinence. It causes urine to flow through an opening in the abdomen into an external bag, instead of into the bladder. 
Vaginal sacrospinous fixation 
A type of surgery used to treat vaginal vault or uterine prolapse. The top of the vagina is stitched to a ligament in the pelvis. It is done through a cut on the inside of the vagina. 
Vaginal sacrospinous hysteropexy 
An operation used to treat uterine prolapse. The cervix is stitched to a ligament in the pelvis. It is done through a cut on the inside of the vagina. 
Additional information 
Recommendation 1.4.31 
This could be any medicine with the lowest acquisition cost from any of the medicines reviewed in 2013. The evidence review considered the following medicines: darifenacin, fesoterodine, oxybutynin (immediate release), oxybutynin (extended release), oxybutynin (transdermal), oxybutynin (topical gel), propiverine, propiverine (extended release), solifenacin, tolterodine (immediate release), tolterodine (extended release), trospium and trospium (extended release). See chapter 6 of the 2013 full guideline . 
Recommendations 1.4.44 to 1.4.50 
In April 2019, only 1 preparation of botulinum toxin type A (BOTOX, Allergan) had a UK marketing authorisation for overactive bladder. The licensed dose was 100 units. 
One preparation of botulinum toxin type A (BOTOX, Allergan) had a UK marketing authorisation for use at a dose of 200 units, for treating neurogenic detrusor overactivity with urinary incontinence due to subcervical spinal cord injury (traumatic or non-traumatic) or multiple sclerosis. 
Note that units of botulinum toxin type A are not interchangeable between preparations. If prescribing outside the marketing authorisation ('off label'), see NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
