Overview | Antimicrobial stewardship: changing risk-related behaviours in the general population | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Antimicrobial stewardship: changing risk-related behaviours in the general population
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG63 
Published: 
25 January 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
The committee's discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Overview 
This guideline covers making people aware of how to correctly use antimicrobial medicines (including antibiotics) and the dangers associated with their overuse and misuse. It also includes measures to prevent and control infection that can stop people needing antimicrobials or spreading infection to others. It aims to change people’s behaviour to reduce antimicrobial resistance and the spread of resistant microbes. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use . 
Last reviewed: 25 January 2017 
Next review:  This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
ensuring antimicrobial stewardship programmes  are a local priority 
providing information for the public about reducing inappropriate antimicrobial demand and use 
providing information for the public about  preventing and reducing the spread of infections 
improving infection prevention knowledge and behaviour among children and young people   
advising people  on how to use antimicrobial medicines 
Who is it for? 
Local authority public health teams 
Commissioners, including clinical commissioning groups, and providers 
Childcare and education providers 
Prescribers, primary care and community pharmacy teams 
The general public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guidance. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Antimicrobial stewardship 
Infection prevention and control 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
