Other considerations | Pyelonephritis (acute): antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Pyelonephritis (acute): antimicrobial prescribing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG111 
Published: 
31 October 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Summary of the evidence 
Other considerations 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Medicines adherence
Resource implications
Other considerations 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines adherence may be a problem for some people with medicines that require frequent dosing (for example, some antibiotics) or longer treatment duration (see the NICE guideline on medicines adherence ). 
Resource implications 
One small randomised controlled trial (RCT; Moramezi et al. 2008 ) in pregnant women with acute pyelonephritis found no significant difference in length of hospital stay in women taking a cephalosporin compared with ampicillin plus gentamicin (p=0.22; very low quality evidence). 
One RCT ( Talan et al. 2000 ), which compared ciprofloxacin with co‑trimoxazole in adult women with acute pyelonephritis, found that resource use (hospital stay, visits and telephone contacts, laboratory tests and prescription costs) was higher in the co‑trimoxazole group (no analysis reported). The only exception was for radiological procedures, which was slightly higher in the ciprofloxacin group (no analysis reported). One systematic review ( Eliakim-Raz et al. 2013 ), which compared antibiotic course lengths in adults with acute pyelonephritis and included the Talan et al. (2000) study, noted a shorter duration of hospital stay with a short course of antibiotics (7 days or fewer) compared with a longer course (10 days to 6 weeks). 
One RCT in the systematic review by Strohmeier et al. (2014) in children with acute pyelonephritis found that giving sequential intravenous then oral antibiotics reduced the duration of hospital stay compared with a longer duration of intravenous antibiotics (4.9 days compared with 9.8 days). 
Recommended antibiotics are available as generic formulations, see the Drug Tariff for costs. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Summary of the evidence 
Back to top
