Overview | Suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over: recognition, assessment and early management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over: recognition, assessment and early management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG253 
Published: 
19 November 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Could this be sepsis? 
Face-to-face assessment 
Evaluating risk 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Training and education 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the recognition, diagnosis and early management of suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over who are not and have not recently been pregnant. It includes recommendations on recognition and early assessment, initial treatment, escalating care, finding and controlling the source of infection, early monitoring, information and support, and training and education. 
We have split the sepsis guideline, that covered all age groups, into 3 guidelines (including this one). See also NICE's guidelines on suspected sepsis in people under 16 and suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people . 
Last reviewed: 5 December 2025 
We checked this guideline and are updating it around the use of procalcitonin (PCT) tests. For more information, see the surveillance decision . See the guideline in development page for progress on the update. 
This guideline partially updates and replaces NICE guideline NG51 (2016). 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
Could this be sepsis? 
Face-to-face assessment 
Evaluating risk 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Training and education 
See the visual summaries on evaluating and managing suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over . 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals working in primary, secondary and tertiary care 
People aged 16 or over with suspected sepsis who are not and have not recently been pregnant, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Suspected sepsis in over 16s 
Next page 
Could this be sepsis? 
Back to top
