Overview | Older people: independence and mental wellbeing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Older people: independence and mental wellbeing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG32 
Published: 
17 December 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Implementation: getting started 
Committee discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Overview 
This guideline covers interventions to maintain and improve the mental wellbeing and independence of people aged 65 or older and how to identify those most at risk of a decline. 
Recommendations 
The guideline includes recommendations on: 
principles of good practice 
group-based activities 
one-to-one activities 
volunteering 
identifying people most at risk of a decline 
Who is it for? 
Local authorities working in partnership with organisations in the public, private, voluntary and community sectors that come into contact with older people 
The NHS and other service providers with a remit for older people 
It may also be of interest to older people, their families and carers 
Commissioners of services for older people should ensure any service specifications take into account the recommendations in this guideline. 
Is this guideline up to date? 
We checked this guideline in March 2018 . We found no new evidence that affects the recommendations of this guideline. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Mental wellbeing and independence for older people 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
