Overview | Child maltreatment: when to suspect maltreatment in under 18s | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Child maltreatment: when to suspect maltreatment in under 18s
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG89 
Published: 
22 July 2009
Last updated: 
03 December 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Using this guidance 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the signs of possible child maltreatment in children and young people aged under 18 years. It aims to raise awareness and help healthcare professionals who are not child protection specialists to identify the features of physical, sexual and emotional abuse, neglect and fabricated or induced illness.   
NICE has also produced a guideline on child abuse and neglect . 
Last reviewed: 3 December 2025 
We added a definition of independently mobile in the context of recommendations 1.1.2, 1.1.5 and 1.1.6. 
Next review:  This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
physical features 
clinical presentations 
neglect by failure of provision and failure of supervision 
emotional and behavioural states and behavioural disorders or abnormalities 
parent–child interactions 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called when to suspect child maltreatment. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
