Overview | Subarachnoid haemorrhage caused by a ruptured aneurysm: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Cranial aneurysms
Subarachnoid haemorrhage caused by a ruptured aneurysm: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG228 
Published: 
23 November 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and treating an aneurysmal (caused by a ruptured aneurysm) subarachnoid haemorrhage and its complications. It provides recommendations to improve diagnosis and ensure that the most effective treatments are offered. It includes guidance on follow-up care and information for people (aged 16 and over) who have had an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, their families and carers. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
assessment and diagnosis 
managing a confirmed aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage 
monitoring and managing complications 
follow-up care 
information and support 
See the  visual summary on recommendations for the diagnosis and management of subarachnoid haemorrhage caused by a ruptured aneurysm . 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers of healthcare services for people with a suspected or confirmed subarachnoid haemorrhage caused by a ruptured aneurysm 
People with an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
