Overview | Maternal and child nutrition: nutrition and weight management in pregnancy, and nutrition in children up to 5 years | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diet, nutrition and obesity
Maternal and child nutrition: nutrition and weight management in pregnancy, and nutrition in children up to 5 years
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG247 
Published: 
15 January 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers nutrition and weight management in pregnancy for anyone who may become pregnant, is planning to become pregnant or is already pregnant, and nutrition in children up to 5 years. Care of babies and children born preterm or with low birth weight is not covered. The guideline does not give detailed advice on what constitutes a healthy diet. 
NICE has also produced guidelines on: 
antenatal care 
postnatal care (this covers baby feeding in the first 8 weeks after the birth) 
overweight and obesity management (this covers weight management before and after pregnancy). 
For information on other related topics, see our  women's and reproductive health summary page . 
Last reviewed:  15 January 2025 
This guideline updates and replaces: 
the NICE guideline on maternal and child nutrition (PH11, 2008) 
the recommendations on weight management during pregnancy from NICE's guideline on weight management before, during and after pregnancy (PH27, 2010). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
vitamin supplementation 
healthy eating, physical activity and weight management during pregnancy 
breastfeeding and formula feeding 
weighing babies and young children 
healthy eating behaviours in babies and children from 6 months and up to 5 years . 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals working in the NHS responsible for maternal and child nutrition from birth to 5 years, including midwives, obstetricians, health visitors, dietitians, public health nutritionists, primary healthcare professionals, general practitioners, community paediatricians, school and community nurses, specialist nurses, dentists and dental professionals, and pharmacists 
Commissioners and providers of antenatal and postnatal care services, weight management and activity or exercise services, and primary care services 
Providers of preschool education and care services and early years settings 
Employers and staff in education settings 
People planning a pregnancy or who are pregnant, and their families 
Families, carers, partners, people who look after babies and children up to 5 years, and the public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Antenatal care 
Postnatal care 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
