Overview | Autism spectrum disorder in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Autism
Autism spectrum disorder in adults: diagnosis and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG142 
Published: 
27 June 2012
Last updated: 
14 June 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing suspected or confirmed autism spectrum disorder in people aged 18 and over. It aims to improve access and engagement with interventions and services, and the experience of care, for people with autism. 
We have also produced guidelines on autism spectrum disorder in under 19s: recognition, referral and diagnosis and autism spectrum disorder in under 19s: support and management . 
Last reviewed: 5 September 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will not update the recommendations on interventions for coexisting mental disorders . See the  surveillance decision  for further details. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
identification and assessment 
interventions for autism 
interventions for behaviour that challenges 
interventions for coexisting mental disorders 
assessment and interventions for families, partners and carers 
organising and delivering care   
Who is it for? 
Health and social care professionals (including those in the independent sector) 
Commissioners and providers 
Adults with autism and their families, partners and carers  
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called autism: recognition, referral, diagnosis and management of adults on the autism spectrum. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Autism 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
