Key priorities for implementation | Irritable bowel syndrome in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Digestive tract conditions
Irritable bowel syndrome
Irritable bowel syndrome in adults: diagnosis and management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG61 
Published: 
23 February 2008
Last updated: 
04 April 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Initial assessment
Diagnostic tests
Dietary and lifestyle advice
Pharmacological therapy
Key priorities for implementation 
The following recommendations were identified as priorities for implementation in the 2008 guideline and have not been changed in the 2015 update. 
Initial assessment 
Healthcare professionals should consider assessment for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) if the person reports having had any of the following symptoms for at least 6 months: 
A bdominal pain or discomfort 
B loating 
C hange in bowel habit. [2008] 
A diagnosis of IBS should be considered only if the person has abdominal pain or discomfort that is either relieved by defaecation or associated with altered bowel frequency or stool form. This should be accompanied by at least 2 of the following 4 symptoms: 
altered stool passage (straining, urgency, incomplete evacuation) 
abdominal bloating (more common in women than men), distension, tension or hardness 
symptoms made worse by eating 
passage of mucus. 
Other features such as lethargy, nausea, backache and bladder symptoms are common in people with IBS, and may be used to support the diagnosis. [2008] 
Diagnostic tests 
In people who meet the IBS diagnostic criteria, the following tests should be undertaken to exclude other diagnoses: 
full blood count (FBC) 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or plasma viscosity 
c‑reactive protein (CRP) 
antibody testing for coeliac disease (endomysial antibodies [EMA] or tissue transglutaminase [TTG]). [2008] 
The following tests are not necessary to confirm diagnosis in people who meet the IBS diagnostic criteria: 
ultrasound 
rigid/flexible sigmoidoscopy 
colonoscopy; barium enema 
thyroid function test 
faecal ova and parasite test 
faecal occult blood 
hydrogen breath test (for lactose intolerance and bacterial overgrowth). [2008] 
Dietary and lifestyle advice 
People with IBS should be given information that explains the importance of self‑help in effectively managing their IBS. This should include information on general lifestyle, physical activity, diet and symptom‑targeted medication. [2008] 
Healthcare professionals should review the fibre intake of people with IBS, adjusting (usually reducing) it while monitoring the effect on symptoms. People with IBS should be discouraged from eating insoluble fibre (for example, bran). If an increase in dietary fibre is advised, it should be soluble fibre such as ispaghula powder or foods high in soluble fibre (for example, oats). [2008] 
Pharmacological therapy 
People with IBS should be advised how to adjust their doses of laxative or antimotility agent according to the clinical response. The dose should be titrated according to stool consistency, with the aim of achieving a soft, well‑formed stool (corresponding to Bristol Stool Form Scale type 4). [2008] 
Consider tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) as second‑line treatment for people with IBS if laxatives, loperamide or antispasmodics have not helped. Start treatment at a low dose (5 mg to 10 mg equivalent of amitriptyline), taken once at night, and review regularly. Increase the dose if needed, but not usually beyond 30 mg. At the time of publication (February 2015), TCAs did not have a UK marketing authorisation for this indication. The prescriber should follow relevant professional guidance, taking full responsibility for the decision. Informed consent should be obtained and documented. See the General Medical Council's Good practice in prescribing and managing medicines and devices for further information . [2015] 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Previous page 
Introduction 
Back to top
