Overview | Early and locally advanced breast cancer: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Breast cancer
Early and locally advanced breast cancer: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG101 
Published: 
18 July 2018
Last updated: 
14 April 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing early and locally advanced breast cancer. It aims to help healthcare professionals offer the right treatments to people, taking into account the person's individual preferences. 
For information on related topics, see our breast cancer summary page  and our guideline on suspected cancer: recognition and referral . NICE has also produced guidelines on advanced breast cancer  and familial breast cancer . 
Last reviewed: 2 June 2026 
We have reviewed this guideline and will be updating the recommendation on annual mammography . See the June 2026 surveillance decision for further details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG80 and the section on lymphoedema in NICE guideline CG81 (both 2009). It also updates and replaces NICE technology appraisal guidance 107, 108, 109 and 112 (2006) and NICE evidence summary ES15 (2017). 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
triple negative (ER/PR/HER2-negative) breast cancer 
HER2-positive breast cancer 
endocrine therapy for hormone receptor positive breast cancer 
management of treatment side effects and menopausal symptoms 
It also includes recommendations on: 
information and support 
pretreatment assessment 
assessment of tumour profile and genetic testing 
surgery to the breast and axilla 
breast reconstruction 
systemic anti-cancer therapy planning 
systemic anti-cancer therapy for all receptor subtypes 
hormone receptor positive, HER2-negative breast cancer 
adjuvant bisphosphonate therapy 
radiotherapy 
follow-up and lifestyle advice 
locally advanced inoperable disease 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers of breast cancer services 
People with early and locally advanced breast cancer, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Breast cancer 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
