Overview | Specialist neonatal respiratory care for babies born preterm | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Postnatal care
Specialist neonatal respiratory care for babies born preterm 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG124 
Published: 
03 April 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers specific aspects of respiratory support (for example, oxygen supplementation, assisted ventilation, treatment of some respiratory disorders, and aspects of monitoring) for preterm babies in hospital. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
risk factors for bronchopulmonary dysplasia 
respiratory support for preterm babies 
managing respiratory disorders 
monitoring 
sedation and analgesia 
involving, supporting and informing parents and carers 
discharge planning 
See a  visual timeline of interventions and support for babies born preterm who need specialist neonatal respiratory care. 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers of specialist neonatal care services 
Parents and carers of preterm babies who need respiratory support 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Specialist neonatal respiratory care for babies born preterm 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
