Overview | Cough (acute): antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Cough (acute): antimicrobial prescribing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG120 
Published: 
07 February 2019
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Terms used in the guideline 
Summary of the evidence 
Other considerations 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline sets out an antimicrobial prescribing strategy for acute cough associated with an upper respiratory tract infection or acute bronchitis in adults, young people and children. It aims to limit antibiotic use and reduce antibiotic resistance. 
See a  2-page visual summary of the recommendations, including tables to support prescribing decisions. 
For treating coughs associated with other lower respiratory tract infections, see our topic page on respiratory conditions . 
NICE has also produced a guideline on antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
treatment 
reassessment 
referral and seeking specialist advice 
self-care 
choice of antibiotic 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
People with acute cough, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guidance. 
This guideline partially updates and replaces NICE guideline CG69 (Published July 2008).  
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Acute respiratory infection in over 16s: initial assessment and management including virtual wards (hospital at home) 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
