Other considerations | Otitis media (acute): antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Ear, nose and throat conditions
Otitis media (acute): antimicrobial prescribing 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG91 
Published: 
28 March 2018
Last updated: 
11 March 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Summary of the evidence 
Other considerations 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Medicines adherence
Resource implications
Other considerations 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines adherence may be a problem for some people with medicines that require frequent dosing (for example, some antibiotics) or longer treatment duration (see the NICE guideline on medicines adherence ). [2018] 
Resource implications 
Respiratory tract infections, including acute otitis media, are a common reason for consultations in primary care, and therefore are a common reason for potential antibiotic prescribing. [2018] 
There is potential for resource savings if no antibiotic or a back-up antibiotic prescription is used. There was significantly lower antibiotic use with back‑up antibiotics compared with immediate antibiotics, both when the back‑up antibiotic prescription was given at the time of consultation (38% compared with 87%; moderate quality evidence) and when the prescription had to be collected on a separate visit (24% compared with 87%; high quality evidence). There was no significant difference between groups in re‑consultation rates (low quality evidence). This was based on a systematic review of RCTs ( Spurling et al. 2013 ). [2018] 
Recommended antibiotics are all available as generic formulations. Eardrops containing an anaesthetic and an analgesic (Otigo eardrops) are a prescription only medicine. See the Drug Tariff for costs. [2022] 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Summary of the evidence 
Back to top
