Recommendations | Looked-after children and young people | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Children's social care
Looked-after children and young people
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG205 
Published: 
20 October 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Context 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Diversity
1.2 Supporting positive relationships
1.3 Valuing carers
1.4 Safeguarding
1.5 Health and wellbeing
1.6 Learning and education
1.7 Transition between care placements and to permanent placements
1.8 Transition out of care to independence
1.9 Forum for strategic leadership and best practice
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
This guideline should be read alongside NICE's guideline on children's attachment . 
1.1 Diversity 
1.1.1 
Be aware that many looked-after children and young people are from groups that may face additional disadvantage. Ensure that their needs are met and that they do not face further marginalisation. These groups include those from black, Asian and other minority ethnic groups, Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities, and those from different religious backgrounds, as well as other groups such as refugees and unaccompanied asylum-seeking children , disabled people with complex needs, autistic children and young people, children and young people with a learning disability or neurodevelopmental disability, lower socioeconomic groups and people who identify as LGBTQ+. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on diversity . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: barriers and facilitators for supporting positive relationships among looked-after children and young people . 
1.2 Supporting positive relationships 
Positive relationships in the care network 
1.2.1 
Ensure that the care network around a looked-after child or young person consists of positive relationships. These are characterised by: 
genuine caring – being treated by carers as 'one of their own' 
availability – being there when needed 
reliability – providing promised support in a timely manner 
listening that is engaged and non-judgemental 
continuity of relationships 
promoting agency and shared decision making that is appropriate to developmental age 
providing well-communicated and fair discipline and boundaries 
persistence and understanding, to respond to behaviours that challenge and to support positive behaviours 
positive role models who offer guidance. 
1.2.2 
If the looked-after child or young person has speech, language and communication problems (whether or not these have been previously diagnosed), refer them to speech and language therapists, if needed, for assessment and for advice on how to communicate effectively with them. 
Sibling relationships 
1.2.3 
Consider interventions and support to improve the relationship between siblings in care, including biological siblings who live apart and non-biological siblings who live together (for example, other looked-after children or young people in the placement, and the carer's biological or adopted children). Take into account safeguarding issues and the looked-after child or young person's preferences. 
1.2.4 
For primary-school-aged children, or those needing greater assistance, ensure that the primary carers are present during interventions to improve relationships between siblings in care. Components of this intervention should include: 
structured conversation around relationships and conflict resolution 
incentivised cooperation, for example shared activities and outings to encourage prosocial , cooperative behaviour 
shared activities with coaching in prosocial skills using life story work . 
1.2.5 
Consider relationship coaching independently from the carer for adolescent siblings in care. 
1.2.6 
Offer carers support to help them understand and maintain stable sibling relationships before offering interventions to improve the relationship between siblings in care. 
Relationships with the birth family 
1.2.7 
Respect the wishes of looked-after children and young people about contact arrangements (where and who with) and take them into account when making plans. Balance them against safeguarding considerations and the risk of repeating trauma. 
1.2.8 
Provide contact supervisors for contact with birth families if this is necessary for safeguarding, or if it will help support the relationship between the looked-after child or young person and the birth family. Ensure that the looked-after child or young person always has the same contact supervisor if possible. 
1.2.9 
Contact supervisors should receive training in: 
safeguarding the looked-after child or young person, including trauma-informed training in recognising signs of distress (including in babies and in non-verbal children and young people) and how and when to end a session 
providing emotional support for the looked-after child or young person, including in transition to and from contact with the birth family 
providing support for and feedback to birth parents to help them build positive relationships during contact 
knowing when to support, and how to reduce support when necessary 
record keeping and sharing information with the broader care team. 
1.2.10 
Consider the need for more intense contact supervision (in terms of monitoring and feedback provided) between the birth family and looked-after child or young person in the early stages of care placements, with reduced intensity as needs decrease over time. 
1.2.11 
Provide interpreting services for contact supervisors if the people taking part in contact are non-English speaking. Consider any additional communication support as needed, for example sign language. 
1.2.12 
Think about using text, email or social media to support contact for looked-after children and young people. Safeguarding plans should also take account of the possibility of ongoing unmonitored online contact and ensure that the time spent in digital or social media contact and the content of these interactions is appropriate. 
1.2.13 
Consider the contact needs of children placed out of their local area – for example, additional support for the birth family to attend contact centres. 
Relationships with social workers 
1.2.14 
Support the looked-after child or young person's allocated social worker, to reduce professional turnover. Support could include, for example: 
supervision with regular meetings to check on the wellbeing of workers, and reflect on practices that promote positive relationships (see recommendation 1.2.1 ) 
consultation for complex and specialist problems (see recommendation 1.4.3 ) 
trauma-informed training in communication skills to support positive relationships (see also recommendation 1.3.18 ). 
1.2.15 
Managers of social workers should use and review ways of working to reduce duplication of effort, increase staff retention and enable more one-to-one time between social workers and looked-after children and young people (for example, by improving administrative support). 
1.2.16 
Local authorities and partner agencies should collect and review data on staff turnover to assess the impact on looked-after children and young people and the success of existing staff support systems. They should use this data to inform action plans to support greater continuity of practitioners working directly with looked-after people and care leavers. 
1.2.17 
If possible, social workers should tell looked-after children, young people, care leavers, and primary carers pre-emptively, and in a manner appropriate to developmental age, about upcoming changes in their job that will affect their relationship with the looked-after child or young person. This should include a joint meeting in person between the previous and new social worker and the looked-after child or young person. Recognise the emotional impact of such changes and provide an opportunity to say goodbye. 
Mentoring 
1.2.18 
Consider programmes (with professional oversight) to support mentoring relationships. For example, by pairing looked-after young people with near peers with care experience to provide positive role models, particularly for looked-after young people with social, emotional and mental wellbeing needs. 
Friendship 
1.2.19 
To support overnight stays with friends, ensure that safeguarding checks are completed in good time so as not to cause a barrier to relationships. 
1.2.20 
Consider providing funding to support contact with friends (for example, for travel or activities), particularly for friendships that existed before the looked-after child or young person entered care. 
Placement stability 
1.2.21 
Provide out-of-hours support services (separate from those provided for carers) for looked-after children and young people to help resolve urgent problems, and tell looked-after children and young people about these options. Services could be provided, for example, through social workers 'on call', voluntary or independent agency helplines or advocacy organisations. 
1.2.22 
Adopt a proactive approach to identify children and young people who may be likely to present out-of-hours (for example, they may show early warning signs such as skipping school, lying or stealing), for whom out-of-hours support could be planned ahead of time. 
1.2.23 
Discuss the priorities and needs of carers sensitively and transparently with the looked-after child or young person in a manner appropriate to developmental age. For example, if placements are at risk of breakdown, social workers should facilitate communication between the carers and the looked-after child or young person (and birth parents if relevant) to try to resolve problems. 
1.2.24 
If a placement changes: 
Discuss the reasons for this with the looked-after child or young person in a way they can understand and that is appropriate to their developmental age. 
Offer the child or young person emotional support, if possible by a practitioner they have an existing relationship with. 
Use ongoing life story work to help them process changes in placement. 
1.2.25 
Provide the new carer with appropriate health information in good time before the new placement starts (for example, the health plan recommendations, any new health concerns, health contacts and upcoming health appointments). 
Serious behavioural problems 
1.2.26 
Consider multidimensional treatment foster care for looked-after adolescents with a history of persistent offending behaviour. 
1.2.27 
For guidance on service design and delivery for learning disabilities and behaviour that challenges, see NICE's guideline on learning disabilities and behaviour that challenges . 
Disorganised attachment 
1.2.28 
For guidance on attachment difficulties, see the NICE guideline on children's attachment . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on supporting positive relationships . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review A: interventions to support care placement stability for looked-after children and young people 
evidence review B: barriers and facilitators for supporting care placement stability among looked-after children and young people 
evidence review C: interventions to support positive relationships for looked-after children, young people and care leavers 
evidence review D: barriers and facilitators for supporting positive relationships among looked-after children and young people 
evidence review F: interventions to promote physical, mental, and emotional health and wellbeing of looked-after children, young people and care leavers 
evidence review G: barriers and facilitators for promoting physical, mental and emotional health and wellbeing of looked-after children and young people and care leavers . 
1.3 Valuing carers 
These recommendations cover support for primary carers , including foster carers , connected carers , key workers in residential care and birth parents (when the looked-after child or young person is placed with the birth parent). 
Supporting and involving carers 
1.3.1 
Involve and value the carer's input in decision making in the broader care team, and keep carers fully informed about a looked-after child or young person's care plan. 
1.3.2 
Provide out-of-hours support services for carers to help resolve urgent problems, for example through social workers working 'on call', emergency duty teams or out-of-hours service, voluntary or independent agency helplines, or carer peer support associations. 
1.3.3 
Ensure that carers log any help sought outside of usual operational hours as part of their routine and urgent reports. 
1.3.4 
Facilitate peer support for carers at accessible times and places, including online if people may find it difficult to attend a physical meeting. 
1.3.5 
As part of the care plan, think about the need for planned respite care (or 'support care') for carers. 
1.3.6 
Ensure that respite (or support) care is used in the looked-after child or young person's best interests and explain this to the looked-after child or young person. For example, make use of short breaks that are fun for the child or young person, such as staying with relatives or extended carer family. 
1.3.7 
Use a respite (or support care) carer who the child or young person is familiar with if possible, and take into account the skills or training needed to meet the looked-after child or young person's assessed need. 
1.3.8 
Keep carers fully informed and updated about the support services available to carers and looked-after children and young people in their local authority. 
1.3.9 
Inform the looked-after child or young person's carers about any interventions used to support the looked-after child or young person, including the purpose of these interventions. 
1.3.10 
For further guidance on support for adult carers, follow the NICE guideline on supporting adult carers . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on supporting and involving carers . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review A: interventions to support care placement stability for looked-after children and young people 
evidence review B: barriers and facilitators for supporting care placement stability among looked-after children and young people . 
Training for carers 
1.3.11 
Plan training for carers so that it is delivered before it is needed. Think about the need for multiagency involvement in training programmes and ensure that the organisations involved agree the source of funding between them. 
1.3.12 
Supervising social workers should work with carers to assess the needs of the looked-after child or young person, to inform and tailor training and development needs for the carers. 
1.3.13 
Provide a schedule of mandatory training for carers, excluding birth parents. Ensure that this training covers: 
Therapeutic, trauma-informed parenting (covering attachment-informed, highly supportive and responsive relational care). 
Safeguarding procedures. 
How to communicate effectively and sensitively (for example, using de-escalation techniques). 
Life story work to promote a positive self-identity, which has a consistent, child-focused and planned approach (see the section on life story work for identity and wellbeing ). 
How to be an educational advocate (this part of the training should be delivered by practitioners from the virtual school ). 
Identifying problems with, and supporting, good oral health, diet and personal hygiene (particularly among those coming into care). 
Encouraging positive relationships and sexual identity (covering issues such as consent, encouraging healthy intimate relationships, 'coming out' and transitioning). 
Self-care for carers, preventing burnout and coping with placements ending. 
The importance of health assessments, supporting attendance and issues of consent for medical treatment. 
Record keeping and sharing the information in the record with the looked-after child or young person in a constructive and positive way, considering the need for confidentiality, and the impact the record may have on the looked-after child or young person. 
Training can be delivered in person (for example, at home or in community group settings) or virtually. 
1.3.14 
Provide targeted support and training for birth parents if reunification is a possibility or if the child or young person is to remain in placement with the birth parent. This should be provided through transition planning with family support teams. 
1.3.15 
Think about providing tailored training for carers if there are specific needs related to race, ethnicity and culture. This could include, for example, understanding and respecting cultural and religious identity (including dietary requirements or preferences), and understanding specific hair and skin care needs. 
1.3.16 
Provide tailored training for carers if there are specific needs relating to special educational needs, long-term health conditions and disabilities, for example sensory and communication needs. Training could be provided through specialist healthcare teams and voluntary organisations. 
1.3.17 
Based on the individual needs and developmental age of the looked-after child or young person, consider more intensive training methods for carers to support the delivery of therapeutic, trauma-informed caregiving. These methods should use video feedback, coaching and observation, role play, and follow-up booster sessions and be delivered by trained facilitators. 
1.3.18 
Ensure that trauma-informed training covers: 
understanding behaviour as a form of communication and as a response to trauma 
understanding, recognising and processing triggers for trauma responses 
understanding attachment and loss. 
1.3.19 
Ensure that trainers for carers are trauma informed and have a good understanding of attachment issues and therapeutic approaches. 
1.3.20 
Ensure that new permanent or long-term carers are trained and prepared so that there is continuity of care and support, including therapeutic support if needed, between placements. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on training for carers . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review A: interventions to support care placement stability for looked-after children and young people 
evidence review B: barriers and facilitators for supporting care placement stability among looked-after children and young people 
evidence review C: interventions to support positive relationships for looked-after children, young people and care leavers . 
1.4 Safeguarding 
1.4.1 
Local authorities should facilitate a multidisciplinary approach to safeguarding looked-after children and young people, recognising that, like other children, looked-after children may need a full safeguarding response despite already being in care. This approach should: 
include all relevant agencies in meetings to address safeguarding concerns 
facilitate the sharing of data between agencies 
seek the views of looked-after children and young people and their carers , to ensure that responses to safeguarding risks are effective and acceptable, for example by coordinating safeguarding responses for siblings in care. 
1.4.2 
Hold safeguarding meetings to bring together practitioners from multiple agencies involved in the care and support of looked-after children and young people, such as: social care; fostering, residential and connected care; education and the virtual school ; healthcare; voluntary agencies; housing services; emergency services; policing; and immigration. 
1.4.3 
Local authorities should seek specialist support to address safeguarding risks outside the home ( contextual safeguarding ), exploitation and children missing from care. This practitioner should lead and facilitate safeguarding meetings and build clear lines of accountability. The practitioner could be, for example, a missing person's coordinator or another trauma-informed specialist with knowledge of exploitation and safeguarding issues in the looked-after population. 
1.4.4 
Assess the safeguarding risk of a looked-after child or young person using data shared across agencies. This could include data on vulnerabilities: 
at the individual level (such as those captured by risk-assessment tools) 
at the group level (red flags specific to subpopulations such as young girls and boys, trafficked children and unaccompanied asylum-seeking children ) 
at the community level (gathered from community-level health and mental health data, area deprivation indexes, number of county lines operating in a single area and area-specific missing person reports). 
1.4.5 
Use training and review meetings to ensure that practitioners and carers working directly with looked-after children and young people are: 
able to recognise critical moments for looked-after people; that is, times when they may be more open to change and receiving help 
aware of the early signs of, and risk factors for, gang involvement, exploitation and going missing 
familiar with how to report concerns. 
1.4.6 
Promote positive relationships (including broader relationships such as those with carers, siblings and practitioners) as the main way to prevent exploitation and children going missing from care (see recommendation 1.2.1 ). 
1.4.7 
Provide tailored support for the looked-after child or young person to prevent exploitation, by addressing issues specific to young girls and boys, trafficked children and unaccompanied asylum-seeking children (for example, addressing issues of self-esteem, domestic abuse, negative relationships and previous exploitation). 
1.4.8 
Review the case files of looked-after children and young people who have been the subject of safeguarding meetings, to help the safeguarding partnership learn and develop future safeguarding responses (or to inform best practice). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on safeguarding . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: barriers and facilitators for promoting physical, mental and emotional health and wellbeing of looked-after children and young people and care leavers . 
1.5 Health and wellbeing 
Building expertise about trauma and raising awareness 
1.5.1 
Ensure that all practitioners working with looked-after children and young people are aware of the impact of trauma (including developmental trauma) and attachment difficulties and appropriate responses to these, to help them build positive relationships and communicate well. 
1.5.2 
Ensure that practitioners and carers working with unaccompanied asylum-seeking children are aware of the issues that affect this group, including health needs, safeguarding issues, language and culturally sensitive care needs, and the danger of going missing. 
1.5.3 
Ensure that there is sufficient specialist professional expertise to support, and provide consultation for, looked-after children and young people with more complex needs. This could be provided through more intensive (responsive) trauma-informed training, or by sharing expertise across agencies. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on building expertise about trauma and raising awareness . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review C: interventions to support positive relationships for looked-after children, young people and care leavers 
evidence review D: barriers and facilitators for supporting positive relationships among looked-after children and young people 
evidence review E: interventions and approaches to support practitioners in completing physical and mental health and wellbeing assessments (and act on findings during the care journey) for looked-after children and young people 
evidence review G: barriers and facilitators for promoting physical, mental and emotional health and wellbeing of looked-after children and young people and care leavers . 
Physical and mental health and wellbeing assessments 
1.5.4 
In line with statutory guidance, when a child or young person enters care, local authorities must ensure that healthcare teams are informed as soon as possible about the legal status of the looked-after child or young person and why they have entered care (within 5 working days, as specified by the Care Planning, Placement and Case Review Regulations 2010 ). Get consent to share this information from an adult with parental responsibility, or from the looked-after child or young person directly if appropriate. 
1.5.5 
When a child or young person enters care, social workers should: 
Make a formal request for the initial health assessment , giving the reasons that the child or young person is coming into the care system. 
Ask for consent from the birth parents (or from another adult with parental responsibility, or from the looked-after young person directly if appropriate) to access and share information from the child health record. 
Ask for consent from the birth parents to share their own health information, and ask them to complete a parental health questionnaire to help with this. If the birth mother has agreed to share her health information, ask the relevant hospital about her health during pregnancy. 
All this information should be available in time for the looked-after child or young person's initial health assessment. 
1.5.6 
Ensure that statutory review health assessments for a looked-after child or young person are carried out by the same healthcare professional each time, if possible. 
1.5.7 
Consider the need for confidential and private access to healthcare for looked-after young people, for example if phone use or internet use are restricted because of safeguarding needs, or when seeking out sexual health advice or treatment. For guidance on one-to-one interventions to prevent sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and contraceptive services, see NICE's guidelines on reducing STIs and contraceptive services . 
1.5.8 
Healthcare professionals should compile a history of the looked-after child or young person's health from the information they hold in the health records and additional information given to healthcare professionals from other teams, to give practitioners and carers a clear sense of their past, present, and likely future physical and mental health needs. 
1.5.9 
Be aware that care leavers are very likely to request access to their health and social care records. Practitioners should ensure that the language used in the records and the way events are captured are sensitive and empathetic. 
1.5.10 
Offer a culturally appropriate, registered interpreter to communicate in person with looked-after children and young people for the initial health assessment if language is a barrier to communication. If language remains a barrier to communication, think about the need for a culturally appropriate, registered interpreter to be available in person for subsequent health and social care assessments. 
1.5.11 
Offer unaccompanied asylum-seeking children tailored initial health assessments that address risks arising from their country of origin and journey to the UK. Include: 
diet and nutrition, including nutritional deficiencies such as vitamin D deficiency 
gastrointestinal symptoms 
oral health 
tuberculosis screening and general immunisation status 
sexual health, tailored to the individual (for example, testing for sexually transmitted diseases; and being aware of signs of assault and abuse, including abuse linked to faith and culture such as female genital mutilation and breast flattening). For guidance on one-to-one interventions to prevent sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and under‑18 conceptions, see NICE's guidelines on reducing STIs and contraceptive services 
other infectious diseases and bloodborne infections, for example HIV and hepatitis testing 
sensory issues not previously identified because of lack of screening, for example hearing, vision or mobility problems 
an assessment of mental health, with referral to specialist mental health teams if indicated 
sleep disturbances. 
1.5.12 
After looked-after children and young people (including babies) have had their initial health assessment, consider the need for an additional specialist mental and emotional health assessment once the looked-after child or young person has begun to form a relationship with the primary carer. This could be, for example, up to a year or by the first review health assessment. 
1.5.13 
Healthcare professionals responsible for the care of looked-after children and young people should review whether care recommendations in the health plan have been completed, particularly if the child or young person has been moved out of area, checking with the professionals concerned across agencies. 
1.5.14 
For guidance on the diagnosis and management of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children and young people, see NICE's guideline on ADHD . 
1.5.15 
For guidance on the recognition, referral and diagnosis of autistic spectrum disorder, see NICE's guideline on autism spectrum disorder in under 19s: recognition, referral and diagnosis . 
1.5.16 
For guidance on the recognition, assessment and treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), see NICE's guideline on PTSD . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on physical and mental health and wellbeing assessments . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: interventions and approaches to support practitioners in completing physical and mental health and wellbeing assessments (and act on findings during the care journey) for looked-after children and young people . 
Mental health and child and adolescent mental health services 
1.5.17 
To avoid delays in care, provide intermediate therapeutic or specialist support for the care network around looked-after children and young people who are on a waiting list for child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS), for example a specialist outreach team. This should not be used as a replacement for CAMHS. 
1.5.18 
Offer a range of dedicated CAMHS that are tailored to the needs of looked-after children and young people – for example, making them longer term, more trauma informed and relationship based. 
1.5.19 
Offer preventive services based on assessed need (see recommendation 1.5.12), with timely delivery to prevent serious mental health problems that need tier 3 or 4 specialist services. 
1.5.20 
Be aware that children moving placements must not lose their place in the waiting list for CAMHS, as there is a statutory right to not lose a place in a waiting list for a health service. 
1.5.21 
Provide specialist, trauma-informed mental health and emotional wellbeing support for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. Take into account cultural sensitivities (for example, the different perspectives of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children about mental health services) and that symptoms of trauma could come to the surface over the long term. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on mental health and child and adolescent mental health services . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review F: interventions to promote physical, mental, and emotional health and wellbeing of looked-after children, young people and care leavers 
evidence review G: barriers and facilitators for promoting physical, mental and emotional health and wellbeing of looked-after children and young people and care leavers . 
Life story work for identity and wellbeing 
1.5.22 
Start life story work as soon as possible after the looked-after child or young person enters care, to support care placement and emotional stability, rather than as an intervention to deliver once placements are stable. 
1.5.23 
Schedule regular, dedicated times for life story work to help the looked-after child or young person make sense of their journey through the care system and beyond, their significant relationships and their identity. 
1.5.24 
Ensure that life story work is done in the setting preferred by the looked-after child or young person, and conducted by a named carer or practitioner with whom they have a continuous and close relationship. This named person may change over the period in care. 
1.5.25 
Include the following in life story work for looked-after children and young people: 
the present – identity, strengths and significant relationships 
the past – reasons for entering care and for any placement breakdowns, important memories and relationships 
the future – building independence, careers, hopes and dreams. 
1.5.26 
Take a flexible approach to life story work, and tailor it to the developmental age and needs of the looked-after child or young person. The content could include life mapping, pictures, art, narratives, and toys or play. 
1.5.27 
Compile life story work in 1 place (such as a ring binder) and build on this in each session. Give the child or young person control over who this is shared with and how it is stored. Help them to choose a safe and secure storage option. 
1.5.28 
Ensure that life story work for looked-after children and young people captures and embraces ethnicity, cultural and religious identity, as well as other personal aspects of identity, for example, sexual identity or disabilities. 
1.5.29 
Ensure that a social worker oversees the life story work if another carer or practitioner is carrying out the work. For example, the social worker may share background information to support the carer or practitioner carrying out life story work, with the looked-after child or young person's consent. 
1.5.30 
Think about and plan how to carry out life story work for looked-after children and young people, with sibling groups, in a manner appropriate to developmental age. This may include: 
preparing siblings for navigating conversations with older siblings or siblings not in care 
deciding whether it is appropriate to deliver life story work sessions in a sibling group or individually 
determining whether conversations will include sensitive information. 
1.5.31 
Ensure that the experience and skillset of the practitioner or carer delivering life story work for looked-after children and young people is sufficient to deliver good quality work, particularly in complex situations. 
1.5.32 
Explain to the looked-after child or young person's wider support network that life story work is ongoing, so that they can support it as needed. For example, if sensitive or emotional information has been discussed with the child or young person during life story work, schools may need to be informed. 
1.5.33 
Plan regular reviews of how life story work may affect contact arrangements and the looked-after child or young person's relationship with their birth family. Use information from these reviews to adjust the support provided. This could include, for example, involving birth families in life story work to encourage consistencies in narratives explored, and helping the looked-after child or young person with reframing previous relationships. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on life story work for identity and wellbeing . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: barriers and facilitators for supporting care placement stability among looked-after children and young people . 
Relationships and wellbeing activities 
1.5.34 
Promote a positive relationship between the primary carer and the looked-after child or young person as the main way to support the social, emotional and mental wellbeing of the looked-after child or young person. 
1.5.35 
When making safer caring plans , think about a looked-after child or young person's need for: 
Physical touch and affection as a part of a healthy relationship with male and female primary carers. Take into account any adverse childhood experiences. 
Play, particularly for babies and young children. 
1.5.36 
Develop the interests of looked-after children and young people to help them develop their identity and to find peer support and new friendships. Do this by helping them to find, and setting aside time, for outings, interest groups and other activities that will help them to build skills. These may include: 
one-to-one activities accompanied by the primary carer (at least initially) to promote opportunities for listening and positive relationship building (for example, visiting outdoor green spaces such as parks) 
funded, supported and facilitated activities (such as school clubs, for example making use of the pupil premium grant as determined in the personal education plan ) specifically to address emotional health and wellbeing needs 
activities or outings to support identity, for example community support groups, cultural or religious activities, events or festivals 
activities to bring together children, carers and practitioners in informal settings, for example group outdoor activities. 
1.5.37 
For guidance on managing obesity and promoting physical activity, follow NICE's guidelines on overweight and obesity management and physical activity for children and young people . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on relationships and wellbeing activities . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: barriers and facilitators for promoting physical, mental and emotional health and wellbeing of looked-after children and young people and care leavers . 
1.6 Learning and education 
Readiness for starting or changing school 
1.6.1 
Consider the following to support social competence and emotional stability in looked-after children: 
early years education, including playgroups 
other opportunities to encourage child-led play. 
1.6.2 
The virtual school should plan bespoke, individual transition support for supporting readiness for school and resilience in looked-after children and young people moving between schools and settings (including those moving out of care to permanency ). This includes: 
moving from preschool to primary school 
moving from primary to secondary school 
moving in the middle of a school year 
returning to school after an extended absence. 
Individual transition support for school moves may include structured visits to the school beforehand, school preparation for the carer , meeting the designated teacher, catch-up support and handover between designated teachers (for example, drawing from weekly diaries and life story work ). 
1.6.3 
Think about providing multidisciplinary specialist support for transition between school placements, tailored to the looked-after child or young person's needs and alongside or part of the virtual school and the team around the child – for example, including healthcare professionals in transition support for looked-after people who have health conditions that affect their education. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on readiness for starting or changing school . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: interventions to support readiness for school in looked-after children and young people . 
Support in schools 
1.6.4 
Inform looked-after children and young people and their carers of: 
their rights to educational support and 
the purpose of the pupil premium grant for education and how it is distributed by the virtual school. 
1.6.5 
Schools should ensure that behavioural management policies reflect trauma-informed practices and cover attachment issues. 
1.6.6 
Schools should ensure that the designated teacher is a consistent advocate for the looked-after child or young person's educational progress. 
1.6.7 
The designated teacher should: 
collaborate with school staff (who the looked-after child or young person is most comfortable with), primary carers and named practitioners in the personal education plan and the education health and care plan 
provide timely assessment and ongoing monitoring of learning needs, particularly in times of transition between educational placements 
refer for specialist support when needed (for example, educational or clinical psychology), and be aware of the impact of trauma on learning and behaviour 
be aware of special educational needs and link up with the special educational needs coordinator 
liaise with specialist looked-after children nurse teams if a health problem has been identified that affects education 
work to ensure that young people are able to access the most appropriate and inspirational educational opportunities, especially post‑16 
have regular one-to-one informal conversations with the looked-after child or young person and their primary carer, at a frequency informed by the looked-after child or young person. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on support in schools . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review G: barriers and facilitators for promoting physical, mental and emotional health and wellbeing of looked-after children and young people and care leavers 
evidence review K: barriers to, and facilitators for, supporting learning needs of looked-after children and young people . 
Virtual schools 
1.6.8 
Ensure that the virtual school includes all of the following: 
early years expertise 
a special educational needs coordinator 
a post‑16 coordinator. 
1.6.9 
Ensure that the virtual school covers early years provision, incorporating information from nurseries and health visitors (such as the Ages and Stages Questionnaire ) and other involved health services. Complete the early years personal education plan and link it to the foundation stage profile if possible. 
1.6.10 
Ensure that the virtual school special educational needs coordinator is trained in the special educational needs and disability legal framework so they can help looked-after children and young people access all the provision and support that the law entitles them to. 
1.6.11 
The post‑16 coordinator in the virtual school should help looked-after young people navigate opportunities for training and education (including further and higher education, and apprenticeships) and available funding streams to support these. 
1.6.12 
Ensure that the expertise in the virtual school reflects the needs and profile of the school-aged population it serves. For example, the population may include unaccompanied asylum-seeking children , trafficked children, children with a history of exploitation, and looked-after children on remand or in secure settings. 
1.6.13 
Make virtual school heads the key enabler for service collaboration and a link between named specialists in the following: 
social workers 
independent reviewing officers 
school admissions and further or higher education admissions 
other virtual schools if a looked-after child or young person is placed out of area 
designated teachers 
school improvement services 
designated practitioners working with looked-after children and young people who have a health need, including mental health services or therapeutic services. 
1.6.14 
Local authorities should simplify and merge meetings about looked-after children and young people if possible. For example, education, health and care plan meetings for looked-after children and young people and personal education plan meetings may benefit from occurring together. 
1.6.15 
Include healthcare professionals in multiagency review meetings for looked-after children and young people who have additional health needs that affect their education. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on virtual schools . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: barriers to, and facilitators for, supporting learning needs of looked-after children and young people . 
Improving educational outcomes 
1.6.16 
To improve educational outcomes, such as literacy and numeracy, in primary-school-aged looked-after children: 
offer paired reading 
consider individual or small group tutoring (for example, by trained foster carers , trained volunteers or professional tutors). 
1.6.17 
Ensure that interventions for improving education in secondary-school-aged looked-after young people are regularly evaluated to check they are appropriate for the user and effective as part of the personal education plan. 
1.6.18 
Assess the language and communication needs of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children: 
Offer English language lessons to those who are not fluent in English. 
Consider intensive English lessons for those with no previous knowledge of English. 
1.6.19 
Consider the need for virtual schools to increase specialist education support for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children – for example, by providing designated staff members, and additional English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) support. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on improving educational outcomes . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review I: interventions to support learning needs for school-aged looked-after children and young people 
evidence review K: barriers to, and facilitators for, supporting learning needs of looked-after children and young people . 
Data collection, sharing and publication in education 
1.6.20 
The responsible local authorities should collect, publish and monitor information on educational provision for their looked-after children and young people, in particular those missing education (for example, those in schools that do not have a Department for Education number, or those on permanent or fixed-term exclusions). This may include unaccompanied asylum-seeking children and those with a history, or high risk of, exploitation. 
1.6.21 
Local authorities should agree and share a strategy for reducing the number of looked-after children and young people missing from education. 
1.6.22 
Local authorities, working with the virtual school, should develop a mechanism to check the spending of the total pupil premium grant, beyond the information recorded in the personal education plan, and evaluate the impact of the spending on the looked after child or young person. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on data collection, sharing and publication in education . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: barriers to, and facilitators for, supporting learning needs of looked-after children and young people . 
Further and higher education 
1.6.23 
Virtual schools should collaborate with universities and colleges to support looked-after young people to access higher or further education. Ways to do this could include: 
residential experiences and visits to university or college campuses, mentoring by near peers in higher or further education, and coaching 
local opportunities such as university access schemes and college support programmes 
encouraging self-identification as a care leaver, once in university or college, to help them access support such as financial bursaries. 
1.6.24 
Ensure that looked-after young people are aware of the possibility of re-entering education when older (up to age 25) with the financial support of their local authority. 
1.6.25 
Personal advisers , with the support of the post‑16 coordinator, should help care leavers to understand the funding and support available for re-entering education, as part of the care offer, once they have left care. 
1.6.26 
Virtual schools should support a looked-after young person's entry into careers and training. Ways to do this could include providing: 
careers support and advice 
current local opportunities such as work experience placements, apprenticeships and internships (particularly those targeted at looked-after young people and care leavers). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on further and higher education . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: interventions to support entry into further or higher education or training in looked-after children and young people . 
1.7 Transition between care placements and to permanent placements 
These recommendations cover support for all permanent carers , including long-term foster carers , special guardians , connected carers , adopters, key workers in residential care and reunified birth parents. 
Before transition 
1.7.1 
When planning transition between care placements, social workers should aim to have a good match between the permanent carers and the looked-after child or young person: 
assess the child or young person's case history and care needs, and the carers' strengths, support and training needs (including the length of time needed for training), then 
discuss relationship dynamics with the looked-after child or young person and their prospective carers. 
1.7.2 
During the transition period, support the foster carer and permanent carer relationship. Help to manage foster carer expectations during the planning stage (for example, the need for the permanent carer to be in the foster carer's house at times, using non-judgemental supportive language with new carers and understanding the emotional challenges for the foster carer of 'letting go'). 
1.7.3 
In the planning stage, discuss the need for longer-term contact and longer-term contact arrangements with the current foster carer, for example contact by letter or email or meeting up once the looked-after child or young person has settled in their new placement. 
1.7.4 
Encourage and help the permanent carer's family and support network , including other children in the home, to be involved when a looked-after child or young person moves into their new placement – for example, by offering a family and friends training day before the placement. 
1.7.5 
Consider support, by trained staff, for birth parents with substance and alcohol misuse to support reunification. If the support is given, carry it out alongside court processes, such as family drug and alcohol courts. 
1.7.6 
Think about providing relational, emotional and mental health support for birth parents and families, alongside court processes, to support reunification. 
1.7.7 
Continue mental health support and support for drug and alcohol abstinence after reunification. 
1.7.8 
Consider concurrent planning to speed up the transition to permanent placements. If concurrent planning is used, ensure that carers and birth parents are well informed about the risk of late changes to the permanency plan. 
1.7.9 
For guidance on support for drug and alcohol abstinence and behaviour change, follow NICE's guidance on lifestyle and wellbeing . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on before transition between care placements and to permanent placements . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review L: interventions to support looked-after children and young people transitioning out of care to living with adoptive or birth parents or special guardians, or into connected care 
evidence review M: barriers to, and facilitators for, supporting looked-after children and young people in transition out of care to living with their adoptive or birth parents or special guardians, or into connected care . 
During transition 
1.7.10 
During transition to a new permanent or long-term placement, think about the need for a more integrated experience for looked-after children (including non-verbal children) and young people that takes into account previous significant caregiving relationships. This could be achieved, for example, by creating opportunities for current and new carers to meet, developing positive carer-to-carer relationships and sharing information (such as familiar routines, emotional responses and diet) before the placement move. 
1.7.11 
When a looked-after child or young person moves between care placements or out of care to permanent placements, ensure that: 
contact support takes into account the need for continuity with their existing social network (for example, previous friendships), especially if the care or educational placement is in a new area and 
the transition period allows sufficient time for new social connections to form and for coming to terms with the loss of previous relationships. 
1.7.12 
To ensure that the permanency process is focused on the looked-after child or young person, set aside time for 'checking in' with them. Checking in should consist of careful observation and listening, writing a record of the conversation, and sharing the perspective of the looked-after child or young person to feed into shared decision making about transition arrangements. 
1.7.13 
In line with statutory guidance, advocacy services must be provided with communication support. The primary carer should also be present during check-ins, particularly for non-verbal children and young people, and children and young people with learning difficulties. 
1.7.14 
During transition to any new placement, social workers should give prospective carers a profile of the child and their care journey as a history of the care the looked-after child or young person has received. The information can be obtained from the statutory health reports, reports from school and the social worker's assessment. 
1.7.15 
Give all new carers a history of the looked-after child or young person's care. Create a summary for ease of reading with references to sections that give more detail. Gain consent for information that involves third parties and share only what is directly relevant. Include: 
Risk factors for placement instability and long-term physical and emotional health, such as: 
family health history 
previous exposures to drug or substance use, domestic violence and abuse, or neglect 
other medical history, including antenatal health problems and antenatal exposure to alcohol or illicit drugs (see recommendation 1.5.4 ) 
significant relationships and previous significant conflicts in these relationships (especially concerning contact) 
significant negative events, for example behaviour with potential for harm to others (with context and timeline of previous events) 
previous placement moves and reasons for them. 
Protective factors to build on, from life story work : 
strengths and hopes for the future 
significant positive relationships with family members, friends and adults 
how behaviours have been successfully supported in previous settings 
faith, communities and religion 
routines 
'things that are enjoyed', such as games, shopping and favourite food 
interests, activities and achievements. 
1.7.16 
For emergency care placements that become long-term placements, review what information the carer has been given about the child or young person, and give them more if needed. 
1.7.17 
Ensure that there is continuity of the care practitioners who help in the handover of information for new carers, if possible. 
1.7.18 
Ensure that there is continuity of education (through virtual schools with oversight of a virtual school head) when a looked-after child or young person is placed out of their local authority area. Ensure that the current school provides a handover of information to the new school as part of the personal education plan . 
1.7.19 
Ensure that there is continuity of healthcare for the looked-after child or young person so that any physical and mental health and wellbeing support can continue in the new placement. This includes making sure that any ongoing referrals and existing specialist care are transferred to healthcare services in the new location, before their move to a new placement. 
1.7.20 
When supporting adoptive parents or other carers, recognise that they may still be learning to parent. Use non-judgemental language and ensure that they are aware of their rights to receive support. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on during transition between care placements and to permanent placements . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: barriers to, and facilitators for, supporting looked-after children and young people in transition out of care to living with their adoptive or birth parents or special guardians, or into connected care . 
After transition 
1.7.21 
When social workers give information about a looked-after child or young person's care history to the new carer, they should: 
involve the looked-after child or young person, if appropriate and the child or young person is willing, drawing from continuous life story work 
think about involving the child or young person in sharing information, after enough time has passed for a relationship of trust to form with the new carer. 
1.7.22 
Ensure that the looked-after child or young person can keep in contact with their previous carers and friends after the placement move, if the child or young person wants to and would benefit from it. 
1.7.23 
Agencies should seek feedback from carers and adopters and the child or young person to improve their transition services, after the adoption order is made. 
1.7.24 
Facilitate peer support for permanent carers – for example, by setting up and moderating social media networks and fun group outings for face-to-face peer support. 
1.7.25 
Ask experienced volunteer permanent carers to help permanent carers with strategies to manage more specialist problems – for example, when there is emotional distance in the relationship between adoptive parent and child, and with looked-after children and young people who have severe behavioural or mental health problems, or special educational needs. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on after transition between care placements and to permanent placements . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: barriers to, and facilitators for, supporting looked-after children and young people in transition out of care to living with their adoptive or birth parents or special guardians, or into connected care . 
1.8 Transition out of care to independence 
Extended care 
1.8.1 
Encourage and support young people leaving care to stay in their current care placement until at least age 18. Explore the possibility of staying with current carers beyond age 18. 
1.8.2 
Take into account the increased risk to young people (aged 16 to 17) posed by breakdowns in placement that lead to moves into inappropriate housing. Whenever possible, avoid using unregulated housing, particularly for young people at higher risk of exploitation or risk-taking behaviour. If a move to unregulated housing is planned, thoroughly document the risks and the plans to mitigate these, and review this regularly. 
Needs assessment 
1.8.3 
Personal advisers , working with social workers, should assess the needs of looked-after young people when transitioning out of care to independence. Take into account: 
previous life story work 
problem-solving skills and practical skills, including life skills such as financial literacy, budgeting and household management 
physical and mental health support and long-term health needs, for example managing treatments and appointments 
education, training and employment 
financial resources 
communication needs 
social network (assessing gaps, connectedness, isolation, and both negative and supportive relationships). 
1.8.4 
Based on the needs assessment, consider providing the following support for care leavers: 
Access to health services, including registering with a GP, dentist, optician, sexual health services and therapists (for those with complex healthcare needs), and extending access to CAMHS (to support continuity of care) or alternative emotional and wellbeing services such as online support, face-to-face counselling or group work. If needed, continue services beyond age 18 until care has been transferred to adult services. 
Support for gaps in social network. 
Life skills training. 
Support for pregnancy and parenting. 
Job preparation services, job searching and career advice. 
Flexible funding to support career development, for example for specialist equipment. 
Suitable and ongoing accommodation (through the leaving care team working together with other housing services), for example supported housing. 
1.8.5 
Provide the following services to give care leavers a safety net: 
drop-in services 
more frequent meetings with their personal adviser, if the care leaver wants them 
facilitated peer support groups. 
Plans and support for care leavers 
1.8.6 
Tell care leavers and their primary carers: 
about the rights of care leavers to statutory support (related to care-leaver status such as child in care and relevant child support) and extended support from age 18 to 25 (including reopening pathway planning and contact with the local authority) 
that care leavers can receive the full level of support to re-enter education up to age 25. 
1.8.7 
Explicitly outline the support available to care leavers in a care offer, and ensure that this can be accessed easily by care leavers up to age 25. 
1.8.8 
Consider using virtual meetings to help meet the needs of care leavers who are living outside of their responsible authority. 
1.8.9 
Schedule pathway plan reviews to occur near significant milestones if possible, for example education, training or employment application deadlines. 
1.8.10 
Explain to care leavers and their primary carers how the pathway plan works, and the care leaver's rights associated with pathway planning – for example, that they can request an additional pathway plan review. 
1.8.11 
Tell care leavers and their primary carers of the rights of care leavers to advocacy services, to ensure that they receive the statutory provision they are entitled to and that advocacy services are provided in good time to support them with significant milestones. 
1.8.12 
When developing pathway plans for care leavers, include clear timeframes for actions, and who is responsible for completing the action. 
1.8.13 
Quality assure and review pathway plans for care leavers to ensure that improvements in outcomes are achieved. 
1.8.14 
Personal advisers should tell care leavers about services available in their area to support independence. These could include work experience opportunities, apprenticeships and college support. 
1.8.15 
For further guidance on transition from child to adult services, particularly for those with complex health needs and disabilities, follow NICE's guideline on transition from children's to adults' services for young people using health or social care services . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on transition out of care to independence . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review N: interventions and approaches to support looked-after young people transitioning out of care into independent living 
evidence review O: barriers to, and facilitators for, supporting and developing looked-after young people to transition out of care into independent living . 
Support for care leavers in further and higher education 
1.8.16 
Consider the need for extended care beyond age 18 for care leavers: 
in higher and further education 
with special educational needs and disabilities. 
1.8.17 
Virtual school heads should take into account educational opportunities for care leavers beyond traditional further or higher education when deciding whether to extend support. 
1.8.18 
For care leavers who move away to college or university, ensure that there is continuity of housing during holidays, with meaningful social support. This support could include 'buddying' systems for peer support, mentoring from older student volunteers on campus, and other social opportunities for care leavers to tackle isolation during the holidays. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on support for care leavers in further and higher education . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review N: interventions and approaches to support looked-after young people transitioning out of care into independent living 
evidence review O: barriers to, and facilitators for, supporting and developing looked-after young people to transition out of care into independent living . 
Feedback to improve services 
1.8.19 
Encourage children and young people in care and care leavers to give feedback about their care placement and the services they receive. This could be done, for example, through children in care councils, care leaver forums and surveys. 
1.8.20 
When seeking feedback, specifically seek out the views of children and young people who are looked after out of area. 
1.8.21 
Include feedback in decision making to improve services. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on feedback to improve services . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review N: interventions and approaches to support looked-after young people transitioning out of care into independent living 
evidence review O: barriers to, and facilitators for, supporting and developing looked-after young people to transition out of care into independent living . 
1.9 Forum for strategic leadership and best practice 
1.9.1 
Use forums to help communication and bring together expertise and leadership from all agencies providing care for looked-after children and young people, as well as representatives of looked-after children and young people and their carers , and care leavers. 
1.9.2 
Use forums for looked-after children and young people to highlight examples of exemplary practice, review recent research, align and improve tools used for health and risk assessments, educate practitioners , understand one another's roles and responsibilities (and identify important gaps in provision of services), standardise language (for example, job titles and the names of risk-assessment tools and procedures) and agree a partnership approach to practice. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on forum for strategic leadership and best practice . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: interventions and approaches to support practitioners in completing physical and mental health and wellbeing assessments (and act on findings during the care journey) for looked-after children and young people . 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline. For other definitions see the NICE glossary and the Think Local Act Personal Care and Support Jargon Buster . 
Ages and Stages Questionnaire 
The Ages and Stages Questionnaire provides developmental and social–emotional screening for children between birth and age 6. It draws on parents' knowledge and is widely used in practice to pinpoint developmental progress and catch developmental delays in young children. 
Attachment 
A deep and long-lasting emotional bond between 2 people. For example, it includes the child seeking to be close to their caregiver when they feel upset or threatened, with the caregiver responding sensitively and appropriately to their needs. Attachment disorder is a recognised mental disorder that affects a very small minority of children experiencing attachment problems. Insecure attachment patterns and disorganised attachment are more common and are indicators of possible dysfunction in a child's attachment system that can lead to poor outcomes. 
Carer 
The primary carer of the looked-after child or young person – that is, the adult who has primary responsibility for the day-to-day care of the looked-after child or young person. 
Care network 
The carers and professionals who support the looked-after child or young person, including, for example, foster carers, social workers, healthcare professionals and educational professionals. 
Concurrent planning 
Usually for babies and young children who are likely to need adoption but who have a chance of being reunited with their birth family. In concurrent planning, concurrent carers are approved as both foster and adoptive parents. They act as foster carers while the courts decide whether or not a child can return to their birth family. During this time, the children see their parents regularly in supervised contact centres and the concurrent carers support the birth family's efforts to regain the care for their child. 
Connected carers 
Relatives, friends or other people who have a pre-existing relationship with the looked-after child or young person. If a child or young person cannot live with their parents, connected carers can become their approved foster carers. The child formally remains a looked-after child or young person. 
Contact supervisors 
The role of a contact supervisor is to unobtrusively observe contact between looked-after children and young people and their parents or other family members during their arranged visits, to ensure that all contact is safe and positive. 
Contextual safeguarding 
Seeks to recognise the risks to the child or young person that occur outside the home and respond to these to keep them safe. The risks can include violence and abuse from, for example, the person's neighbourhood or school, or social media. 
Foster carers 
Foster carers work alongside a team of practitioners to provide looked-after children and young people with full-time care in the foster carer's home. Foster care may be a temporary arrangement, with children and young people moving on to a permanent placement or returning to their own birth families. Children and young people may also live in long-term foster care placements if a return home is not possible. 
Health plan 
Part of each looked-after child and young person's care plan. It is written after the initial and review health assessments. Health needs or concerns are identified and actions are formulated into the health plan to address the health concern. It is incorporated into the child's care plan. The health plan is reviewed after each subsequent health assessment and at the child's looked-after review, or as circumstances change, to ensure that health actions have been completed. 
Initial health assessment 
A statutory health assessment for looked-after children and young people that must be completed within 20 working days of coming into care. It must be completed by a doctor who is registered with the General Medical Council and holds a licence to practise. 
Life story work 
A social work intervention that aims to help children and young people in care begin to understand and accept their personal history and future. Life story books are often used to give a visual aid and reminder of important events or feelings. 
Multidimensional treatment foster care 
Multidimensional treatment foster care (now called Treatment Foster Care Oregon) is a solo foster placement with a specially trained foster family for between 9 and 12 months. It includes intensive support from a multidisciplinary team, with 24‑hour support from the programme supervisor. The intention is to change behaviour through promoting positive role models. During the placement, the young person's behaviour is closely monitored and good behaviour is rewarded. Family therapy is provided for birth parents, and they are taught the same strategies in preparation for reuniting them with their child. Also known as intensive fostering. 
Non-verbal 
Not yet able or unable to talk – for example, because they are too young or they have a disability. 
Paired reading 
In paired reading, looked-after children read alongside a partner, such as their primary carer. This helps the child practise their spelling, comprehension and pronunciation. Attentive and responsive feedback by the carer throughout helps the child to achieve reading fluency. 
Personal adviser 
Local authorities provide personal advisers to care leavers up until they reach the age of 25. The personal adviser ensures that a care leaver is given the correct level of support to achieve independence. They should have a practical knowledge of the issues facing care leavers as they make their transition into adulthood and the legal requirements for support. 
Personal education plan 
This is a document describing a course of action to help a looked-after child or young person reach their full academic and life potential. All children in care must have a personal education plan as part of their care plan. It is a legal requirement for every young person in care of statutory school age to have their personal education plan reviewed at least 3 times each academic year. 
Permanency 
The conditions that lead to a child or young person experiencing security and continuity in their relationships, particularly those of belonging to a committed family. In a permanency plan, a looked-after child or young person is assessed and prepared for long-term care that meets their needs, and takes into account their wishes and feelings. In a care and placement order, it has been agreed that a child or young person will not return home to their birth family, and parental rights and responsibilities are transferred to another carer, for example an adoptive parent. 
Practitioner 
A paid professional providing direct care for looked-after children and young people. Practitioners may include social workers, independent review officers, educational professionals, healthcare professionals and therapists. 
Prosocial 
Prosocial behaviour is social behaviour that benefits other people, characterised by actions that show concern for the feelings and welfare of other people – for example, helping, cooperating and sharing. 
Randomised controlled trial 
Trials in which participants (or clusters) are randomly allocated to receive either intervention or control. If well implemented, randomisation should ensure that intervention and control groups differ only in their exposure to treatment. 
Safer caring plan 
Enables foster carers to consider potentially abusive or risky situations that may arise in the foster home and create a plan to minimise risks. 
Shared decision making 
A joint process in which a healthcare professional works together with a person to reach a decision about care. It involves choosing tests and treatments based both on evidence and on the person's individual preferences, beliefs and values. It makes sure the person understands the risks, benefits and possible consequences of different options through discussion and information sharing. 
Special guardians 
People or a person appointed by a Special Guardianship Order for children and young people who would benefit from a legally secure placement but cannot live with their birth parents. A birth parent cannot apply to discharge the order unless they have the permission of the court to do so, but the order does not end the legal relationship between the child and the birth parents (as in adoption). 
Staying put 
When a foster placement becomes a 'staying put' arrangement, the young person staying put is no longer a looked-after child but is a care leaver. They are therefore entitled to support (for example, a personal adviser) as a care leaver but will remain in the foster home. However, the former foster carer is no longer officially a foster carer for that young adult. 
Support network 
This covers carers, professionals, friends, birth family and any other supportive adults who provide formal or informal support to the looked-after child or young person. 
Unaccompanied asylum-seeking children 
Children and young people who have left their country of origin without the care or protection of their parents or carers and are seeking asylum in the UK. 
Virtual school 
The virtual school champions progress and educational attainment of looked-after children and young people in the local authority. The virtual school is not 'attended' but provides coordination of educational services for looked-after children and young people at a strategic and operational level. Looked-after children and young people within the local authority remain the responsibility of the school at which they are enrolled. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Context 
Back to top
