Overview | Sore throat (acute): antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Ear, nose and throat conditions
Sore throat (acute): antimicrobial prescribing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG84 
Published: 
26 January 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Summary of the evidence 
Other considerations 
Terms used in the guideline 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline sets out an antimicrobial prescribing strategy for acute sore throat. It aims to limit antibiotic use and reduce antimicrobial resistance. Acute sore throat is often caused by a virus, lasts for about a week, and most people get better without antibiotics. Withholding antibiotics rarely leads to complications. 
February 2023: We have reinstated our prescribing guidance for children and young people, because the December 2022 NHSE interim guidance on group A streptococcus that replaced it has been withdrawn. See Group A Streptococcus: withdrawal of NHSE interim guidance . 
See a  3-page visual summary of the recommendations, including a table to support prescribing decisions. 
There is also a NICE guideline on antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
managing acute sore throat , including advice when an antibiotic is not needed 
choice of antibiotic  when a back-up or immediate prescription is needed 
self-care 
Who is it for? 
Health professionals 
Adults with acute sore throat and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guidance. 
This guideline partially updates and replaces NICE guideline CG69 (Published July 2008).  
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Acute respiratory infection in over 16s: initial assessment and management including virtual wards (hospital at home) 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
