Overview | Alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis and management of physical complications | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Liver conditions
Alcohol-use disorders
Alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis and management of physical complications
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG100 
Published: 
02 June 2010
Last updated: 
12 April 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers care for adults and young people (aged 10 years and older) with physical health problems that are completely or partly caused by an alcohol-use disorder. It aims to improve the health of people with alcohol-use disorders by providing recommendations on managing acute alcohol withdrawal and treating alcohol-related conditions. 
NICE has also produced guidelines on alcohol-use disorders: prevention and alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis, assessment and management of harmful drinking and alcohol dependence . 
Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapies: In September 2024, supplies of pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy were disrupted, so availability varies. Use the Specialist Pharmacy Service’s prescribing and ordering available pancreatic enzyme replacement therapies resource and tool to help identify equivalent licensed products. 
MHRA advice on antiepileptic drugs in pregnancy: In May 2021, we linked to the updated  MHRA safety advice on antiepileptic drugs in pregnancy in the recommendation on treatment for acute alcohol withdrawal. 
Last reviewed: 23 January 2019 
We checked this guideline and are updating it, see the surveillance decision for more information. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
acute alcohol withdrawal 
Wernicke’s encephalopathy 
alcohol-related liver disease 
alcohol-related pancreatitis 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with alcohol-use disorders, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis and management 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
