Recommendations | Renal and ureteric stones: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Kidney conditions
Renal stones
Renal and ureteric stones: assessment and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG118 
Published: 
08 January 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Diagnostic imaging
1.2 Pain management
1.3 Medical expulsive therapy
1.4 Stenting before shockwave lithotripsy
1.5 Surgical treatments (including shockwave lithotripsy)
1.6 Stenting after ureteroscopy for adults with ureteric stones less than 20 mm
1.7 Metabolic testing
1.8 Preventing recurrence
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in  NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Diagnostic imaging 
1.1.1 
Offer urgent (within 24 hours of presentation) low-dose non-contrast CT to adults with suspected renal colic. If a woman is pregnant, offer ultrasound instead of CT. 
1.1.2 
Offer urgent (within 24 hours of presentation) ultrasound as first-line imaging for children and young people with suspected renal colic. 
1.1.3 
If there is still uncertainty about the diagnosis of renal colic after ultrasound for children and young people, consider low-dose non-contrast CT. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on diagnostic imaging . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: imaging for diagnosis . 
1.2 Pain management 
1.2.1 
Offer a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) by any route as first-line treatment for adults, children and young people with suspected renal colic. 
1.2.2 
Offer intravenous paracetamol to adults, children and young people with suspected renal colic if NSAIDs are contraindicated or are not giving sufficient pain relief. 
1.2.3 
Consider opioids for adults, children and young people with suspected renal colic if both NSAIDs and intravenous paracetamol are contraindicated or are not giving sufficient pain relief. 
1.2.4 
Do not offer antispasmodics to adults, children and young people with suspected renal colic. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on pain management . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: pain management . 
1.3 Medical expulsive therapy 
1.3.1 
Consider alpha blockers for adults, children and young people with distal ureteric stones less than 10 mm. 
In January 2019, this was an off-label use of alpha blockers. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on medical expulsive therapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: medical expulsive therapy . 
1.4 Stenting before shockwave lithotripsy 
1.4.1 
Do not offer pre-treatment stenting to adults having shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) for ureteric or renal stones. 
1.4.2 
Consider pre-treatment stenting for children and young people having SWL for renal staghorn stones. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on stenting before shockwave lithotripsy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: stents before surgery . 
1.5 Surgical treatments (including shockwave lithotripsy) 
Renal stones 
1.5.1 
Consider watchful waiting for asymptomatic renal stones in adults, children and young people if: 
the stone is less than 5 mm or 
the stone is larger than 5 mm and the person (or their family or carers, as appropriate) agrees to watchful waiting after an informed discussion of the possible risks and benefits. 
1.5.2 
Follow the recommendations in table 1 for surgical treatment (including SWL) of renal stones in adults, children and young people. 
Table 1 Surgical treatment (including SWL) of renal stones in adults, children and young people 
Stone type and size 
Treatment for adults (16 years and over) 
Treatment for children and young people (under 16 years) 
Renal stone less than 10 mm 
Offer SWL 
Consider URS: 
if there are contraindications for SWL or 
if a previous course of SWL has failed or 
because of anatomical reasons, SWL is not indicated 
Consider PCNL if SWL and URS have failed to treat the current stone or they are not an option 
Consider URS or SWL 
Consider PCNL if: 
URS or SWL have failed or 
for anatomical reasons, PCNL is the more favourable option 
Renal stone 10 to 20 mm 
Consider URS or SWL 
Consider PCNL if URS or SWL have failed 
Consider URS, SWL or PCNL 
Renal stone larger than 20 mm, including staghorn stones 
Offer PCNL 
Consider URS if PCNL is not an option 
Consider URS, SWL or PCNL 
Abbreviations: PCNL, percutaneous nephrolithotomy; SWL, shockwave lithotripsy; URS, ureteroscopy. 
Use clinical judgement when considering mini or standard PCNL for children and young people under 16 years with renal stones greater than 10 mm, including staghorn stones. 
Use clinical judgement when considering tubeless, mini or standard PCNL, and supine and prone positions for adults (16 years and over) with renal stones greater than 20 mm, including staghorn stones. 
Ureteric stones 
1.5.3 
Follow the recommendations in table 2 for surgical treatment (including SWL) of ureteric stones in adults, children and young people. 
Table 2 Surgical treatment (including SWL) of ureteric stones in adults, children and young people 
Stone type and size 
Treatment for adults (16 years and over) 
Treatment for children and young people (under 16 years) 
Ureteric stone less than 10 mm 
Offer SWL 
Consider URS if: 
stone clearance is not possible within 4 weeks with SWL or 
there are contraindications for SWL or 
the stone is not targetable with SWL or 
a previous course of SWL has failed 
Consider URS or SWL 
Ureteric stone 10 to 20 mm 
Offer URS 
Consider SWL if local facilities allow stone clearance within 4 weeks 
Consider PCNL for impacted proximal stones when URS has failed 
Consider URS or SWL 
Abbreviations: PCNL, percutaneous nephrolithotomy; SWL, shockwave lithotripsy; URS, ureteroscopy. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgical treatments (including shockwave lithotripsy) . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: surgical treatments . 
Timing of surgical treatment (including SWL) for adults with ureteric stones and renal colic 
1.5.4 
Offer surgical treatment (including SWL) to adults with ureteric stones and renal colic within 48 hours of diagnosis or readmission, if: 
pain is ongoing and not tolerated or 
the stone is unlikely to pass. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on timing of surgical treatment . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: timing of surgery . 
Medical expulsive therapy as an adjunct to SWL for adults with ureteric stones less than 10 mm 
1.5.5 
Consider alpha blockers as adjunctive therapy for adults having SWL for ureteric stones less than 10 mm. 
In January 2019, this was an off-label use of alpha blockers. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on medical expulsive therapy as adjunctive to shockwave lithotripsy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: medical expulsive therapy . 
1.6 Stenting after ureteroscopy for adults with ureteric stones less than 20 mm 
1.6.1 
Do not routinely offer post-treatment stenting to adults who have had ureteroscopy for ureteric stones less than 20 mm. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on stenting after ureteroscopy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: stents after surgery . 
1.7 Metabolic testing 
1.7.1 
Consider stone analysis for adults with ureteric or renal stones. 
1.7.2 
Measure serum calcium for adults with ureteric or renal stones. 
1.7.3 
Consider referring children and young people with ureteric or renal stones to a paediatric nephrologist or paediatric urologist with expertise in this area for assessment and metabolic investigations. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on metabolic testing . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: metabolic investigations . 
1.8 Preventing recurrence 
Dietary and lifestyle advice 
1.8.1 
Discuss diet and fluid intake with the person (and their family or carers, as appropriate), and advise: 
adults to drink 2.5 to 3 litres of water per day, and children and young people (depending on their age) 1 to 2 litres 
adding fresh lemon juice to drinking water 
avoiding carbonated drinks 
adults to have a daily salt intake of no more than 6 g, and children and young people (depending on their age) 2 to 6 g 
not restricting daily calcium intake, but maintaining a normal calcium intake of 700 to 1,200 mg for adults, and 350 to 1,000 mg per day for children and young people (depending on their age). 
1.8.2 
Follow the recommendations on maintaining a healthy lifestyle in the NICE guideline on overweight and obesity management . 
Potassium citrate 
The following recommendations apply alongside the recommendations on dietary and lifestyle advice. 
1.8.3 
Consider potassium citrate for adults with a recurrence of stones that are predominantly (more than 50%) calcium oxalate. 
1.8.4 
Consider potassium citrate for children and young people with a recurrence of stones that are predominantly (more than 50%) calcium oxalate, and with hypercalciuria or hypocitraturia. 
Thiazides 
The following recommendation applies alongside the recommendations on dietary and lifestyle advice. 
1.8.5 
Consider thiazides for adults with a recurrence of stones that are predominantly (more than 50%) calcium oxalate and hypercalciuria, after restricting their sodium intake to no more than 6 g a day. 
In January 2019, this was an off-label use of thiazides. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on preventing recurrence . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: dietary interventions and evidence review K: prevention of recurrence . 
Terms used in this guideline 
Children and young people 
People under 16 years. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
