Overview | Antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG15 
Published: 
18 August 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
What is this guideline about and who is it for? 
Person-centred care 
Recommendations 
Implementation: getting started 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the effective use of antimicrobials (including antibiotics) in children, young people and adults. It aims to change prescribing practice to help slow the emergence of antimicrobial resistance and ensure that antimicrobials remain an effective treatment for infection. 
Last reviewed: 18 January 2018 
We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. See the  surveillance decision  for further details. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
antimicrobial stewardship programmes 
antimicrobial prescribing 
introducing new antimicrobials 
Who is it for? 
Health and social care practitioners 
Organisations commissioning, providing or supporting the provision of care 
People who are taking antimicrobials and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Antimicrobial stewardship 
Acute respiratory infection in over 16s: initial assessment and management including virtual wards (hospital at home) 
Infection prevention and control 
Next page 
What is this guideline about and who is it for? 
Back to top
