Overview | Recent-onset chest pain of suspected cardiac origin: assessment and diagnosis | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Acute coronary syndromes
Recent-onset chest pain of suspected cardiac origin: assessment and diagnosis
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG95 
Published: 
24 March 2010
Last updated: 
30 November 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and diagnosing recent chest pain in people aged 18 and over and managing symptoms while a diagnosis is being made. It aims to improve outcomes by providing advice on tests (ECG, high-sensitivity troponin tests, multislice CT angiography, functional testing) that support healthcare professionals to make a speedy and accurate diagnosis. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on managing acute coronary syndromes . 
Last reviewed: 4 September 2019 
We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. For more information, see the surveillance decision . 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
providing information for adults with chest pain 
assessing and managing acute chest pain 
assessing and managing stable chest pain 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Adults with chest pain of recent onset, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called chest pain of recent onset: assessment and diagnosis of recent onset chest pain or discomfort of suspected cardiac origin. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Stable angina 
Acute coronary syndromes in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
