Overview | Borderline personality disorder: recognition and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Personality disorders
Borderline personality disorder: recognition and management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG78 
Published: 
28 January 2009
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers recognising and managing borderline personality disorder. It aims to help people with borderline personality disorder to manage feelings of distress, anxiety, worthlessness and anger, and to maintain stable and close relationships with others. 
Last reviewed: 30 July 2024 
We simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines (for example, the  NICE guideline on service user experience in adult mental health ). This is a presentational change only, and no changes to practice are intended. 
Future updates: The current International Classification of Diseases ( ICD-11 ) does not distinguish between the previous separate types of personality disorder, but defines it as a single condition, classified by severity. We are continuing to explore if the existing recommendations can be contextualised in line with ICD-11. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
general principles for working with people with borderline personality disorder 
recognition and management in primary care 
assessment and management by community mental health services 
inpatient services 
organisation and planning of services 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
People with borderline personality disorder, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called borderline personality disorder: treatment and management. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Personality disorders: borderline and antisocial 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
