Recommendations | Neuropathic pain in adults: pharmacological management in non-specialist settings | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Chronic and neuropathic pain
Neuropathic pain in adults: pharmacological management in non-specialist settings 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG173 
Published: 
20 November 2013
Last updated: 
22 September 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Recommendations 
Additional information 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off‑label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
The following guidance is based on the best available evidence. The full guideline gives details of the methods and the evidence used to develop the guidance. 
1.1 List of all recommendations 
Key principles of care 
For guidance on safe prescribing and managing withdrawal of antidepressants and dependence-forming medicines, see NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms . 
1.1.1 
When agreeing a treatment plan with the person, take into account their concerns and expectations, and discuss: 
the severity of the pain, and its impact on lifestyle, daily activities (including sleep disturbance) and participation 
the underlying cause of the pain and whether this condition has deteriorated 
why a particular pharmacological treatment is being offered 
the benefits and possible adverse effects of pharmacological treatments, taking into account any physical or psychological problems, and concurrent medications 
the importance of dosage titration and the titration process, providing the person with individualised information and advice 
coping strategies for pain and for possible adverse effects of treatment 
non-pharmacological treatments, for example, physical and psychological therapies (which may be offered through a rehabilitation service) and surgery (which may be offered through specialist services). 
For more information about involving people in decisions and supporting adherence, see the NICE guideline on medicines adherence . 
1.1.2 
Consider referring the person to a specialist pain service and/or a condition-specific service at any stage, including at initial presentation and at the regular clinical reviews (see recommendation 1.1.6), if: 
they have severe pain or 
their pain significantly limits their lifestyle, daily activities (including sleep disturbance) and participation or 
their underlying health condition has deteriorated. 
1.1.3 
Continue existing treatments for people whose neuropathic pain is already effectively managed, taking into account the need for regular clinical reviews (see recommendation 1.1.6). 
1.1.4 
When introducing a new treatment, take into account any overlap with the old treatments to avoid deterioration in pain control. 
1.1.5 
After starting or changing a treatment, carry out an early clinical review of dosage titration, tolerability and adverse effects to assess the suitability of the chosen treatment. 
1.1.6 
Carry out regular clinical reviews to assess and monitor the effectiveness of the treatment. Each review should include an assessment of: 
pain control 
impact on lifestyle, daily activities (including sleep disturbance) and participation 
physical and psychological wellbeing 
adverse effects 
continued need for treatment. 
1.1.7 
When withdrawing or switching treatment, taper the withdrawal regimen to take account of dosage and any discontinuation symptoms. 
Treatment 
All neuropathic pain (except trigeminal neuralgia) 
For guidance on safe prescribing and managing withdrawal of antidepressants and dependence-forming medicines, see NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms . 
For advice on treating sciatica, see the NICE guideline on low back pain and sciatica and the September 2020 update information . 
1.1.8 
Offer a choice of amitriptyline, duloxetine, gabapentin or pregabalin as initial treatment for neuropathic pain (except trigeminal neuralgia). See additional information for more on duloxetine, gabapentin and pregabalin. 
1.1.9 
If the initial treatment is not effective or is not tolerated, offer 1 of the remaining 3 drugs, and consider switching again if the second and third drugs tried are also not effective or not tolerated. 
1.1.10 
Consider tramadol only if acute rescue therapy is needed (see recommendation 1.1.12 about long‑term use). 
1.1.11 
Consider capsaicin cream for people with localised neuropathic pain who wish to avoid, or who cannot tolerate, oral treatments. See additional information for more on capsaicin cream. 
Treatments that should not be used 
1.1.12 
Do not start the following to treat neuropathic pain in non-specialist settings , unless advised by a specialist to do so: 
cannabis sativa extract 
capsaicin patch 
lacosamide 
lamotrigine 
levetiracetam 
morphine 
oxcarbazepine 
topiramate (follow the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) safety advice on the use of topiramate ) 
tramadol (this is referring to long-term use; see recommendation 1.1.10 for short-term use) 
venlafaxine 
valproate (follow the MHRA safety advice on valproate use in women and girls , valproate use in people younger than 55 years and valproate use in men ). [amended 2018] 
Also follow the MHRA safety advice on anti-epileptic drugs in pregnancy . 
Trigeminal neuralgia 
1.1.13 
Offer carbamazepine as initial treatment for trigeminal neuralgia. Follow the MHRA safety advice on anti-epileptic drugs in pregnancy . [amended 2021] 
1.1.14 
If initial treatment with carbamazepine is not effective, is not tolerated or is contraindicated, consider seeking expert advice from a specialist and consider early referral to a specialist pain service or a condition-specific service. 
Next page 
Additional information 
Previous page 
Introduction 
Back to top
