Recommendations for research | Postnatal care | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Postnatal care
Postnatal care 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG194 
Published: 
20 April 2021
Last updated: 
09 June 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1 Length of postpartum stay and first midwife visit after transfer of care
2 Timing of first health visitor visit
3 Clinical tools to assess women's health
4 Perineal pain
5 Breastfeeding support for parents with twins or triplets
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following key recommendations for research. 
1 Length of postpartum stay and first midwife visit after transfer of care 
How does the length of postpartum stay and the timing of the first midwife visit after transfer of care affect unplanned or emergency health contacts for women and babies? [2021] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this 2021 recommendation for research, see the rationale section on timing of transfer to community care . 
Full details of the recommendation for research are in evidence review A: length of postpartum stay . 
See also the rationale section on first midwife visit after transfer of care from the place of birth or after a home birth . 
Full details of the recommendation for research are in evidence review C: timing of first postnatal contact by midwife . 
2 Timing of first health visitor visit 
What is the most effective timing of the first postnatal contact by a health visitor? [2021] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this 2021 recommendation for research, see the rationale section on first health visitor visit . 
Full details of the recommendation for research are in evidence review D: timing of first postnatal contact by health visitor . 
3 Clinical tools to assess women's health 
What tools for the clinical review of women (including pain scores) are effective during the first 8 weeks after birth? [2021] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this 2021 recommendation for research, see the rationale section on assessment and care of the woman . 
Full details of the recommendation for research are in evidence review H: tools for the clinical review of women . 
4 Perineal pain 
What characteristics of perineal pain suggest the need for further evaluation? [2021] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this 2021 recommendation for research, see the rationale section on perineal health . 
Full details of the recommendation for research are in evidence review J: perineal pain . 
5 Breastfeeding support for parents with twins or triplets 
What support with breastfeeding do parents of twins or triplets find helpful? [2021] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this 2021 recommendation for research, see the rationale section on supporting women to breastfeed . 
Full details of the recommendation for research are in evidence review S: breastfeeding information and support . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
