Overview | Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Heart failure
Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG106 
Published: 
12 September 2018
Last updated: 
03 September 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing chronic heart failure in people aged 18 and over. It aims to improve diagnosis and treatment to increase the length and quality of life for people with heart failure. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on acute heart failure . 
Last reviewed: 3 September 2025 
We reviewed the evidence on treating and monitoring heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, mildly reduced ejection fraction and preserved ejection fraction. We amended the recommendations on heart failure with reduced ejection and added new recommendations on heart failure with mildly reduced and preserved ejection fraction. For more details, see the  update information . 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG108 (August 2010). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
treating heart failure with reduced ejection fraction 
treating heart failure with mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction 
starting and monitoring medication use 
These supplement the existing recommendations on: 
multidisciplinary working 
diagnosing heart failure 
giving information for people with heart failure 
treating heart failure with chronic kidney disease 
cardiac rehabilitation 
palliative care 
See the 1-page visual summary for diagnosing chronic heart failure and the 2-page visual summary on core treatments for chronic heart failure . 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
People with heart failure and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Promoting health and preventing premature mortality in black, Asian and other minority ethnic groups 
Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health 
Chronic heart failure in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
