Overview | Antisocial behaviour and conduct disorders in children and young people: recognition and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Attention deficit disorder
Antisocial behaviour and conduct disorders in children and young people: recognition and management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG158 
Published: 
27 March 2013
Last updated: 
19 April 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers recognising and managing antisocial behaviour and conduct disorders in children and young people aged under 19. It aims to improve care by identifying children and young people who are at risk and when interventions can prevent conduct disorders from developing. The guideline also makes recommendations on communication, to help professionals build relationships with children and young people and involve them in their own care. 
Last reviewed: 17 April 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will not be updating the section on psychosocial interventions. See the surveillance decision for further details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE technology appraisal 102 (July 2006). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
selective prevention 
identification and assessment 
psychosocial interventions for treatment and indicated prevention 
pharmacological interventions 
service delivery 
Who is it for? 
Health and social care professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Children and young people aged under 19 who have or are at risk of antisocial behaviour or conduct disorders, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guidance has been developed jointly by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) and the Social Care Institute for Excellence (SCIE). 
This guideline was previously called antisocial behaviour and conduct disorders in children and young people: recognition, intervention and management. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
Antisocial behaviour and conduct disorders in children and young people 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
