Managing suspected sepsis | Suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people: recognition, diagnosis and early management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people: recognition, diagnosis and early management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG255 
Published: 
19 November 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Could this be sepsis? 
Face to face assessment 
Evaluating risk level 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Training and education 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.6 Outside acute hospital settings
1.7 In acute hospital settings
Managing suspected sepsis 
1.6 Outside acute hospital settings 
NICE has produced a visual summary on managing risk of severe illness or death outside acute hospital settings . 
When to transfer immediately to an acute hospital setting 
1.6.1 
If they meet any high risk criteria, refer people with suspected sepsis who are or were recently pregnant and are outside acute hospital settings for emergency medical care (see table 1: criteria for stratification of risk from sepsis in people who are or have recently been pregnant ). 
Use the most appropriate means of transport (usually 999 ambulance). 
Emergency care requires facilities for resuscitation to be available and, depending on local services, may be an emergency department, medical admissions unit or maternity services. [2016] 
1.6.2 
Pre-alert secondary care (through GP or ambulance service) when any high risk criteria are met in a person with suspected sepsis who is or has recently been pregnant and is outside of an acute hospital, and transfer the person immediately. [2016] 
Managing the condition while awaiting transfer 
1.6.3 
In remote and rural locations where transfer time to emergency department is routinely more than 1 hour, ensure GPs have mechanisms in place to give antibiotics to people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant and meet high risk criteria in pre-hospital settings. For high risk criteria, see table 1: criteria for stratification of risk from sepsis in people who are or have recently been pregnant . [2016, amended 2024] 
1.6.4 
In remote and rural locations where combined transfer and handover times to emergency department are greater than 1 hour: 
ambulance services should consider whether they need to put mechanisms in place to be able to give antibiotics to people with high risk criteria if antibiotics have not been given before by a GP (for high risk criteria, see table 1: criteria for stratification of risk from sepsis in people who are or have recently been pregnant ) 
paramedics who are thinking about giving antibiotics should follow local guidelines or seek advice from more senior colleagues, if needed. [2016, amended 2024] 
See also the recommendations on choice of antibiotic therapy for people with suspected sepsis . 
If immediate transfer is not required 
1.6.5 
Assess people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant , are outside acute hospital settings, and meet any moderate to high risk criteria to: 
make a definitive diagnosis of their condition 
decide whether their condition can be treated safely outside hospital. 
If a definitive diagnosis is not reached or the person's condition cannot be treated safely outside an acute hospital setting, refer them urgently for emergency care. [2016] 
1.6.6 
If a person with suspected sepsis who is or has recently been pregnant does not meet any high risk or moderate to high risk criteria, provide the person with information about: 
symptoms to monitor and 
how to access medical care if they are concerned. 
Also see information at discharge for people assessed for suspected sepsis, but not diagnosed with sepsis . [2016] 
1.7 In acute hospital settings 
NICE has also produced a visual summary on managing risk of severe illness or death in acute hospital settings . 
Initial investigations to find the source of infection 
1.7.1 
For people in hospital who have suspected infections: 
start looking for the source of infection (see the section on finding and controlling the source of infection ) 
take microbiological and blood samples before giving an antimicrobial. 
See the UK standards for microbiology investigations . [2016, amended 2024] 
1 or more high risk criteria 
Assessment, blood tests and antibiotics 
1.7.2 
For people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant and meet 1 or more high risk criteria: 
arrange for the senior clinical decision maker to immediately assess the person's condition and think about alternative diagnoses to sepsis 
carry out a venous blood test, including for: 
blood gas, including glucose and lactate measurement 
blood culture 
full blood count 
C-reactive protein 
urea and electrolytes 
creatinine 
liver function tests 
a clotting screen 
give a broad-spectrum antimicrobial without delay (within 1 hour of identifying that they meet any high risk criteria), if antibiotics have not already been given for this episode of sepsis 
discuss with a consultant. 
Also see the recommendations on finding and controlling the source of infection and choice of antibiotic therapy . [2016, amended 2024] 
1.7.3 
Ensure urgent assessment mechanisms are in place to deliver antibiotics when any high risk criteria are met in secondary care by a person who is or has recently been pregnant (within 1 hour of meeting a high risk criterion in an acute hospital setting). [2016] 
Intravenous fluids 
1.7.4 
For people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant, meet any high risk criteria and have either lactate over 4 mmol/litre or systolic blood pressure of 90 mmHg or less: 
give intravenous fluid bolus without delay (within 1 hour of identifying that they meet any high risk criteria), in line with recommendations on intravenous fluids for people with suspected sepsis and 
refer to a critical care specialist or team for them to review the management of the person's condition, including their need for central venous access and initiation of inotropes or vasopressors. 
Referral may be a formal referral process or discussion with a specialist in intensive care or intensive care outreach team. [2016] 
1.7.5 
For people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant, meet any high risk criteria and have lactate between 2 and 4 mmol/litre, give intravenous fluid bolus without delay (within 1 hour of identifying that they meet any high risk criteria), in line with recommendations on intravenous fluids for people with suspected sepsis . [2016] 
1.7.6 
For people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant, meet any high risk criteria and have lactate below 2 mmol/litre, consider giving an intravenous fluid bolus (in line with recommendations on intravenous fluids for people with suspected sepsis ). [2016, amended 2024] 
Monitoring and escalation 
1.7.7 
Monitor people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant and meet any high risk criteria continuously, or a minimum of once every 30 minutes depending on setting. Use physiological track and trigger systems. [2016] 
1.7.8 
Monitor the mental state of people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant. Consider using a scale such as the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) or AVPU ('alert, voice, pain, unresponsive') scale. [2016] 
1.7.9 
Alert a consultant to attend in person if a person with suspected sepsis who is or has recently been pregnant and meets any high risk criteria does not respond within 1 hour of any intervention. [2016, amended 2024] 
2 or more moderate to high risk criteria 
1.7.10 
For people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant and either meet 2 or more moderate to high risk criteria or have systolic blood pressure 91 to 100 mmHg: 
carry out a venous blood test, including for: 
blood gas, including glucose and lactate measurement 
blood culture 
full blood count 
C-reactive protein 
urea and electrolytes 
creatinine 
liver function tests 
a clotting screen 
arrange for a clinician to review the person's condition and venous lactate results within 1 hour of meeting 2 or more moderate to high risk criteria or have systolic blood pressure 91 to 100 mmHg. 
A 'clinician' should be a medically qualified practitioner or equivalent who has antibiotic prescribing responsibilities. [2016, amended 2024] 
1.7.11 
For people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant, meet 2 or more moderate to high risk criteria and have either lactate over 2 mmol/litre or evidence of acute kidney injury, treat their condition as if it met 1 or more high risk criteria . 
For a definition of acute kidney injury, see NICE's guideline on acute kidney injury . [2016] 
1.7.12 
For people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant, meet 2 or more moderate to high risk criteria, have lactate of 2 mmol/litre or lower, have no evidence of acute kidney injury, and in whom a definitive condition cannot be identified: 
repeat structured assessment at least hourly 
ensure a senior clinical decision maker reviews the person's condition and need for antibiotics within 3 hours of meeting 2 or more moderate to high risk criteria. [2016] 
1 moderate to high risk criterion 
1.7.13 
For people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant and meet only 1 moderate to high risk criterion: 
arrange for clinician review within 1 hour of meeting a moderate to high risk criterion 
perform blood tests if indicated. 
A 'clinician' should be a medically qualified practitioner or equivalent who has antibiotic prescribing responsibilities. [2016] 
1.7.14 
For people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant, meet only 1 moderate to high risk criterion, have lactate of less than 2 mmol/litre, have no evidence of acute kidney injury, and in whom a definitive condition cannot be identified: 
repeat structured assessment at least hourly 
ensure a senior clinical decision maker reviews the person's condition and need for antibiotics within 3 hours of meeting moderate to high risk criterion. [2016] 
No high risk or moderate to high risk criteria 
1.7.15 
For people with suspected sepsis who are or have recently been pregnant and meet no high risk or moderate to high risk criteria: 
arrange for clinician review 
use clinical judgement to manage their condition. 
A 'clinician' should be a medically qualified practitioner or equivalent who has antibiotic prescribing responsibilities. [2016] 
Discharge 
1.7.16 
Before discharging people who have been assessed for suspected sepsis, provide information on: 
the management of their definitive condition (if identified) and 
warning signs for sepsis (see information at discharge for people assessed for suspected sepsis ). [2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2024 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on discharge . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: early management of suspected sepsis (except antibiotic therapy) in the NEWS2 population, in acute hospital settings . 
Next page 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Previous page 
Evaluating risk level 
Back to top
