Overview | Psychosis and schizophrenia in adults: prevention and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Psychosis and schizophrenia
Psychosis and schizophrenia in adults: prevention and management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG178 
Published: 
12 February 2014
Last updated: 
18 March 2014
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers recognising and managing psychosis and schizophrenia in adults. It aims to improve care through early recognition and treatment, and by focusing on long-term recovery. It also recommends checking for coexisting health problems and providing support for family members and carers. 
Last reviewed: 29 July 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will not be including meta-cognitive therapy (MCT) as a treatment option for psychosis . See the surveillance decision for further details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG82 (March 2009) and evidence summary ESNM39 (March 2014). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
recognising and preventing psychosis 
early intervention for a first episode of psychosis 
treating and referring people with an acute episode of psychosis or schizophrenia 
promoting recovery and long-term care 
preventing and treating physical health problems and  continuing to check for physical health problems 
support for carers 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
People with psychosis or schizophrenia, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Promoting health and preventing premature mortality in black, Asian and other minority ethnic groups 
Psychosis and schizophrenia in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
