Finding and controlling the source of infection | Suspected sepsis in under 16s: recognition, diagnosis and early management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Suspected sepsis in under 16s: recognition, diagnosis and early management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG254 
Published: 
19 November 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Could this be sepsis? 
Face to face assessment 
Evaluating risk level 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Training and education 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.11 All people under 16
1.12 Babies aged 3 months or less
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.11 All people under 16 
1.11.1 
Tailor investigations of the sources of infection to the person's clinical history and to findings from examination. [2016] 
1.11.2 
Consider urine analysis and chest X‑ray to identify the source of infection in all people with suspected sepsis. [2016] 
1.11.3 
Consider imaging of the abdomen and pelvis if no likely source of infection is identified after clinical examination and initial tests. [2016] 
1.11.4 
Involve the relevant surgical team early on if surgical or radiological intervention is suitable for the source of infection. The surgical team or interventional radiologist should: 
seek senior advice about the timing of intervention  
carry the intervention out as soon as possible, in line with the advice received. [2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2024 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on finding and controlling the source of infection . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: early management of suspected sepsis (except antibiotic therapy) in the NEWS2 population, in acute hospital settings . 
1.12 Babies aged 3 months or less 
1.12.1 
Perform lumbar puncture in the following babies with suspected sepsis (unless contraindicated, see the section on lumbar puncture in the NICE guideline on bacterial meningitis and meningococcal disease ): 
babies younger than 1 month 
all babies aged 1 to 3 months who appear unwell 
babies aged 1 to 3 months with a white blood cell count less than 5×10 9 /litre or greater than 15×10 9 /litre. [2016] 
For guidance on contraindications to lumbar puncture, see the section on lumbar puncture in the NICE guideline on bacterial meningitis and meningococcal disease . 
Next page 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Previous page 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Back to top
