Overview | Supporting adult carers | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Supporting adult carers
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG150 
Published: 
22 January 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Overview 
This guideline covers support for adults (aged 18 and over) who provide unpaid care for anyone aged 16 or over with health or social care needs. It aims to improve the lives of carers by helping health and social care practitioners identify people who are caring for someone and give them the right information and support. It covers carers’ assessments, practical, emotional and social support and training, and support for carers providing end of life care. 
This guideline covers general principles that apply to all adult carers. Recommendations about supporting carers of people with specific health needs can be found in NICE guidance on those conditions. 
This guideline should be read together with the Care and support statutory guidance under the Care Act 2014 and the Children and Families Act 2014 . 
The recommendations in this guideline were developed before the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
information and support for carers 
identifying carers 
carers’ assessments 
helping carers stay in, enter or return to work, education and training 
social and community support for carers 
training to provide care and support 
psychological and emotional support for carers 
support during changes to the caring role and during end of life care 
Who is it for? 
Local authorities, clinical commissioning groups and other organisations that assess, plan, and commission local services or provide support and information for adult carers and people receiving care 
Providers of health and social care services, including:
Social care providers 
Primary care (including pharmacists and GPs) 
Hospital and community care (including acute and mental health trusts and residential care) 
Emergency services 
Community and voluntary organisations 
Health and social care practitioners (including personal assistants) working with adult carers 
Adults who provide unpaid care for 1 or more people aged 16 or over with health and social care needs 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
End of life care for adults 
Supporting adult carers 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
