Context | Fractures (complex): assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Fractures (complex): assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG37 
Published: 
17 February 2016
Last updated: 
23 November 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Context 
Complex fractures make up the minority of the 1.8 million fractures that occur in England each year, but are associated with considerable morbidity and are a large burden on healthcare resources. The treatment of complex fractures is often complicated and usually involves multiple healthcare professionals and specialists. 
This guideline covers the triage, initial and acute stage assessment and management, imaging, referral to specialist care and treatment of complex fractures in children (under 16s) and adults (16 or over). It includes recommendations in the following key clinical areas: 
management in pre‑hospital settings 
immediate destination for people with suspected complex fractures 
initial assessment and management in acute care 
imaging and haemorrhage control of pelvic fractures 
management of open fractures 
management plan and referral for adults with pilon fractures and children with intra‑articular distal tibia fractures 
documentation 
information and support for people with complex fractures and their families and carers. 
The guideline does not address all potential situations for every individual complex fracture. It is based around topics that should be considered as representative of an evidence‑based guide to the general management of complex fractures. It provides recommendations on open fractures, pelvic fractures, pilon fractures in adults and intra‑articular distal tibia fractures in children. It does not cover the prevention and follow‑up of complex fractures, and the management and follow‑up of dislocations and conditions such as osteoporosis and osteoarthritis. 
The guideline does not cover non‑complex fractures, skull fractures, hip fractures and spinal injuries. These are covered by other NICE guidelines. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
