Rationale and impact | Child maltreatment: when to suspect maltreatment in under 18s | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Child maltreatment: when to suspect maltreatment in under 18s
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG89 
Published: 
22 July 2009
Last updated: 
03 December 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Using this guidance 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Rationale and impact 
This section briefly explains why the committee made the definition of independently mobile and how it might affect practice. 
Definition of independently mobile 
Recommendations 1.1.2, 1.1.5 and 1.1.6 
Why the expert working group made the definition 
The child maltreatment guideline refers to children not being independently mobile in the context of its recommendations on bruising, lacerations, abrasions or scars, and thermal injuries. Previously it did not define 'independently mobile', and this led to variation in how people were interpreting the term. In turn, this affected how child maltreatment was being classified and addressed. NICE decided to add a definition of the term while leaving the wording of the recommendations unchanged. 
Since a standard definition of the term 'independently mobile' was not found in the published literature and was not in use in current practice, a number of statements were drafted by NICE based on the range of definitions found. Each member of the expert working group voted on whether or not they agreed with each statement to produce a shortlist of options. The group used the shortlist of statements, together with their expertise and experience, to agree the definition. 
How it might affect practice 
Providing clarity over the meaning of 'independently mobile' will support professionals with experience in child maltreatment (such as practitioners and health visitors), as well as professionals who are less experienced with child maltreatment, to have difficult conversations with parents and carers. 
It will also aid in decision making as to whether child maltreatment has occurred or whether there is a plausible explanation for the injury to the child. This will help to ensure that further investigations of child maltreatment are only carried out when needed and potential cases of child maltreatment are not overlooked. 
Return to recommendations 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Recommendations for research 
Back to top
