Overview | Alcohol interventions in secondary and further education | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Alcohol interventions in secondary and further education
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG135 
Published: 
12 August 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers interventions in secondary and further education to prevent and reduce alcohol use among children and young people aged 11 up to and including 18. It also covers people aged 11 to 25 with special educational needs or disabilities in full-time education. It will also be relevant to children aged 11 in year 6 of primary school. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
planning alcohol education 
delivering universal alcohol education 
targeted interventions 
Who is it for? 
Local authorities responsible for education and public health 
Teachers, school governors, academy trusts and others (including school and public health nurses and healthy school leads) in secondary education, including special schools and further education settings 
Health and social care practitioners 
Providers of alcohol education 
Members of the public, including parents or carers of children and young people in full-time education 
People working with children and young people in the voluntary sector 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guidance. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline PH7 (November 2007). 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Alcohol: preventing harmful use in the community 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
