Overview | Oral health promotion: general dental practice | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Oral and dental health
Oral health promotion: general dental practice
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG30 
Published: 
15 December 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Implementation: getting started 
Context 
The committee's discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Glossary 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers how general dental practice teams can convey advice about oral hygiene and the use of fluoride. It also covers diet, smoking, smokeless tobacco and alcohol intake. 
Last reviewed: 21 June 2018 
We found no new evidence that affects the recommendations in this guideline. For more information, see the  surveillance decision . 
Next review:  This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
The recommendations cover: 
oral health advice given by dentists and dental care professionals 
how dentists and dental care professionals can adopt a patient-centred approach 
Who is it for? 
Dentists 
Dental care professionals – this includes dental hygienists, dental nurses, dental therapists, dental technicians and orthodontic therapists 
Dental practice owners and managers 
Dental practice administrative staff, including receptionists 
Directors of public health, dental public health consultants and strategic leads who plan local dental services 
Dental bodies corporate 
People responsible for educating dental professionals 
Members of the public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Oral health promotion in the community 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
