Overview | Venous thromboembolic diseases: diagnosis, management and thrombophilia testing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Embolism and thrombosis
Venous thromboembolic diseases: diagnosis, management and thrombophilia testing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG158 
Published: 
26 March 2020
Last updated: 
02 August 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing venous thromboembolic diseases in adults. It aims to support rapid diagnosis and effective treatment for people who develop deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE). It also covers testing for conditions that can make a DVT or PE more likely, such as thrombophilia (a blood clotting disorder) and cancer. It does not cover pregnant women. 
See the MHRA advice on warfarin and other anticoagulants – monitoring of patients during the COVID-19 pandemic , which includes reports of supratherapeutic anticoagulation with warfarin. 
Last reviewed: 1 May 2026 
We have checked this guideline and will not be updating it to include recommendations on early mobilisation or bed rest after treatment for venous thromboembolism (VTE). 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG144 (June 2012). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
diagnosing and managing suspected DVT and PE 
outpatient management of low-risk PE 
anticoagulation treatment for suspected or confirmed DVT or PE 
long-term anticoagulation for secondary prevention 
information and support for people having anticoagulation treatment 
thrombolytic therapy , inferior vena caval filters , investigations for cancer and thrombophilia testing 
See a  3-page visual summary of the recommendations on diagnosis and anticoagulation treatment for venous thromboembolism . 
Who is it for? 
Commissioners and providers of venous thromboembolism services 
Healthcare professionals in primary, secondary and tertiary care 
Adults (18 and over) with suspected or confirmed DVT or PE, their families and carers 
First-degree relatives of people with inherited thrombophilia or other venous thromboembolic diseases 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Venous thromboembolism in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
