Overview | Suspected cancer: recognition and referral | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood and bone marrow cancers
Suspected cancer: recognition and referral
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG12 
Published: 
23 June 2015
Last updated: 
15 April 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Recommendations organised by site of cancer 
Recommendations on patient support, safety netting and the diagnostic process 
Recommended actions organised by symptom and findings of primary care investigations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers identifying children, young people and adults with symptoms that could be caused by cancer. It outlines appropriate investigations in primary care, and selection of people to refer for a specialist opinion. It aims to help people understand what to expect if they have symptoms that may suggest cancer. 
Last reviewed: 15 April 2026 
We reviewed the evidence for referral for ovarian cancer, endometrial cancer and non-site-specific weight loss. We have added new and updated recommendations on ovarian cancer age and serum CA125 thresholds ( recommendations 1.5.6 to 1.5.9, and 1.5.11 ), endometrial cancer ( recommendations 1.5.12, 1.5.14 and 1.5.15 ), and non-site-specific weight loss ( recommendation 1.13.2 ). For more details, see the update information . 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG27 (June 2005) and updates and replaces recommendations in NICE guideline CG121 (April 2011). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on the symptoms and signs that warrant investigation and referral for suspected cancer. 
The recommendations are organised by: 
the site of the suspected cancer 
the symptom , alphabetically then in order of urgency of the action needed 
the findings of primary care investigations 
The guideline includes recommendations on: 
symptoms in children and young people 
information and support for people with suspected cancer and their families and/or carers 
active monitoring in primary care of people who have presented with symptoms (safety netting) 
best practice in the diagnostic process 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
People involved in clinical governance in both primary and secondary care 
People with suspected cancer and their families or carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Skin cancer
Ovarian cancer 
Brain tumours (primary) and brain metastases in over 16s 
Urinary tract infections in adults 
Dyspepsia and gastro‑oesophageal reflux disease in adults 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
