Could this be sepsis? | Suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over: recognition, assessment and early management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over: recognition, assessment and early management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG253 
Published: 
19 November 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Could this be sepsis? 
Face-to-face assessment 
Evaluating risk 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Training and education 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 When to suspect sepsis
1.2 People who are most vulnerable to sepsis
Could this be sepsis? 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
Babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare 
Decision making and mental capacity 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines optimisation 
Multimorbidity 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
Shared decision making . 
1.1 When to suspect sepsis 
1.1.1 
Think 'could this be sepsis?' if a person presents with symptoms or signs that indicate possible infection. [2016] 
1.1.2 
Take into account that people with sepsis may have non-specific, non-localised presentations, for example feeling very unwell, and may not have a high temperature. [2016] 
1.1.3 
Pay particular attention to concerns expressed by the person and their family or carers, for example changes from usual behaviour. [2016] 
1.1.4 
Assess people who might have sepsis with extra care if there is difficulty in taking their history, for example people with English as a second language or people with communication challenges (such as those associated with neurodiversity, cognitive impairment, learning disabilities, severe mental health conditions or brain injury). [2016, amended 2025] 
1.1.5 
Assess people with any suspected infection to identify: 
possible source of infection (see the recommendations on finding and controlling the source of infection ) 
factors that increase risk of sepsis (see people who are most vulnerable to sepsis ) 
any indications of clinical concern, such as new-onset abnormalities of behaviour, circulation or respiration. [2016] 
For a short explanation of why the committee amended this recommendation in 2025 and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on people who are most vulnerable to sepsis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: sepsis risk factors . 
1.1.6 
During a remote assessment, when deciding whether to offer a face-to-face assessment and, if so, on the urgency of it, identify: 
factors that increase risk of sepsis (see people who are most vulnerable to sepsis ) and 
indications of clinical concern such as new-onset abnormalities of behaviour, circulation or respiration. [2016] 
1.1.7 
Use a structured set of observations to assess people in a face-to-face setting to stratify risk if sepsis is suspected. (See the recommendations on face-to-face assessment and the recommendations on evaluating risk ). [2016] 
1.1.8 
Use the national early warning score ( NEWS2 ) to assess people with suspected sepsis who are aged 16 or over, are not and have not recently been pregnant , and are in an acute hospital setting, acute mental health setting or ambulance. [2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2024 recommendation on using NEWS2 and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on evaluating risk level in people with suspected sepsis in acute hospital settings, acute mental health settings and ambulances . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: stratifying risk of severe illness or death from sepsis . 
1.1.9 
Consider using an early warning score to assess people with suspected sepsis who are 16 or over, in a community or custodial setting. [2016, amended 2024] 
1.1.10 
Suspect neutropenic sepsis in people who become unwell and: 
are having or have had systemic anticancer treatment within the last 30 days 
are receiving or have received immunosuppressant treatment for reasons unrelated to cancer; use clinical judgement (based on the person's specific condition, medical history, or both, and on the treatment they received) to determine whether any past treatment may still be likely to cause neutropenia. [2016, amended 2024] 
1.1.11 
Refer patients with suspected neutropenic sepsis immediately for assessment in secondary or tertiary care. [This recommendation is from NICE's guideline on neutropenic sepsis in people with cancer .] [2012] 
1.1.12 
Treat people with neutropenic sepsis, regardless of cause, in line with NICE's guideline on neutropenic sepsis in people with cancer . [2016, amended 2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee amended the neutropenic sepsis recommendations and how these might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on people with neutropenia or immunosuppression . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: early management of suspected sepsis (except antibiotic therapy) in the NEWS2 population, in acute hospital settings . 
1.2 People who are most vulnerable to sepsis 
1.2.1 
Take into account the factors that may increase the risk of developing sepsis or sepsis not being identified promptly. These include: 
age: being 75 or over 
ethnicity: being from an ethnic minority background 
clinical features such as: 
frailty 
multimorbidities or severe chronic conditions 
impaired immune function because of illness or medical treatment 
surgery or invasive procedures in the past 6 weeks 
indwelling catheters 
repeated antibiotic use 
breach of skin integrity 
communication challenges, such as with people: 
with learning disabilities 
with cognitive impairment 
who need an interpreter 
drugs or alcohol misuse 
social, economic or environmental factors such as: 
homelessness 
living in deprived areas. 
See also recommendation 1.1.10 on when to suspect neutropenic sepsis . [2025] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on people who are most vulnerable to sepsis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: sepsis risk factors . 
For specific risk in pregnant or recently pregnant people, see NICE's guideline on suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people . 
Next page 
Face-to-face assessment 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
