Overview | Organ donation for transplantation: improving donor identification and consent rates for deceased organ donation | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Organ and tissue transplantation
Organ donation for transplantation: improving donor identification and consent rates for deceased organ donation
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG135 
Published: 
12 December 2011
Last updated: 
21 December 2016
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Person-centred care 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers identifying people who wish to donate their organs after their death. It offers advice on how to approach families and carers of people who are nearing the end of life and how to seek consent for organ donation. It aims to promote discussion of organ donation as part of end-of-life care and to increase the number of organs available for people waiting for a transplant. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
identifying potential organ donors 
assessing best interests 
seeking consent 
approaching families and carers 
policies for identification, referral and consent 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Organ donors and their families and carers 
Is this guideline up to date? 
We are monitoring the implications for this guideline of the change to organ donation law in England . We plan to check the need to update the guideline when the legislative changes have been embedded in practice. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
