Overview | Cystic fibrosis: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cystic fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG78 
Published: 
25 October 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing cystic fibrosis. It specifies how to monitor the condition and manage the symptoms to improve quality of life. There are also detailed recommendations on treating the most common infections in people with cystic fibrosis. 
Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapies: In September 2024, supplies of pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy were disrupted, so availability varies. Use the Specialist Pharmacy Service’s prescribing and ordering available pancreatic enzyme replacement therapies resource and tool to help identify equivalent licensed products. 
Last reviewed: 19 March 2026 
We added links to relevant NICE technology appraisal guidance in the section on pulmonary monitoring, assessment and management . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
This NICE guideline updates and replaces NICE evidence summary ESUOM37. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
diagnosis 
service delivery, including how to organise  services and  multidisciplinary teams 
annual and routine reviews 
monitoring, assessment and management, including for lung disease , pulmonary infection , distal intestinal obstruction syndrome ,  liver disease and  cystic-fibrosis-related diabetes 
preventing cross-infection 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Social care practitioners working with people with cystic fibrosis 
People with cystic fibrosis and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Cystic fibrosis 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
