Recommendations | Rehabilitation for adults with complex psychosis | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Mental health services
Rehabilitation for adults with complex psychosis 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG181 
Published: 
19 August 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Who should be offered rehabilitation?
1.2 Overarching principles of rehabilitation
1.3 Organising the rehabilitation pathway
1.4 Improving access to rehabilitation
1.5 Delivering services within the rehabilitation pathway
1.6 Recovery-orientated rehabilitation services
1.7 Person-centred care planning through assessment and formulation
1.8 Rehabilitation programmes and interventions
1.9 Adjustments to mental health treatments in rehabilitation
1.10 Physical healthcare
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off‑label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Health and social care professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
decision making and mental capacity 
medicines adherence 
medicines optimisation 
multimorbidity 
people's experience in adult social care services 
service user experience in adult mental health 
shared decision making 
supporting adult carers 
transition between inpatient mental health settings and community or care home settings . 
In this guideline, 'complex psychosis' refers to a primary diagnosis of a psychotic illness (this includes schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder, psychotic depression, delusional disorders and schizoaffective disorder) with severe and treatment-resistant symptoms of psychosis and functional impairment. 
People with complex psychosis usually also have 1 or more of the following: 
cognitive impairments associated with their psychosis 
coexisting mental health conditions (including substance misuse) 
pre-existing neurodevelopmental disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
physical health problems, such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease or pulmonary conditions. 
Together, these complex problems severely affect the person's social and everyday functioning, and mean they need a period of rehabilitation to enable their recovery and ensure they achieve their optimum level of independence. 
The guideline does not cover people who have a primary diagnosis of a non-psychotic illness. However, rehabilitation practitioners can also provide advice to services outside the rehabilitation pathway on appropriate treatment and support, including specialist placements and tailored support packages, for people with other primary mental health diagnoses or neurodevelopmental conditions, such as personality disorders or autism spectrum disorder. 
1.1 Who should be offered rehabilitation? 
1.1.1 
Offer rehabilitation to people with complex psychosis : 
as soon as it is identified that they have treatment-resistant symptoms of psychosis and impairments affecting their social and everyday functioning 
wherever they are living, including in inpatient or community settings. 
In particular, this should include people who: 
have experienced recurrent admissions or extended stays in acute inpatient or psychiatric units, either locally or out of area 
live in 24‑hour staffed accommodation whose placement is breaking down. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on who should be offered rehabilitation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: identifying people who would benefit most and evidence review D: effectiveness of rehabilitation services . 
Other supporting information can be found in evidence review F: components of an effective rehabilitation pathway , evidence review J: rehabilitation approaches, care, support and treatment and evidence review Q: factors associated with successful transition . 
1.2 Overarching principles of rehabilitation 
1.2.1 
Rehabilitation services for people with complex psychosis should: 
be embedded in a local comprehensive mental healthcare service 
be offered in the least restrictive environment and aim to help people progress from more intensive support to greater independence through the rehabilitation pathway 
recognise that not everyone returns to the same level of independence they had before their illness and may require supported accommodation (such as residential care , supported housing or floating outreach ) in the long term. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on overarching principles of rehabilitation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: rehabilitation approaches, care, support and treatment . 
1.3 Organising the rehabilitation pathway 
1.3.1 
All local mental healthcare systems should include a defined rehabilitation pathway as part of their comprehensive service. 
1.3.2 
Use the local joint strategic needs assessment to inform the commissioning of specific service components (see recommendation 1.3.4) that make up the rehabilitation pathway, to match the needs of the local population. 
1.3.3 
Conduct a local rehabilitation service needs assessment. This should include the number of people with complex psychosis who: 
are currently placed out of area for rehabilitation 
have recurrent admissions or extended stays (for example, longer than 60 days) in acute inpatient units and psychiatric intensive care units, either locally or out of area 
live in highly supported (24‑hour staffed) accommodation 
are receiving care from forensic services but will need to continue their rehabilitation locally when risks or behaviours that challenge have been sufficiently addressed (for example, fire setting, physical or sexual aggression) 
are receiving care from early intervention for psychosis services and developing problems that are likely to require mental health rehabilitation services now or in the near future 
are physically frail and may need specialist support in their accommodation 
are young adults moving from children and young people's mental health services to adult mental health services. 
1.3.4 
The rehabilitation pathway should include the following components, as informed by the needs assessment: 
rehabilitation in the community, providing clinical care from a community mental health rehabilitation team to people living in supported accommodation ( residential care , supported housing and floating outreach ) and 
rehabilitation in inpatient settings, such as high-dependency rehabilitation units and/or community rehabilitation units . 
1.3.5 
Health and social care commissioners should work together with health services, local authorities, housing providers and other partners (third sector and independent sector providers, service users and their families and carers) to ensure that rehabilitation is provided as locally as possible for all those identified in the local rehabilitation service needs assessment. 
1.3.6 
Consider jointly commissioning the most specialised services (including highly specialist rehabilitation units and longer-term high-dependency rehabilitation units ) across areas to provide these services at a regional level for people with particularly complex needs. 
1.3.7 
Ensure that the rehabilitation pathway is designed to provide flexibility, smooth transitions and support over the longer term, that enables people to: 
join and leave the rehabilitation pathway at different points 
move between parts of the pathway that provide higher or lower levels of support according to their changing needs 
spend different periods of time at different stages of the pathway according to need 
have access to more than 1 period of rehabilitation to progress successfully in their recovery and be swiftly referred back to the pathway if their needs increase and they would benefit from further rehabilitation. 
The lead commissioner 
1.3.8 
Health and social care commissioners should jointly designate a lead commissioner to oversee the commissioning of the specific services that make up the defined rehabilitation pathway for people with complex psychosis. 
1.3.9 
The lead commissioner should: 
have in‑depth knowledge and experience of commissioning services for people with psychosis and other severe mental health conditions 
have knowledge of local rehabilitation services and partnerships 
be familiar with best practice in rehabilitation. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on organising the rehabilitation pathway and the lead commissioner . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: identifying people who would benefit most and evidence review P: supported accommodation (recommendation 1.3.2 and 1.3.4); evidence review F: components of an effective rehabilitation pathway (recommendations 1.3.1, 1.3.3, 1.3.5, 1.3.6 and 1.3.7); and evidence review G: integrated rehabilitation care pathways involving multiple providers (recommendations 1.3.8 and 1.3.9). 
Joint working 
Integrated rehabilitation pathway 
1.3.10 
The lead commissioner should work together with service providers to deliver an integrated rehabilitation pathway, by ensuring that: 
regular communication is supported between senior service managers and senior clinicians across providers of different services within the pathway 
budgets and other resources are shared between local authorities and health services, so that local and regional rehabilitation services meet the local population's needs 
funding mechanisms support collaboration between service providers and do not create unhelpful or perverse funding incentives that undermine people's progression through the rehabilitation pathway 
clinical records and care plans are shared between providers 
service level agreements are developed so that relevant services and agencies can work together in a timely and flexible way, including for transitions between services (see recommendation 1.3.7) 
services within the pathway are staffed by appropriately skilled staff 
the remit for each of the services making up the pathway (see recommendation 1.3.1) is clearly specified, including the population they cover. 
Transitions 
1.3.11 
The lead commissioner and service providers should ensure that transitions in people's care between the rehabilitation service and other mental health teams or primary care are: 
guided by criteria that are clearly defined in local policy 
supported by a group of local rehabilitation practitioners, with whom clinicians can discuss potential referrals and re-referrals and receive advice on appropriate treatment and support 
supported by close collaboration, including comprehensive handovers or an individually tailored period of co‑working between services 
agreed with the person and their family or carers (as appropriate) and the clinicians involved in the person's care, at least 3 months before the transition (unless a referral is urgent). 
1.3.12 
The lead commissioner and service providers should ensure that people have opportunities to visit potential supported accommodation before moving in to help them make an informed choice about the service. 
1.3.13 
The lead commissioner should think about ways to improve the sharing of information and IT systems between health and social care staff, particularly in relation to people placed out of area. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on joint working . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: integrated rehabilitation care pathways involving multiple providers (recommendation 1.3.10); evidence review Q: factors associated with successful transition (recommendations 1.3.11 and 1.3.12); and evidence review B: barriers in accessing rehabilitation services (recommendation 1.3.13). 
Working with other healthcare providers 
1.3.14 
The lead commissioner should oversee the agreement of local protocols and service level agreements with primary and secondary physical healthcare providers, for people having inpatient or community rehabilitation. These protocols should: 
promote access to national physical health screening programmes, health promotion, monitoring and interventions (see the section on physical healthcare ) 
ensure there is a system to monitor and report people's access to physical healthcare and outcomes that takes into account the increased physical health risks for specific subgroups, for example the higher prevalence of metabolic syndrome and diabetes in people from black, Asian and minority ethnic groups 
ensure that any physical health conditions are assessed and treated (see the section on physical healthcare ) 
ensure practitioners in primary care, secondary physical care and rehabilitation services work collaboratively and flexibly, drawing together the necessary expertise and capacity to manage physical health conditions 
ensure that the processes of the Mental Capacity Act (including Court of Protection decisions) do not delay care and treatment. 
1.3.15 
The lead commissioner should agree local protocols with specialist substance misuse services for people having inpatient or community rehabilitation who have substance misuse problems. These should: 
define local arrangements and the content of care to ensure people can get support from local substance misuse services 
include in‑reach arrangements for people in inpatient rehabilitation services 
monitor and review access to substance misuse services and outcomes. 
1.3.16 
The lead commissioner should agree a local protocol with the community mental health service to enable clozapine to be started or restarted in the community. This protocol should: 
be drawn up by, or in consultation with, the community mental health services pharmacist 
include all relevant safety checks 
include informing the person's GP. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on working with other healthcare providers . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: prevalence of comorbidity (recommendation 1.3.14); evidence review O: substance misuse (recommendation 1.3.15); and evidence review H: adjustments to standard treatment (recommendation 1.3.16). 
1.4 Improving access to rehabilitation 
1.4.1 
The lead commissioner and service providers should provide information about the local rehabilitation pathway and how it is accessed to health and social care practitioners, people who may benefit from rehabilitation and their families and carers. 
1.4.2 
The lead commissioner should work together with service providers to ensure that everyone with complex psychosis has access to rehabilitation services regardless of age, gender, ethnicity and other characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010 , and should actively monitor and report on access at least every 6 months. 
1.4.3 
If any differences are found in rates of access for specific groups of people (for example, women or ethnic groups) compared with anticipated rates, these should be addressed, for example through: 
providing bespoke services for specific groups, such as women-only services 
providing outreach into other services that work with under-served groups, or home visiting 
providing tailored information and advocacy. 
1.4.4 
Service providers should support people to access legal advice about their immigration status if required. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on improving access to rehabilitation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: barriers in accessing rehabilitation services . 
1.5 Delivering services within the rehabilitation pathway 
Multidisciplinary teams 
1.5.1 
Inpatient and community rehabilitation services for people with complex psychosis should be staffed by multidisciplinary teams comprising a range of professionals with skills and competence in mental health rehabilitation, including: 
rehabilitation psychiatrists 
practitioner psychologists 
nurses 
occupational therapists 
social workers 
approved mental health professionals 
support workers (including peer support workers) 
specialist mental health pharmacists. 
1.5.2 
The multidisciplinary team should have access to physical exercise coaches, vocational trainers, welfare rights specialists, dietitians or nutritionists, podiatrists, speech and language therapists and physiotherapists. 
Size of accommodation 
1.5.3 
Commissioners and providers of inpatient rehabilitation services and supported accommodation should be aware of the benefits to people of providing rehabilitation in smaller facilities, for example for promoting self-management, autonomy and social integration. 
Service quality improvement 
1.5.4 
Consider using tools to support quality improvement such as the Quality Indicator for Rehabilitative Care (QuIRC) for inpatient rehabilitation units , and the QuIRC-Supported Accommodation (QuIRC‑SA) for supported accommodation. 
1.5.5 
Consider joining a peer accreditation or quality improvement forum. 
Rehabilitation in the community 
1.5.6 
For people with complex psychosis who are living in supported accommodation, specialist clinical care should be provided by a multidisciplinary community mental health rehabilitation team whose work is integrated within an overall framework for the delivery of community mental health services. This team should: 
coordinate the person's care and hold overall clinical responsibility for the person's mental health while they are living in the community 
provide a designated care coordinator for each person but operate with a shared team caseload approach; this involves discussing people's care together at regular team meetings to pool and agree ideas about care and treatment 
make the majority of contacts with the person in their home or community settings rather than where the team is based 
work closely with staff at the person's supported accommodation to tailor people's care plans to their needs (see recommendation 1.7.7 ) and make clear which staff are responsible for providing different parts of the person's treatment and support as part of their rehabilitation 
support and oversee the person's progression through the rehabilitation pathway by: 
increasing the intensity of treatment and support during periods of relapse 
providing ongoing contact and support during any periods of acute inpatient care 
enabling the person's discharge home at the earliest opportunity 
adjusting care plans to enable the person to gain the skills and confidence to manage in more independent accommodation 
liaise with the person's GP about their physical healthcare 
liaise with the relevant service when the person is ready to be discharged from the team to ensure a smooth transition. 
1.5.7 
Senior clinicians in the community mental health rehabilitation team should work with commissioners and supported accommodation providers to: 
hold an overview of the local mental health supported accommodation services, including current vacancies and the quality of care provided 
ensure that the rehabilitation pathway continues to develop in line with changes in the needs of the local population. 
1.5.8 
Community mental health rehabilitation teams should include as part of their team the staff who are designated care managers for people placed out of area. 
Supported accommodation 
1.5.9 
Supported accommodation services should: 
provide support appropriate to the person's mental and physical health needs 
promote stability and avoid unnecessary moves 
be in a familiar place close to the person's social and cultural networks, if this is clinically appropriate 
include support with tasks such as managing money and everyday living while encouraging independence and participation in society 
give the person the option (if they are eligible) to have a personal budget or direct payment so they can choose and control their social care and support (for more information on personal budgets and direct payments, see the NICE guideline on people's experience in adult social care services ) 
give the person a safe place that feels like their own 
recognise and safeguard individual vulnerability, risk, loneliness and exploitation. 
Rehabilitation in inpatient settings 
1.5.10 
Inpatient rehabilitation services should have an expected maximum length of stay (which should be used as a guide rather than an absolute) to reduce the chance of people becoming 'institutionalised'. 
1.5.11 
Service providers should advise people about the impact of being in inpatient rehabilitation services for an extended period of time on their welfare benefits and the tenure of any existing housing tenancy. 
Out-of-area placements 
1.5.12 
Out-of-area placements should be limited to people with particularly complex needs. This could include: 
people with psychosis and brain injury, or psychosis and autism spectrum disorder, who need treatment in a highly specialist rehabilitation unit or 
people who have a clear clinical or legal requirement to receive treatment outside their home area. 
1.5.13 
Out-of-area placements should only be provided after a local placement funding panel (including a rehabilitation practitioner, a senior service manager and local commissioner) has confirmed that the person's care cannot be provided locally. 
A designated care manager (or 'out-of-area placement review officer') based within the community mental health rehabilitation team, should review the person's placement after the first 3 months and then every 6 months, to ensure it still meets their needs. This should include: 
reviewing the person's progress with them and the multidisciplinary team at their placement 
agreeing the necessary steps to help the person progress in their recovery so they can transfer to an appropriate placement in their local area at the earliest opportunity. 
1.5.14 
When people are placed in out-of-area rehabilitation services, provide an explanation in writing to the person (and their family or carers, as appropriate): 
why they have been placed out of area 
the steps that will be taken so they can return to their local area 
how their family or carers will be helped to keep in contact 
the advocacy support available to help them. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect services, see the rationale and impact section on delivering services within the rehabilitation pathway . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: comparative effectiveness of different types of rehabilitation services (recommendations 1.5.1, 1.5.2, 1.5.6 to 1.5.8 and 1.5.12 to 1.5.15); evidence review F: components of an effective rehabilitation pathway (recommendations 1.5.3 to 1.5.5 and 1.5.10); and evidence review P: supported accommodation (recommendations 1.5.9 and 1.5.11). 
1.6 Recovery-orientated rehabilitation services 
1.6.1 
Staff should build on people's strengths and encourage hope and optimism by: 
helping people choose and work towards personal goals, based on their skills, aspirations and motivations 
developing and maintaining continuity of individual therapeutic relationships wherever possible 
helping them find meaningful occupations (including work, leisure or education) and build support networks using voluntary, health, social care and mainstream resources 
helping people to gain skills to manage both their everyday activities and their mental health, including moving towards self-management of medication (see the recommendations on helping people to manage their own medicines ) 
providing opportunities for sharing experiences with peers 
encouraging positive risk-taking 
developing people's self-esteem and confidence 
validating people's achievements and celebrating their progress 
recognising that people vary in their experiences and progress at different rates 
improving people's understanding of their experiences and the treatment and support that may help them – for example, through accessible written information, face-to-face discussions and group work. 
Supporting people to make decisions 
1.6.2 
Staff must meet people's communication needs as set out in the NHS Accessible Information Standard . 
1.6.3 
Provide support to people, if they need it, to express their views, preferences and aspirations about their care and support in line with recommendations in the NICE guideline on people's experience in adult social care services . 
Universal staff competencies 
These recommendations apply to all staff working in the services described in recommendation 1.3.4 . 
1.6.4 
Ensure that staff training emphasises recovery principles so that all rehabilitation staff work with a recovery-orientated approach . 
1.6.5 
Provide support for staff to acknowledge and manage any feelings of pessimism about people's potential for recovery. Support could include helping staff to share experiences and frustrations with each other, for example through supervision, reflective practice and peer support groups. 
1.6.6 
Ensure that all staff are trained and skilled in supporting structured group activities and promoting daily living skills. 
1.6.7 
Ensure that staff have skills and competence in risk assessment and management to an appropriate level for the service they work in. For example, staff in high-dependency units should be able to work with people who have a history of, or currently present with, serious risks to themselves or others. 
1.6.8 
Rehabilitation services should ensure that their healthcare staff are competent to recognise and care for people with psychosis and coexisting substance misuse. 
Maintaining and supporting social networks 
1.6.9 
Enable the person to maintain links with their home community by: 
supporting them to maintain relationships with family and friends, for example, by finding ways to help with transport 
helping them to stay in touch with social and recreational contacts 
helping them to keep links with employment, education and their local community. 
This is particularly important if people are in an out-of-area placement. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect services, see the rationale and impact section on recovery-orientated rehabilitation services . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: rehabilitation approaches, care, support and treatment (recommendations 1.6.1, 1.6.2 and 1.6.4); evidence review I: collaborative care planning (recommendations 1.6.7 and 1.6.9); evidence review B: barriers in accessing rehabilitation services (recommendation 1.6.3); evidence review K: activities of daily living (recommendation 1.6.6); evidence review A: identifying people who would benefit most (recommendation 1.6.5); and evidence review O: substance misuse (recommendation 1.6.8). 
1.7 Person-centred care planning through assessment and formulation 
Assessment 
1.7.1 
Offer people a comprehensive biopsychosocial needs assessment by a multidisciplinary team within 4 weeks of entering the rehabilitation service. 
1.7.2 
Include the following as part of the comprehensive assessment: 
systematic assessment of primary and coexisting mental health problems 
psychiatric history, including past admissions and treatments, responses to treatment, adverse effects from medicines, and medication adherence 
medicines reconciliation by a specialist mental health pharmacist 
vulnerabilities, including self-neglect, exploitation and abuse, and the person's risk of harm to themselves (including suicide) and others 
physical health and wellbeing through a physical health check (see recommendation 1.7.3) 
developmental history from birth, including milestones; relationships with peers; and problems at school (identifying any problems with social or cognitive functioning, motor development and skills or coexisting neurodevelopmental conditions) 
occupational and educational history, including educational attainment and reason for leaving any employment 
social history, including accommodation history (noting the highest level of independence); culture, ethnicity and spirituality; leisure activities; and finances 
smoking, alcohol and illicit substance use 
psychological and psychosocial history, including relationships, life history, experiences of abuse and trauma, coping strategies, strengths, resiliency, and previous psychological or psychosocial interventions 
current social network, including any caring responsibilities 
current skills in activities of daily living 
current cognitive function, including any communication needs. 
1.7.3 
The initial physical health check in the comprehensive assessment by the rehabilitation service should include: 
body mass index 
waist circumference 
full blood count 
pulse and blood pressure 
glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c), blood lipid profile, liver function tests, renal function tests and thyroid function 
prolactin levels (for people on medicines that raise prolactin levels). 
renal function tests and calcium levels (for people on lithium) 
drug levels where appropriate, for example mood stabilising or anti-epileptic medicines, lithium and clozapine 
electrocardiogram (ECG) 
smoking, alcohol and illicit substance use 
nutritional status, diet and level of physical activity 
continence and constipation (particularly if the person is on clozapine) 
any movement disorders 
sexual health 
vision, hearing and podiatry 
oral inspection of general dental health 
any difficulties with swallowing. 
1.7.4 
Be aware that people with complex psychosis are more likely to have multiple comorbidities, both mental and physical. 
1.7.5 
Be aware that people with complex psychosis have a higher prevalence of the following mental health conditions (which may contribute to complexity in rehabilitation): 
anxiety (see the NICE guideline on generalised anxiety disorder and panic disorder in adults ) 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (see the NICE guideline on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ) 
autism spectrum disorder (see the NICE guidelines on autism spectrum disorder in under 19s: recognition, referral and diagnosis , autism spectrum disorder in under 19s: support and management and autism spectrum disorder in adults ) 
borderline personality disorder (see the NICE guidelines on borderline personality disorder and antisocial personality disorder ) 
cognitive impairments (including acquired brain disorders) 
depression (see the NICE guideline on depression in adults ) 
speech, language and communication disorders. 
1.7.6 
Be aware that people with complex psychosis have a higher prevalence of the following physical health conditions (which may contribute to higher mortality in this population): 
cardiovascular disease 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
dental problems and poor oral health 
diabetes 
metabolic syndrome 
obesity 
osteoporosis 
substance misuse. 
See the section on care and treatment for physical health conditions for links to other relevant NICE guidance. 
Care planning and review 
1.7.7 
Use the results of the comprehensive assessment to make a team formulation to inform treatment and care planning. The care plan should: 
be developed collaboratively with the person 
cover the areas of need identified during assessment (see recommendation 1.7.2), including both mental and physical health (for physical healthcare planning, see the section on responsibilities of different healthcare providers ) 
include the person's personal recovery goals 
clarify actions and responsibilities for staff, the person themselves and their family or carers (where relevant). 
1.7.8 
Consider using accessible formatting to support the person in jointly developing their care plan, regardless of whether or not they have identified communication and information needs. 
1.7.9 
Review people's progress and care plans with them at multidisciplinary care review meetings at least: 
every month in the inpatient rehabilitation service 
every 6 months in the community. 
1.7.10 
Incorporate both staff-rated and service user-rated measurements of the person's progress into their care plan reviews, so that their support can be adjusted if needed. 
1.7.11 
Update care plans according to changes in the person's needs after these meetings and between meetings as needed. At every meeting or review, consider and plan with the person their transition to the next step in the rehabilitation pathway. 
1.7.12 
Ensure that care plans are shared with the person and everyone involved in the person's care (for example, clinicians, supported accommodation staff, and the person's family or carers, if the person agrees) at: 
each review 
each transition point in the rehabilitation pathway 
at discharge from the service. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on person-centred care planning through assessment and formulation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: prevalence of comorbidity (recommendations 1.7.1 to 1.7.6) and evidence review I: collaborative care planning (recommendations 1.7.7 to 1.7.12). 
1.8 Rehabilitation programmes and interventions 
Daily living skills 
1.8.1 
Rehabilitation services should develop a culture that promotes activities to improve daily living skills as highly as other interventions (for example, medicines). 
1.8.2 
Provide activities to help people with complex psychosis develop and maintain daily living skills such as self-care, laundry, shopping, budgeting, using public transport, cooking and communicating (including using digital technology). 
1.8.3 
Support people to engage in activities to develop or improve their daily living skills by: 
making a plan with each person that focuses on their needs and regularly reviews their goals 
providing activities they enjoy and that motivate them 
enabling them to practise their skills in risk-managed real life, such as kitchens and laundry rooms, wherever possible. 
Interpersonal and social skills 
1.8.4 
Offer structured group activities (social, leisure or occupational) aimed at improving interpersonal skills. These could be peer-led or peer-supported and should be offered: 
daily in inpatient rehabilitation services 
at least weekly in community settings. 
1.8.5 
Offer regular opportunities to discuss the choice of group activities, for example by inviting everyone in the inpatient unit or supported accommodation service to a 'community meeting'. 
1.8.6 
Offer regular one-to-one sessions with a named member of staff to help the person plan and review their activity programme. The person could be: 
the primary nurse in inpatient rehabilitation or 
the person's care coordinator or keyworker in community rehabilitation services. 
Engagement in community activities, including leisure, education and work 
1.8.7 
Programmes to engage people in community activities should: 
be flexible and make reasonable adjustments to accommodate the person's illness and fluctuating needs 
be individualised 
develop structure and purpose in the person's day 
aim to increase their sense of identity, belonging and social inclusion in the community 
involve peer support 
recognise people's skills and strengths. 
1.8.8 
Offer people the chance to be involved in a range of activities that they enjoy, tailored to their level of ability and wellness. 
1.8.9 
Offer people a range of educational and skill development opportunities, for example, recovery colleges and mainstream adult education settings, which build confidence and may lead to qualifications if the person wishes. 
1.8.10 
For people who would like to work towards mainstream employment, consider referring them to supported employment that uses the Individual Placement and Support approach . 
1.8.11 
Take into account and advise people about the impact of supported employment on their welfare benefits. 
1.8.12 
For people who are not ready to return to paid employment, consider alternatives such as transitional employment schemes and volunteering. 
1.8.13 
Consider providing a cognitive remediation intervention alongside vocational rehabilitation services. 
1.8.14 
Develop partnerships, for example with voluntary organisations and local employment advice schemes, to increase opportunities for support to prepare people for work or education. 
Substance misuse 
1.8.15 
Ask people about their substance use (alcohol and illicit substances) when they enter the rehabilitation service. 
1.8.16 
Assess people's readiness to address their substance misuse, for example, through motivational interviewing . 
1.8.17 
Rehabilitation services should work with specialist substance misuse services to support people in line with NICE guidelines on: 
coexisting severe mental illness (psychosis) and substance misuse: assessment and management in healthcare settings 
coexisting severe mental illness and substance misuse: community health and social care services 
alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis, assessment and management of harmful drinking (high-risk drinking) and alcohol dependence . 
1.8.18 
Rehabilitation services should offer support and substance misuse interventions that aim to: 
support harm reduction 
change behaviour 
help people develop coping strategies 
improve engagement with substance misuse services 
prevent relapse. 
1.8.19 
Substance misuse services should provide reasonable adjustments to help people use specialist substance misuse services, for example, by providing in‑reach services to people in the inpatient rehabilitation service. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on rehabilitation programmes and interventions . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: activities of daily living (recommendations 1.8.1 to 1.8.3); evidence review L: interpersonal functioning (recommendations 1.8.4 to 1.8.6); evidence review M: engagement in community activities and evidence review J: rehabilitation approaches, care, support and treatment (recommendations 1.8.7 to 1.8.14); and evidence review O: substance misuse (recommendations 1.8.15 to 1.8.19). 
1.9 Adjustments to mental health treatments in rehabilitation 
1.9.1 
For standard pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments, follow recommendations in these sections of the NICE guideline on psychosis and schizophrenia in adults : 
choice of antipsychotic medication (section 1.3.5) 
how to use antipsychotic medication (section 1.3.6) 
how to deliver psychological interventions (section 1.3.7) 
subsequent acute episodes of psychosis or schizophrenia and referral in crisis (section 1.4). 
Also see the NICE guideline on bipolar disorder, in particular section 1.10 on how to use medication . 
1.9.2 
Routinely monitor for and treat other coexisting mental health conditions, including depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, anxiety, substance misuse, and risk of suicide (for guidance on these conditions, see NICE's topic page on mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions ). 
1.9.3 
For people diagnosed with a coexisting autism spectrum disorder, follow recommendations in the NICE guideline on autism spectrum disorder in adults . 
Psychological therapies 
1.9.4 
Continue to offer people with complex psychosis individual cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and family intervention as recommended by the NICE guideline on psychosis and schizophrenia in adults . Follow the recommendations on delivery and monitoring in the section of that guideline on psychological interventions. 
1.9.5 
Consider additional psychological interventions, especially for people who are not ready to engage in CBT. Use psychological assessment and formulation to identify the most appropriate therapeutic intervention, guided by the person's preferences. Interventions could include: 
those focusing on learned behaviours and how context influences behaviour 
mindfulness approaches where people can be supported to focus on and attend to present experiences 
approaches that include a focus on wider systems such as families or ward environments and their impact on the person. 
1.9.6 
Consider training all rehabilitation staff in psychologically informed approaches such as motivational interviewing , positive behaviour support , behavioural activation , trauma-informed care , and simple techniques for supporting people who are having troubling thoughts and feelings. 
Pharmacological treatments 
Anti-epileptic medicines : Follow the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) safety advice on the use of valproate , valproate use in people younger than 55 years , valproate use in women and girls , valproate use in men and anti-epileptic drugs in pregnancy . 
1.9.7 
For people with complex psychosis whose symptoms have not responded adequately to an optimised dose of clozapine alone, consider augmenting clozapine with the following, depending on target symptoms: 
an antipsychotic, for example aripiprazole for schizophrenia and related psychoses and/or 
a mood stabiliser for psychosis with significant affective symptoms and/or 
an antidepressant if there are significant depressive symptoms in addition to the psychotic condition. 
Be aware of potential drug interactions and note that not all combinations of treatments may be in accordance with UK marketing authorisations. Any off-licence prescribing should be communicated in writing with the person's GP. Seek specialist advice if needed, for example from another psychiatrist specialising in treatment-resistant symptoms or a specialist mental health pharmacist. 
1.9.8 
Optimise the dosage (as tolerated) of medicines used to manage complex psychosis (see recommendations 1.9.1 and 1.9.7) according to the BNF and therapeutic plasma levels in the first instance. 
1.9.9 
Only use multiple medicines, or doses above BNF or summary of product characteristics limits, to treat complex psychosis: 
if this is agreed and documented by the multidisciplinary team and the person (and their family, carer or advocate, as appropriate) 
as a limited therapeutic trial, returning to conventional dosages or monotherapy after 3 months, unless the clinical benefits of higher doses or combined therapy clearly outweigh the risks 
if the medicines are being used to treat specific symptoms that are disabling or distressing 
after taking into account drug interactions and side effects, for example be cautious when adding an antidepressant to clozapine for someone who has experienced symptoms of mania 
if systems and processes are in place for monitoring the person's response to treatment and side effects (monitoring may include physical examination, ECG and appropriate haematological tests). 
1.9.10 
Regularly review medicines used to manage complex psychosis and monitor effectiveness, adverse effects and drug interactions, including monitoring for constipation for those taking clozapine. 
1.9.11 
If pharmacological treatment is not effective, consider stopping the medicine: 
following a thorough review of treatment 
after agreeing and documenting the decision at a meeting with a multidisciplinary team and the person (and their family, carer or advocate, as appropriate) 
with caution, particularly if the person has been on the medicine for many years 
by reducing the dose slowly and closely monitoring the person for symptoms of relapse. 
1.9.12 
Monitor drug levels to check adherence and guide dosing: 
At least annually and as needed for clozapine and mood stabilising anti-epileptic medicines. 
Every 3 to 6 months for people established on lithium, following recommendations on using lithium in the NICE guideline on bipolar disorder . 
1.9.13 
Consider monitoring prolactin levels annually if the person is taking a medicine that raises prolactin, and more regularly if they have symptoms. 
1.9.14 
Monitor thyroid function, renal function and calcium levels at least every 6 months for people established on lithium, following recommendations on using lithium in the NICE guideline on bipolar disorder . 
1.9.15 
Consider annual ECGs for everyone with complex psychosis in rehabilitation services, and more regularly if they are taking medicines, combinations of medicines or medicines above BNF or summary of product characteristics limits that may alter cardiac rhythm (for example, causing prolonged QT interval). 
1.9.16 
Be aware that people may be using non-prescription substances (for example, alcohol, smoking or drugs) to cope with their symptoms, which may affect their prescribed medicines. 
1.9.17 
Consider referring for a second opinion from a relevant specialist when treating people whose symptoms have not responded well to standard treatment. 
Adherence to medicines 
1.9.18 
Rehabilitation services should promote adherence to medicines. Strategies to promote adherence could include avoiding complex medicine regimens and polypharmacy wherever possible. 
Helping people to manage their own medicines 
1.9.19 
Offer people the opportunity to manage their own medicines through a graduated self-management of medicines programme if they have been assessed as able to take part. 
1.9.20 
Be flexible in tailoring the self-management of medicines programme and choice of equipment to the person's needs and preferences. This could include using monitored dosage systems together with a reminder system (for examples, charts or alarms). 
Electroconvulsive therapy 
1.9.21 
See the NICE technology appraisal guidance on the use of electroconvulsive therapy . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on adjustments to mental health treatments in rehabilitation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: adjustments to standard treatment (recommendations 1.9.1 to 1.9.17) and evidence review K: activities of daily living (recommendations 1.9.18 to 1.9.20). 
1.10 Physical healthcare 
Responsibilities of different healthcare providers 
1.10.1 
GPs should develop and use practice case registers to monitor the physical and mental health of people with complex psychosis in primary care. 
1.10.2 
For people having community rehabilitation, GPs should assume lead responsibility for the person's physical health needs, including health checks and treatment of physical health conditions, working collaboratively with the community mental health rehabilitation team and other services as relevant. 
1.10.3 
For people having inpatient rehabilitation, the rehabilitation team should ensure that health checks, treatment of physical health conditions and other healthcare needs are addressed. 
Coordinating physical healthcare 
1.10.4 
Nominate a professional from the rehabilitation service to provide continuity of physical healthcare across settings, liaising between the rehabilitation service, primary care, secondary mental health and secondary physical healthcare. 
1.10.5 
The nominated professional should work in collaboration with a healthcare professional to develop and oversee the physical healthcare plan, ensuring it is informed by the initial physical health check (see recommendation 1.7.3 ) and include: 
health promotion interventions (see the section on healthy living, below) 
routine screening through the national screening programmes (for example, cervical cancer) if the person is eligible 
monitoring side effects of pharmacological treatments (see the section on pharmacological treatments ) 
monitoring of physical health (see the section on monitoring physical health, below) 
monitoring of oral health 
treatment plans for any risk factors or health conditions (see care and treatment for physical health conditions, below) 
any reasonable adjustments needed for healthy living, screening, monitoring or treatments 
the physical healthcare responsibilities for primary care, the rehabilitation service, other secondary mental health services and secondary physical healthcare. 
Healthy living 
1.10.6 
Offer people who smoke help to stop smoking, even if previous attempts have been unsuccessful. 
1.10.7 
Be aware of the potential significant impact of reducing cigarette smoking on the metabolism of other drugs, particularly clozapine. Follow recommendations 1.1.2.4 and 1.1.2.5 in the physical health section of NICE's guideline on psychosis and schizophrenia in adults . 
1.10.8 
Offer people a combined healthy eating and physical activity programme and support them to take part in it. 
1.10.9 
Give people clear and accessible information about any health risks related to their: 
medicines (side effects) 
lifestyle, including: 
diet and physical activity 
smoking, alcohol or illicit substance use 
oral hygiene 
bone health 
sexual and reproductive health. 
1.10.10 
Offer annual flu vaccination to people: 
in inpatient rehabilitation services 
in communal supported accommodation 
who have a comorbid physical health condition (such as chronic respiratory disease, chronic heart disease or diabetes) that means they are more likely to develop serious complications from flu (see the section on clinical risk groups in NICE's guideline on flu vaccination ). 
1.10.11 
Explain to people that family members or carers who support them may also be eligible for free flu vaccination (see the section on flu vaccination in carers in NICE's guideline on flu vaccination ). 
1.10.12 
Support people to maintain good oral hygiene and access dental appointments in line with NICE's guideline on oral health promotion . 
1.10.13 
Consider providing advice and support for good sleep hygiene and maximise opportunities for healthy sleep. For example, for inpatients, avoid barriers to sleep such as environmental factors or intrusive night-time checks. 
Monitoring physical health 
1.10.14 
Offer people in rehabilitation services a routine physical health check at least annually. The annual physical health check should include: 
body mass index 
waist circumference 
pulse and blood pressure 
full blood count, HbA1c, blood lipid profile, renal function tests, liver function tests and thyroid function 
smoking, alcohol or drug use 
nutritional status, diet and level of physical activity 
any movement disorders 
sexual health 
vision, hearing and podiatry 
oral inspection of general dental health. 
For additional physical health checks associated with pharmacological treatments, see the section on pharmacological treatments . 
1.10.15 
Give people the choice, whenever possible, to have their annual physical health check at their GP practice or by a trained professional at the rehabilitation service (see recommendation 1.10.5). 
1.10.16 
Ensure a copy of the results of the physical health check is available to the rehabilitation service, primary care, secondary mental healthcare and secondary physical healthcare as appropriate, and is recorded in the case notes. Discuss any important findings with the person. 
Care and treatment for physical health conditions 
1.10.17 
Use the annual physical health check in recommendation 1.10.14 to identify at the earliest opportunity people who: 
have or are at high risk of cardiovascular disease (see the NICE guideline on cardiovascular disease ) 
have hypertension (see the NICE guideline on hypertension ) 
are obese or at risk of obesity (see the NICE guideline on overweight and obesity management ) 
have diabetes or are at high risk of diabetes (see the NICE guidelines on preventing type 2 diabetes , type 1 diabetes in adults: diagnosis and management and  type 2 diabetes in adults: management ) 
are physically inactive (see the NICE guideline on physical activity ) 
have COPD (see the NICE guideline on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ). 
Offer treatment in line with NICE guidance, ideally in primary care. 
1.10.18 
Be alert to the possibility of infection with blood-borne diseases in people who could be at risk, for example because of homelessness, intravenous drug use or a history of sexually transmitted disease. For more information about those at risk and case identification, see the NICE guidelines on hepatitis B and C testing and HIV testing . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on physical healthcare . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: prevalence of comorbidity (recommendations 1.10.1 to 1.10.3 and 1.10.18) and evidence review N: engagement in healthy living (recommendations 1.10.4 to 1.10.17). 
Terms used in this guideline 
Behavioural activation 
A low-intensity intervention using goal setting and activity schedules to encourage people to engage in activities they have previously avoided due to factors such as low mood or motivation. 
Cognitive remediation intervention 
A manualised intervention to improve people's cognitive function. 
Commissioners 
At the time of publication, the development of integrated care systems, integrated care providers and NHS provider collaboratives is changing the commissioning landscape in the English health and care system. This may be formalised within new legislation. All references to 'commissioners' and 'commissioning' in this guideline should therefore be read in that context, wherever the commissioning function may sit and however it may operate in the future NHS in England. 
Community mental health rehabilitation team 
Teams providing specialist skills and care coordination to identify and address people's rehabilitation needs in the community. These teams can work in all community settings, but commonly work with people living in supported accommodation, often over many years, to enable their optimum level of functioning and independence. 
Community rehabilitation units 
Inpatient rehabilitation units that are set outside hospital grounds. These units provide the full complement of multidisciplinary treatment and support for people with ongoing complex needs that prevent them from being discharged from a high-dependency rehabilitation unit directly to supported accommodation. They build on the progress made in the high-dependency inpatient rehabilitation unit and have a strong focus on promoting independent living skills and community participation. Most referrals come from high-dependency rehabilitation units or acute inpatient units. Community rehabilitation units can only care for detained people under the Mental Health Act 1983 if the unit is registered as a ward. If they are not registered as a ward, they can care for people who are voluntary or those subject to a community order (for example, a community treatment order, guardianship, or conditionally discharged Section 37/41). The expected length of stay in a community rehabilitation unit is 1 to 2 years. 
Complex psychosis 
In this guideline, 'complex psychosis' refers to a primary diagnosis of a psychotic illness (this includes schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder, psychotic depression, delusional disorders and schizoaffective disorder) with severe and treatment-resistant symptoms of psychosis and functional impairment. 
People with complex psychosis usually also have 1 or more of the following: 
cognitive impairments associated with their psychosis 
coexisting mental health conditions (including substance misuse) 
pre-existing neurodevelopmental disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
physical health problems, such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease or pulmonary conditions. 
Together, these complex problems severely affect the person's social and everyday functioning, and mean they need a period of rehabilitation to enable their recovery and ensure they achieve their optimum level of independence. 
Floating outreach 
Services providing support to people living in time-unlimited, usually self-contained, individual tenancies. Staff are based off-site and visit for a few hours per week, providing practical and emotional support, with the aim of reducing support over time to zero. 
Graduated self-management of medicines programme 
Supporting a person to learn how to take and manage their own medicines. This usually involves them managing 1 day of medicines to begin with, with staff undertaking spot checks before progressing to managing 2 days, then 3 days and so on. 
High-dependency rehabilitation units 
Inpatient rehabilitation units for people with complex psychosis whose symptoms have not yet been stabilised and whose associated risks and challenging behaviours remain problematic. These units aim to maximise benefits of medication, address physical health comorbidities, reduce challenging behaviours, re‑engage families and facilitate access to the community. Most people in high-dependency units are detained under the Mental Health Act 1983. Most (80%) referrals to high-dependency units are from acute inpatient units and 20% from forensic units, with only occasional referrals of people living in the community. The expected length of stay is around 1 year. 
Highly specialist rehabilitation units 
Inpatient rehabilitation units for people with psychosis and comorbid conditions who need a specialist programme tailored to their specific comorbidity (such as acquired brain injury, severe personality disorder, autism spectrum disorder or Huntingdon's disease). Often, the complexity of the person's coexisting conditions is associated with greater support needs (more challenging behaviours and/or a greater risk to themselves and others) than people having treatment in a high-dependency rehabilitation unit. Referrals come from acute inpatient units or high-dependency rehabilitation units, and the expected length of stay is over 3 years. 
Individual Placement and Support (IPS) approach 
A method of supporting people with severe mental health problems into work. IPS finds people a job quickly and then provides time-unlimited individualised support to keep the job and manage their mental health. 
Inpatient rehabilitation units 
Units providing specialist inpatient care to people with complex psychosis. They can be based within a hospital or in the community. 
Local placement funding panel 
A panel not specific to rehabilitation, who agree funding (health, social care or both) for people to receive treatment within area or out of area, for example in a nursing or residential care home, or in an inpatient rehabilitation unit. The panel has a commissioner and senior service managers, as well as clinicians (a senior rehabilitation practitioner plus possibly a senior clinician who works in general adult care, not specifically rehabilitation). 
Longer-term high-dependency rehabilitation units 
These units provide longer-term inpatient rehabilitation for people with high levels of disability due to treatment-resistant symptoms and comorbid conditions that take more than 1 year to stabilise, and who have ongoing risks to others and/or challenging behaviours. The aims of longer-term high-dependency rehabilitation units are the same as for high-dependency rehabilitation units, and most referrals come from high-dependency rehabilitation units. 
Motivational interviewing 
A person-centred psychologically informed approach that supports behavioural change by helping people explore and resolve ambivalence towards change. 
Out-of-area placements 
A placement that provides treatment and support in an inpatient rehabilitation unit or supported accommodation outside the local area where a person usually lives, and/or outside the catchment area for the local authority that has responsibility for their housing. The placement may be away from the person's local area because there is no local service available, or because there are clinical or legal reasons that make local rehabilitation inappropriate for their needs, or because they prefer to have treatment outside their local area. 
Positive behaviour support 
A behaviour management system that seeks to understand the reasons behind problematic behaviours and to find alternative ways to meet goals and needs. 
Psychologically informed approaches 
Brief skills-based interventions that can be delivered by any staff member or service user who has had suitable training in the intervention. They include: guided self-help using online resources or workbooks; relaxation or mindfulness; stress workshops and behavioural activation groups. 
Recovery colleges 
Peer-led education and training programmes for mental health service users. They provide education as a route to recovery, not as a form of therapy. The courses are co‑devised and co‑delivered by people with lived experience of mental illness and by mental health professionals. 
Recovery-orientated approach 
There is no single definition of recovery for people with mental health problems, but the guiding principle is the belief that it is possible for someone to regain a meaningful life, despite serious mental illness. In this guideline, it refers to someone achieving the best quality of life they can, while living and coping with their symptoms. It is an ongoing process whereby the person is supported to build up their confidence and skills and resilience, through setting and achieving goals to minimise the impact of mental health problems on their everyday life. 
Residential care 
Communal facilities, staffed 24 hours, where day-to-day needs are provided (including meals, supervision of medicines and cleaning), and placements are not time limited. People do not hold a tenancy in a residential care home. 
Supported accommodation 
An umbrella term covering residential care, supported housing and floating outreach. 
Supported housing 
Shared or individual self-contained, time-limited tenancies with staff based on site up to 24 hours a day who help the person to gain skills to move on to less supported accommodation. The intended length of stay is usually about 2 years but in practice, only around one-third of people move on in that time. 
Team formulation 
A shared understanding of the issues that brought the person into rehabilitation services. It is their story, but draws on information from theory and research, as well as the experiences of the person, professionals and, where possible, others such as carers. It includes factors that made the person vulnerable to developing problems, factors that triggered the problems and factors that keep the problems going. A team formulation includes strengths and resources and points to ways that problems can be addressed. 
Transitional employment schemes 
These schemes give people a supported occupation in which to gain pre-vocational work experiences and potentially prepare for mainstream employment. One of the original examples was the 'clubhouse' model of psychosocial rehabilitation developed at Fountain House in New York. 
Trauma-informed care 
Care that is built on an understanding that anyone using services could have experienced psychosocial trauma and that this is likely to influence how they engage with care. Key principles include safety and avoiding re-traumatisation; relationship building; peer support; collaboration and mutuality; empowerment and choice; and an awareness of cultural, historical and gender issues. 
Treatment-resistant symptoms 
Persistent symptoms that have not responded to the range of treatments (including pharmacological treatments) recommended in the NICE guidance for the person's condition. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
