Face to face assessment | Suspected sepsis in under 16s: recognition, diagnosis and early management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Suspected sepsis in under 16s: recognition, diagnosis and early management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG254 
Published: 
19 November 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Could this be sepsis? 
Face to face assessment 
Evaluating risk level 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Training and education 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.3 Initial assessment and examination
1.4 Interpreting findings
Face to face assessment 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.3 Initial assessment and examination 
1.3.1 
Assess temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, level of consciousness and oxygen saturation in people aged 12 to 15 with suspected sepsis. [2016] 
1.3.2 
Assess temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, level of consciousness, oxygen saturation and capillary refill time in children under 12 with suspected sepsis. [2016] 
1.3.3 
Measure blood pressure of children under 5 if heart rate or capillary refill time is abnormal and equipment is available, including a correctly-sized blood pressure cuff. In community settings, only do this if taking a measurement does not cause a delay in assessment or treatment. [2016] 
1.3.4 
Measure blood pressure of children aged 5 to 11 who might have sepsis if equipment is available, including a correctly-sized cuff. In community settings, only do this if taking a measurement does not cause a delay in assessment or treatment. [2016] 
1.3.5 
In community settings, measure oxygen saturation if equipment is available and taking a measurement does not cause a delay in assessment or treatment. [2016] 
1.3.6 
Examine people with suspected sepsis for: 
mottled or ashen appearance 
cyanosis of the skin, lips or tongue 
non-blanching petechial or purpuric rash 
any breach of skin integrity (for example, cuts, burns or skin infections) 
other rash indicating potential infection. 
For signs and symptoms of meningococcal disease, see the NICE guideline on bacterial meningitis and meningococcal disease . [2016, amended 2024] 
1.3.7 
Ask the person or their family or carers how often the person urinated in the past 18 hours. [2016] 
1.3.8 
Ask the person with suspected sepsis and their family or carers about any recent fever or rigors. [2016] 
1.3.9 
Ask the person or their family or carers if they have recently presented (for example to their GP or to hospital) with symptoms or signs that could indicate sepsis. [2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2024 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on initial assessment and examination . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: early management of suspected sepsis (except antibiotic therapy) in the NEWS2 population, in acute hospital settings . 
1.3.10 
As part of the initial assessment, carry out a thorough clinical examination to look for sources of infection, including sources that might need drainage or other interventions. Follow the recommendations on finding and controlling the source of infection . [2016, amended 2024] 
1.4 Interpreting findings 
Temperature in suspected sepsis 
1.4.1 
Do not rely on fever or hypothermia alone to rule sepsis either in or out. [2016] 
1.4.2 
Take into account that some groups of people under 16 with sepsis may not develop a raised temperature. These include: 
people living with chronic illnesses, disabilities, or complex care needs 
people having treatment for cancer 
people severely ill with sepsis 
babies or children 
people with a spinal cord injury [2016, amended 2024] 
1.4.3 
Take into account that a rise in temperature can be a physiological response, for example after surgery or trauma. [2016] 
Heart rate in suspected sepsis 
1.4.4 
Interpret the heart rate of a person under 16 with suspected sepsis in context, taking into account that: 
baseline heart rate may be lower in young people who are fit 
heart rate response may be affected by medicines such as beta-blockers. [2016] 
Blood pressure in suspected sepsis 
1.4.5 
Interpret blood pressure in the context of a person's previous blood pressure, if known. Be aware that the presence of normal blood pressure does not exclude sepsis in people under 16. [2016] 
Confusion, mental state and cognitive state in suspected sepsis 
1.4.6 
Interpret a person's mental state in the context of their normal function and treat changes as being significant. [2016] 
1.4.7 
Be aware that changes in cognitive function may be subtle and assessment should include history from the person and their family or carers. [2016] 
1.4.8 
Take into account that changes in cognitive function may present as changes in behaviour or irritability in under 16s, especially those with a learning disability. [2016, amended 2024] 
Oxygen saturation in suspected sepsis 
1.4.9 
Take into account that if peripheral oxygen saturation is difficult to measure in a person with suspected sepsis, this may indicate poor peripheral circulation because of shock. [2016] 
Be aware that some pulse oximeters can underestimate or overestimate oxygen saturation levels, especially if the saturation level is borderline. Overestimation has been reported in people with dark skin. See also the NHS England Patient Safety Alert on the risk of harm from inappropriate placement of pulse oximeter probes . 
Next page 
Evaluating risk level 
Previous page 
Could this be sepsis? 
Back to top
