Overview | Coexisting severe mental illness and substance misuse: community health and social care services | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Bipolar disorder
Coexisting severe mental illness and substance misuse: community health and social care services
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG58 
Published: 
30 November 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
The committee's discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers how to improve services for people aged 14 and above who have been diagnosed as having coexisting severe mental illness and substance misuse. The aim is to provide a range of coordinated services that address people’s wider health and social care needs, as well as other issues such as employment and housing. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on coexisting severe mental illness (psychosis) and substance misuse: assessment and management in healthcare settings . 
Last reviewed: 14 August 2024 
We simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines (for example, the NICE guideline on service user experience in adult mental health ). This is a presentational change only, and no changes to practice are intended. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
first contact with services 
referral to secondary care mental health services 
the care plan: multi-agency approach to address physical health, social care, housing and other support needs 
partnership working between specialist services, health, social care and other support services and commissioners 
improving service delivery 
maintaining contact between services and people with coexisting severe mental illness and substance misuse who use them 
Who is it for? 
Commissioners and providers including those working in primary care 
Staff working in all services who come into contact with this group 
The criminal justice system 
Voluntary and community sector organisations 
People aged 14 and above diagnosed as having coexisting severe mental illness and substance misuse and who live in the community, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Coexisting severe mental illness and substance misuse 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
