Glossary | Transition between inpatient hospital settings and community or care home settings for adults with social care needs | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Transition between inpatient hospital settings and community or care home settings for adults with social care needs
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG27 
Published: 
01 December 2015
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Implementation: getting started 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Glossary 
Finding more information and committee details 
Glossary 
Advance care plan 
An advance care plan could include: 
an advance statement (a statement of wishes and preferences) 
an advance decision to refuse treatment 
the appointment of a personal welfare Lasting Power of Attorney. 
Discharge plan 
A document that describes the coordination of care and support for discharge from hospital. It is a working document for the multidisciplinary teams. 
Discharge summary 
A summary of what happened during admission and the hospital stay from a medical perspective. It might include the diagnosis, outcomes of investigations, changes to treatment and the medicines started or stopped, or dosage changes and the reasons why. 
Early supported discharge 
A multidisciplinary service that aims to allow patients to return home from hospital early and receive more rehabilitation support at home. 
Hospital passport 
A document for people who have a learning disability. It provides hospital staff with information to help with care planning and discharge arrangements. 
Medication review 
A structured, critical examination of a person's medicines. The aim is to agree the treatment with them, make sure the medication is being used effectively, minimise medication‑related problems and reduce waste. 
Medicines optimisation 
A person‑centred approach to safe and effective medicines use, to ensure that people get the best possible outcomes. Covers both prescription and non‑prescription medicines. 
Medicines reconciliation 
Identifying the most accurate list of a person's current medicines – including name, dosage and frequency – and comparing them with the medicines the person is taking. The aim is to spot any discrepancies and document any changes to ensure that the list is complete, up to date and accurately communicated. 
Step‑up facilities 
Intermediate care settings that people are referred to from community settings. The aim is to prevent unnecessary acute hospital admissions or premature admissions to long‑term care. 
Supportive self‑management 
Supportive self‑management is based on the principle that people should be active partners in supporting their own health and wellbeing, rather than being passive recipients of care. Self‑management techniques help people build the confidence to make informed decisions about their own health and social care and reach any related goals. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Recommendations for research 
Back to top
