8 Service organisation | COVID-19 rapid guideline: managing the long-term effects of COVID-19 | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
COVID-19
COVID-19 rapid guideline: managing the long-term effects of COVID-19 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG188 
Published: 
18 December 2020
Last updated: 
25 January 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
1 Identification 
2 Assessment 
3 Investigations and referral 
4 Planning care 
5 Management 
6 Follow‑up, monitoring and discharge 
7 Sharing information and continuity of care 
8 Service organisation 
9 Common symptoms 
Recommendations for research 
Rationales 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
8 Service organisation 
8.1 
Provide access to multidisciplinary services, if available, (these could be 'one-stop' clinics) for assessing physical and mental health symptoms and carrying out further tests and investigations. Services should be led by a doctor with relevant skills and experience and appropriate specialist support, taking into account the variety of presenting symptoms. [2020, amended 2021] 
8.2 
Provide integrated, multidisciplinary rehabilitation services, based on local need and resources. Healthcare professionals should have a range of specialist skills, with expertise in managing fatigue and respiratory symptoms (including breathlessness). Additional expertise may be needed depending on the age and symptoms of the person. The core team could include, but not be limited to, the following specialist areas: 
occupational therapy 
physiotherapy 
clinical psychology and psychiatry 
rehabilitation medicine. [2020] 
8.3 
Share knowledge, skills and training between services to help practitioners in the community provide assessments and interventions, such as 1‑minute sit‑to‑stand tests and breathlessness training. [2020] 
8.4 
Agree local, integrated referral pathways between primary and community care, rehabilitation services and specialist services, multidisciplinary assessment clinics (where available) and specialist mental health services. [2020] 
For a short explanation of why the panel made these recommendations, see the rationale section on service organisation . 
Full details of the evidence and the panel's discussion are in evidence review F: service models . 
Next page 
9 Common symptoms 
Previous page 
7 Sharing information and continuity of care 
Back to top
