Overview | Ovarian cancer: recognition and initial management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Ovarian cancer
Ovarian cancer: recognition and initial management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG122 
Published: 
27 April 2011
Last updated: 
15 April 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix: Risk of malignancy index (RMI I) 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers detecting, diagnosing and treating women (aged 18 and over) who have, or are suspected of having, epithelial ovarian cancer, fallopian tube cancer, primary peritoneal cancer or borderline ovarian cancer. It aims to enable earlier detection of ovarian cancer and improve initial treatment. 
NICE has also produced a  guideline on identifying and managing familial and genetic risk associated with ovarian cancer . 
This guideline refers to NHS England commissioning policies. In Wales and Northern Ireland, follow Welsh or Northern Irish commissioning positions if applicable. 
Last reviewed:  15 April 2026 
We have removed the recommendations on detecting ovarian cancer in primary care (section 1.1). This change reflects our April 2026 update of  NICE’s guideline on suspected cancer: recognition and referral , in which we reviewed the evidence on referral for ovarian cancer and introduced new and updated recommendations on age and serum CA125 thresholds in the  section on ovarian cancer . Also see the  update information . 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
Establishing the diagnosis in secondary care 
Information and support for women with newly diagnosed ovarian cancer 
Managing suspected early (stage 1) ovarian cancer 
Managing advanced (stage 2 to 4) ovarian cancer 
Systemic anticancer therapy for recurrent or relapsed ovarian cancer 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People who provide palliative and hospice care for the NHS 
Women with ovarian cancer and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Ovarian cancer 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
