Overview | Sedation in under 19s: using sedation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Surgical care
Sedation in under 19s: using sedation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG112 
Published: 
15 December 2010
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Update information 
Finding more information and committee details 
Overview 
This guideline covers the assessment, preparation, training and monitoring needed when using sedation in people aged under 19. It aims to help healthcare professionals decide when sedation is the most clinically and cost effective option for reducing pain and anxiety during operations for children and young people. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
pre-sedation assessment, communication, patient information and consent 
personnel and training 
sedation for  painless imaging ,  painful procedures ,  dental procedures  and  endoscopy 
clinical environment and monitoring during sedation 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Under 19s who are having sedation and their families and carers 
Is this guideline up to date? 
December 2018: We found no new evidence that affects the recommendations in this guideline. For more information, see the surveillance decision . 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called sedation in children and young people: sedation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures in children and young people. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
