Overview | Urinary tract infection (catheter-associated): antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Urinary tract infection (catheter-associated): antimicrobial prescribing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG113 
Published: 
23 November 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Summary of the evidence 
Other considerations 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline sets out an antimicrobial prescribing strategy for catheter-associated urinary tract infection in children, young people and adults. It aims to optimise antibiotic use and reduce antibiotic resistance. 
Last reviewed:  18 April 2019 
We checked this guideline to assess the impact of the 2018 English Surveillance Programme for Antimicrobial Utilisation and Resistance (ESPAUR) report. We found no new evidence that affects the recommendations in this guideline. See the review decision for more information. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
See a 5-page visual summary of the recommendations, including tables to support prescribing decisions. 
NICE has also produced guidelines on antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use and healthcare-associated infections: prevention and control in primary and community care . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
treatment 
advice when an antibiotic prescription is given 
reassessment 
referral and seeking specialist advice 
self-care 
choice of antibiotic 
prevention 
Who is it for? 
Health professionals 
People with catheter-associated urinary tract infection, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guidance. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
