Managing localised and locally advanced renal cell carcinoma | Kidney cancer: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Renal cancer
Kidney cancer: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG256 
Published: 
19 March 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Information and support 
Diagnosis 
Managing oncocytomas and Bosniak 2F cysts 
Managing localised and locally advanced renal cell carcinoma 
Managing advanced renal cell carcinoma 
Managing renal cell carcinoma in people with a heritable renal cell carcinoma predisposition syndrome 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
1.5 Non-pharmacological management of suspected or confirmed localised renal cell carcinoma and Bosniak 3 and 4 cysts
1.6 Referring people with complex locally advanced RCC to specialist centres
1.7 Surgery for suspected or confirmed locally advanced RCC
1.8 Information for healthcare professionals to discuss with people before and after kidney surgery
1.9 Risk prediction tools for localised and locally advanced RCC
1.10 Adjuvant SACT
1.11 Follow-up for localised and locally advanced RCC
Managing localised and locally advanced renal cell carcinoma 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
Decision making and mental capacity 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines optimisation 
Multimorbidity 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
People's experience in adult social care services 
Service user experience in adult mental health 
Shared decision making . 
1.5 Non-pharmacological management of suspected or confirmed localised renal cell carcinoma and Bosniak 3 and 4 cysts 
See also NICE's visual summary on management of localised renal cell carcinoma (RCC) . 
Shared decision making 
1.5.1 
When deciding between non-pharmacological options for suspected or confirmed localised RCC and Bosniak 3 and 4 cysts, discuss with the person: 
the benefits and risks of each option that is suitable for them, including that: 
surgery may be associated with a lower risk of local recurrence than thermal ablation and stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR), but there may be a greater risk of short-term complications 
a greater reduction in kidney function is expected from surgically removing the whole kidney compared with thermal ablation and SABR 
thermal ablation may have a lower risk of short-term complications than surgery, but a higher risk of recurrence 
there is a lack of evidence for SABR compared with surgery or thermal ablation, so its relative effectiveness and chance of complications are uncertain, and there may also be a higher risk of recurrence 
active surveillance has a higher risk of renal lesion growth and spread than interventions to treat the lesion 
that people undergoing active surveillance may be able to have treatment later if they wish to. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on shared decision making about non-pharmacological management of suspected or confirmed localised RCC and Bosniak 3 and 4 cysts . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: management of localised renal cell carcinoma using non-surgical interventions or active surveillance . 
Surgery, thermal ablation, active surveillance or SABR 
1.5.2 
When deciding which management options are suitable for suspected or confirmed localised RCC and Bosniak 3 and 4 cysts, take into account: 
renal lesion factors, such as location, size of the solid mass (or solid component in a Bosniak 4 cyst), complexity and histological subtype 
that surgery is the preferred option for solid renal masses, and Bosniak 4 cysts, 2 cm in diameter or larger when it is suitable 
that SABR is not suitable for renal lesions that are larger than 7 cm in diameter 
that for solid renal masses larger than 4 cm in diameter, only certain types of thermal ablation may be suitable, multiple sessions may be needed and this may need to be done in a specialist centre 
that thermal ablation and SABR should not be used without prior biopsy confirmation of malignancy before treatment 
whether reducing the risk of surgical complications is important enough to justify the higher risks associated with non-surgical options compared with surgery, including that: 
thermal ablation and SABR may have a higher risk of local recurrence 
active surveillance has a higher risk of renal lesion growth and spread 
the person's clinical characteristics, including comorbidities and frailty 
the person's preferences. 
See table 1 and the section on information for healthcare professionals to discuss with people before and after kidney surgery if surgery is the chosen option. See the section on active surveillance information, imaging types and scheduling if active surveillance is the chosen option. 
Renal lesions 2 cm in diameter or larger 
1.5.3 
Offer surgery to people with localised solid renal masses, or Bosniak 4 cysts, that are 2 cm in diameter or larger after: 
imaging for diagnosis and staging and 
discussion with a uro-oncology multidisciplinary team . 
See also the section on biopsy for suspected localised or locally advanced RCC for information on when to offer biopsy before surgery. 
1.5.4 
When deciding between partial nephrectomy (preferably robot-assisted) or total nephrectomy (preferably minimally invasive), take into account: 
the factors in table 1 
that 4 cm in diameter is often the maximum renal lesion size for partial nephrectomy, but there is little evidence to support this. 
Table 1 Factors to take into account when deciding between partial and total nephrectomy for suspected or confirmed localised RCC and Bosniak 3 or 4 cysts 
Partial nephrectomy is preferred when both factors apply 
Total nephrectomy is preferred when either factor applies 
The renal lesion can be entirely removed through this approach while preserving the remaining kidney tissue (based on lesion location, size and complexity, and the person's clinical characteristics). 
The renal lesion cannot be entirely removed with partial nephrectomy (based on lesion location, size and complexity, and the person's clinical characteristics). 
Preserving renal function is important enough to justify the greater risk of complications from partial nephrectomy compared with total nephrectomy, for example, people with any of the following: 
only 1 functioning kidney 
lesions on both kidneys 
reduced kidney function. 
Reducing the risk of complications is more important than preserving kidney function. 
See also the section on information for healthcare professionals to discuss with people before and after kidney surgery . 
1.5.5 
Liaise with local renal services if there is any expectation that renal replacement therapy might be needed. 
See NICE's guideline on perioperative care in adults for considerations around perioperative care and enhanced recovery programmes. 
1.5.6 
For people with solid renal masses between 2 and 4 cm in diameter who cannot have surgery or decline it, consider either: 
active surveillance or thermal ablation 
SABR, if thermal ablation is not suitable and active surveillance is declined. 
1.5.7 
For people with solid renal masses larger than 4 cm in diameter who cannot have surgery or decline it, consider thermal ablation or SABR. 
1.5.8 
For people with Bosniak 4 cysts 2 cm in diameter or larger who cannot have surgery or decline it, consider 1 of the following, taking into account the size of the cyst and its solid component: 
thermal ablation 
SABR 
active surveillance. 
1.5.9 
For people with Bosniak 3 cysts 2 cm in diameter or larger, consider either: 
active surveillance 
surgery if the person declines active surveillance. 
Renal lesions less than 2 cm in diameter 
1.5.10 
Consider active surveillance for people with localised solid renal masses, or Bosniak 3 or 4 cysts, that are less than 2 cm in diameter after: 
imaging for diagnosis and staging and 
discussion with a uro-oncology multidisciplinary team. 
1.5.11 
For people with localised solid renal masses, or Bosniak 4 cysts, that are less than 2 cm in diameter who decline active surveillance, consider surgery or thermal ablation. 
1.5.12 
For people with Bosniak 3 cysts less than 2 cm in diameter who decline active surveillance, consider surgery. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgery, thermal ablation, active surveillance or SABR . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: management of localised renal cell carcinoma using partial versus radical nephrectomy and evidence review B: management of localised renal cell carcinoma using non-surgical interventions or active surveillance . 
Active surveillance information, imaging types and scheduling 
1.5.13 
Offer all people who are undergoing active surveillance the opportunity to discuss and agree a personalised care plan with their healthcare professional, which is given to them and their GP, and documented in their health record. The plan should include: 
the person's active surveillance imaging schedule 
clarity that active surveillance is managed in secondary care 
a named healthcare professional and examples of symptoms that the person should contact them about (such as if they have blood in their urine or persistent abdominal pain). 
1.5.14 
As part of active surveillance, offer imaging (CT, MRI or ultrasound) at regular intervals, basing the choice of imaging on the renal lesion's and the person's clinical characteristics (such as kidney function). 
1.5.15 
Consider alternating CT with ultrasound or MRI to reduce radiation exposure. 
See also the sections on assessing risk factors and preventing acute kidney injury in adults having iodine-based contrast media in NICE's guideline on acute kidney injury . 
1.5.16 
Consider using the following imaging schedule, making changes if more frequent imaging is needed based on the renal lesion's and person's clinical characteristics, and the person's preferences: 
year 1: imaging between 3 and 6 months, and again at 12 months, after the start of active surveillance 
years 2 to 5: imaging at least annually 
after year 5: discuss with the person the benefits and risks of continuing active surveillance or being discharged if there have been no triggers for moving to treatment (see the sections on managing oncocytomas and Bosniak 2F cysts and on moving from active surveillance to treatment or discharge for renal lesions 4 cm in diameter or smaller ). 
1.5.17 
Compare current imaging findings to the most recent previous and baseline imaging findings to see if there are changes in the renal lesion's size and other characteristics. 
1.5.18 
Consider more frequent imaging if there are changes in the renal lesion's size or other characteristics that need enhanced monitoring but are not triggers for a discussion about moving to treatment. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on active surveillance information, imaging types and scheduling . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: monitoring of untreated renal lesions using active surveillance . 
Moving from active surveillance to treatment or discharge for renal lesions 4 cm in diameter or smaller 
1.5.19 
For people with solid renal masses, or Bosniak 3 or 4 cysts, 4 cm in diameter or smaller, discuss moving from active surveillance to treatment if any of the following apply: 
the renal lesion's growth rate (or the growth rate of the solid component for Bosniak 4 cysts) is greater than 5 mm in diameter in a year 
the renal lesion is likely to be larger than 4 cm in diameter by the time of the next scan 
there is stage progression (based on the clinical TNM staging system ) in the solid renal mass 
the Bosniak 3 or 4 cyst progresses or changes characteristics 
the person's clinical circumstances (for example, pregnancy or comorbidities) which made treatment unsuitable previously have since changed 
the person wants to move to treatment, and this is still suitable for them. 
1.5.20 
Stop active surveillance and discharge the person with a solid renal mass, or Bosniak 3 or 4 cyst, 4 cm in diameter or smaller from active surveillance if treatment for RCC is no longer an option. 
1.5.21 
Consider stopping active surveillance and discharging the person with a solid renal mass, or Bosniak 3 or 4 cyst, 4 cm in diameter or smaller from active surveillance if the renal lesion remains stable for 5 years (that is, it does not meet any of the criteria in recommendation 1.5.19), taking into account the person's preferences and clinical characteristics (such as age and fitness). 
1.5.22 
When discharging a person from active surveillance because their lesion has remained stable for 5 years or treatment for RCC is no longer an option: 
explain why they are being discharged 
explain the lack of evidence on how long active surveillance should last 
provide examples of symptoms that the person should contact primary care about (such as if they have blood in their urine or persistent abdominal pain). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on moving from active surveillance to treatment or discharge for renal lesions 4 cm in diameter or smaller . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: monitoring of untreated renal lesions using active surveillance . 
1.6 Referring people with complex locally advanced RCC to specialist centres 
1.6.1 
Refer people with complex locally advanced RCC (for example, people with inferior vena cava tumour thrombus) to a uro-oncology multidisciplinary team with relevant expertise in managing kidney cancer and extensive retroperitoneal surgery (for example, a urologist with speciality in kidney cancer surgery, oncologist, radiologist, and pathologist). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on referring people with complex locally advanced RCC to specialist centres . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: management of locally advanced renal cell carcinoma using nephrectomy or stereotactic ablative radiotherapy . 
1.7 Surgery for suspected or confirmed locally advanced RCC 
1.7.1 
Offer total nephrectomy to people with suspected or confirmed locally advanced RCC after: 
comprehensive imaging for diagnosis and staging and 
discussion with a uro-oncology multidisciplinary team (which may also include cardiothoracic, vascular and hepatobiliary surgeons) and 
liaising with local renal services if there is any expectation that renal replacement therapy might be needed. 
See NICE's guideline on perioperative care in adults for additional considerations around perioperative care and enhanced recovery programmes. 
1.7.2 
Consider either of the following approaches for total nephrectomy: 
minimally invasive, when suitable based on the renal lesion's location, size and complexity, and the person's clinical characteristics 
open, if minimally invasive approaches are not suitable because, for example: 
the lesion's size limits the creation of a pneumoperitoneum (inflation of gas into the abdomen to create enough space to do a minimally invasive surgery) 
the lesion is at risk of rupture 
control of the inferior vena cava, needed for resection of the tumour thrombus, cannot be achieved adequately by minimally invasive approaches. 
See also the section on information for healthcare professionals to discuss with people before and after kidney surgery . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgery for suspected or confirmed locally advanced RCC . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: management of locally advanced renal cell carcinoma using nephrectomy or stereotactic ablative radiotherapy . 
1.8 Information for healthcare professionals to discuss with people before and after kidney surgery 
1.8.1 
Before surgery for RCC, share the following information with the person: 
the approach being used (minimally invasive or open surgery) 
that adjuvant systemic anticancer therapy (SACT) might be recommended after surgery when appropriate 
that the removal of part or all of a kidney will reduce kidney function, but for many people, this is unlikely to impact overall health and does not necessarily lead to progressive chronic kidney disease (CKD) 
that if there is new mention of CKD on their medical record and this concerns them, then they should discuss this with their healthcare professional 
the kidney's role in the body and that they may need to take additional measures to help protect remaining kidney function, for example, blood pressure control and lifestyle changes. 
See also section 7.4 (example patient information) in the Getting It Right First Time (GIRFT) guide Urology: Towards better care for patients with kidney cancer and the Kidney Cancer UK and GIRFT Kidney cancer fact sheet: consent consultation general information – planning for surgery and beyond . 
After surgery, see Kidney Cancer UK and GIRFT Kidney cancer fact sheet: post nephrectomy and follow up and if relevant, the section on information and education for people with CKD in NICE's guideline on chronic kidney disease . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information for healthcare professionals to discuss with people before and after kidney surgery . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: information needs . 
1.9 Risk prediction tools for localised and locally advanced RCC 
1.9.1 
Consider using 1 of the following risk prediction tools to calculate the 5‑year risk of recurrence of clear cell RCC: 
Karakiewicz 
Kattan 
Leibovich 2003 
Sorbellini 
SSIGN 
UISS . 
1.9.2 
Consider using the VENUSS tool to calculate the 5-year risk of recurrence of papillary RCC. 
1.9.3 
Do not rely on risk prediction tools alone, and always use them with clinical judgement (including whether pathology information is available from surgical samples after nephrectomy or biopsy), when deciding: 
follow-up imaging schedules (see the section on types of follow-up imaging and scheduling ) 
future treatment options (including adjuvant SACT). 
1.9.4 
If the person has had treatment for more than 1 renal lesion, use the highest calculated risk of recurrence to determine the follow-up schedule. 
1.9.5 
If relevant NICE technology appraisal guidance or NHS clinical commissioning criteria for RCC use a particular risk prediction tool to determine eligibility for systemic anticancer therapy (SACT) for people with localised or locally advanced RCC, use that tool instead of the tools in recommendations 1.9.1 and 1.9.2 if SACT is indicated. 
1.9.6 
Pathologists should include in the pathology reports: 
the tumour stage (using the TNM staging system) 
other pathology information needed to calculate a risk score for each type of RCC, using tools selected by the local uro-oncology multidisciplinary team from recommendations 1.9.1 and 1.9.2. 
1.9.7 
Consider reporting a risk score in the pathology report using a tool selected by the local uro-oncology multidisciplinary team from recommendation 1.9.1 or 1.9.2, depending on the person's type of RCC. 
1.9.8 
Record the risk score clearly in the person's clinical records before any decisions about follow-up schedules or future treatment options are made. 
1.9.9 
When using risk prediction tools for people with localised or locally advanced RCC, share with them: 
the name of the tool 
what the tool has been used for 
what the results mean for their follow-up care or future treatment options. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on risk prediction tools for localised and locally advanced RCC . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: risk prediction tools for localised and locally advanced renal cell carcinoma . 
1.10 Adjuvant SACT 
1.10.1 
When adjuvant SACT is an option, discuss with the person: 
the benefits and risks 
whether it might impact any future treatment decisions 
whether there are opportunities to take part in clinical trials of adjuvant SACT that are still in the research stage of development (see recommendation 1.1.8 in the section on information for healthcare professionals to support people with suspected or confirmed RCC ). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on adjuvant SACT . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: information needs . 
1.10.2 
Pembrolizumab is recommended as an option for adjuvant treatment of RCC at increased risk of recurrence after nephrectomy, with or without metastatic lesion resection. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on pembrolizumab (TA830, 2022) . 
1.11 Follow-up for localised and locally advanced RCC 
See also NICE's visual summary on management of localised RCC . 
1.11.1 
Offer follow-up to people who have completed treatment (including any adjuvant treatment) for localised or locally advanced RCC. 
1.11.2 
Offer all people who are undergoing follow-up the opportunity to discuss and agree a personalised care plan with their healthcare professional, which is given to them and their GP, and documented in their health record. The plan should include: 
the person's risk of recurrence, follow-up imaging schedule and the expected duration of follow-up if there is no sign of recurrence 
clarity that follow-up is managed in secondary care 
a named healthcare professional 
examples of symptoms that could indicate recurrence or metastases that the person should contact their healthcare professional about (such as if they have blood in their urine or persistent abdominal pain). 
For an example follow-up letter, see section 7.2 in the GIRFT guide Urology: Towards better care for patients with kidney cancer . See also section 3.9 on post-surgery follow-up in the GIRFT guide , particularly the information on patient support during follow-up, principles for good communication with patients, and information to communicate to patients. 
Testing before follow-up 
1.11.3 
After completing treatment and before starting follow-up, offer estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) creatinine testing. 
1.11.4 
If eGFR is less than 60 ml/minute/1.73 m 2 , inform the person's primary care provider. 
1.11.5 
Primary care healthcare professionals should offer people with a GFR less than 60 ml/minute/1.73 m 2 albumin–creatinine ratio testing. 
See also NICE's guideline on chronic kidney disease , including the section on referral criteria for specialist assessment when relevant . 
Types of follow-up imaging and scheduling 
1.11.6 
Offer contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis at regular intervals to detect recurrence (see recommendation 1.11.9 for a suggested follow-up imaging schedule). 
See also NICE's HealthTech guidance on point-of-care creatinine devices to assess kidney function before CT imaging with intravenous contrast . Also see the sections on assessing risk factors and preventing acute kidney injury in adults having iodine-based contrast media in NICE's guideline on acute kidney injury . 
1.11.7 
If CECT should be avoided to reduce radiation exposure, offer: 
MRI (with or without contrast) of the abdomen and pelvis and 
CT (without contrast) of the chest, unless the person cannot have CT. 
1.11.8 
If CECT should be avoided because the contrast agent is contraindicated, offer either: 
CT (without contrast) of the chest and MRI (with or without contrast) of the abdomen and pelvis 
CT (without contrast) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis. 
1.11.9 
Consider using the follow-up imaging schedule in table 2 based on the person's calculated risk of recurrence (see the section on risk prediction tools for localised and locally advanced RCC ), making changes if more frequent imaging is needed based on clinical and pathological characteristics. 
Table 2 Minimum recommended follow-up imaging schedules based on risk of recurrence 
Time after completing treatment 
Low risk of recurrence 
Intermediate risk of recurrence 
High risk of recurrence 
Month 3 
– 
– 
scan 
Month 6 
– 
scan 
scan 
Year 1 
scan 
scan 
scan 
Year 1.5 
– 
– 
scan 
Year 2 
– 
scan 
scan 
Year 3 
scan 
scan 
scan 
Year 4 
– 
scan 
scan 
Year 5 
scan 
scan 
scan 
More than 5 years (see the section on discharge ) 
discharge 
scan every 2 years or discharge 
scan every 2 years or discharge 
This table is adapted from GIRFT's guide Urology: Towards better care for patients with kidney cancer . 
1.11.10 
Consider using the intermediate-risk follow-up imaging schedule in table 2 when accurate risk assessment is not possible (for example, for people who have had thermal ablation or SABR), making changes if more frequent imaging is needed based on clinical and pathological characteristics. 
1.11.11 
For people with chromophobe RCC, consider using the follow-up imaging schedules from table 2, making changes if more frequent imaging is needed based on the following clinical and pathological characteristics: 
low risk, when there is none of the following: 
fat invasion 
sarcomatoid differentiation 
nodal involvement. 
intermediate risk, when there is both: 
fat invasion 
no sarcomatoid differentiation or nodal involvement. 
high risk, when there is either or both: 
sarcomatoid differentiation 
nodal involvement. 
1.11.12 
For people with a positive surgical margin after partial nephrectomy, consider increasing the frequency of follow-up imaging by changing to the next highest risk schedule, making changes if more frequent imaging is needed based on clinical and pathological characteristics. 
Recurrence or development of metastases 
1.11.13 
If recurrence or metastases are suspected during follow-up, do further imaging, a biopsy or both, to confirm recurrence or metastases and to determine their type and extent (see the sections on imaging , biopsy for suspected localised or locally advanced RCC and biopsy for suspected metastatic RCC ). 
1.11.14 
If metastasis is confirmed, follow the recommendations for managing advanced RCC in the sections on non-pharmacological management of metastatic RCC and SACT for advanced RCC . 
Discharge 
1.11.15 
Consider discharging people from follow-up if treatment for potential future RCC recurrence or metastases is no longer an option. 
1.11.16 
Consider discharging people who are at low risk of recurrence from follow‑up if there is no sign of recurrence or metastases after the scan at 5 years. 
1.11.17 
Discuss with people who are at intermediate or high risk of recurrence whether to continue follow-up or be discharged if there is no sign of recurrence or metastases after the scan at 5 years, taking into account the person's preferences and clinical characteristics (such as age, fitness and comorbidities). 
1.11.18 
If follow-up is continued for longer than 5 years for people who are at intermediate or high risk of recurrence, consider: 
doing a scan every 2 years 
discussing possible discharge each time there is no sign of recurrence or metastases on the scan taking into account the person's preferences and clinical characteristics (such as age, fitness and comorbidities) 
stopping follow up and discharging the person after 10 years unless there is a reason not to. 
1.11.19 
When discharging a person from follow-up: 
explain why they are being discharged 
provide examples of symptoms that could indicate recurrence or metastases that the person should contact primary care about (such as if they have blood in their urine or persistent abdominal pain). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on follow-up for localised and locally advanced RCC . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: follow-up of previously treated renal cell carcinoma . 
Next page 
Managing advanced renal cell carcinoma 
Previous page 
Managing oncocytomas and Bosniak 2F cysts 
Back to top
