Overview | Adrenal insufficiency: identification and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Adrenal dysfunction
Adrenal insufficiency: identification and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG243 
Published: 
28 August 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers identifying and managing adrenal insufficiency (hypoadrenalism) in babies, children, young people and adults. It aims to improve the treatment of primary, secondary and tertiary adrenal insufficiency, and the prevention and management of adrenal crisis. 
Last reviewed: 18 December 2024 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Next review:  This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
initial identification and referral 
routine pharmacological management 
management during physiological or psychological stress 
when to suspect adrenal crisis 
emergency management of adrenal crisis 
ongoing care and monitoring 
managing glucocorticoid withdrawal to prevent adrenal insufficiency 
Who is it for? 
Health and social care practitioners providing NHS-commissioned services, including those working in dental services, school health services and pre-hospital care 
Commissioners of health and social care services 
People with adrenal insufficiency, their families, and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
