Recommendations for research | Ovarian cancer: identifying and managing familial and genetic risk | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Ovarian cancer
Ovarian cancer: identifying and managing familial and genetic risk
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG241 
Published: 
21 March 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Interventions to support decision making 
What is the effectiveness of psychological interventions to support decision making by people who meet the referral criteria for genetic testing? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on information and support about risk assessment and genetic testing in genetics services . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: support interventions . 
2 Assessing a person's risk of having a pathogenic variant associated with familial ovarian cancer 
What are the optimal tools to assess mutation carrier probability for a wider range of ovarian cancer susceptibility genes, not limited to BRCA1 and BRCA2? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on assessing the risk of having a pathogenic variant . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: optimal methods of assessing the probability of having a pathogenic variant . 
3 Assessing the risk of developing ovarian cancer 
What are the performance characteristics of tools or models to assess the absolute risk of developing ovarian cancer? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on assessing the risk of developing ovarian cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: optimal methods of assessing the absolute risk of having a pathogenic variant . 
4 Ovarian cancer surveillance 
What are the long-term benefits and risks of ovarian cancer surveillance for people at increased risk of ovarian cancer? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on ovarian cancer surveillance by the familial ovarian cancer multidisciplinary team for people who choose to delay or not have risk-reducing surgery . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: benefits and risks of surveillance . 
5 Hormone replacement therapy after risk-reducing surgery 
What is the safety and efficacy of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) after risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on HRT after risk-reducing surgery . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review P: HRT after risk-reducing surgery . 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Primary preventive medicines 
What is the effectiveness of primary preventive medicines for reducing the incidence of ovarian cancer in people at increased risk of familial ovarian cancer? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on primary preventive medicines . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: preventive medicines . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
