Management of female factor fertility problems | Fertility problems: assessment and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Fertility
Fertility problems: assessment and treatment
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG257 
Published: 
31 March 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Principles of care 
Initial advice to people concerned about delays in conception 
Advice about factors that can affect fertility 
Defining infertility and initial assessment 
Investigation of fertility problems and management strategies 
Management of male factor fertility problems 
Management of female factor fertility problems 
Unstimulated intrauterine insemination (IUI) 
Unexplained fertility problems in people trying to conceive through unprotected vaginal sexual intercourse 
Access criteria for in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Procedures used during in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) 
Donor insemination 
Oocyte donation 
Fertility preservation for medical indications 
Long-term safety of assisted reproductive technologies 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.30 Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
1.31 Hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian dysfunction (predominantly PCOS)
1.32 Ovulatory disorders due to hyperprolactinaemia
1.33 Monitoring ovulation induction during gonadotrophin therapy
1.34 Tubal surgery
1.35 Uterine surgery
1.36 Endometriosis
Management of female factor fertility problems 
1.30 Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
1.30.1 
Advise women, and trans men and non-binary people with female reproductive organs who have hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and anovulatory infertility that they may improve their chance of regular ovulation, conception and an uncomplicated pregnancy by: 
increasing their body weight to reach a healthy weight if they have a body mass index (BMI) of less than 18.5 kg/m 2 and/or 
moderating their exercise levels if they undertake high levels of exercise. 
Also see NHS advice on healthy ways to gain weight . [2026] 
1.30.2 
Offer gonadotrophins with luteinising hormone activity or gonadotrophin releasing hormone to induce ovulation in women, and trans men and non-binary people with female reproductive organs who have hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on hypogonadotropic hypogonadism . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: ovulation induction strategies for hypogonadotropic hypogonadism . 
1.31 Hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian dysfunction (predominantly PCOS) 
The recommendations in this section have been removed because NICE is developing a guideline on polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). For more information see the NICE website . 
1.32 Ovulatory disorders due to hyperprolactinaemia 
1.32.1 
Offer cabergoline to treat ovulatory disorders due to hyperprolactinaemia. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on ovulatory disorders due to hyperprolactinaemia . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: cabergoline for hyperprolactinaemia . 
1.33 Monitoring ovulation induction during gonadotrophin therapy 
1.33.1 
Inform women, and trans men and non-binary people with female reproductive organs who are offered ovulation induction with gonadotrophins about the risk of multiple pregnancy and ovarian hyperstimulation before starting treatment. [2004] 
1.33.2 
Use ovarian ultrasound monitoring to measure follicular size and number as an integral part of gonadotrophin therapy, to reduce the risk of multiple pregnancy and ovarian hyperstimulation. [2004] 
1.34 Tubal surgery 
Tubal surgery for mild tubal disease 
1.34.1 
Consider tubal surgery as a treatment option for mild tubal disease, in centres where appropriate expertise is available. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on tubal surgery for mild tubal disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: tubal surgery . 
Tubal catheterisation 
1.34.2 
Consider fallopian tube catheterisation by hysteroscopic or radiological guidance to treat subfertility due to proximal tube obstruction, after discussing the risks and benefits of other options, including in vitro fertilisation (IVF). [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on tubal catheterisation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: tubal catheterisation . 
Surgery for hydrosalpinges before IVF 
1.34.3 
Offer laparoscopic salpingectomy or tubal occlusion to treat hydrosalpinges before IVF. [2026] 
1.34.4 
Consider aspiration to treat hydrosalpinges, close to the time of oocyte retrieval, if there is a high risk of complications from laparoscopic surgery. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgery for hydrosalpinges before IVF . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: surgery for hydrosalpinges before IVF . 
1.35 Uterine surgery 
1.35.1 
Offer hysteroscopic adhesiolysis for women, and trans men and non-binary people with female reproductive organs with amenorrhoea who are found to have intrauterine adhesions, because this is likely to restore menstruation and improve the chance of pregnancy. [2004] 
1.36 Endometriosis 
The recommendations in this section should be read in conjunction with NICE's guideline on endometriosis . 
1.36.1 
Discuss the following options with women, and trans men, and non-binary people with female reproductive organs who have endometriosis: 
expectant management for up to 2 years (including the time already spent trying to conceive before assessment) 
surgical treatment of endometriosis, in line with the section on management if fertility is a priority in NICE's guideline on endometriosis . [2026] 
1.36.2 
If the woman, trans man or non-binary person with endometriosis has not conceived during 2 years of expectant management or after surgical treatment, or if expectant management or surgical treatment (or both) is not appropriate, discuss the fertility treatment options and: 
consider up to 4 cycles of intrauterine insemination (IUI) with ovarian stimulation using gonadotrophins before offering IVF treatment, if appropriate, or 
offer IVF treatment (see the section on access criteria for IVF ). 
Explain the potential risks and benefits of each option and take into account the person's individual preferences and circumstances during discussions. [2026] 
1.36.3 
When discussing fertility with women, and trans men, and non-binary people with female reproductive organs who have endometriosis, take into account: 
the length of time they have been trying to conceive 
the symptoms and severity of the endometriosis 
their age 
their ovarian reserve 
any male factor fertility issues. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2026 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on endometriosis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: assisted reproduction techniques for people with unexplained fertility problems, mild endometriosis, and mild male factor fertility problems . 
Next page 
Unstimulated intrauterine insemination (IUI) 
Previous page 
Management of male factor fertility problems 
Back to top
