Recommendations | Social, emotional and mental wellbeing in primary and secondary education | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Children's social care
Social, emotional and mental wellbeing in primary and secondary education 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG223 
Published: 
06 July 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Whole-school approach
1.2 Universal curriculum content
1.3 Identifying children and young people at risk of poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing
1.4 Targeted support
1.5 Support with school-related transitions and other life changes
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Recommendations relating to parents or carers might be less relevant to older young people, especially those in post-16 education settings and may need to be interpreted accordingly. 
For the purposes of this guideline, the term 'school' covers schools, colleges, further education providers and other educational settings. 
1.1 Whole-school approach 
1.1.1 
Adopt a whole-school approach to support positive social, emotional and mental wellbeing of staff, children and young people (including people with a neurodiverse condition) in primary and secondary education. 
1.1.2 
Ensure that the school has a culture, ethos and practice that strengthens relational approaches and inclusion, and that recognises the importance of psychological safety . 
1.1.3 
Review the school's policies and procedures regularly to make sure that they promote social, emotional and mental wellbeing positively and consistently. This should include making them consistent with relational approaches to social, emotional and mental wellbeing. 
1.1.4 
Review regularly the school's accessibility plan, medical conditions policy and approach to understanding behaviour, taking into account neurodiversity and communication needs. Also take into account the value of trauma-informed approaches and parental co-production. 
1.1.5 
Consider monitoring and evaluating the impact and effectiveness of the whole-school approach as part of a school improvement strategy. 
Supporting the whole-school approach 
1.1.6 
Support the whole-school approach by: 
having an outward-facing approach to the community and to engaging with local communities and groups 
strengthening links to external agencies that can provide additional support, such as local children's health and care services and relevant voluntary and community sector organisations 
having shared principles for engagement between education and mental health services, for example agreeing referral pathways 
promoting the involvement of education providers in wider local strategic decision making about children and young people's mental health 
having ways of feeding back to parents and carers. 
1.1.7 
Ensure that school governance structures support the whole-school approach and that school leadership is actively involved in supporting the whole-school approach. Make the responsibility for social, emotional and mental wellbeing curriculum content part of the remit of school leadership (including governance). 
Supporting staff 
1.1.8 
Ensure that staff have continuing professional development to support both their own wellbeing and the implementation of the school's approach. This could include training in emotional literacy, trauma, neurodiversity, communication needs and relational approaches. 
1.1.9 
Signpost staff to quality-assured local and national resources to support their wellbeing in line with the Department for Education's education staff wellbeing charter . 
1.1.10 
Support staff in their pastoral roles by providing protected time for supervision and continuing professional development. 
1.1.11 
Make peer supervision available for teachers and other school staff to enable them to have space and support to discuss issues and reflect on practice. 
1.1.12 
Ensure that all teachers can recognise children and young people's pastoral needs, and that they understand the wider context of the pupils' lived experiences and how they interact with their environment. Provide them with additional training or support if needed. 
1.1.13 
Ensure that all information held by the school related to the local early help offer is kept up to date. 
Involving families and pupils 
1.1.14 
Involve parents and carers in designing and implementing the whole‑school approach. 
1.1.15 
Involve children and young people in discussing and agreeing whole‑school approaches and communicate with them regularly about decisions, so they understand how their views inform practice. Take into account the opinions of all members of the school community. This may mean making adjustments to address neurodiversity and communication needs. 
Implementing the whole-school approach 
1.1.16 
Designate a lead person to determine what is needed to successfully implement universal curriculum interventions. The lead should also be the go-to person for advice on the most appropriate educational resources for any intervention. The lead person should be someone in a leadership post who has strategic responsibilities and oversight of social, emotional and mental wellbeing across the school. 
1.1.17 
When implementing whole-school approaches, take into account the core values that the school culture and practice are built on, and the psychological safety of pupils, staff members and leadership. For example, this could involve developing a school culture and ethos in which children, young people and staff feel safe to make and learn from mistakes. 
1.1.18 
Adopt a 'graduated response' (or 'step up–step down') approach to support (moving between universal and targeted support as relevant) as an integral part of the whole-school approach alongside broader universal approaches. Ensure that staff understand this approach and have the right support to implement it (see the recommendations on targeted support ). 
Local support 
1.1.19 
Local public health departments, and children and young people's mental health services, should proactively gather and be responsive to the views and concerns of schools and colleges in their area about children and young people's social, emotional and mental wellbeing. 
1.1.20 
Local authorities should compile, and keep up to date, a directory of the local services that promote children and young people's social emotional and mental wellbeing and are available to support schools in their area. This should include: 
what the services can offer 
local mental health and special educational needs and disability (SEND) services, including services that might be less well known 
details of how to access the services. 
1.1.21 
Take risk factors for poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing into account when developing the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment. This should include the contribution that schools can make to improving social, emotional and mental wellbeing and take into account schools' impact on learning and life chances (see the recommendations on identification and risk factors ). 
1.1.22 
The local integrated care system and schools should work together to identify opportunities for joint practice to support the social, emotional and mental wellbeing of children and young people, for example agreeing principles for when and how to share information. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on whole-school approach . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: whole-school approaches . 
1.2 Universal curriculum content 
1.2.1 
Ensure that the curriculum for all pupils includes evidence-based, culturally appropriate information about social, emotional and mental wellbeing to develop children and young people's knowledge and skills as part of the whole-school approach . 
1.2.2 
Take account of the Department for Education's relationships education, relationships and sex education, and health education guidance when selecting or developing universal curriculum content . 
1.2.3 
Use an approach that builds on children and young people's previous learning (for example, a spiral curriculum ) when planning and delivering a curriculum intervention for all pupils. 
1.2.4 
Integrate relevant activities into all aspects of education to reinforce the curriculum offer about social, emotional and mental wellbeing and skills. 
1.2.5 
Use non-judgemental 'strengths-based' approaches to support children and young people's social, emotional and mental wellbeing. These are approaches to improve or develop their: 
self-worth (for example, self-esteem, empowerment, self-care) 
skills (for example, problem solving skills, social skills, communication skills) 
resilience (for example, coping skills and strategies, perseverance). 
1.2.6 
Use universal interventions that align with the whole-school approach, for example 'child- (or young person) to- trusted-adult ' support. 
1.2.7 
Consider universal interventions informed by mindfulness or cognitive behavioural approaches (including trauma-focused cognitive behavioural approaches) for all children and young people. These should be delivered by trained staff who can teach children and young people how to use the approach and support them when they do. 
1.2.8 
Consider including regular rhythmic physical activity in the universal curriculum. If it is included, ensure that there is time and space available for this. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on universal curriculum content . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review B: universal curriculum approaches 
evidence review C: qualitative evidence synthesis for universal curriculum approaches . 
1.3 Identifying children and young people at risk of poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing 
Identification and risk factors 
1.3.1 
When considering whether a child or young person has risk factors for poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing, take into account: 
the number, duration and complexity of risk and protective factors, their cumulative effects and interactions between them 
that the effects of risk and protective factors, or combinations of factors, might differ across life stages 
that they may have unidentified or unmet educational needs, for example special educational needs or disabilities that impact on their ability to access education. 
For a list of risk and protective factors, see table 1 in the Department for Education's mental health and behaviour in schools guidance . Be aware that the list is not exhaustive. 
1.3.2 
Base the identification of children and young people at risk of poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing on information from a variety of sources, for example observation, self-report and consideration of their early life experiences. Be aware that some children and young people will internalise their distress and will therefore be more difficult to identify. 
1.3.3 
Assess children and young people identified as at risk and decide whether to monitor their social, emotional and mental wellbeing or to offer them targeted support (see the recommendations on tools and techniques ). Take into account any existing assessments, for example from educational psychologists or child and adolescent mental health services. 
1.3.4 
When identifying risk in children and young people with disabilities or special educational needs, ensure that staff understand the graduated response to need as specified in the current Department of Health and Social Care and Department for Education's special educational needs and disability (SEND) code of practice , and that they can respond with relevant interventions. If necessary, they should seek input from specialised external agencies. 
Tools and techniques 
1.3.5 
If using a tool or technique to assess a child or young person who has been identified as at risk of poor social, emotional or mental wellbeing, consider using one that is validated (see Public Health England's guidance on measuring mental wellbeing in children and young people ). 
1.3.6 
When selecting a tool or technique to assess social, emotional and mental wellbeing, take into account: 
the child or young person's needs, wishes and feelings 
the purpose of the assessment 
how the tool or technique fits with the school culture and ethos 
contextual factors, such as the child or young person's chronological or developmental age or ethnicity and any communication needs (being aware that assessment tools are context specific and vary in quality). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on identifying children and young people at risk of poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review D: risk factors for poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing 
evidence review E: qualitative review for risk factors for poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing 
evidence review F: risk factors for poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing . 
1.4 Targeted support 
1.4.1 
Have clear guidance on how to identify individual children and young people and groups of people for targeted support based on their specific needs (see the section on identifying children and young people at risk of poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing ). 
1.4.2 
Offer targeted individual or group support to children and young people who have been identified as needing additional social, emotional or mental health support. Use trained, experienced practitioners who are competent to provide the support. Any support should be culturally sensitive and take into account possible neurodiversity, communication needs and other needs of the child or young person. 
1.4.3 
Actively involve the parents or carers of the child or young person when deciding whether to offer targeted support (but think about whether the young person is competent to give their consent or there are reasons not to involve the parents or carers). Discuss with them any support that is being proposed and make sure that they understand it and agree with it. 
1.4.4 
Explain the targeted support to the child or young person and involve them in decisions about the support offered to them, including when and where it is offered. Where appropriate and possible, obtain their agreement before starting the support. 
1.4.5 
Take into account the range of individual needs and risks when putting together a group for targeted group support, including the developmental age and cultural background of the pupils it is being delivered to. 
1.4.6 
Promote a range of targeted support, including peer-to-peer support, that allows children and young people to express difficult feelings and talk about their experiences. 
1.4.7 
Aim to minimise the risk of any unintended adverse consequences and stigma and proactively normalise seeking support. Take care not to reinforce bullying by singling people out for support. 
1.4.8 
Ensure that all targeted support is delivered collaboratively with any other external agencies or services, the professional network around the child or young person and any support that the child or young person is already receiving. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on targeted support . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review G: targeted social and emotional support 
evidence review H: targeted mental health support . 
1.5 Support with school-related transitions and other life changes 
All transitions and life changes 
1.5.1 
Train staff to recognise the wide-ranging impacts of transitions and life changes on children and young people's social, emotional and mental wellbeing, taking into account that they may differ between individuals, for example because of cultural background, age and gender. This includes recognising both planned (for example, moving between schools or classes) and unanticipated life changes, and the different ways that a child or young person typically expresses their mental health problems and responds to trauma. 
Transitions between schools and classes or leaving education 
1.5.2 
Plan and offer tailored interventions to prepare children and young people for educational transitions and for leaving education completely. This includes: 
Establishing a relationship with the child or young person and their parent or carer. 
Gathering the child or young person's views about their transition. 
Supporting the child or young person to feel ready for the transition, for example understanding how they will get to and from the new school or job. 
Sharing with the new class or school and staff information about the child or young person that will help them. The information should be positive and not set out to victimise or stigmatise them, and it should be shared in line with the National Data Guardian's Caldicott principles . 
Identifying and communicating with the professional and personal network around the child or young person, if there is one, as part of good transition support. 
Also follow these principles for any managed moves (in which a child or young person is placed in a new school by the local authority or by school-to-school voluntary agreement). 
1.5.3 
Support the child or young person at the time of the educational transition to cope with the loss of important relationships caused by the transition. 
1.5.4 
Enhance children and young people's sense of belonging in the new school or class, for example by organising a peer mentor or buddy for them (see recommendation 1.4.6 ). 
After transitions between schools 
1.5.5 
Check on an ongoing basis to see whether the child or young person is settling in and thriving after moving to a new education setting. Offer them tailored support if necessary. Check more regularly if the child or young person is at a higher risk of poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing. 
1.5.6 
Promote peer mentoring between a child or young person entering a new education setting and a peer who has training in mentoring (see recommendation 1.4.6). 
Significant life changes 
1.5.7 
Address needs identified by children or young people (or their parents or carers) going through significant life changes, mental health problems or mental illness. This should involve the special educational needs and disabilities coordinator (SENCo) or designated safeguarding lead and other agencies if necessary. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on transitions . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: interventions to support children and young people during periods of transition . 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline. For other definitions see the NICE glossary and the Think Local Act Personal Care and Support Jargon Buster . 
Adverse childhood experiences 
Highly stressful, and potentially traumatic, events or situations that occur during childhood or adolescence. They can be a single event, or prolonged threats to, and breaches of, the child or young person's safety, security, trust or bodily integrity. 
Early help 
Providing support as soon as a problem emerges, at any point in a child's life. For example, see the Early Intervention Foundation . 
Psychological safety 
The belief that one is in a safe place and will not be punished or humiliated for speaking up with ideas, questions, concerns or mistakes. 
Punitive behaviour management systems 
An approach to classroom or school management that focuses on establishing clear expectations for appropriate behaviour, monitoring behaviour, and then reinforcing appropriate behaviour and redirecting or sanctioning inappropriate behaviour. 
Relational approaches 
Approaches that emphasise connection, belonging and the teaching of effective conflict resolution skills. These approaches assume that behaviour is a means of communication and that behaviour that challenges can be a sign of unmet emotional needs. Relational approaches approach behaviour with curiosity rather than judgement. They are grounded in psychological theory and support children to build their self-regulation skills. They take account of context and the child or young person's lived experiences. 
Rhythmic physical activity 
Any kind of activity that is based on a steady and prominent beat. During rhythmic activities individuals participate in rhythmic body movement, for example rebounding on a trampoline or moving to a beat. 
Spiral curriculum 
A course of study in which pupils study the same topics in ever-increasing complexity throughout their time at school to reinforce previous lessons. 
Targeted support 
Support aimed at individuals or groups who have been identified as being at greater risk of poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing. 
Trauma-informed approaches 
Approaches to support children and young people who suffer with trauma or mental health problems and whose troubled behaviour is a barrier to learning. 
Trusted adults 
Adults that children and young people can turn to in times of worry, stress or crisis. 
Universal curriculum content 
Curriculum content that is for everyone. 
Whole-school approach 
For the purposes of this guideline, 'whole-school' also covers colleges, further education providers and other educational settings. 
A whole-school approach defines the entire school community as a single unit and involves coordinated action between 3 interrelated components: 
curriculum, teaching and learning 
school ethos and environment 
family and community partnership. 
The 8 principles to promoting a whole-school and college approach to mental health andwellbeing are set out in Department for Education and Public Health England's guidance on promoting children and young people's mental health and wellbeing . 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
