Key priorities for implementation | Pregnancy and complex social factors: a model for service provision for pregnant women with complex social factors | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Pregnancy
Pregnancy and complex social factors: a model for service provision for pregnant women with complex social factors
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG110 
Published: 
22 September 2010
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
General recommendations
Pregnant women who misuse substances (alcohol and/or drugs)
Pregnant women who are recent migrants, asylum seekers or refugees, or who have difficulty reading or speaking English
Young pregnant women aged under 20
Pregnant women who experience domestic abuse
Key priorities for implementation 
General recommendations 
The recommendations in this section apply to all pregnant women covered in this guideline. 
Service organisation 
In order to inform mapping of their local population to guide service provision, commissioners should ensure that the following are recorded: 
The number of women presenting for antenatal care with any complex social factor. Examples of complex social factors in pregnancy include: poverty; homelessness; substance misuse; recent arrival as a migrant; asylum seeker or refugee status; difficulty speaking or understanding English; age under 20; domestic abuse. Complex social factors may vary, in both type and prevalence, across different local populations 
The number of women within each complex social factor grouping identified locally. 
Commissioners should ensure that the following are recorded separately for each complex social factor grouping: 
The number of women who: 
attend for booking by 10, 12+6 and 20 weeks. 
attend for the recommended number of antenatal appointments, in line with national guidance, see NICE's guideline on antenatal care . 
experience, or have babies who experience, mortality or significant morbidity. Significant morbidity is morbidity that has a lasting impact on either the woman or the child. 
The number of appointments each woman attends. 
The number of scheduled appointments each woman does not attend. 
Commissioners should ensure that women with complex social factors presenting for antenatal care are asked about their satisfaction with the services provided; and the women's responses are: 
recorded and monitored 
used to guide service development. 
Care provision 
Consider initiating a multi-agency needs assessment, including safeguarding issues so that the woman has a coordinated care plan. See Information sharing advice for safeguarding practitioners , Information sharing to protect vulnerable children and families and Multi Agency Risk Assessment Conference . 
Respect the woman's right to confidentiality and sensitively discuss her fears in a non-judgemental manner. 
Tell the woman why and when information about her pregnancy may need to be shared with other agencies. 
Information and support for women 
For women who do not have a booking appointment at the first contact with any healthcare professional: 
discuss the need for antenatal care 
offer the woman a booking appointment in the first trimester, ideally before 10 weeks if she wishes to continue the pregnancy, or offer referral to sexual health services if she is considering termination of the pregnancy. 
In order to facilitate discussion of sensitive issues, provide each woman with a one-to-one consultation, without her partner, a family member or a legal guardian present, on at least one occasion. 
Pregnant women who misuse substances (alcohol and/or drugs) 
Service organisation 
Healthcare commissioners and those responsible for the organisation of local antenatal services should work with local agencies, including social care and third-sector agencies that provide substance misuse services, to coordinate antenatal care by, for example: 
jointly developing care plans across agencies 
including information about opiate replacement therapy in care plans 
co-locating services 
offering women information about the services provided by other agencies. 
Training for healthcare staff 
Healthcare professionals should be given training on the social and psychological needs of women who misuse substances. 
Healthcare staff and non-clinical staff such as receptionists should be given training on how to communicate sensitively with women who misuse substances. 
Pregnant women who are recent migrants, asylum seekers or refugees, or who have difficulty reading or speaking English 
Service organisation 
Those responsible for the organisation of local antenatal services should provide information about pregnancy and antenatal services, including how to find and use antenatal services, in a variety of: 
formats, such as posters, notices, leaflets, photographs, drawings/diagrams, online video clips, audio clips and DVDs 
settings, including pharmacies, community centres, faith groups and centres, GP surgeries, family planning clinics, children's centres, reception centres and hostels 
languages. 
Young pregnant women aged under 20 
Service organisation 
Commissioners should consider commissioning a specialist antenatal service for young women aged under 20, using a flexible model of care tailored to the needs of the local population. Components may include: 
antenatal care and education in peer groups in a variety of settings, such as GP surgeries, children's centres and schools 
antenatal education in peer groups offered at the same time as antenatal appointments and at the same location, such as a 'one-stop shop' (where a range of services can be accessed at the same time). 
Pregnant women who experience domestic abuse 
Service organisation 
Commissioners and those responsible for the organisation of local antenatal services should ensure that a local protocol is written, which: 
is developed jointly with social care providers, the police and third-sector agencies by a healthcare professional with expertise in the care of women experiencing domestic abuse. 
includes: 
clear referral pathways that set out the information and care that should be offered to women 
the latest government guidance on responding to domestic abuse, see Domestic abuse: a resource for health professionals 
sources of support for women, including addresses and telephone numbers, such as social services, the police, support groups and women's refuges 
safety information for women 
plans for follow-up care, such as additional appointments or referral to a domestic abuse support worker 
obtaining a telephone number that is agreed with the woman and on which it is safe to contact her 
contact details of other people who should be told that the woman is experiencing domestic abuse, including her GP. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Previous page 
Introduction 
Back to top
