Overview | Thyroid disease: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Thyroid disorders
Thyroid disease: assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG145 
Published: 
20 November 2019
Last updated: 
12 October 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers investigating all suspected thyroid disease and managing primary thyroid disease (related to the thyroid rather than the pituitary gland). It does not cover managing thyroid cancer or thyroid disease in pregnancy. It aims to improve quality of life by making recommendations on diagnosis, treatment, long-term care and support. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on thyroid cancer . 
Last reviewed: 3 October 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will not update the  recommendations on managing primary hypothyroidism . See the  surveillance decision  for further details. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
information for people with thyroid disease 
investigating suspected thyroid dysfunction 
managing ,  follow-up and monitoring of primary hypothyroidism 
managing and monitoring of subclinical hypothyroidism 
managing thyrotoxicosis  and  follow-up and monitoring of hyperthyroidism 
managing and monitoring of subclinical hyperthyroidism 
diagnosing, managing and monitoring thyroid enlargement with normal thyroid function 
See the 1-page visual summary on the recommendations for managing and monitoring hyperthyroidism in adults . 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with thyroid disease, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines    
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
