Overview | Prostate cancer: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Prostate cancer
Prostate cancer: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG131 
Published: 
09 May 2019
Last updated: 
15 December 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the diagnosis and management of prostate cancer in secondary care, including information on the best way to diagnose and identify different stages of the disease, and how to manage adverse effects of treatment. It also includes recommendations on follow-up in primary care for people diagnosed with prostate cancer. 
Last reviewed: 13 August 2025 
We reviewed this guideline in both May 2025 and August 2025 and will update the section on localised and locally advanced prostate cancer . See the surveillance decision for further details. Post surveillance additional areas have also been identified for update during the scoping process. See the guideline in-development page for progress on the update. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG175 (January 2014), NICE diagnostics guidance 17 (June 2015), and evidence summaries ESNM30 and ESUOM50. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
information and decision support 
assessment and diagnosis 
localised and locally advanced prostate cancer 
people having hormone therapy 
metastatic prostate cancer 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers of prostate cancer services 
People with prostate cancer, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Prostate cancer 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
