Recommendations for research | Heart valve disease presenting in adults: investigation and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Structural heart defects
Heart valve disease presenting in adults: investigation and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG208 
Published: 
17 November 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Monitoring when there is no current need for intervention 
What is the most clinically and cost-effective monitoring (type and frequency of test) for adults with asymptomatic mild or moderate heart valve disease (aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation, mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation) and no current need for intervention? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on monitoring where there is no current need for intervention . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: monitoring of people with heart valve disease and no current indication for intervention . 
2 Interventions for tricuspid regurgitation 
What is the most clinically and cost-effective management strategy for adults with tricuspid regurgitation? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on interventions for tricuspid regurgitation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: transcatheter intervention, surgery or conservative management in heart valve disease . 
3 Interventions for a failed valve 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of transcatheter intervention compared with surgical redo intervention for adults with failing biological prosthetic tricuspid valves or failing repaired native tricuspid valves when either procedure is suitable? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on repeat intervention . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: repeat intervention for failure of biological or repaired valves . 
4 Monitoring after an intervention 
What is the most clinically and cost‑effective timing, nature and frequency of follow up for different types of valve interventions, including repair and replacement with tissue or mechanical valves? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see rationale section on monitoring after an intervention . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: monitoring in people with repaired or replaced heart valves . 
5 Information and advice 
What are the information and advice needs of all adult age groups with heart valve disease of all severities and stages? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on information and advice . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: information and advice . 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Indications for interventions – stress testing or echocardiography 
What is the prognostic value of severe mitral regurgitation unmasked on exercise echocardiography in adults with symptomatic non‑severe mitral regurgitation at rest? 
What is the prognostic value of parameters observed on exercise stress testing and exercise stress echocardiography in asymptomatic severe aortic regurgitation? 
7 Indications for interventions – CT or MRI 
In adults with aortic or primary mitral regurgitation in whom the need for intervention is unclear after echocardiography, what is the prognostic value and cost effectiveness of cardiac MRI to assess the severity of valvular regurgitation? 
In adults with aortic or mitral regurgitation in whom the need for intervention is unclear after echocardiography, what is the prognostic value and cost effectiveness of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) measured on cardiac MRI to assess the need for intervention? 
In adults with asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis what is the prognostic value and cost effectiveness of LVEF measured on cardiac MRI to assess the need for intervention? 
In adults with asymptomatic severe tricuspid regurgitation what is the prognostic value and cost effectiveness of cardiac MRI for assessment of the right ventricle to assess the need for intervention? 
8 Indications for interventions – global longitudinal strain 
In adults with severe heart valve disease what is the prognostic value and cost effectiveness of global longitudinal strain to assess the need for intervention? 
In adults with asymptomatic, severe aortic regurgitation or mitral regurgitation what is the prognostic value and cost effectiveness of B‑type natriuretic peptide (BNP) to assess the need for intervention? 
9 Pharmacological management for adults with heart valve disease 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor antagonists, beta‑blockers and diuretics for adults with severe aortic stenosis? 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor antagonists, beta‑blockers and calcium channel blockers, including compared with placebo, for adults with aortic regurgitation? 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor antagonists, beta‑blockers and diuretics for adults with primary severe mitral regurgitation? 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of beta‑blockers for adults over 75 years with non‑rheumatic/calcific mitral stenosis, in both sinus rhythm and atrial fibrillation? 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of pharmacological management of heart failure for adults with heart failure and severe aortic stenosis, severe aortic regurgitation or severe mitral regurgitation? 
10 Monitoring when there is no current need for intervention 
What is the most clinically and cost‑effective monitoring strategy (type and frequency of test) for adults with asymptomatic severe heart valve disease (aortic regurgitation, mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation or tricuspid regurgitation) and no current indication for intervention? 
What is the most clinically and cost‑effective monitoring strategy (type and frequency of test) for adults with symptomatic moderate heart valve disease (aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation, mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation) and no current indication for intervention? 
11 Interventions 
What is the most clinically and cost‑effective management strategy for adults with calcific mitral stenosis and an indication for intervention? 
12 Anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of single or dual antiplatelet therapies or anticoagulants compared with placebo after transcatheter or surgical valve replacement (implantation) with biological prosthesis and after valve repair? 
In adults with biological valve replacement, what effect does anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy have on long-term valve function and outcomes? 
13 Repeat interventions 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of transcatheter intervention compared with surgical redo intervention for adults with failing biological prosthetic aortic valves when either procedure is suitable? 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of transcatheter intervention compared with surgical redo intervention for adults with failing biological prosthetic mitral valves when either procedure is suitable? 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
