Overview | Food allergy in under 19s: assessment and diagnosis | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Allergies and anaphylaxis
Food allergy in under 19s: assessment and diagnosis 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG116 
Published: 
23 February 2011
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and managing food allergy in children and young people under 19. It aims to improve symptoms such as faltering growth and eczema by offering advice on how to identify food allergy and when to refer to secondary or specialist care. 
The guideline does not cover reactions to food that are due to intolerance (for example, intolerance to lactose in dairy products) rather than allergy. 
NICE has also produced diagnostics guidance on ImmunoCAP ISAC 112 for multiplex allergen testing . 
Last reviewed: 21 September 2018 
We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. See the surveillance decision  for further details. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
assessment and taking a clinical history 
diagnosing IgE-mediated food allergy 
diagnosing non-IgE-mediated food allergy 
providing information and support 
referral to secondary or specialist care 
alternative diagnostic tools 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Children and young people with food allergy and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called food allergy in children and young people: diagnosis and assessment of food allergy in children and young people in primary care and community settings. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Food allergy 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
