Overview | Major trauma: service delivery | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Major trauma: service delivery
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG40 
Published: 
17 February 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix: Recommendations that might have particular implications for service delivery 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the organisation and provision of major trauma services in pre-hospital and hospital settings, including ambulance services, emergency departments, major trauma centres and trauma units. It aims to reduce deaths and disabilities in people with serious injuries by providing a systematic approach to the delivery of major trauma care. It does not cover services for people with burns. 
The guideline should be read alongside the NICE guidelines on major trauma , spinal injury and complex fractures , which provide clinical recommendations for major trauma care. 
Last reviewed: 17 February 2016 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
pre-hospital triage   
the destination of patients with major trauma 
the organisation of a hospital major trauma service  
documentation  
national audit systems  to improve performance 
information and support for patients with major trauma, their family members and carers   
Who is it for? 
Commissioners of major trauma services, ambulance and hospital trust boards, medical directors, and senior managers in ambulance trusts 
Healthcare professionals and practitioners who provide care for people with major trauma or suspected major trauma in pre-hospital and hospital settings 
People with major trauma or suspected major trauma, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Trauma 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
