Investigations before starting antibiotics for early-onset or late-onset neonatal infection | Neonatal infection: antibiotics for prevention and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Neonatal infection: antibiotics for prevention and treatment 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG195 
Published: 
20 April 2021
Last updated: 
13 May 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Using this guideline 
Information and support for parents and carers 
Prevention and risk reduction 
Risk factors and clinical indicators: early-onset neonatal infection 
Risk factors and clinical indicators: late-onset neonatal infection 
Investigations before starting antibiotics for early-onset or late-onset neonatal infection 
Principles around use of antibiotics for early-onset or late-onset neonatal infection 
Investigations during antibiotic treatment for early-onset or late-onset infection 
Investigations and treatments for site-specific infections 
Antibiotics for early-onset neonatal infection 
Antibiotics for late-onset neonatal infection 
Antifungals to prevent fungal infection during antibiotic treatment for late-onset neonatal infection 
Meningitis: babies with early-onset or late-onset infection in neonatal units 
Therapeutic drug monitoring for babies receiving gentamicin 
Care setting and care after discharge 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.13 Cultures, microscopy and C-reactive protein
1.14 Lumbar puncture
Investigations before starting antibiotics for early-onset or late-onset neonatal infection 
NICE has published early value assessment guidance on Genedrive   MT-RNR1 ID Kit for detecting the MT-RNR1 m.1555A>G genetic variant to guide use of aminoglycoside antibiotics (including gentamicin) and prevent hearing loss in babies. This technology can be used in the NHS, while more evidence is generated. The guidance will be reviewed after the generation period (3 years). See  NICE's early value assessment on Genedrive MT-RNR1 ID kit .  
1.13 Cultures, microscopy and C-reactive protein 
1.13.1 
When starting antibiotic treatment in babies who may have neonatal infection, perform a blood culture before giving the first dose. [2021] 
1.13.2 
Measure baseline C-reactive protein concentration when starting antibiotic treatment in babies who may have neonatal infection. Use this together with any subsequent readings to assess the likelihood of infection and response to treatment. [2021] 
1.13.3 
Do not routinely perform urine microscopy or culture as part of the investigations for early-onset neonatal infection, or late-onset neonatal infection for babies in neonatal units. [2021] 
1.13.4 
Perform urine microscopy and culture for babies with suspected late-onset neonatal infection outside of neonatal units in line with NICE's guideline on urinary tract infection in under 16s . [2021] 
1.13.5 
Do not perform skin swab microscopy or culture as part of the investigations for neonatal infection if there are no clinical signs of a localised infection. [2021] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on cultures, microscopy and C-reactive protein before starting antibiotics . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: investigations before starting treatment for late-onset neonatal infection . 
1.14 Lumbar puncture 
1.14.1 
If it is safe to do so, perform a lumbar puncture to obtain a cerebrospinal fluid sample when: 
there is a strong clinical suspicion of neonatal infection or 
there are clinical symptoms or signs suggesting meningitis. [2021] 
1.14.2 
Treat and stabilise any of the following before performing a lumbar puncture: 
unprotected airway 
respiratory compromise 
shock 
uncontrolled seizures 
bleeding risk. [2024] 
1.14.3 
Do not perform lumbar puncture if there is: 
extensive or rapidly spreading purpura 
infection at the lumbar puncture site 
risk factors for an evolving space-occupying lesion 
any of these symptoms or signs, which might indicate raised intracranial pressure: 
new focal neurological features (including seizures or posturing) 
abnormal pupillary reactions 
a progressive and sustained or rapid fall in level of consciousness. [2024] 
1.14.4 
Measure blood glucose in babies immediately before lumbar puncture, so that the cerebrospinal fluid to blood glucose ratio can be calculated. [2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2021 and 2024 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on lumbar puncture . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: investigations before starting treatment for late-onset neonatal infection and evidence review L: investigating and diagnosing suspected bacterial meningitis with cerebrospinal fluid parameters . 
Cerebrospinal fluid investigations in babies with suspected bacterial meningitis 
1.14.5 
Perform the following cerebrospinal fluid investigations in babies with suspected bacterial meningitis: 
red and white cell count and cell type (including differential white cell count) 
total protein 
glucose concentration (to calculate cerebrospinal fluid to blood glucose ratio) 
microscopy for bacteria (using gram stain) 
microbiological culture and sensitivities 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for relevant pathogens. [2024] 
1.14.6 
Store the remaining cerebrospinal fluid in case more tests are needed. [2024] 
1.14.7 
Ensure that cerebrospinal fluid, cell counts, total protein and glucose concentrations are available within 4 hours of lumbar puncture. [2024] 
1.14.8 
When interpreting the results of cerebrospinal fluid investigations, take into account: 
red cells in the sample, which may suggest blood contamination or a different diagnosis 
whether earlier antibiotics may have reduced the diagnostic reliability of these investigations. [2024] 
1.14.9 
Interpret cerebrospinal fluid results using standard age-appropriate threshold values (taking into account factors such as gestational age, chronological age, birth weight, and earlier antibiotic use or suspected immunodeficiency). [2024] 
1.14.10 
Interpret cerebrospinal fluid results in babies alongside the clinical presentation and maternal history. [2024] 
1.14.11 
If cerebrospinal fluid results are abnormal, consider alternative viral, mycobacterial, fungal or non-infectious causes as well as bacterial meningitis. [2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on cerebrospinal fluid investigations in babies with suspected bacterial meningitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: investigating and diagnosing suspected bacterial meningitis with cerebrospinal fluid parameters . 
Next page 
Principles around use of antibiotics for early-onset or late-onset neonatal infection 
Previous page 
Risk factors and clinical indicators: late-onset neonatal infection 
Back to top
