Recommendations for research | Spinal injury: assessment and initial management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Spinal injury: assessment and initial management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG41 
Published: 
17 February 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1 Neuropathic pain relief
2 Cervical spine dislocation
3 Thoracic and lumbosacral assessment tool
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
1 Neuropathic pain relief 
Does early treatment with a centrally acting analgesic (for example pregabalin) reduce the frequency or severity of neuropathic pain in people with spinal cord injury? 
Why this is important 
Neuropathic pain occurs in 40% of people with spinal cord injury. It can be severe and disabling, and in people with spinal cord injury it can lead to further impairment of function. Having neuropathic pain can also result in increased care needs and costs of care, and make it difficult to find employment. It also increases the risk of significant depressive illness and suicide. Research is needed to address whether early treatment of spinal cord injury with a centrally acting analgesic such as pregabalin might reduce the frequency or severity of neuropathic pain. 
2 Cervical spine dislocation 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of emergency reduction of cervical spine dislocations following acute traumatic cervical spine injury? 
Why this is important 
Half of all traumatic spinal cord injuries involve the cervical spinal cord, and a large proportion of these are caused by cervical spine dislocation. Cervical spinal cord injury caused by traumatic cervical spine dislocation produces permanent disability. The greater the permanent neurological impairment the greater the disability. A high level of disability is associated with less independence, fewer opportunities for a full life, reduced prospects for employment and a shorter life expectancy. Any intervention that improves the neurological outcome in this group of people will improve all of these adverse outcomes. 
3 Thoracic and lumbosacral assessment tool 
After injury, what is the best method of clinical assessment to determine who needs imaging of the thoracic and lumbar spine to exclude injury to the spinal column or cord, and who is safe to discharge without risk of missing significant injury? 
Why this is important 
Injuries to the thoracic and lumbar spine are associated with significant morbidity and can be associated with relatively minor mechanisms of injury. This is a particular problem in older people where such injuries can have a significant impact on their mobility, functional status and level of independence. 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
