Managing oncocytomas and Bosniak 2F cysts | Kidney cancer: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Renal cancer
Kidney cancer: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG256 
Published: 
19 March 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Information and support 
Diagnosis 
Managing oncocytomas and Bosniak 2F cysts 
Managing localised and locally advanced renal cell carcinoma 
Managing advanced renal cell carcinoma 
Managing renal cell carcinoma in people with a heritable renal cell carcinoma predisposition syndrome 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Managing oncocytomas and Bosniak 2F cysts 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
Decision making and mental capacity 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines optimisation 
Multimorbidity 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
People's experience in adult social care services 
Service user experience in adult mental health 
Shared decision making . 
1.4 Active surveillance for oncocytomas and Bosniak 2F cysts 
Active surveillance for oncocytomas 
1.4.1 
For people with a renal lesion that is likely to be an oncocytoma (based on imaging, biopsy results or both), who have: 
no symptoms, then: 
offer active surveillance 
offer to treat the oncocytoma if they decline active surveillance 
symptoms, such as haematuria (blood in their urine), then: 
offer to treat the oncocytoma 
offer active surveillance if they decline treatment. 
See the section on active surveillance information, imaging types and scheduling . 
1.4.2 
For people undergoing active surveillance for a renal lesion that is likely to be an oncocytoma that has a growth rate greater than 5 mm in diameter in a year, discuss with the person the following options: 
having a biopsy, or a repeat biopsy, to help confirm the diagnosis (see the section on biopsy ) 
treating the lesion or staying on active surveillance if the person chooses not to have a biopsy or a biopsy is not possible. 
1.4.3 
For people who choose to have a biopsy during active surveillance for a renal lesion originally suspected to be an oncocytoma that has a growth rate greater than 5 mm in diameter in a year, if the lesion is found to be: 
malignant, then move to treatment for renal cell carcinoma (RCC), following the recommendations in the section on managing localised and locally advanced RCC or managing advanced RCC 
benign, then consider: 
continuing active surveillance or 
treating the benign lesion. 
1.4.4 
Consider managing oncocytic renal neoplasms of low malignant potential, not otherwise specified, in the same way as an oncocytoma. 
Active surveillance for Bosniak 2F cysts 
1.4.5 
Offer active surveillance to people with Bosniak 2F cysts. 
See the section on active surveillance information, imaging types scheduling . 
1.4.6 
If the Bosniak 2F cyst progresses to a Bosniak 3 or 4 cyst during active surveillance, follow the relevant recommendations in the section on managing localised and locally advanced RCC or managing advanced RCC . 
Stopping active surveillance 
1.4.7 
Stop active surveillance and discharge the person with an oncocytoma or Bosniak 2F cyst if treatment for local symptoms, or treatment for RCC if developed in the future, is no longer an option. Explain to the person why they are being discharged from the active surveillance pathway. 
1.4.8 
Consider stopping active surveillance of an oncocytoma or Bosniak 2F cysts after 5 years and discharging the person, taking into account their preferences and clinical characteristics (such as age and fitness), if the: 
oncocytoma does not have a growth rate greater than 5 mm in diameter in any 12-month period 
Bosniak 2F cyst has not progressed to stage 3 or 4. 
1.4.9 
When discharging a person from active surveillance because their lesion has remained stable for 5 years: 
explain why they are being discharged 
explain that if they had a malignancy, it is likely that it would be detected by this time 
provide examples of symptoms that the person should contact primary care about (such as if they have blood in their urine or persistent abdominal pain). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on managing oncocytomas and Bosniak 2F cysts . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: monitoring of untreated renal lesions using active surveillance . 
Next page 
Managing localised and locally advanced renal cell carcinoma 
Previous page 
Diagnosis 
Back to top
