Overview | Preterm labour and birth | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Intrapartum care
Preterm labour and birth
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG25 
Published: 
20 November 2015
Last updated: 
10 June 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the care of women with a singleton pregnancy at increased risk of, or with symptoms and signs of, preterm labour (before 37 weeks), and women with a singleton pregnancy having a planned preterm birth. It aims to reduce the risks of preterm birth for the baby and describes treatments to prevent or delay early labour and birth. 
For information on related topics, including twin and triplet pregnancy, see our women's and reproductive health summary page . 
N ovember 2024 : There is a problem with the supply of cassettes used for fetal fibronectin testing. We will review our guidance on diagnosing preterm labour in women with intact membranes and use our topic prioritisation process to decide whether to update it. For more information, see the NHS England letter on the discontinuation of Hologic fetal fibronectin testing . 
Last reviewed: 1 May 2023 
We have reviewed our guidelines portfolio to identify topics that we think will add the most value to the health and care system and have agreed the updates recommended in this surveillance report will not proceed as planned. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
In this guideline, we use the terms 'woman' or 'mother' throughout. These should be taken to include people who do not identify as women but are pregnant or have given birth. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
repeat doses of maternal corticosteroids 
It also includes recommendations on: 
care of women at risk of preterm labour 
diagnosing, and caring for women with, preterm prelabour rupture of membranes (P-PROM) 
diagnosing preterm labour 
tocolysis 
fetal monitoring 
mode of birth and clamping the cord 
information and support 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals who care for women at increased risk of or with symptoms and signs of preterm labour and women having a planned preterm birth 
Commissioners and providers of maternity services 
Women at increased risk of or with symptoms and signs of preterm labour and women having a planned preterm birth, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Preterm labour and birth 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
