Antibiotics for early-onset neonatal infection | Neonatal infection: antibiotics for prevention and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Neonatal infection: antibiotics for prevention and treatment 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG195 
Published: 
20 April 2021
Last updated: 
13 May 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Using this guideline 
Information and support for parents and carers 
Prevention and risk reduction 
Risk factors and clinical indicators: early-onset neonatal infection 
Risk factors and clinical indicators: late-onset neonatal infection 
Investigations before starting antibiotics for early-onset or late-onset neonatal infection 
Principles around use of antibiotics for early-onset or late-onset neonatal infection 
Investigations during antibiotic treatment for early-onset or late-onset infection 
Investigations and treatments for site-specific infections 
Antibiotics for early-onset neonatal infection 
Antibiotics for late-onset neonatal infection 
Antifungals to prevent fungal infection during antibiotic treatment for late-onset neonatal infection 
Meningitis: babies with early-onset or late-onset infection in neonatal units 
Therapeutic drug monitoring for babies receiving gentamicin 
Care setting and care after discharge 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.20 Choice and dosage of intravenous antibiotics
1.21 Treatment duration for intravenous antibiotics
1.22 Switching to oral antibiotics
Antibiotics for early-onset neonatal infection 
1.20 Choice and dosage of intravenous antibiotics 
1.20.1 
Use intravenous benzylpenicillin sodium with gentamicin as the first-choice antibiotic regimen for empirical treatment of suspected early-onset infection, unless microbiological surveillance data show local bacterial resistance patterns that indicate the need for a different antibiotic. [2012] 
1.20.2 
Give benzylpenicillin sodium in a dosage of 25 mg/kg every 12 hours. Consider shortening the dose interval to every 8 hours, based on clinical judgement (for example, if the baby appears very ill). [2012] 
1.20.3 
Give gentamicin in a starting dose of 5 mg/kg (see also recommendation 1.20.4). [2012] 
1.20.4 
When prescribing gentamicin, be aware that: 
the summary of product characteristics recommends a dosage of 4 to 7 mg/kg/day administered in a single dose 
the evidence reviewed for the guideline supports a starting dosage of 5 mg/kg every 36 hours administered in a single dose. 
In 2021, a dosage of 5 mg/kg every 36 hours is an off-label use of gentamicin. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . [2012] 
1.20.5 
If a second dose of gentamicin is given this should usually be 36 hours after the first dose (for criteria for stopping antibiotics at 36 hours, see recommendation 1.21.3 in the section on treatment duration for intravenous antibiotics for early-onset neonatal infection ). Use a shorter interval if clinical judgement suggests this is needed, for example, if: 
the baby appears very ill 
the blood culture shows a Gram-negative infection. [2012] 
1.20.6 
Take account of blood gentamicin concentrations when deciding on subsequent gentamicin dosing regimen (see the section on therapeutic drug monitoring for babies receiving gentamicin ). [2012] 
1.20.7 
Record the times of: 
gentamicin administration 
sampling for therapeutic monitoring . [2012] 
1.20.8 
If there is microbiological evidence of Gram-negative bacterial sepsis, add another antibiotic to the benzylpenicillin sodium and gentamicin regimen that is active against Gram-negative bacteria (for example, cefotaxime). If Gram-negative infection is confirmed, stop benzylpenicillin sodium. [2012] 
1.21 Treatment duration for intravenous antibiotics 
1.21.1 
Give intravenous antibiotic treatment for a total of 7 days for babies with a positive blood culture or negative blood culture if sepsis has been strongly suspected. [2012] 
1.21.2 
Consider continuing intravenous antibiotic treatment for more than 7 days for babies with a positive blood culture or negative blood culture if sepsis has been strongly suspected, if: 
the baby has not yet fully recovered or 
this is advisable because of the pathogen identified on blood culture (seek expert microbiological advice if necessary). [2012] 
1.21.3 
For babies who are being treated with intravenous antibiotics because of risk factors for early-onset infection or clinical indicators of possible infection, stop antibiotics at 36 hours if: 
the blood culture is negative and 
the initial clinical suspicion of infection was not strong and 
the baby's clinical condition is reassuring, with no clinical indicators of possible infection (see box 2 for clinical indicators of possible early-onset infection ) and 
the levels and trends of C-reactive protein concentration are reassuring. [2012, amended 2026] 
1.21.4 
When continuing intravenous antibiotics for longer than 36 hours despite negative blood cultures, review the need for ongoing antibiotics at least once every 24 hours, taking account of: 
the level of initial clinical suspicion of infection and 
the baby's clinical progress and current condition and 
the levels and trends of C-reactive protein concentration. [2012] 
1.22 Switching to oral antibiotics 
1.22.1 
For babies born from 35+0 weeks' gestation with negative blood culture who need antibiotics for more than 36 hours because the initial clinical suspicion of infection was strong, consider switching treatment from intravenous to oral antibiotics at 36 hours or thereafter to complete the course (up to 7 days of antibiotics in total) if: 
the baby's clinical condition is reassuring, with no current clinical indicators of ongoing infection (see box 2 for clinical indicators of possible early-onset neonatal infection ) and 
the levels and trends of C-reactive protein concentration are reassuring and 
the baby is tolerating oral feeds. [2026] 
1.22.2 
Use amoxicillin as the oral antibiotic, unless local bacterial resistance data indicates the need for a different antibiotic. 
May 2026: Amoxicillin is licensed for neonates but not specifically for the indication of early-onset neonatal infection. BNF for Children is reviewing the recommended dosage for neonates.  [2026] 
1.22.3 
Consider enabling parents or carers to treat babies on oral antibiotics at home with support from the neonatal team. [2026] 
1.22.4 
Ensure that any decisions on switching to oral antibiotics or enabling a baby to go home is agreed by a senior neonatologist or paediatrician (consultant or similar level). [2026] 
1.22.5 
Before parents or carers take a baby on oral antibiotics home, ensure that: 
they have been trained to give the baby oral antibiotics, and have given them their first dose under supervision while in hospital 
they know when and how to seek medical help from the neonatal team (for signs in babies that require medical attention, see the section on information and support for parents and carers before transferring babies home ) 
any concerns they have raised are addressed 
there are no other reasons for the baby to stay in hospital. [2026] 
1.22.6 
For parents and carers of babies on oral antibiotics, provide at least 2 follow-up consultations to assess the baby's wellbeing and the need for ongoing antibiotics, including 1 consultation at the end of treatment. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on switching treatment to oral antibiotics for babies with early-onset neonatal infection . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review R: switching from intravenous to oral antibiotics for suspected early-onset neonatal infection . 
Next page 
Antibiotics for late-onset neonatal infection 
Previous page 
Investigations and treatments for site-specific infections 
Back to top
