Recommendations | Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Respiratory conditions
Pulmonary fibrosis
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in adults: diagnosis and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG163 
Published: 
12 June 2013
Last updated: 
23 May 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Awareness of clinical features of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
1.2 Diagnosis
1.3 Information and support
1.4 Prognosis
1.5 Management
1.6 Review and follow-up
Recommendations 
The following guidance is based on the best available evidence. The full guideline gives details of the methods and the evidence used to develop the guidance. 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Awareness of clinical features of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 
1.1.1 
Be aware of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis when assessing a patient with the clinical features listed below and when considering requesting a chest X‑ray or referring to a specialist: 
age over 45 years 
persistent breathlessness on exertion 
persistent cough 
bilateral inspiratory crackles when listening to the chest 
clubbing of the fingers 
normal spirometry or impaired spirometry usually with a restrictive pattern but sometimes with an obstructive pattern. 
1.2 Diagnosis 
1.2.1 
Assess everyone with suspected idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis by: 
taking a detailed history, carrying out a clinical examination (see recommendation 1.1.1 for clinical features ) and performing blood tests to help exclude alternative diagnoses, including lung diseases associated with environmental and occupational exposure, with connective tissue diseases and with drugs and 
performing lung function testing (spirometry and gas transfer) and 
reviewing results of chest X‑ray and 
performing CT of the thorax (including high-resolution images). 
1.2.2 
Diagnose idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis only with the consensus of the multidisciplinary team (listed in table 1), based on: 
the clinical features, lung function and radiological findings (see recommendation 1.2.1) 
pathology when indicated (see recommendation 1.2.4). 
1.2.3 
At each stage of the diagnostic care pathway the multidisciplinary team should consist of a minimum of the healthcare professionals listed in table 1, all of whom should have expertise in interstitial lung disease. 
Table 1 Minimum composition of multidisciplinary team involved in diagnosing idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 
Stage of diagnostic care pathway 
Multidisciplinary team composition (all healthcare professionals should have expertise in interstitial lung disease) 
After clinical evaluation, baseline lung function and CT 
Consultant respiratory physician 
Consultant radiologist 
Interstitial lung disease specialist nurse 
Multidisciplinary team coordinator 
When considering performing bronchoalveolar lavage, and/or transbronchial biopsy or surgical lung biopsy 
Only some patients will have bronchoalveolar lavage or transbronchial biopsy but they may be being considered for surgical lung biopsy 
Consultant respiratory physician 
Consultant radiologist 
Consultant histopathologist 
Thoracic surgeon as appropriate 
Interstitial lung disease specialist nurse 
Multidisciplinary team coordinator 
When considering results of bronchoalveolar lavage, transbronchial biopsy or surgical lung biopsy 
Consultant respiratory physician 
Consultant radiologist 
Consultant histopathologist 
Interstitial lung disease specialist nurse 
Multidisciplinary team coordinator 
See the full guideline for more information on the expertise of the multidisciplinary team . 
If a confident diagnosis cannot be made 
1.2.4 
If the multidisciplinary team cannot make a confident diagnosis from clinical features, lung function and radiological findings, consider: 
bronchoalveolar lavage or transbronchial biopsy and/or 
surgical lung biopsy, with the agreement of the thoracic surgeon. 
1.2.5 
Discuss with the person who may have idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: 
the potential benefits of having a confident diagnosis compared with the uncertainty of not having a confident diagnosis and 
the increased likelihood of obtaining a confident diagnosis with surgical biopsy compared with bronchoalveolar lavage or transbronchial biopsy and 
the increased risks of surgical biopsy compared with bronchoalveolar lavage or transbronchial biopsy. 
1.2.6 
When considering bronchoalveolar lavage, transbronchial biopsy or surgical lung biopsy take into account: 
the likely differential diagnoses and 
the person's clinical condition, including any comorbidities. 
1.2.7 
If a confident diagnosis cannot be made continue to review the person under specialist care. 
1.3 Information and support 
1.3.1 
The consultant respiratory physician or interstitial lung disease specialist nurse should provide accurate and clear information (verbal and written) to people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, and their families and carers with the person's consent. This should include information about investigations, diagnosis and management. 
1.3.2 
NICE has produced guidance on the components of good patient experience in adult NHS services. Follow the recommendations in NICE's guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . 
1.3.3 
An interstitial lung disease specialist nurse should be available at all stages of the care pathway to provide information and support to people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and their families and carers with the person's consent. 
1.3.4 
Offer advice, support and treatment to aid smoking cessation to all people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis who also smoke, in line with NICE's guideline on tobacco . 
1.4 Prognosis 
1.4.1 
Measure the initial rate of decline in the person's condition, which may predict subsequent prognosis, by using lung function test results (spirometry and gas transfer) at: 
diagnosis and 
6 months and 12 months after diagnosis. Repeat the lung function tests at shorter intervals if there is concern that the person's condition is deteriorating rapidly. 
1.4.2 
Discuss prognosis with people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in a sensitive manner and include information on: 
the severity of the person's disease and average life expectancy 
the varying courses of disease and range of survival 
management options available. 
1.4.3 
Do not use the 6‑minute walk distance at diagnosis to estimate prognosis. (The 6‑minute walk test may be useful for other purposes, see recommendation 1.5.1.) 
1.5 Management 
Pulmonary rehabilitation 
1.5.1 
Assess people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis for pulmonary rehabilitation at the time of diagnosis. Assessment may include a 6-minute walk test (distance walked and oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry) and a quality-of-life assessment. 
Be aware that some pulse oximeters can underestimate or overestimate oxygen saturation levels, especially if the saturation level is borderline. Overestimation has been reported in people with dark skin. See also the NHS England Patient Safety Alert on the risk of harm from inappropriate placement of pulse oximeter probes . 
1.5.2 
Repeat the assessment for pulmonary rehabilitation for people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis at 6‑month or 12‑month intervals. 
1.5.3 
If appropriate after each assessment, offer pulmonary rehabilitation including exercise and educational components tailored to the needs of people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in general. 
1.5.4 
Pulmonary rehabilitation should be tailored to the individual needs of each person with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Sessions should be held somewhere that is easy for people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis to get to and has good access for people with disabilities. 
Best supportive care 
1.5.5 
Offer best supportive care to people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis from the point of diagnosis. Best supportive care should be tailored to disease severity, rate of progression, and the person's preference, and should include if appropriate: 
information and support (see recommendation 1.3.1 in the section on information and support ) 
symptom relief 
management of comorbidities 
withdrawal of therapies suspected to be ineffective or causing harm 
end of life care. 
1.5.6 
If the person is breathless on exertion consider assessment for: 
the causes of breathlessness and degree of hypoxia and 
ambulatory oxygen therapy and long-term oxygen therapy and/or 
pulmonary rehabilitation. 
1.5.7 
If the person is breathless at rest consider: 
assessment for the causes of breathlessness and degree of hypoxia and 
assessment for additional ambulatory oxygen therapy and long-term oxygen therapy and 
the person's psychosocial needs and offering referral to relevant services such as palliative care services and 
pharmacological symptom relief with benzodiazepines and/or   opioids. 
1.5.8 
Assess the oxygen needs of people who have been hospitalised with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis before they are discharged. 
1.5.9 
If the person has a cough consider: 
treatment for causes other than idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (such as gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, post-nasal drip) 
treating with opioids if the cough is debilitating 
discussing treatment with thalidomide with a consultant respiratory physician with expertise in interstitial lung disease if the cough is intractable. 
At the time of publication (June 2013), thalidomide did not have a UK marketing authorisation for this indication. The prescriber should follow relevant professional guidance, taking full responsibility for the decision. Informed consent should be obtained and documented. See the General Medical Council's Good practice in prescribing and managing medicines and devices for further information. 
1.5.10 
Ensure people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, and their families and carers, have access to the full range of services offered by palliative care teams. Ensure there is collaboration between the healthcare professionals involved in the person's care, community services and the palliative care team. 
Disease-modifying pharmacological interventions 
1.5.11 
Nintedanib is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in people with forced vital capacity (FVC) above 80% predicted. For full details, see the guidance on nintedanib (TA864, 2023) . 
1.5.12 
For medicines recommended as options in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in people with FVC between 50% and 80% of predicted, see the guidance on: 
pirfenidone (TA504, 2018) 
nintedanib (TA379, 2016) . 
1.5.13 
Do not use any of the medicines below, either alone or in combination, to modify disease progression in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: 
ambrisentan 
azathioprine 
bosentan 
co-trimoxazole 
mycophenolate mofetil 
prednisolone 
sildenafil 
warfarin. 
1.5.14 
Advise the person that oral N‑acetylcysteine is used for managing idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, but its benefits are uncertain. 
At the time of publication (June 2013), N‑acetylcysteine did not have a UK marketing authorisation. The prescriber should follow relevant professional guidance, taking full responsibility for the decision. Informed consent should be obtained and documented. See the General Medical Council's Good practice in prescribing and managing medicines and devices for further information. 
1.5.15 
If people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis are already using prednisolone or azathioprine, discuss the potential risks and benefits of discontinuing, continuing or altering therapy. 
1.5.16 
Manage any comorbidities according to best practice. For gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, see NICE's guideline on gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and dyspepsia in adults . 
Lung transplantation 
1.5.17 
Discuss lung transplantation as a treatment option for people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis who do not have absolute contraindications. Discussions should: 
take place between 3 and 6 months after diagnosis or sooner if clinically indicated 
be supported by an interstitial lung disease specialist nurse 
include the risks and benefits of lung transplantation 
involve the person's family and carers with the person's consent. 
(See the recommendations in the section on best supportive care .) 
1.5.18 
Refer people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis for lung transplantation assessment if they wish to explore lung transplantation and if there are no absolute contraindications. Ask the transplant centre for an initial response within 4 weeks. 
Ventilation 
1.5.19 
A respiratory physician or specialist nurse with an interest in interstitial lung disease should discuss the poor outcomes associated with mechanical ventilation (including non-invasive mechanical ventilation) for respiratory failure with people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. These discussions should ideally take place between 3 to 6 months after diagnosis or sooner if clinically indicated. (See the recommendations in the section on best supportive care .) 
1.5.20 
Do not routinely offer mechanical ventilation (including non-invasive mechanical ventilation) to people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis who develop life-threatening respiratory failure. 
1.6 Review and follow-up 
1.6.1 
In follow-up appointments for people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: 
assess lung function 
assess for oxygen therapy 
assess for pulmonary rehabilitation 
offer smoking cessation advice, in line with NICE's guideline on tobacco 
identify exacerbations and previous respiratory hospital admissions 
consider referral for assessment for lung transplantation in people who do not have absolute contraindications (see the recommendations in the section on lung transplantation ) 
consider psychosocial needs and referral to relevant services as appropriate 
consider referral to palliative care services 
assess for comorbidities (which may include anxiety, bronchiectasis, depression, diabetes, dyspepsia, ischaemic heart disease, lung cancer and pulmonary hypertension). 
1.6.2 
Consider follow-up of people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: 
every 3 months or sooner if they are showing rapid disease progression or rapid deterioration of symptoms or 
every 6 months or sooner if they have steadily progressing disease or 
initially every 6 months if they have stable disease and then annually if they have stable disease after 1 year. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
