Overview | Falls: assessment and prevention in older people and in people 50 and over at higher risk | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Falls: assessment and prevention in older people and in people 50 and over at higher risk
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG249 
Published: 
29 April 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing risk of falling and interventions to prevent falls in all people aged 65 and over, and people aged 50 to 64 who are at higher risk of falls. It aims to reduce the risk and incidence of falls, and the associated distress, pain, injury, loss of confidence, loss of independence and mortality. 
For information on related topics, see the NICE topic page on injuries, accidents and wounds . 
Last reviewed: 29 April 2025 
This guideline updates and replaces the NICE guideline on falls (CG161, published 2013). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
identifying people at risk of falls 
comprehensive falls assessment 
interventions to reduce the risk of falls 
maximising ongoing participation in falls prevention interventions 
Information and education 
See the 1-page visual summary on falls in older people: assessing risk and prevention . 
Who is it for? 
Health and social care practitioners 
Local authorities 
Care home providers, managers and staff 
Commissioners and providers of health and social care services 
People aged 65 and over, their families and carers 
People aged 50 to 64 with a condition or conditions that may put them at risk of falls, their families and carers. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Falls 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
