Symptoms and signs of ectopic pregnancy and initial assessment | Ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage: diagnosis and initial management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Pregnancy
Ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage: diagnosis and initial management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG126 
Published: 
17 April 2019
Last updated: 
17 June 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Using this guideline 
Support and information 
Early pregnancy assessment services 
Symptoms and signs of ectopic pregnancy and initial assessment 
Diagnosis of viable intrauterine pregnancy and of tubal ectopic pregnancy 
Management of miscarriage 
Management of tubal ectopic pregnancy 
Anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Symptoms and signs of ectopic pregnancy and initial assessment 
1.4 Presentation, assessment and referral 
1.4.1 
Refer women who are haemodynamically unstable, or in whom there is significant concern about the degree of pain or bleeding, directly to A&E. [2012] 
1.4.2 
Be aware that atypical presentation for ectopic pregnancy is common. [2012] 
1.4.3 
Be aware that ectopic pregnancy can present with a variety of symptoms. Even if a symptom is less common, it may still be significant. Symptoms of ectopic pregnancy include: 
common symptoms: 
abdominal or pelvic pain 
amenorrhoea or missed period 
vaginal bleeding with or without clots 
other reported symptoms: 
breast tenderness 
gastrointestinal symptoms 
dizziness, fainting or syncope 
shoulder tip pain 
urinary symptoms 
passage of tissue 
rectal pressure or pain on defecation. [2012] 
1.4.4 
Be aware that ectopic pregnancy can present with a variety of signs on examination by a healthcare professional. Signs of ectopic pregnancy include: 
more common signs: 
pelvic tenderness 
adnexal tenderness 
abdominal tenderness 
other reported signs: 
cervical motion tenderness 
rebound tenderness or peritoneal signs 
pallor 
abdominal distension 
enlarged uterus 
tachycardia (more than 100 beats per minute) or hypotension (less than 100/60 mmHg) 
shock or collapse 
orthostatic hypotension. [2012] 
1.4.5 
During clinical assessment of women of reproductive age, be aware that: 
they may be pregnant, and think about offering a pregnancy test even when symptoms are non-specific and 
the symptoms and signs of ectopic pregnancy can resemble the common symptoms and signs of other conditions – for example, gastrointestinal conditions or urinary tract infection. [2012] 
1.4.6 
All healthcare professionals involved in the care of women of reproductive age should have access to pregnancy tests. [2012] 
1.4.7 
Refer immediately to an early pregnancy assessment service (or out-of-hours gynaecology service if the early pregnancy assessment service is not available) for further assessment of women with a positive pregnancy test and the following on examination: 
pain and abdominal tenderness or 
pelvic tenderness or 
cervical motion tenderness. [2012] 
1.4.8 
Exclude the possibility of ectopic pregnancy, even in the absence of risk factors (such as previous ectopic pregnancy), because about a third of women with an ectopic pregnancy will have no known risk factors. [2012] 
1.4.9 
Refer to an early pregnancy assessment service (or out-of-hours gynaecology service if the early pregnancy assessment service is not available) women with bleeding or other symptoms and signs of early pregnancy complications who have: 
pain or 
a pregnancy of 6 weeks' gestation or more or 
a pregnancy of uncertain gestation. 
The urgency of this referral depends on the clinical situation. [2012] 
1.4.10 
Use expectant management for women with a pregnancy of less than 6 weeks' gestation who are bleeding but not in pain, and who have no risk factors, such as a previous ectopic pregnancy. Advise these women: 
to return if bleeding continues or pain develops 
to repeat a urine pregnancy test after 7 to 10 days and to return if it is positive 
a negative pregnancy test means that the pregnancy has miscarried. [2012, amended 2019] 
1.4.11 
Refer women who return with worsening symptoms and signs that could suggest an ectopic pregnancy to an early pregnancy assessment service (or out-of-hours gynaecology service if the early pregnancy assessment service is not available) for further assessment. The decision about whether she should be seen immediately or within 24 hours will depend on the clinical situation. [2012] 
1.4.12 
If a woman is referred to an early pregnancy assessment service (or out-of-hours gynaecology service if the early pregnancy assessment service is not available), explain the reasons for the referral and what she can expect when she arrives there. [2012] 
Next page 
Diagnosis of viable intrauterine pregnancy and of tubal ectopic pregnancy 
Previous page 
Early pregnancy assessment services 
Back to top
