Overview | Multiple sclerosis in adults: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Multiple sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis in adults: management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG220 
Published: 
22 June 2022
Last updated: 
03 June 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing multiple sclerosis in people aged 18 and over. It aims to improve the quality of life for people with multiple sclerosis by promoting prompt and effective symptom management and relapse treatment, and comprehensive reviews. 
This guideline refers to NHS England commissioning policies. In Wales and Northern Ireland, follow Welsh or Northern Irish commissioning positions if applicable. 
Last reviewed: 03 June 2026 
We have updated recommendations on diagnosis to take account of the revised 2024 McDonald criteria. See update information for more details 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG186 (October 2014) and NICE evidence summary ESUOM9. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
diagnosis 
information and support 
coordination of care 
modifiable risk factors for relapse or progression 
symptom management and rehabilitation 
comprehensive review 
managing relapses and exacerbations 
disease-modifying therapies 
other treatments 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Social care practitioners 
Commissioners and providers 
People with multiple sclerosis and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Multiple sclerosis 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
