6 Treating childhood-onset epilepsies | Epilepsies in children, young people and adults | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Epilepsy
Epilepsies in children, young people and adults
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG217 
Published: 
27 April 2022
Last updated: 
30 January 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
1 Diagnosis and assessment of epilepsy 
2 Information and support 
3 Referral to tertiary specialist services 
4 Principles of treatment, safety, monitoring and withdrawal 
5 Treating epileptic seizures in children, young people and adults 
6 Treating childhood-onset epilepsies 
7 Treating status epilepticus, repeated or cluster seizures, and prolonged seizures 
8 Non-pharmacological treatments 
9 Psychological, neurobehavioural, cognitive and developmental comorbidities in epilepsy 
10 Reducing the risk of epilepsy-related death including sudden unexpected death in epilepsy 
11 Service provision and transition 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
6.1 Dravet syndrome
6.2 Lennox–Gastaut syndrome
6.3 Infantile spasms syndrome
6.4 Self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes
6.5 Epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures (Doose syndrome)
6.6 Treatments for other childhood-onset seizures
6 Treating childhood-onset epilepsies 
Antiseizure medications for childhood-onset epilepsy syndromes are considered off-label unless they are authorised for the specific syndrome. 
See also the section on safety considerations . Follow the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) safety advice on the use of valproate ,  valproate use in people younger than 55 years , valproate use in women and girls , valproate use in men , the use of topiramate and antiepileptic drugs in pregnancy . 
6.1 Dravet syndrome 
For guidance on safe prescribing and managing withdrawal of clobazam in adults, see NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms . 
Specialist involvement 
6.1.1 
Ensure that people with Dravet syndrome have an adult or paediatric neurologist with expertise in epilepsy involved in their care. 
First-line treatment 
6.1.2 
Consider sodium valproate as first-line treatment for people with Dravet syndrome. Follow the MHRA safety measures and precautionary advice for sodium valproate in box 2 . Be aware that sodium valproate should be used with caution, but it is recommended as first-line treatment for Dravet syndrome because of the severity of the syndrome and the lack of evidence for other effective first-line treatment options. 
6.1.3 
If sodium valproate alone is unsuccessful as first-line monotherapy for Dravet syndrome, consider triple therapy with stiripentol and clobazam as first-line add-on therapy. Carefully titrate the additional drugs and review treatment frequently, including monitoring for adverse effects such as sedation. 
In April 2022, these were off-label uses of clobazam as add-on therapy in children under 6 months, and stiripentol when it is started in adults over 18 years. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Second-line treatment 
6.1.4 
If triple therapy is unsuccessful for Dravet syndrome and the child is aged 2 years or over, consider second-line add-on treatment options in line with NICE technology appraisal guidance on: 
fenfluramine (TA808, 2022) 
cannabidiol with clobazam (TA614, 2019) . 
See the technology appraisal guidance for more details, including information about when treatment should be stopped. 
Further treatment options 
6.1.5 
If triple therapy is unsuccessful for Dravet syndrome in a child aged under 2 years or second-line treatment is unsuccessful in a child aged 2 years or over, consider 1 of the following add-on options under the supervision of a ketogenic diet team or a neurologist with expertise in epilepsy, as appropriate: 
ketogenic diet 
levetiracetam 
topiramate (do not use topiramate in women and girls of childbearing potential unless the conditions of the Pregnancy Prevention Programme are fulfilled). 
If the first choice is unsuccessful, consider the other add-on options. 
In January 2025, these were off-label uses of levetiracetam and topiramate. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
6.1.6 
If all other treatment options for Dravet syndrome are unsuccessful, consider potassium bromide under the guidance of a neurologist with expertise in epilepsy. 
In January 2025, potassium bromide was not licensed for use in the UK. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Other treatment considerations 
6.1.7 
Be aware that the following medications may exacerbate seizures in people with Dravet syndrome: 
carbamazepine 
gabapentin 
lacosamide 
lamotrigine 
oxcarbazepine 
phenobarbital 
pregabalin 
tiagabine 
vigabatrin. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on Dravet syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: effectiveness of antiseizure therapies in the treatment of Dravet syndrome . 
6.2 Lennox–Gastaut syndrome 
Specialist involvement 
6.2.1 
Ensure that people with Lennox–Gastaut syndrome have an adult or paediatric neurologist with expertise in epilepsy involved in their care. 
First-line treatment 
6.2.2 
Consider sodium valproate as first-line treatment for people with Lennox–Gastaut syndrome. Follow the MHRA safety measures and precautionary advice for sodium valproate in box 2 . Be aware that sodium valproate should be used with caution, but it is recommended as first-line treatment for Lennox–Gastaut syndrome because of the severity of the syndrome and the lack of evidence for other effective first-line treatment options. 
Second-line treatment 
6.2.3 
If first-line treatment is unsuccessful, consider lamotrigine as a second-line monotherapy or add-on treatment for people with Lennox–Gastaut syndrome. 
In January 2025, this use of lamotrigine was off-label as monotherapy in children under 13 years and add-on therapy for children under 2 years. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Third-line treatment 
For guidance on safe prescribing and managing withdrawal of clobazam in adults, see NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms . 
6.2.4 
If second-line treatment is unsuccessful, consider the following as third-line add-on treatment options for people with Lennox–Gastaut syndrome: 
cannabidiol with clobazam if the child is aged 2 years or over, in line with NICE's technology appraisal guidance on cannabidiol with clobazam for treating seizures associated with Lennox–Gastaut syndrome (TA615, 2019) 
clobazam 
fenfluramine if the child is aged 2 years or over, in line with NICE's technology appraisal guidance on fenfluramine for treating seizures associated with Lennox–Gastaut syndrome (TA1050, 2025) 
rufinamide 
topiramate (do not use topiramate in women and girls of childbearing potential unless the conditions of the Pregnancy Prevention Programme are fulfilled). 
In January 2025, these uses were off label: clobazam as add-on therapy in children under 6 months, rufinamide in children under 1 year, and topiramate in children under 2 years. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
When using cannabidiol with clobazapam, or fenfluramine, see the technology appraisal guidance for more details, including information about when treatment should be stopped. 
Starting an add-on treatment 
6.2.5 
When starting an add-on treatment in people with Lennox–Gastaut syndrome, carefully titrate the additional medicine and review treatment frequently, including monitoring for adverse effects such as sedation. 
Further treatment options 
6.2.6 
If seizures continue with third-line treatments for Lennox–Gastaut syndrome, consider a ketogenic diet as an add-on treatment under the supervision of a ketogenic diet team. 
6.2.7 
If all other treatment options for Lennox–Gastaut syndrome are unsuccessful, consider felbamate as add-on treatment under the supervision of a neurologist with expertise in epilepsy. 
In April 2022, felbamate was not licensed for use in the UK. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Other treatment considerations 
6.2.8 
Be aware that the following medications may exacerbate seizures in people with Lennox–Gastaut syndrome: 
carbamazepine 
gabapentin 
lacosamide 
lamotrigine 
oxcarbazepine 
phenobarbital 
pregabalin 
tiagabine 
vigabatrin. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on Lennox–Gastaut syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: effectiveness of antiseizure therapies in the treatment of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome . 
6.3 Infantile spasms syndrome 
Specialist involvement 
6.3.1 
If a child under 2 years has suspected or confirmed infantile spasms, within 24 hours seek guidance from, and refer the child urgently to, a tertiary paediatric neurologist to ensure rapid assessment, including a sleep electroencephalogram (EEG), and rapid treatment to stop spasms. 
Monitoring 
6.3.2 
Review children under 2 years with infantile spasms at least weekly during treatment and repeat sleep EEG at 2 weeks after starting treatment. 
6.3.3 
When infantile spasms have stopped, review children monthly and repeat sleep EEG if spasms recur or there are clinical concerns. 
First-line treatment 
6.3.4 
Offer combination therapy with high-dose oral prednisolone and vigabatrin as first-line treatment for infantile spasms that are not due to tuberous sclerosis, unless the child is at high risk of steroid-related side effects. 
In January 2025, this was an off-label use of vigabatrin in combination with prednisolone. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
6.3.5 
Consider vigabatrin alone as first-line treatment for infantile spasms in children at high risk of steroid-related side effects. 
6.3.6 
Offer vigabatrin alone as first-line treatment for infantile spasms due to tuberous sclerosis. If vigabatrin is ineffective after 1 week, add high-dose oral prednisolone. 
In April 2022, this was an off-label use of vigabatrin in combination with prednisolone. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
6.3.7 
Before starting oral prednisolone for infantile spasms: 
discuss the possible side effects of steroid treatment with parents and carers 
test whether the child has antibodies to the varicella zoster virus 
give the parents and carers a steroid card and information about when to seek medical help for side effects. 
6.3.8 
When using oral prednisolone to treat infantile spasms, follow the advice in the BNF for children on prednisolone dosages . Monitor blood pressure and urinary glucose weekly during treatment. 
See recommendations on managing glucocorticoid withdrawal in NICE's guideline on adrenal insufficiency . 
6.3.9 
When using vigabatrin to treat infantile spasms, increase the dose as outlined in the BNF for children on vigabatrin . Discuss further dose increases with a tertiary paediatric neurologist if the spasms do not stop (clinically and on EEG). 
Second-line treatment 
6.3.10 
If first-line treatment for infantile spasms is unsuccessful, discuss further treatment with a tertiary paediatric epilepsy specialist. 
6.3.11 
Consider the following as a second-line monotherapy or add-on treatment options for infantile spasms, guided by a ketogenic diet team or tertiary paediatric epilepsy specialist, as appropriate: 
ketogenic diet 
levetiracetam 
nitrazepam 
sodium valproate 
topiramate. 
If the first choice is unsuccessful, consider the other second-line options. 
In January 2025, these were off-label uses of levetiracetam, nitrazepam and topiramate. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on infantile spasms syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review P: effectiveness of antiseizure therapies for infantile spasms . 
6.4 Self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes 
November 2025: Sulthiame is now licensed for use in the UK. We are reviewing recommendations 6.4.2 to 6.4.4 in this section. See the  guideline in development page  for progress on the update. 
Discussing starting treatment 
6.4.1 
Discuss with children and young people with self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes, and their families or carers as appropriate, whether they wish to start treatment. In particular, discuss: 
frequency and severity of seizures 
possible hazards of ongoing seizures (including the small risk of death) 
possible side effects of treatment. 
First-line treatment 
6.4.2 
Consider lamotrigine or levetiracetam as first-line treatment for self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes. If either lamotrigine or levetiracetam is unsuccessful, try the other of these options. 
In January 2025, these were off-label uses of lamotrigine in children under 13 years, and levetiracetam in children under 16 years. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Second-line treatment 
6.4.3 
If first-line treatments for self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes are unsuccessful, consider the following as second-line monotherapy treatment options: 
carbamazepine 
oxcarbazepine 
zonisamide. 
If the first choice is unsuccessful, consider the other second-line monotherapy options. 
In January 2025, these were off-label uses for oxcarbazepine in children under 6 years, and zonisamide in adults and children. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Third-line treatment 
6.4.4 
If second-line treatments tried are unsuccessful for self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes, consider sulthiame as monotherapy or add-on treatment, but only after discussion with a tertiary paediatric neurologist. 
Other treatment considerations 
6.4.5 
Be aware that carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine and lamotrigine may rarely exacerbate seizures or the development of another epilepsy syndrome, or affect cognitive performance, in a small number of children and young people with self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes. 
6.4.6 
If there is concern about the school performance of a child or young person having antiseizure medication, seek guidance from an epilepsy specialist and consider: 
sleep electroencephalogram (EEG) to exclude exacerbation of epileptic activity (electrical status epilepticus during sleep) and 
neuropsychology assessment to review academic performance. 
6.4.7 
If a child or young person having antiseizure medication treatment develops other seizure types, consider a sleep EEG to exclude exacerbation of epileptic activity (developmental epileptic encephalopathy with spike-wave activation in sleep). 
6.4.8 
Offer follow up at a frequency and with a healthcare professional appropriate to the child or young person's individual needs. Discuss discontinuing treatment if a child or young person with self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes is seizure-free for at least 2 years or at age 14 years. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q: effectiveness of antiseizure medications for self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes . 
6.5 Epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures (Doose syndrome) 
Specialist involvement 
6.5.1 
Discuss the treatment and management of epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures in children with a tertiary paediatric neurologist. 
First-line treatment 
6.5.2 
Consider levetiracetam or sodium valproate as first-line treatments for epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures. Follow the MHRA safety measures and precautionary advice for sodium valproate in box 2 . If either levetiracetam or sodium valproate is unsuccessful, try the other of these options. 
In January 2025, this was an off-label use of levetiracetam. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Second-line treatment 
6.5.3 
If first-line treatments for epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures are unsuccessful, consider a ketogenic diet as a second-line monotherapy or add-on treatment, under the supervision of a ketogenic diet team. 
Third-line treatment 
For guidance on safe prescribing and managing withdrawal of clobazam in adults, see NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms . 
6.5.4 
If second-line treatment for epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures is unsuccessful, consider the following as third-line monotherapy or add-on treatment options: 
clobazam 
ethosuximide 
topiramate (do not use topiramate in women and girls of childbearing potential unless the conditions of the Pregnancy Prevention Programme are fulfilled) 
zonisamide. 
If the first choice is unsuccessful, consider the other third-line options. 
In January 2025, these uses were off label: clobazam as monotherapy in adults and children, and add-on therapy in children under 6 months, and topiramate and zonisamide in adults and children. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Other treatment considerations 
6.5.5 
Do not use any of the following medications because they may exacerbate seizures in people with epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures: 
carbamazepine 
gabapentin 
oxcarbazepine 
phenytoin 
pregabalin 
vigabatrin. 
Discontinuing medication 
6.5.6 
Consider discontinuing antiseizure medication treatment in children with epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures who are seizure-free for 2 years. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures (Doose syndrome) . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review R: effectiveness of antiseizure therapies for epilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures (Doose syndrome) . 
6.6 Treatments for other childhood-onset seizures 
6.6.1 
Cannabidiol is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance as an add-on treatment for seizures caused by tuberous sclerosis complex in some children aged 2 years and over. For full details, including information about when treatment should be stopped, see the guidance on cannabidiol (TA873, 2023) . 
6.6.2 
Ganaxolone is not recommended in NICE technology appraisal guidance as an add-on treatment option for seizures caused by cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) deficiency disorder in children aged 2 years and over. For full details, see the guidance on ganaxolone (TA1033, 2025) . 
Next page 
7 Treating status epilepticus, repeated or cluster seizures, and prolonged seizures 
Previous page 
5 Treating epileptic seizures in children, young people and adults 
Back to top
