2 Information and support | Epilepsies in children, young people and adults | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Epilepsy
Epilepsies in children, young people and adults
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG217 
Published: 
27 April 2022
Last updated: 
30 January 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
1 Diagnosis and assessment of epilepsy 
2 Information and support 
3 Referral to tertiary specialist services 
4 Principles of treatment, safety, monitoring and withdrawal 
5 Treating epileptic seizures in children, young people and adults 
6 Treating childhood-onset epilepsies 
7 Treating status epilepticus, repeated or cluster seizures, and prolonged seizures 
8 Non-pharmacological treatments 
9 Psychological, neurobehavioural, cognitive and developmental comorbidities in epilepsy 
10 Reducing the risk of epilepsy-related death including sudden unexpected death in epilepsy 
11 Service provision and transition 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
2 Information and support 
For information and support before diagnosis, see the section on information and support after a first seizure . 
2.1.1 
When providing information to people with epilepsy and their families or carers, follow: 
the recommendations on communication and information in NICE's guidelines on patient experience in adult NHS services or babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare   and 
NICE's guideline on shared decision making . 
2.1.2 
Provide tailored information and support to people with epilepsy, and their families or carers if appropriate, according to their individual needs and circumstances. 
2.1.3 
Include children and young people in discussions about their information and support needs, and provide information appropriate to their developmental age. 
2.1.4 
Take into account the information and support needs of people with epilepsy who are older, have a learning disability or have other complex needs, for example: 
give longer appointments to allow more time for discussion 
provide information in different formats, such as easy read, large print or audio versions 
involve family members or carers or an advocate if the person wishes 
share information with those involved in the care of older people or people with learning disabilities if appropriate. 
See also the section on general principles of care in NICE's guideline on challenging behaviour and learning disabilities and the section on overarching principles in NICE's guideline on care and support of people growing older with learning disabilities . 
2.1.5 
Give people with epilepsy, and their families and carers if appropriate, details of local and national epilepsy information and support groups. 
2.1.6 
Support people to self-manage their epilepsy and make informed choices by discussing the following issues with them during their first appointment: 
triggers that may provoke seizures 
medications for epilepsy, the importance of adherence to medication and possible side effects 
reducing epilepsy-related risks, including sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) 
impact on daily activities, including driving 
their epilepsy syndrome or seizure types. 
The discussion may be reiterated at an information and care-planning session with an epilepsy specialist nurse (see also the section on epilepsy specialist nurses ). 
2.1.7 
Provide the person with epilepsy, and their family or carers if appropriate, with a copy of their care plan, which includes details of their care and support as discussed and agreed with the person, and their family or carers if appropriate. 
2.1.8 
Repeat information for people with epilepsy, and their families or carers if appropriate, at subsequent appointments according to their individual needs and circumstances. 
2.1.9 
Provide information and support at routine appointments with the person's GP, specialist or epilepsy specialist nurse, as needed, and also at dedicated information and care-planning appointments with an epilepsy specialist nurse (see the section on epilepsy specialist nurses ). 
2.1.10 
Consider providing a framework for discussions before appointments that includes issues commonly raised by people with epilepsy or that may be of concern to the person. 
2.1.11 
Offer people with epilepsy, and their families and carers if appropriate, opportunities at each appointment to discuss issues that concern them including, but not limited to, the topics in box 1. 
Box 1 Topics to discuss with people with epilepsy and their families and carers 
Activities of daily living 
Safety issues, including activities that should be adapted or avoided, for example, showering rather than having baths, cooking safely, caring for babies and young children safely, and avoiding working at heights. 
Safety issues for children and young people, including supervised swimming and water sports, not climbing above their height without supervision. 
Potential impact on lifestyle and social life and any experiences of social exclusion. 
Driving, including Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) regulations . 
Employment and education, including concerns and rights related to employment and education. 
Carers 
Physical and emotional demands of caring for and supporting a person with epilepsy. 
Information and support for carers, including assessing carers needs (see also NICE's guideline on supporting adult carers ). 
Cognition 
Concerns about the impact of epilepsy and antiseizure medication on cognitive function, including memory, attention, concentration, educational attainment and performance in the workplace. 
Medication 
Adherence to antiseizure medication and how to improve this (see also NICE's guidelines on medicines adherence and medicines optimisation ). 
Experiences of side effects from medication and coping strategies. 
Explaining changes to medication. 
Mental health 
Emotional health and psychological wellbeing, for example, experience of depression, anxiety or low mood (see also NICE's guidelines on depression in adults with a chronic physical health problem , depression in children and young people and mental health problems in people with learning disabilities ). 
Neurobehavioural disorders commonly associated with epilepsy, including autism and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. 
Stigmatisation of epilepsy. 
Reproductive health and pregnancy 
Support and information on contraception and pregnancy to enable informed decision making. 
Support for changes in medications and the potential interactions with contraception. 
Teratogenicity of antiseizure medications. 
Potential effects of sodium valproate on male fertility. 
Pre-conception planning, including the use of folic acid and reducing epilepsy-related risk during pregnancy. 
Planning the birth. 
Postnatal care and breastfeeding. 
See also the section on safety considerations . Follow the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) safety advice on antiepileptic drugs in pregnancy , the use of valproate and the use of topiramate . 
SUDEP 
Concerns of people with epilepsy and their families and carers about sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). 
Information about SUDEP, including risk factors for SUDEP and how to reduce the risks. 
Availability of SUDEP counselling. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information and support . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review 4: information and support 
evidence review O: effectiveness of a nurse specialist in the management of epilepsy . 
Next page 
3 Referral to tertiary specialist services 
Previous page 
1 Diagnosis and assessment of epilepsy 
Back to top
