Recommendations | Cannabis-based medicinal products | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Epilepsy
Cannabis-based medicinal products 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG144 
Published: 
11 November 2019
Last updated: 
22 March 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Intractable nausea and vomiting
1.2 Chronic pain
1.3 Spasticity
1.4 Severe treatment-resistant epilepsy
1.5 Prescribing
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Intractable nausea and vomiting 
1.1.1 
Consider nabilone as an add-on treatment for adults (18 years and over) with chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting which persists with optimised conventional antiemetics . 
1.1.2 
When considering nabilone for adults with chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, take into account potential adverse drug interactions, for example, with central nervous system depressants and other centrally active drugs. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on intractable nausea and vomiting . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: intractable nausea and vomiting . 
1.2 Chronic pain 
1.2.1 
Do not offer the following to manage chronic pain in adults: 
nabilone 
dronabinol 
THC (delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol) 
a combination of cannabidiol (CBD) with THC. 
1.2.2 
Do not offer CBD to manage chronic pain in adults unless as part of a clinical trial. 
1.2.3 
Adults who started cannabis-based medicinal products to manage chronic pain in the NHS before this guidance was published (November 2019) should be able to continue treatment until they and their NHS clinician think it appropriate to stop. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on chronic pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: chronic pain . 
1.3 Spasticity 
1.3.1 
Offer a 4-week trial of THC:CBD spray to treat moderate to severe spasticity in adults with multiple sclerosis, if: 
other pharmacological treatments for spasticity are not effective (see the recommendations on spasticity in NICE's guideline on multiple sclerosis in adults ) 
the company provides THC:CBD spray according to its pay-for-responders scheme (it funds the first 3 x10-ml vials if there is agreement for continued funding for people with at least a 20% reduction in spasticity-related symptoms on a 0 to 10 patient-reported numeric rating scale after 4 weeks). 
After the 4-week trial, continue THC:CBD spray if the person has had at least a 20% reduction in spasticity-related symptoms on a 0 to 10 patient-reported numeric rating scale. 
1.3.2 
Treatment with THC:CBD spray should be initiated and supervised by a physician with specialist expertise in treating spasticity due to multiple sclerosis, in line with its marketing authorisation. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on spasticity . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: spasticity . 
1.4 Severe treatment-resistant epilepsy 
1.4.1 
Cannabidiol is recommended in NICE technology appraisal guidance as an add-on treatment option for seizures caused by tuberous sclerosis complex in people aged 2 years and older only if: 
their seizures are not controlled well enough by 2 or more antiseizure medicines (either used alone or in combination) or these were not tolerated 
seizure frequency is checked every 6 months, and cannabidiol is stopped if the frequency has not fallen by at least 30% compared with the 6 months before starting treatment. 
For full details, see the guidance on cannabidiol for tuberous sclerosis complex (TA873, 2023) . 
1.4.2 
Cannabidiol with clobazam is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating seizures associated with Lennox–Gastaut syndrome in people 2 years and older only if the frequency of drop seizures is checked every 6 months, and cannabidiol is stopped if the frequency has not fallen by at least 30% compared with the 6 months before starting treatment. For full details, see the guidance on cannabidiol with clobazam for Lennox–Gastaut syndrome (TA615, 2019) . 
1.4.3 
Cannabidiol with clobazam is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating seizures associated with Dravet syndrome in people 2 years and older only if the frequency of convulsive seizures is checked every 6 months, and cannabidiol is stopped if the frequency has not fallen by at least 30% compared with the 6 months before starting treatment. For full details, see the guidance on cannabidiol with clobazam for Dravet syndrome (TA614, 2019) . 
NICE has made recommendations for research on the use of cannabis-based medicinal products for severe treatment-resistant epilepsy. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research on CBD, and THC in combination with CBD for severe treatment-resistant epilepsy , see the rationale section on severe treatment-resistant epilepsy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: epilepsy . 
1.5 Prescribing 
Who should prescribe? 
1.5.1 
Initial prescription of cannabis-based medicinal products (excluding nabilone, THC:CBD spray [Sativex] and medicines not classed as controlled drugs such as cannabidiol) must be made by a specialist medical practitioner (a doctor included in the register of specialist medical practitioners [the Specialist Register], see section 34D of the Medical Act 1983 ). They should also have a special interest in the condition being treated (see the GMC's information for doctors on cannabis-based products for medicinal use ). For children and young people under the care of paediatric services, the initiating prescriber should also be a tertiary paediatric specialist in the condition being treated. 
Shared care 
1.5.2 
After the initial prescription, subsequent prescriptions of cannabis-based medicinal products may be issued by another prescriber as part of a shared care agreement under the direction of the initiating specialist prescriber, if: 
shared care is appropriate and in the person's best interest 
the person's clinical condition is stable 
the other prescriber is confident to make a fully informed prescribing decision about cannabis-based medicinal products. 
For more information about shared care, see NHS England's guidance on responsibility for prescribing between primary and secondary/tertiary care . 
1.5.3 
Efficacy and safety of cannabis-based medicinal products should be monitored and evaluated, and doses should be adjusted by the initiating specialist prescriber as part of the shared care agreement. 
1.5.4 
A shared care agreement for a person prescribed a cannabis-based medicinal product should include: 
the responsibilities of all parties [the initiating specialist prescriber, the other prescriber(s), the patient, family and/or carers] 
the nature and frequency of monitoring and how this will be recorded 
when treatment might be stopped, for example, if it is not effective 
how suspected or known adverse reactions will be managed 
how communication will be managed between the initiating specialist prescriber, the other prescriber, the patient, family and/or carers 
how the treatment will be funded 
how care will be maintained when the patient, initiating specialist prescriber or other prescriber moves location (including transition to adult services). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on prescribing: who should prescribe and shared care . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: prescribing cannabis-based medicinal products . 
Factors to think about when prescribing 
1.5.5 
When prescribing and monitoring cannabis-based medicinal products, take into account: 
current and past use of cannabis (including any over-the-counter and online products) 
history of substance misuse including the illicit use of cannabis 
potential for dependence, diversion and misuse (in particular with THC) 
mental health and medical history, in particular, liver impairment, renal impairment, cardiovascular disease 
potential for interaction with other medicines, for example, central nervous system depressants and other centrally active drugs, antiepileptics and hormonal contraceptives 
pregnancy and breastfeeding (breastfeeding is a contraindication for Sativex and nabilone; there is limited evidence on the safety of cannabis-based medicinal products during pregnancy and breastfeeding). 
1.5.6 
When prescribing cannabis-based medicinal products for babies, children and young people, pay particular attention to the: 
potential impact on psychological, emotional and cognitive development 
potential impact of sedation 
potential impact on structural and functional brain development. 
NICE has produced a guideline on babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare . 
1.5.7 
When prescribing cannabis-based medicinal products, advise people to stop any non-prescribed cannabis, including over-the-counter, online and illicit products. 
1.5.8 
Prescribers should record details of treatment, clinical outcomes and adverse effects for people prescribed cannabis-based medicinal products, using local or national registers if available. 
1.5.9 
For more information on safe prescribing and use of cannabis-based medicinal products, see the recommendations in the NICE guideline on controlled drugs . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on prescribing: factors to think about when prescribing . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: prescribing cannabis-based medicinal products . 
Supporting shared decision making 
1.5.10 
Before prescribing cannabis-based medicinal products, discuss with people: 
the potential benefits and harms, including any risk of dependence or interaction with other medicines 
the licensing status of the medicines 
how long they might take the medicine 
how long it will take to work 
what it has been prescribed for and how to take it 
how it may affect their ability to drive (see the advice from the Department of Transport on drug driving and medicine ) 
the need to seek advice before travelling abroad about the legality of cannabis-based medicinal products in other countries (see the UK Government's advice on travelling with medicine containing a controlled drug ). 
the importance of not allowing others to use the prescribed medicine. 
1.5.11 
When discussing cannabis-based medicinal products with patients and their families and carers, follow the NICE guideline on shared decision making . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on prescribing: supporting shared decision making . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: prescribing cannabis-based medicinal products . 
Terms used in this guideline 
Cannabis-based medicinal products 
In this guideline cannabis-based medicinal products include: 
cannabis-based products for medicinal use as set out by the UK Government in the 2018 Regulations 
the licensed products delta-9-tetrahydrocannibinol combined with cannabidiol (Sativex) and nabilone 
plant-derived cannabinoids such as pure cannabidiol (CBD) 
synthetic compounds which are identical in structure to naturally occurring cannabinoids such as delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), for example, dronabinol. 
Optimised conventional antiemetics 
These are treatments that are commonly used in practice at an optimum tolerated dose to manage nausea and vomiting. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
