Overview | Melanoma: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Skin cancer
Melanoma: assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG14 
Published: 
29 July 2015
Last updated: 
27 July 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Stages of melanoma 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the assessment and management of melanoma (a type of skin cancer) in children, young people and adults. It aims to reduce variation in practice and improve survival.  
In July 2022 , we made new and updated recommendations on genetic testing, staging, surgery for stages 0 to III melanoma, anticancer treatment for people with stage III and IV melanoma, and follow-up. For more details see the update information . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
communication and support 
managing vitamin D levels and drug treatment for other conditions 
assessing and staging melanoma 
managing stages 0 to II melanoma 
managing stage III melanoma 
treating in-transit metastases in stages III and IV melanoma 
managing stage IV and unresectable stage III melanoma 
follow-up after treatment 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals working in primary, secondary and tertiary care 
Commissioners and providers 
People with melanoma and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Skin cancer
Next page 
Stages of melanoma 
Back to top
