Overview | Cataracts in adults: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Eye conditions
Cataracts in adults: management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG77 
Published: 
26 October 2017
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Overview 
This guideline covers managing cataracts in adults aged 18 and over. It aims to improve care before, during and after cataract surgery by optimising service organisation, referral and surgical management, and reducing complications. It further aims to improve the availability of information for people with cataracts before, during and after cataract surgery. 
We have produced a large print version of this guideline, which is available to download in tools and resources . 
Last reviewed: 20 May 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and plan to update recommendations on intraocular lens selection . We will not update recommendations around biometry formulas, surgical timing and technique, bilateral simultaneous cataract surgery and toric lenses. See the May 2025 surveillance decision  for further details. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
patient information 
referral for cataract surgery 
preoperative assessment and biometry 
preventing wrong lens implant errors 
surgical timing and technique 
preventing and managing complications 
postoperative assessment 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with cataracts, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Serious eye disorders 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
