Overview | Irritable bowel syndrome in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Digestive tract conditions
Irritable bowel syndrome
Irritable bowel syndrome in adults: diagnosis and management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG61 
Published: 
23 February 2008
Last updated: 
04 April 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) in people aged 18 and over. It details how to accurately diagnose IBS, and aims to improve the quality of life for adults with IBS by promoting effective management using dietary and lifestyle advice, pharmacological therapy and referral for psychological interventions. 
Last reviewed: 30 April 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will not update the section on clinical management of irritable bowel syndrome . See the  surveillance decision  for further details. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
This guideline updates and replaces evidence summary ESNM16. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
diagnosing IBS 
dietary and lifestyle advice 
pharmacological therapy 
referral for psychological interventions 
follow-up 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with suspected or confirmed IBS and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called irritable bowel syndrome in adults: diagnosis and management of irritable bowel syndrome in primary care. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Irritable bowel syndrome in adults 
Coeliac disease 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
