Overview | Diabetes (type 1 and type 2) in children and young people: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diabetes
Diabetes (type 1 and type 2) in children and young people: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG18 
Published: 
01 August 2015
Last updated: 
11 May 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the diagnosis and management of type 1 and type 2 diabetes in children and young people aged under 18. The guideline recommends how to support children and young people and their families and carers to maintain tight control of blood glucose to reduce the long-term risks associated with diabetes. 
For information on related topics, see our cardiometabolic disease prevention and treatment summary page . 
Insulin detemir:  Levemir insulin (insulin detemir), in both its Penfill and Flexpen presentations, is to be discontinued, with an anticipated supply end date of December 2026. A Medicine Supply Notification (MSN/2025/036U) has been issued about the discontinuation (see the  Community Pharmacy England website ). For information on alternative basal insulins, see the  Association of British Clinical Diabetologists and the Primary Care Diabetes & Obesity Society guidance on discontinuation of Levemir (insulin detemir) . NICE is assessing the impact of the discontinuation of insulin detemir on recommendations in this guideline. 
Last reviewed: 18 December 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will not update the recommendations. See the  surveillance decision  for further details. 
This guideline partially updates and replaces NICE guideline CG15 (published July 2004). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
The guideline includes recommendations on: 
diagnosis 
management of  type 1 and  type 2  diabetes 
diagnosis and management of diabetic ketoacidosis 
service provision 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Children and young people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Diabetes in children and young people 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
