Could this be sepsis? | Suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people: recognition, diagnosis and early management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people: recognition, diagnosis and early management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG255 
Published: 
19 November 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Could this be sepsis? 
Face to face assessment 
Evaluating risk level 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Training and education 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 When to suspect sepsis
1.2 People who are most vulnerable to sepsis
Could this be sepsis? 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 When to suspect sepsis 
1.1.1 
Think 'could this be sepsis?' if a person presents with symptoms or signs that indicate possible infection. [2016] 
1.1.2 
Take into account that people with sepsis may have non-specific, non-localised presentations, for example feeling very unwell, and may not have a high temperature. [2016] 
1.1.3 
Pay particular attention to concerns expressed by the person and their family or carers, for example changes from usual behaviour. [2016] 
1.1.4 
Assess people who might have sepsis with extra care if there is difficulty in taking their history, for example people with English as a second language or people with communication challenges (such as those associated with learning disabilities or autism). [2016, amended 2024] 
1.1.5 
Assess people with any suspected infection to identify: 
possible source of infection (see the recommendations on finding and controlling the source of infection ) 
factors that increase risk of sepsis (see people who are most vulnerable to sepsis ) 
any indications of clinical concern, such as new-onset abnormalities of behaviour, circulation or respiration. [2016] 
1.1.6 
During a remote assessment, when deciding whether to offer a face-to-face-assessment and, if so, on the urgency of it, identify: 
factors that increase risk of sepsis (see people who are most vulnerable to sepsis ) and 
indications of clinical concern such as new-onset abnormalities of behaviour, circulation or respiration. [2016] 
1.1.7 
Use a structured set of observations to assess people in a face-to-face setting to stratify risk if sepsis is suspected. (See the recommendations on face-to-face assessment and the recommendations on grading risk in people with suspected sepsis). [2016] 
1.1.8 
Consider using an early warning score to assess people with suspected sepsis who are pregnant or have recently been pregnant, in any setting. [2016, amended 2024] 
1.1.9 
Suspect neutropenic sepsis in people who become unwell and: 
are having or have had systemic anticancer treatment within the last 30 days 
are receiving or have received immunosuppressant treatment for reasons unrelated to cancer. Use clinical judgement (based on the person's specific condition, medical history, or both, and on the treatment they received) to determine whether any past treatment may still be likely to cause neutropenia. [2016, amended 2024] 
1.1.10 
Refer people with suspected neutropenic sepsis immediately for assessment in secondary or tertiary care. [This recommendation is from NICE's guideline on neutropenic sepsis in people with cancer .] [2012] 
1.1.11 
Treat people with neutropenic sepsis, regardless of cause, in line with NICE's guideline on neutropenic sepsis in people with cancer . [2016, amended 2024] 
1.2 People who are most vulnerable to sepsis 
1.2.1 
Take into account that people who are pregnant, have given birth or had a termination of pregnancy or miscarriage in the past 6 weeks are in a high risk group for sepsis. In particular, people who: 
have impaired immune systems because of illness or drugs (see recommendation 1.2.2) 
have diabetes, gestational diabetes or other comorbidities 
needed invasive procedures (for example, caesarean section, forceps delivery, removal of retained products of conception) 
had prolonged rupture of membranes 
have or have been in close contact with people with group A streptococcal infection, for example, scarlet fever 
have continued vaginal bleeding or an offensive vaginal discharge. [2016] 
1.2.2 
Take into account the factors that may increase the risk of developing sepsis or sepsis not being identified promptly. These include: 
ethnicity: being from an ethnic minority background 
clinical features such as: 
frailty 
multimorbidities or severe chronic conditions 
impaired immune function because of illness or medical treatment 
surgery or invasive procedures in the past 6 weeks 
indwelling catheters 
repeated antibiotic use 
breach of skin integrity 
communication challenges, such as with people: 
with learning disabilities 
with cognitive impairment 
who need an interpreter 
drugs or alcohol misuse 
social, economic or environmental factors such as: 
homelessness 
living in deprived areas. 
See also recommendation 1.1.9 on when to suspect neutropenic sepsis . [2016] 
Next page 
Face to face assessment 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
