Overview | Diabetes in pregnancy: management from preconception to the postnatal period | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diabetes
Diabetes in pregnancy: management from preconception to the postnatal period
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG3 
Published: 
25 February 2015
Last updated: 
16 December 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers managing diabetes and its complications in women who are planning pregnancy or are already pregnant. It aims to improve the diagnosis of gestational diabetes and help women with diabetes to self-manage their blood glucose levels before and during pregnancy. 
For information on related topics, see our summary pages on cardiometabolic disease prevention and treatment and women's and reproductive health . 
Insulin detemir: Levemir insulin (insulin detemir), in both its Penfill and Flexpen presentations, is to be discontinued, with an anticipated supply end date of December 2026. A Medicine Supply Notification (MSN/2025/036U) has been issued about the discontinuation (see the Community Pharmacy England website ). For information on alternative basal insulins, see the Association of British Clinical Diabetologists and the Primary Care Diabetes & Obesity Society guidance on discontinuation of Levemir (insulin detemir) . NICE is assessing the impact of the discontinuation of insulin detemir on recommendations in this guideline. 
Last reviewed: 30 April 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will update it to include recommendations from NICE's technology appraisal guidance on hybrid closed loop systems for managing blood glucose levels in type 1 diabetes . The update will also focus on hybrid closed loop use for pregnant populations with type 1 diabetes. See the surveillance decision for further details. See the guideline in development page for progress on the update. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG63 (published March 2008). 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
preconception planning and care 
diagnosing and managing gestational diabetes 
antenatal care 
intrapartum care 
neonatal care 
postnatal care, including ongoing blood glucose testing for women who have had gestational diabetes 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Women with diabetes who are planning a pregnancy or are pregnant and women at risk of, or diagnosed with, gestational diabetes 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Diabetes in pregnancy 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
