Overview | Ulcerative colitis: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Digestive tract conditions
Inflammatory bowel disease
Ulcerative colitis: management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG130 
Published: 
03 May 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers managing ulcerative colitis in children, young people and adults. It aims to help professionals to provide consistent high-quality care and it highlights the importance of advice and support for people with ulcerative colitis. 
This guideline refers to NHS England commissioning policies. In Wales and Northern Ireland, follow Welsh or Northern Irish commissioning positions if applicable. 
NICE has also produced a  guideline on colonoscopic surveillance for adults with ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease or adenomas . 
Last reviewed: 18 March 2026 
We added links to relevant NICE technology appraisal guidance in the section on treating moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG166 (June 2013) and NICE evidence summary ESNM58. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
patient information and support 
inducing remission 
information about surgery 
maintaining remission 
pregnancy 
monitoring 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with ulcerative colitis and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Inflammatory bowel disease 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
