Overview | Mental wellbeing at work | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Lifestyle and wellbeing
Mental health and wellbeing
Mental wellbeing at work
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG212 
Published: 
02 March 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers how to create the right conditions for mental wellbeing at work. It aims to promote a supportive and inclusive work environment, including training and support for managers and helping people who have or are at risk of poor mental health. 
Last reviewed: 2 March 2022 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline PH22 (November 2009). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
strategic approaches to improving mental wellbeing in the workplace , organisation-wide approaches and having a supportive work environment 
external sources of support 
training and support for managers 
individual-level approaches , employees who have or are at risk of poor mental health and those in high-risk occupations 
engaging with employees and their representatives 
local and regional strategies and plans 
considerations for small and medium-sized enterprises (including micro-enterprises) 
Who is it for? 
Employers 
Senior leadership and managers, including supervisors of volunteers 
Human resource teams 
Employees, self-employed people and volunteers 
Local and regional authorities 
Professional and employee-representative organisations 
All those with a remit for workplace health (including occupational safety and health professionals and occupational health teams) 
Members of the public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guideline. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Healthy workplaces: improving employee mental and physical health and wellbeing 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
