Recommendations on patient support, safety netting and the diagnostic process | Suspected cancer: recognition and referral | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood and bone marrow cancers
Suspected cancer: recognition and referral
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG12 
Published: 
23 June 2015
Last updated: 
15 April 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Recommendations organised by site of cancer 
Recommendations on patient support, safety netting and the diagnostic process 
Recommended actions organised by symptom and findings of primary care investigations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.14 Patient information and support
1.15 Safety netting
1.16 The diagnostic process
Recommendations on patient support, safety netting and the diagnostic process 
Use this guideline to guide referrals. If still uncertain about whether a referral is needed, consider contacting a specialist (see the recommendations on the diagnostic process ). Consider a review for people with any symptom associated with increased cancer risk who do not meet the criteria for referral or investigative action (see the recommendations on safety netting ). 
1.14 Patient information and support 
1.14.1 
Explain to people who are being referred with suspected cancer that they are being referred to a cancer service. Reassure them, as appropriate, that most people referred will not have a diagnosis of cancer, and discuss alternative diagnoses with them. [2015] 
1.14.2 
Give the person information on the possible diagnosis (both benign and malignant) in accordance with their wishes for information (see also NICE's guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services ). [2015] 
1.14.3 
The information given to people with suspected cancer and their families and carers should cover, among other issues: 
where the person is being referred to 
how long they will have to wait for the appointment 
how to obtain further information about the type of cancer suspected or help before the specialist appointment 
what to expect from the service the person will be attending 
what type of tests may be carried out, and what will happen during diagnostic procedures 
how long it will take to get a diagnosis or test results 
whether they can take someone with them to the appointment 
who to contact if they do not receive confirmation of an appointment 
other sources of support. [2015] 
1.14.4 
Provide information that is appropriate for the person in terms of language, ability and culture, recognising the potential for different cultural meanings associated with the possibility of cancer. [2015] 
1.14.5 
Reassure people in the safety netting group (see recommendation 1.15.2) who are concerned that they may have cancer that with their current symptoms their risk of having cancer is low. [2015] 
1.14.6 
Explain to people who are being offered safety netting (see recommendation 1.15.2) which symptoms to look out for and when they should return for re‑evaluation. It may be appropriate to provide written information. [2015] 
1.14.7 
When referring a person with suspected cancer to a specialist service, assess their need for continuing support while waiting for their referral appointment. This should include inviting the person to contact their healthcare professional again if they have more concerns or questions before they see a specialist. [2005] 
1.14.8 
If the person has additional support needs because of their personal circumstances, inform the specialist (with the person's agreement). [2005] 
1.15 Safety netting 
1.15.1 
Ensure that the results of investigations are reviewed and acted upon appropriately, with the healthcare professional who ordered the investigation taking or explicitly passing on responsibility for this. Be aware of the possibility of false‑negative results for chest X‑rays and tests for occult blood in faeces. [2015] 
1.15.2 
Consider a review for people with any symptom that is associated with an increased risk of cancer, but who do not meet the criteria for referral or other investigative action. The review may be: 
planned within a time frame agreed with the person or 
patient‑initiated if new symptoms develop, the person continues to be concerned, or their symptoms recur, persist or worsen. [2015] 
1.16 The diagnostic process 
1.16.1 
Take part in continuing education, peer review and other activities to improve and maintain clinical consulting, reasoning and diagnostic skills, in order to identify at an early stage people who may have cancer, and to communicate the possibility of cancer to the person. [2005] 
1.16.2 
Discussion with a specialist (for example, by telephone or email) should be considered if there is uncertainty about the interpretation of symptoms and signs, and whether a referral is needed. This may also enable the primary healthcare professional to communicate their concerns and a sense of urgency to secondary healthcare professionals when symptoms are not classical. [2005] 
1.16.3 
Put in place local arrangements to ensure that letters about non-urgent referrals are assessed by the specialist, so that the person can be seen more urgently if necessary. [2005] 
1.16.4 
Put in place local arrangements to ensure that there is a maximum waiting period for non-urgent referrals, in accordance with national targets and local arrangements. [2005] 
1.16.5 
Ensure local arrangements are in place to identify people who miss their appointments so that they can be followed up. [2005] 
1.16.6 
Include all appropriate information in referral correspondence, including whether the referral is urgent or non-urgent . [2005] 
1.16.7 
Use local referral proformas if these are in use. [2005] 
1.16.8 
Once the decision to refer has been made, make sure that the referral is made within 1 working day. [2005] 
Next page 
Recommended actions organised by symptom and findings of primary care investigations 
Previous page 
Recommendations organised by site of cancer 
Back to top
