Recommendations for research | Tinnitus: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Ear, nose and throat conditions
Tinnitus: assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG155 
Published: 
11 March 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following key recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Cognitive behavioural therapy for adults with tinnitus delivered by appropriately trained healthcare professionals other than psychologists 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) for adults with tinnitus delivered by appropriately trained healthcare professionals other than psychologists (for example, audiologists)? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on psychological therapies for people with tinnitus-related distress . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: psychological therapies . 
2 Combination management strategy: sound therapy and tinnitus support 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of a combination management strategy consisting of sound therapy and tinnitus support? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on combining therapies . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review P: combinations of management strategies . 
3 Methods for assessing tinnitus in general practice 
What is the optimal method for assessing tinnitus in general practice (including consultation questions, physical examinations and questionnaires)? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on assessing the impact of tinnitus using questionnaires . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: questionnaires to assess tinnitus . 
4 Neuromodulation 
What is the clinical, cost effectiveness and safety of neuromodulation interventions for treating tinnitus in adults? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on neuromodulation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review O: neuromodulation . 
5 Psychological therapies for children and young people 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of psychological therapies for children and young people who have tinnitus-related distress? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on psychological therapies for people with tinnitus-related distress . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: psychological therapies . 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Tinnitus questionnaires for children and young people 
What is the most clinically and cost-effective tinnitus questionnaire to assess tinnitus in children and young people? 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: questionnaires to assess tinnitus . 
7 Tinnitus questionnaires for people with a learning disability or cognitive impairment 
What is the most clinically and cost-effective tinnitus questionnaire to assess tinnitus in people with a learning disability or cognitive impairment? 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: questionnaires to assess tinnitus . 
8 Tinnitus questionnaires for people who are d/Deaf or who have a severe-to-profound hearing loss 
What is the most clinically and cost-effective tinnitus questionnaire to assess tinnitus in people who are d/Deaf or who have a severe-to-profound hearing loss? 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: questionnaires to assess tinnitus . 
9 Relaxation strategies for children, young people and adults 
Are relaxation strategies clinically and cost effective for the management of tinnitus for children, young people and adults? 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: tinnitus support . 
10 Amplification devices for people who are d/Deaf or who have a severe-to-profound hearing loss 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of amplification devices for people who are d/Deaf or who have a severe-to-profound hearing loss? 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: sound therapy and amplification devices . 
11 Psychological therapies for people who are d/Deaf or who have a severe-to-profound hearing loss 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of psychological therapies for people who are d/Deaf or who have a severe-to-profound hearing loss and tinnitus-related distress? 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: psychological therapies . 
12 Amplification devices for people with tinnitus who have hearing loss but no perceived hearing difficulties 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of fitting amplification devices(s) in people with tinnitus who have hearing loss but no perceived hearing difficulties? 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: sound therapy and amplification devices . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
