Overview | Eating disorders: recognition and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Eating disorders
Eating disorders: recognition and treatment
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG69 
Published: 
23 May 2017
Last updated: 
16 December 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessment, treatment, monitoring and inpatient care for children, young people and adults with eating disorders. It aims to improve the care people receive by detailing the most effective treatments for anorexia nervosa, binge eating disorder and bulimia nervosa. 
MHRA safety update on insulins: In December 2020, we highlighted the importance of rotating insulin injection sites within the same body region, in line with an MHRA Drug Safety Update on insulins (all types): risk of cutaneous amyloidosis at injection site . 
Last reviewed: 15 August 2024 
We simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines (for example, the  NICE guideline on service user experience in adult mental health ). This is a presentational change only, and no changes to practice are intended. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG9 (January 2004). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
identifying eating disorders 
treating anorexia nervosa 
treating binge eating disorder 
treating bulimia nervosa 
physical and mental health comorbidities 
assessing, monitoring and managing physical health 
inpatient and day patient care 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Other professionals who provide public services to people with eating disorders (including in education and criminal justice settings) 
People with suspected or diagnosed eating disorders and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Eating disorders 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
