Person-centred care | Antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG15 
Published: 
18 August 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
What is this guideline about and who is it for? 
Person-centred care 
Recommendations 
Implementation: getting started 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Person-centred care 
This guideline offers best practice advice on the effective use of antimicrobial medicines. 
Patients and health professionals have rights and responsibilities as set out in the NHS Constitution for England – all NICE guidance is written to reflect these. Treatment and care should take into account individual needs and preferences. Patients should have the opportunity to make informed decisions about their care and treatment, in partnership with their health professionals. If the person is under 16, their family or carers should also be given information and support to help the child or young person to make decisions about their treatment. If it is clear that the child or young person fully understands the treatment and does not want their family or carers to be involved, they can give their own consent. Health professionals should follow the Department of Health's advice on consent . If a person does not have capacity to make decisions, health and social care practitioners should follow the code of practice that accompanies the Mental Capacity Act and the supplementary code of practice on deprivation of liberty safeguards . 
NICE has produced guidance on the components of good patient experience in adult NHS services. All health professionals should follow the recommendations in NICE's guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . In addition, all health and social care practitioners working with people using adult NHS mental health services should follow the recommendations in NICE's guideline on service user experience in adult mental health . If a young person is moving between paediatric and adult services, care should be planned and managed according to the best practice guidance described in the Department of Health's Transition: getting it right for young people . Adult and paediatric healthcare teams should work jointly to provide assessment and services to young people and diagnosis and management should be reviewed throughout the transition process. There should be clarity about who is the lead clinician to ensure continuity of care. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Previous page 
What is this guideline about and who is it for? 
Back to top
