Introduction | Varicose veins: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Varicose veins
Varicose veins: diagnosis and management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG168 
Published: 
24 July 2013
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Introduction 
Varicose veins are dilated, often palpable subcutaneous veins with reversed blood flow. They are most commonly found in the legs. Estimates of the prevalence of varicose veins vary. Visible varicose veins in the lower limbs are estimated to affect at least a third of the population. Risk factors for developing varicose veins are unclear, although prevalence rises with age and they often develop during pregnancy. 
In some people varicose veins are asymptomatic or cause only mild symptoms, but in others they cause pain, aching or itching and can have a significant effect on their quality of life. Varicose veins may become more severe over time and can lead to complications such as changes in skin pigmentation, bleeding or venous ulceration. It is not known which people will develop more severe disease but it is estimated that 3% to 6% of people who have varicose veins in their lifetime will develop venous ulcers. 
There are several options for the management of varicose veins, including: 
advice and reassurance 
interventional treatments (endothermal ablation, foam sclerotherapy and surgery) 
compression hosiery. 
In 2009 to 2010, there were 35,659 varicose veins procedures carried out in the NHS. There is no definitive system for identifying which people will benefit the most from interventional treatment and no established framework within the NHS for the diagnosis and management of varicose veins. This has resulted in wide regional variations in the management of varicose veins in the UK. This guideline was developed with the aim of giving healthcare professionals guidance on the diagnosis and management of varicose veins in the legs, in order to improve patient care and minimise disparities in care across the UK. 
The guideline will assume that prescribers will use a drug's summary of product characteristics to inform decisions made with individual patients. 
Next page 
Key priorities for implementation 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
