Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis | Suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over: recognition, assessment and early management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over: recognition, assessment and early management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG253 
Published: 
19 November 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Could this be sepsis? 
Face-to-face assessment 
Evaluating risk 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Training and education 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.12 Communicating and sharing information
1.13 People who have sepsis and their families and carers
1.14 Information at discharge for people assessed for suspected sepsis, but not diagnosed with sepsis
1.15 Information at discharge for people at increased risk of sepsis
1.16 Information at discharge for people who have had sepsis
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
Babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare 
Decision making and mental capacity 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines optimisation 
Multimorbidity 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
Shared decision making . 
1.12 Communicating and sharing information 
1.12.1 
In discussions with people with suspected sepsis or their family or carers, and when sharing information with them: 
follow the recommendations in NICE's guidelines on patient experience in adult NHS services 
ensure that the information given supports shared decision making, and follow the recommendations in NICE's guideline on shared decision making 
tailor the timing, content and delivery of information to the person's needs and preferences, paying particular attention to people with additional needs such as autism or learning disabilities, or people whose first language is not English. [2024] 
1.13 People who have sepsis and their families and carers 
1.13.1 
Ensure a care team member is nominated to give information to families and carers, particularly in emergency situations such as in the emergency department. This should include: 
an explanation that the person has sepsis, and what this means 
an explanation of any investigations and the management plan 
regular and timely updates on treatment, care and progress. [2016] 
1.13.2 
Ensure information is given without using medical jargon. Check regularly that people understand the information and explanations they are given. [2016] 
1.13.3 
Give people with sepsis and their family members and carers opportunities to ask questions about diagnosis, treatment options, prognosis and complications. Be willing to repeat any information as needed. [2016] 
1.13.4 
Give people with sepsis and their families and carers information about national charities and support groups that provide information about sepsis and the causes of sepsis. [2016] 
1.14 Information at discharge for people assessed for suspected sepsis, but not diagnosed with sepsis 
1.14.1 
Give people who have been assessed for sepsis but have been discharged without a diagnosis of sepsis (and their family or carers, if appropriate) verbal and written information about: 
what sepsis is, and why it was suspected 
what tests and investigations have been done 
instructions about which symptoms to monitor 
when to get medical attention if their illness continues 
how to get medical attention if they need to seek help urgently. [2016] 
1.14.2 
Confirm that people understand the information they have been given, and what actions they should take to get help if they need it. [2016] 
1.15 Information at discharge for people at increased risk of sepsis 
1.15.1 
Ensure people who are at increased risk of sepsis (for example after surgery) are told before discharge about symptoms that should prompt them to get medical attention and how to get it. [2016] 
See NICE's guideline on neutropenic sepsis for information for people with neutropenic sepsis. 
1.16 Information at discharge for people who have had sepsis 
1.16.1 
Ensure people and their families and carers have been informed that they have had sepsis. [2016] 
1.16.2 
Ensure discharge notifications to GPs include the diagnosis of sepsis. [2016] 
1.16.3 
Give people who have had sepsis (and their families and carers, when appropriate) opportunities to discuss their concerns. These may include: 
why they developed sepsis 
whether they are likely to develop sepsis again 
if more investigations are necessary 
details of any community care needed, for example, related to peripherally inserted central venous catheters (PICC) lines or other intravenous catheters 
what they should expect during recovery 
arrangements for follow-up, including specific critical care follow-up if relevant 
possible short-term and long-term problems. [2016] 
1.16.4 
Give people who have had sepsis and their families and carers information about national charities and support groups that provide information about sepsis and causes of sepsis. [2016] 
1.16.5 
Advise carers they have a legal right to have a carer's assessment of their needs, and give them information on how they can get this. 
See NICE's guideline on rehabilitation after critical illness in adults for recommendations on rehabilitation and follow-up after critical illness. 
See NICE's guideline on bacterial meningitis and meningococcal disease for follow-up of people who have had meningococcal disease. 
Next page 
Training and education 
Previous page 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Back to top
