Overview | Surgical site infections: prevention and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Surgical site infections: prevention and treatment
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG125 
Published: 
11 April 2019
Last updated: 
19 August 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers preventing and treating surgical site infections in adults, young people and children who are having a surgical procedure involving a cut through the skin. It focuses on methods used before, during and after surgery to minimise the risk of infection. 
Last reviewed:  31 May 2023 
We have reviewed our guidelines portfolio to identify topics that we think will add the most value to the health and care system and have agreed the update recommended in this surveillance report will not proceed as planned. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG74 (2008). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
nasal decolonisation  before surgery 
antiseptic skin preparation  during surgery 
antiseptics and antibiotics before wound closure 
methods of wound closure 
It also includes recommendations on: 
information for patients and carers 
what happens before surgery 
what happens during surgery 
what happens after surgery 
treating surgical site infection  and  specialist wound care services 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People having surgery, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Surgical site infection 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
