Overview | Venous thromboembolism in over 16s: reducing the risk of hospital-acquired deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Embolism and thrombosis
Venous thromboembolism in over 16s: reducing the risk of hospital-acquired deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG89 
Published: 
21 March 2018
Last updated: 
13 August 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE or blood clots, including deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism) in people aged 16 and over in hospital. It aims to help healthcare professionals identify people most at risk and describes interventions that can be used to reduce the risk of VTE. 
For guidance on pharmacological VTE prophylaxis for people with COVID-19 pneumonia who are being treated in a hospital or community setting, see our  COVID-19 rapid guideline on managing COVID-19 . 
Last reviewed: 18 September 2024 
We have checked the evidence we will not update the guideline. See the surveillance decision  for further details. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG92 (January 2010). 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
risk assessment 
giving information and planning for discharge 
all patients 
interventions for people with acute coronary syndromes or acute stroke or for acutely ill patients 
interventions for people with renal impairment 
interventions for people with cancer 
interventions for people having palliative care 
interventions for people admitted to critical care 
interventions for people with psychiatric illness 
interventions when using anaesthesia 
interventions for people having orthopaedic surgery 
interventions for people having elective spinal surgery or cranial surgery or people with spinal injury 
interventions for people with major trauma 
interventions for people having abdominal, thoracic or head and neck surgery 
interventions for people having cardiac or vascular surgery 
interventions for pregnant women and women who gave birth or had a miscarriage or termination of pregnancy in the past 6 weeks 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
People going into hospital who are at risk of VTE. This includes people discharged from hospital, (including from A&E) with lower limb devices such as plaster casts and braces, people attending hospital for day procedures including cancer treatment and surgery, and pregnant women admitted to hospital or a midwife-led unit including up to 6 weeks after giving birth, and their carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Venous thromboembolism in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
