Overview | Atrial fibrillation | Quality standards | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Heart rhythm conditions
Atrial fibrillation
Quality standard 
Reference number: QS93 
Published: 
09 July 2015
Last updated: 
07 February 2018
Quality standard 
Tools and resources 
History 
Download (PDF)
Overview
Quality statements 
Quality statement 1: Anticoagulation to reduce stroke risk 
Quality statement 2: Use of aspirin 
Quality statement 3: Discussing options for anticoagulation 
Quality statement 4: Anticoagulation control 
Quality statement 5: Referral for specialised management 
Quality statement 6 (developmental): Self‑monitoring of anticoagulation 
Update information 
About this quality standard 
Overview 
This quality standard covers identifying and managing atrial fibrillation (including paroxysmal, persistent and permanent atrial fibrillation, and atrial flutter) in adults (aged 18 and over). It describes high-quality care in priority areas for improvement. 
Last reviewed: 07 February 2018 
The source guidance and definitions for statement 6 were amended to reflect the updated NICE HealthTech guidance on self-monitoring coagulation status using point-of-care coagulometers (the CoaguChek XS system) . For more information, see  update information . 
How to use NICE quality standards and how we develop them 
Quality standards help you improve the quality of care you provide or commission. They apply in England and Wales (see the UK government website and Welsh government website ). Decisions on how they apply in Scotland and Northern Ireland are made by ministers in the Scottish government and Northern Ireland Executive. 
Find out how to use quality standards and how we develop them .  
Endorsing bodies 
This quality standard is endorsed by 
Department of Health and Social Care as required by the Health and Social Care Act (2012).
Supporting organisations 
A number of organisations recognise the benefit of this quality standard in improving care. They work with us to promote it to commissioners and service providers: 
AF Association 
Alzheimer's Society 
Anticoagulation Europe 
Arrhythmia Alliance 
Heart Valve Voice 
Society for Acute Medicine (SAM) 
UK Clinical Pharmacy Association (UKCPA) 
Next page 
Quality statements 
Back to top
