Overview | Social, emotional and mental wellbeing in primary and secondary education | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Children's social care
Social, emotional and mental wellbeing in primary and secondary education 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG223 
Published: 
06 July 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers ways to support social, emotional and mental wellbeing in children and young people in primary and secondary education (key stages 1 to 5), and people 25 years and under with special educational needs or disability in further education colleges. It aims to promote good social, emotional and psychological health to protect children and young people against behavioural and health problems. 
Last reviewed: 6 July 2022 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guidelines PH12 (March 2008) and PH20 (September 2009). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
whole-school approach 
universal curriculum content 
identifying children and young people at risk of poor social, emotional and mental wellbeing 
targeted support 
support with school-related transitions and other life changes 
Who is it for? 
Education professionals 
Health and social care practitioners 
Commissioners and providers 
Professionals who work in the wider public, private, voluntary and community sectors 
Young people and the families and carers of children and young people 
Members of the public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
