Recommendations for research | Myalgic encephalomyelitis (or encephalopathy)/chronic fatigue syndrome: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
ME/CFS
Myalgic encephalomyelitis (or encephalopathy)/chronic fatigue syndrome: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG206 
Published: 
29 October 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following key recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Diagnostic tests 
What diagnostic tests are clinically and cost effective in people with suspected myalgic encephalomyelitis (or encephalopathy)/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation, see the rationale section on suspecting ME/CFS . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: identifying and diagnosing ME/CFS . 
2 A core outcome set 
What core set of relevant health outcome measures should be used for trials of treatments for ME/CFS and managing symptoms of ME/CFS? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation, see the rationale section on managing ME/CFS . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: non-pharmacological management of ME/CFS and evidence review H: appendices for the management of ME/CFS . 
3 Diagnostic criteria 
In people with suspected ME/CFS, how effective is the NICE 2021 consensus-based diagnostic criteria in identifying people with ME/CFS? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation, see the rationale section on suspecting ME/CFS . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: identifying and diagnosing ME/CFS . 
Other recommendations for research 
4 Self-monitoring management strategies 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of self-monitoring strategies and techniques in guiding energy management? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation, see the rationale section on energy management . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: non-pharmacological management of ME/CFS and evidence review H: appendices for the management of ME/CFS . 
5 Sleep management strategies 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of sleep management strategies in managing ME/CFS? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation, see the rationale section on rest and sleep . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: non-pharmacological management of ME/CFS and evidence review H: appendices for the management of ME/CFS . 
6 Dietary strategies 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of dietary strategies in managing ME/CFS? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation, see the rationale section on dietary management and strategies . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: non-pharmacological management of ME/CFS and evidence review H: appendices for the management of ME/CFS . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
