Overview | Intravenous fluid therapy in children and young people in hospital | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Medicines management
Intravenous fluid therapy in children and young people in hospital
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG29 
Published: 
09 December 2015
Last updated: 
11 June 2020
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale 
Intravenous fluid therapy in children and young people in hospital implementation: getting started 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers general principles for managing intravenous (IV) fluids for children and young people under 16 years, including assessing fluid and electrolyte status and prescribing IV fluid therapy. It applies to a range of conditions and different settings. It does not include recommendations relating to specific conditions. This guideline represents a major opportunity to improve patient safety for children and young people having IV fluid therapy in hospital. 
In June 2020 , we amended a recommendation to clarify the use of isotonic crystalloids for routine maintenance in term neonates . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
principles and protocols for intravenous fluid therapy 
assessment and monitoring 
fluid resuscitation 
routine maintenance 
replacement and redistribution 
managing hypernatraemia  and hyponatraemia  that develops during intravenous fluid therapy 
training and education 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals who care for children and young people who need IV fluid therapy 
Commissioners and providers of healthcare services 
Children and young people under 16 years who need IV fluid therapy, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Intravenous fluid therapy in children and young people in hospital 
Next page 
Key priorities for implementation 
Back to top
