Recommendations | Psoriasis: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Skin conditions
Psoriasis
Psoriasis: assessment and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG153 
Published: 
24 October 2012
Last updated: 
01 September 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix: Information to facilitate discussion of risks and benefits of treatments for people with psoriasis 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Principles of care
1.2 Assessment and referral
1.3 Topical treatment
1.4 Phototherapy (broad- or narrowband UVB light and PUVA)
1.5 Systemic treatment
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Principles of care 
1.1.1.1 
Offer people with any type of psoriasis (and their families or carers), support and information tailored to suit their individual needs and circumstances, in a range of different formats so they can confidently understand: 
their diagnosis and treatment options 
relevant lifestyle risk factors 
when and how to treat their condition 
how to use prescribed treatments safely and effectively (for example, how to apply topical treatments, how to minimise the risk of side effects through monitoring for safety of medicines) 
when and how to seek further general or specialist review 
strategies to deal with the impact on their physical, psychological and social wellbeing. 
Also see NICE's guidelines on behaviour change: individual approaches and behaviour change: general approaches . [2012] 
1.1.1.2 
When offering treatments to a person with any type of psoriasis: 
ensure the treatment strategy is developed to meet the person's health goals so that the impact of their condition is minimised and use relevant assessment tools to ensure these goals are met 
take into account the age and individual circumstances of the person, disease phenotype, severity and impact, coexisting psoriatic arthritis, comorbidities and previous treatment history 
discuss the risks and benefits of treatment options with the person (and their families or carers where appropriate); where possible, use absolute risk and natural frequency (also see the appendix for details of the risk-benefit profiles of interventions recommended in this guideline ) 
discuss the importance of adherence to treatment for optimising outcomes. 
For more information, see NICE's guidelines on medicines adherence and medicines optimisation . [2012] 
1.1.1.3 
Assess whether support and information need updating or revising at every review or interaction with the person, in particular: 
during transition from children's services to adult services 
when new interventions become available 
when the person's disease severity or circumstances (for example, in terms of comorbidities or lifestyle) change. 
See also NICE's guideline on transition from children's to adults' services for young people using health or social care services . [2012] 
1.1.1.4 
Provide a single point of contact to help people with all types of psoriasis (and their families or carers where appropriate) access appropriate information and advice about their condition and the services available at each stage of the care pathway. [2012] 
1.1.1.5 
NICE has produced guidance on the components of good patient experience in adult NHS services. All healthcare professionals should follow the recommendations in NICE's guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . [2012] 
1.2 Assessment and referral 
Severe or atypical psoriasis is an HIV indicator condition as described in HIV in Europe's HIV indicator conditions . Also see recommendations 1.1.5 and 1.1.8 in NICE's guideline on HIV testing . 
1.2.1 Assessment tools for disease severity and impact and when to refer for specialist care 
1.2.1.1 
For people with any type of psoriasis assess: 
disease severity 
the impact of disease on physical, psychological and social wellbeing 
whether they have psoriatic arthritis 
the presence of comorbidities. [2012] 
1.2.1.2 
Assess the severity and impact of any type of psoriasis: 
at first presentation 
before referral for specialist advice and at each referral point in the treatment pathway 
to evaluate the efficacy of interventions. [2012] 
1.2.1.3 
When assessing the disease severity in any healthcare setting, record: 
the results of a static Physician's Global Assessment (classified in psoriasis assessment tools in clinical trials as clear, nearly clear, mild, moderate, severe or very severe) 
the patient's assessment of current disease severity, for example, using the static patient's global assessment (classified as clear, nearly clear, mild, moderate, severe or very severe) 
the body surface area affected 
any involvement of nails, high-impact and difficult-to-treat sites (for example, the face, scalp, palms, soles, flexures and genitals) 
any systemic upset such as fever and malaise, which are common in unstable forms of psoriasis such as erythroderma or generalised pustular psoriasis. [2012] 
1.2.1.4 
In specialist settings, use a validated tool to assess severity of psoriasis, for example, the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) in addition to the assessments indicated in recommendation 1.2.1.3. [2012] 
1.2.1.5 
Be aware that: 
PASI and body surface area are not validated for use in children and young people 
erythema may be underestimated in people with darker skin types, such as skin types 5 and 6 on the Fitzpatrick scale . [2012] 
1.2.1.6 
Use the Nail Psoriasis Severity Index to assess nail disease in specialist settings: 
if there is a major functional or cosmetic impact or 
before and after treatment is initiated specifically for nail disease. [2012] 
1.2.1.7 
Assess the impact of any type of psoriasis on physical, psychological and social wellbeing by asking: 
what aspects of their daily living are affected by the person's psoriasis 
how the person is coping with their skin condition and any treatments they are using 
if they need further advice or support 
if their psoriasis has an impact on their mood 
if their psoriasis causes them distress (be aware the patient may have levels of distress and not be clinically depressed) 
if their condition has any impact on their family or carers. 
Ask children and young people age-appropriate questions. [2012] 
1.2.1.8 
In specialist settings, and if practical in non-specialist settings, use a validated tool to assess the impact of any type of psoriasis on physical, psychological and social wellbeing, for example, the: 
Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI; see also recommendation 1.5.3.2 in the section on targeted immunomodulatory treatments ) for adults or 
Children's Dermatology Life Quality Index (CDLQI) for children and young people. [2012] 
1.2.1.9 
When using an assessment tool for a person with any type of psoriasis: 
take account of their age, any disabilities (such as physical, visual or cognitive impairment), and any language or other communication difficulties, and provide help and support if needed (see Dermatology Life Quality Index ) 
ensure that the chosen assessment tool continues to be a sufficiently accurate measure. [2012] 
1.2.1.10 
Following assessment in a non-specialist setting, refer people for dermatology specialist advice if: 
there is diagnostic uncertainty or 
any type of psoriasis is severe or extensive, for example, more than 10% of the body surface area is affected or 
any type of psoriasis cannot be controlled with topical treatment or 
acute guttate psoriasis requires phototherapy (for guidance on the use of narrowband ultraviolet B, see recommendation 1.4.1.1 in the section on phototherapy ) or 
nail disease has a major functional or cosmetic impact or 
any type of psoriasis is having a major impact on a person's physical, psychological or social wellbeing. [2012] 
1.2.1.11 
People with generalised pustular psoriasis or erythroderma should be referred immediately for same-day specialist assessment and treatment. [2012] 
1.2.1.12 
Refer children and young people with any type of psoriasis to a specialist at presentation. [2012] 
1.2.2 Assessment and referral for psoriatic arthritis 
1.2.2.1 
Offer annual assessment for psoriatic arthritis to people with any type of psoriasis. Assessment is especially important within the first 10 years of onset of psoriasis. [2012] 
1.2.2.2 
Use a validated tool to assess adults for psoriatic arthritis in primary care and specialist settings, for example, the Psoriasis Epidemiological Screening Tool (PEST). Be aware that the PEST does not detect axial arthritis or inflammatory back pain. [2012] 
1.2.2.3 
As soon as psoriatic arthritis is suspected, refer the person to a rheumatologist for assessment and advice about planning their care. Also see NICE's guideline on spondyloarthritis in over 16s . [2012] 
1.2.3 Identification of comorbidities 
1.2.3.1 
Offer adults with severe psoriasis of any type (defined as either needing treatment with phototherapy or systemic treatments, or needing hospital admission in the studies underpinning this recommendation), a cardiovascular risk assessment at presentation using a validated risk estimation tool. Offer further assessment of cardiovascular risk every 5 years, or more frequently if indicated following assessment. For further information, see NICE's guideline on cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid modification . [2012] 
1.2.3.2 
Discuss risk factors for cardiovascular comorbidities with people who have any type of psoriasis (and their families or carers where appropriate). Where appropriate offer preventative advice, healthy lifestyle information and support for behavioural change tailored to meet the needs of the individual in line with NICE's guidelines on: 
cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid modification 
overweight and obesity management 
type 2 diabetes prevention: population and community-level interventions 
cardiovascular disease prevention 
alcohol-use disorders: prevention 
tobacco: preventing uptake, promoting quitting and treating dependence 
physical activity: brief advice for adults in primary care 
physical activity in the workplace 
physical activity for children and young people . [2012] 
1.2.3.3 
For people who have multiple comorbidities or multimorbidities and any type of psoriasis needing second- or third-line treatment, ensure multidisciplinary working and communication between specialties and, if needed, interdisciplinary team working (for example, when both skin and joints are significantly affected). [2012] 
1.2.3.4 
Be aware that psoriasis of any type, especially if severe (identified by hospitalisations [including outpatient visits] for psoriasis [ICD‑10 L40] or psoriatic arthritis) is a risk factor for venous thromboembolism in adults, and: 
explain this risk to adults with any type of psoriasis 
offer advice on how to minimise the risk (for example, during hospital admission, surgery, or periods of immobility) 
manage the risk in line with NICE's guideline on venous thromboembolism in over 16s: reducing the risk of hospital-acquired deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism . [2012] 
1.2.3.5 
Assess whether people with any type of psoriasis are depressed when assessing disease severity and impact, and when escalating treatment. If appropriate offer information, advice and support in line with NICE's guidelines on depression in adults with a chronic physical health problem and depression in children and young people . [2012] 
1.3 Topical treatment 
The treatment pathway in this guideline begins with active topical treatment. The committee acknowledged that the use of emollients in psoriasis was already widespread and hence the evidence review was limited to active topical treatment for psoriasis. Refer to the BNF and BNF for children for guidance on use of emollients. 
1.3.1 General recommendations 
1.3.1.1 
Offer people with psoriasis topical treatment as first-line treatment. [2012] 
1.3.1.2 
Offer second- or third-line treatment options (phototherapy, conventional systemic treatments or targeted immunomodulatory treatments) at the same time when topical treatment alone is unlikely to adequately control psoriasis, such as: 
extensive disease (for example, more than 10% of body surface area affected) or 
at least 'moderate' on the static Physician's Global Assessment or 
where topical treatment is ineffective, such as nail disease. [2012] 
1.3.1.3 
Offer practical support and advice about the use and application of topical treatments. Advice should be provided by healthcare professionals who are trained and competent in the use of topical treatments. Support people to adhere to treatment in line with NICE's guideline on medicines adherence . Also see NICE's guideline on medicines optimisation . [2012] 
1.3.1.4 
When offering topical treatments: 
take into account patient preference, cosmetic acceptability, practical aspects of application and the site(s) and extent of psoriasis to be treated 
discuss the variety of formulations available and, depending on the person's preference, use: 
cream, lotion or gel for widespread psoriasis 
lotion, solution or gel for the scalp or hair-bearing areas 
ointment to treat areas with thick adherent scale 
be aware that topical treatment alone may not provide satisfactory disease control, especially in people with psoriasis that is extensive (for example, more than 10% of body surface area affected) or at least 'moderate' on the static Physician's Global Assessment. [2012] 
1.3.1.5 
If a person of any age with psoriasis requiring topical treatment has a physical disability, or cognitive or visual impairment offer advice and practical support that take into account the person's individual needs. [2012] 
1.3.1.6 
Arrange a review appointment 4 weeks after starting a new topical treatment in adults, and 2 weeks after starting a new topical treatment in children, to: 
evaluate tolerability, toxicity, and initial response to treatment (including measures of severity and impact described in recommendations 1.2.1.3, 1.2.1.6 and 1.2.1.7 in the section on assessment tools for severity and impact, and when to refer to specialist care ) 
reinforce the importance of adherence when appropriate 
reinforce the importance of a 4 week break between courses of potent/very potent corticosteroids (see recommendation 1.3.1.10). 
If there is little or no improvement at this review, discuss the next treatment option with the person. [2012] 
1.3.1.7 
Discuss with people whose psoriasis is responding to topical treatment (and their families or carers where appropriate): 
the importance of continuing treatment until a satisfactory outcome is achieved (for example, clear or nearly clear) or up to the recommended maximum treatment period for corticosteroids (see the sections on topical treatment of psoriasis affecting the trunk and limbs , scalp and face, flexures and genitals ) 
that relapse occurs in most people after treatment is stopped 
that after the initial treatment period topical treatments can be used when needed to maintain satisfactory disease control. [2012] 
1.3.1.8 
Offer people with psoriasis a supply of their topical treatment to keep at home for the self-management of their condition. [2012] 
1.3.1.9 
In people whose psoriasis has not responded satisfactorily to a topical treatment strategy, before changing to an alternative treatment: 
discuss with the person whether they have any difficulties with application, cosmetic acceptability or tolerability and where relevant offer an alternative formulation 
consider other possible reasons for non-adherence in line with NICE's guideline on medicines adherence . 
Also see NICE's guideline on medicines optimisation . [2012] 
How to use corticosteroids safely 
Also see recommendations 1.3.4.2 and 1.3.4.4 for details on safe use of steroids at facial, flexural and genital sites . 
1.3.1.10 
Be aware that continuous use of potent or very potent corticosteroids may cause: 
irreversible skin atrophy and striae 
psoriasis to become unstable 
systemic side effects when applied continuously to extensive psoriasis (for example, more than 10% of body surface area affected); see also recommendation 1.5.2.1 in the section on conventional systemic treatment for further guidance. 
Explain the risks of these side effects to people undergoing treatment (and their families or carers where appropriate) and discuss how to avoid them. [2012] 
1.3.1.11 
Aim for a break of 4 weeks between courses of treatment with potent or very potent corticosteroids. Consider topical treatments that are not steroid based (such as vitamin D or vitamin D analogues or coal tar) as needed to maintain psoriasis disease control during this period. [2012] 
1.3.1.12 
When offering a corticosteroid for topical treatment select the potency and formulation based on the person's need. [2012] 
1.3.1.13 
Do not use very potent corticosteroids continuously at any site for longer than 4 weeks. [2012] 
1.3.1.14 
Do not use potent corticosteroids continuously at any site for longer than 8 weeks. [2012] 
1.3.1.15 
Do not use very potent corticosteroids in children and young people. [2012] 
1.3.1.16 
Offer a review at least annually to adults with psoriasis who are using intermittent or short-term courses of a potent or very potent corticosteroid (either as monotherapy or in combined preparations) to assess for the presence of steroid atrophy and other adverse effects. Also see recommendations 1.3.1.12 and 1.3.1.13 for details on safe duration of steroid use. [2012] 
1.3.1.17 
Offer a review at least annually to children and young people with psoriasis who are using corticosteroids of any potency (either as monotherapy or in combined preparations) to assess for the presence of steroid atrophy and other adverse effects. [2012] 
1.3.2 Topical treatment of psoriasis affecting the trunk and limbs 
1.3.2.1 
Offer a potent corticosteroid applied once daily plus vitamin D or a vitamin D analogue applied once daily (applied separately, 1 in the morning and the other in the evening) for up to 4 weeks as initial treatment for adults with trunk or limb psoriasis. [2012] 
1.3.2.2 
If once-daily application of a potent corticosteroid plus once-daily application of vitamin D or a vitamin D analogue does not result in clearance, near clearance or satisfactory control of trunk or limb psoriasis in adults after a maximum of 8 weeks, offer vitamin D or a vitamin D analogue alone applied twice daily. Also see recommendation 1.3.1.9 in the general recommendations for topical treatments section for additional considerations before changing to the next treatment option. [2012] 
1.3.2.3 
If twice-daily application of vitamin D or a vitamin D analogue does not result in clearance, near clearance or satisfactory control of trunk or limb psoriasis in adults after 8 to 12 weeks, offer either: 
a potent corticosteroid applied twice daily for up to 4 weeks or 
a coal tar preparation applied once or twice daily. 
Also see recommendation 1.3.1.9 in the general recommendations for topical treatments section for additional considerations before changing to the next treatment option. [2012] 
1.3.2.4 
If a twice-daily potent corticosteroid or coal tar preparation cannot be used or a once-daily preparation would improve adherence in adults offer a combined product containing calcipotriol monohydrate and betamethasone dipropionate applied once daily for up to 4 weeks. [2012] 
1.3.2.5 
Offer treatment with very potent corticosteroids in adults with trunk or limb psoriasis only: 
in specialist settings under careful supervision 
when other topical treatment strategies have failed 
for a maximum period of 4 weeks. [2012] 
1.3.2.6 
Consider short-contact dithranol for treatment-resistant psoriasis of the trunk or limbs and either: 
give educational support for self-use or 
ensure treatment is given in a specialist setting. [2012] 
1.3.2.7 
For children and young people with trunk or limb psoriasis consider either: 
calcipotriol applied once daily (only for those over 6 years of age) or 
a potent corticosteroid applied once daily (only for those over 1 year of age). [2012] 
In August 2017, there were different topical calcipotriol preparations available in the UK, which vary in their licensing status for use in children and young people under 18. Additionally, potent topical corticosteroid preparations available in the UK vary in the age from which they are licensed for use in children. Please refer to the BNF for children for information on appropriate dosing and duration of treatment. Refer to the summary of product characteristics for specific information on individual topical calcipotriol and corticosteroid preparations. See also NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.3 Topical treatment of psoriasis affecting the scalp 
In children and young people, the specified duration of treatment in recommendations 1.3.3.1, 1.3.3.3, 1.3.3.4 and 1.3.3.5 may not be appropriate. Please refer to the BNF for children for information on appropriate dosing and duration of treatment. 
In August 2017, there were several potent topical corticosteroid preparations available in the UK, and the age from which they are licensed for use in children varies. Refer to the summary of product characteristics for information on individual potent topical corticosteroid preparations. See also NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.3.1 
Offer a potent corticosteroid applied once daily for up to 4 weeks as initial treatment for people with scalp psoriasis. [2012] 
1.3.3.2 
Show people with scalp psoriasis (and their families or carers where appropriate) how to safely apply corticosteroid topical treatment. [2012] 
1.3.3.3 
If treatment with a potent corticosteroid does not result in clearance, near clearance or satisfactory control of scalp psoriasis after 4 weeks consider either or both of the following: 
a different formulation of the potent corticosteroid (for example, a shampoo or mousse) 
topical treatments to remove adherent scale (for example, agents containing salicylic acid, emollients and oils) before application of the potent corticosteroid. [2012] 
1.3.3.4 
If the response to treatment with a potent corticosteroid for scalp psoriasis remains unsatisfactory after a further 4 weeks of treatment (also see recommendation 1.3.1.9 in the general recommendations for topical treatment section for additional considerations before changing to the next treatment option), offer: 
a combined product containing calcipotriol monohydrate and betamethasone dipropionate applied once daily for up to 4 weeks or 
vitamin D or a vitamin D analogue applied once daily (only in those who cannot use steroids and with mild to moderate scalp psoriasis). [2012] 
In October 2012, the combined product containing calcipotriol monohydrate and betamethasone dipropionate did not have a UK marketing authorisation for this indication in children and young people. 
In August 2017, topical calcitriol and tacalcitol preparations available in the UK were not licensed for use in children. Topical calcipotriol preparations available in the UK vary in their licensing status for use in children and young people under 18. Refer to the summary of product characteristics for specific information on individual topical calcipotriol preparations. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.3.5 
If continuous treatment with either a combined product containing calcipotriol monohydrate and betamethasone dipropionate applied once daily or vitamin D or a vitamin D analogue applied once daily for up to 8 weeks does not result in clearance, near clearance or satisfactory control of scalp psoriasis offer: 
a very potent corticosteroid applied up to twice daily for 2 weeks for adults only or 
coal tar applied once or twice daily or 
referral to a specialist for additional support with either topical applications or advice on other treatment options, or both. [2012] 
In October 2012, the combined product containing calcipotriol monohydrate and betamethasone dipropionate did not have a UK marketing authorisation for this indication in children and young people. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.3.6 
Consider topical vitamin D or a vitamin D analogue alone for the treatment of scalp psoriasis only in people who: 
are intolerant of or cannot use topical corticosteroids at this site or 
have mild to moderate scalp psoriasis. [2012] 
Refer to the BNF for children for information on appropriate dosing and duration of treatment. 
In August 2017, topical calcitriol and tacalcitol preparations available in the UK were not licensed for use in children. Topical calcipotriol preparations available in the UK vary in their licensing status for use in children and young people under 18. Refer to the summary of product characteristics for specific information on individual topical calcipotriol preparations. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.3.7 
Do not offer coal tar-based shampoos alone for the treatment of severe scalp psoriasis. [2012] 
1.3.4 Topical treatment of psoriasis affecting the face, flexures and genitals 
1.3.4.1 
Offer a short-term mild or moderate potency corticosteroid applied once or twice daily (for a maximum of 2 weeks) to people with psoriasis of the face, flexures or genitals. [2012] 
In October 2012, moderate potency corticosteroids did not have a UK marketing authorisation for this indication. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
In children and young people, the specified duration of treatment may not be appropriate. Please refer to the BNF for children for information on appropriate dosing and duration of treatment. 
1.3.4.2 
Be aware that the face, flexures and genitals are particularly vulnerable to steroid atrophy and that corticosteroids should only be used for short-term treatment of psoriasis (1 to 2 weeks per month). Explain the risks to people undergoing this treatment (and their families or carers where appropriate) and how to minimise them. [2012] 
1.3.4.3 
For adults with psoriasis of the face, flexures or genitals if the response to short-term moderate potency corticosteroids is unsatisfactory, or they require continuous treatment to maintain control and there is serious risk of local corticosteroid-induced side effects, offer a calcineurin inhibitor applied twice daily for up to 4 weeks. Calcineurin inhibitors should be initiated by healthcare professionals with expertise in treating psoriasis. [2012] 
In October 2012, topical calcineurin inhibitors did not have a UK marketing authorisation for this indication. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.4.4 
Do not use potent or very potent corticosteroids on the face, flexures or genitals. [2012] 
1.3.4.5 
When prescribing topical treatments at facial, flexural and genital sites take into account that they may cause irritation and inform people undergoing treatment (and their families and carers where appropriate) of these risks and how to minimise them. See also recommendation 1.3.4.2. [2012] 
1.4 Phototherapy (broad- or narrowband UVB light and PUVA) 
1.4.1.1 
Offer narrowband ultraviolet B (UVB) phototherapy to people with plaque or guttate-pattern psoriasis that cannot be controlled with topical treatments alone. Treatment with narrowband UVB phototherapy can be given 3 or 2 times a week depending on patient preference. Tell people receiving narrowband UVB that a response may be achieved more quickly with treatment 3 times a week. [2012] 
1.4.1.2 
Offer alternative second- or third-line treatment when: 
narrowband UVB phototherapy results in an unsatisfactory response or is poorly tolerated or 
there is a rapid relapse following completion of treatment (rapid relapse is defined as greater than 50% of baseline disease severity within 3 months) or 
accessing treatment is difficult for logistical reasons (for example, travel, distance, time off work or immobility) or 
the person is at especially high risk of skin cancer. [2012] 
1.4.1.3 
Consider psoralen (oral or topical) with local ultraviolet A (PUVA) irradiation to treat palmoplantar pustulosis. [2012] 
In October 2012, psoralen did not have a UK marketing authorisation for this or any indication. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.4.1.4 
When considering PUVA for psoriasis (plaque type or localised palmoplantar pustulosis) discuss with the person: 
other treatment options 
that any exposure is associated with an increased risk of skin cancer (squamous cell carcinoma) 
that subsequent use of ciclosporin may increase the risk of skin cancer, particularly if they have already received more than 150 PUVA treatments 
that risk of skin cancer is related to the number of PUVA treatments. [2012] 
1.4.1.5 
Do not routinely offer co-therapy with acitretin when administering PUVA. See the MHRA Drug Safety Update on oral retinoid medicines: revised and simplified pregnancy prevention educational materials for healthcare professionals and women (June 2019). Also see the summary of product characteristics for further information on this issue . [2012] 
1.4.1.6 
Consider topical adjunctive treatment in people receiving phototherapy with broadband or narrowband UVB who: 
have plaques at sites that are resistant or show an inadequate response (for example, the lower leg) to phototherapy alone, or at difficult-to-treat or high-need, covered sites (for example, flexures and the scalp) or 
do not wish to take systemic treatments or in whom systemic treatments are contraindicated. [2012] 
1.4.1.7 
Do not routinely use phototherapy (narrowband UVB, broadband UVB or PUVA) as maintenance therapy. [2012] 
1.4.1.8 
Ensure that all phototherapy equipment is safety checked and maintained in line with local and national policy. Also see the British Association of Dermatologists service guidance and standards for phototherapy and guidelines on the measurement of ultraviolet radiation levels in ultraviolet phototherapy . [2012] 
1.4.1.9 
Healthcare professionals who are giving phototherapy should be trained and competent in its use and should ensure an appropriate clinical governance framework is in place to promote adherence to the indications for and contraindications to treatment, dosimetry and national policy on safety standards for phototherapy. Also see the British Association of Dermatologists service guidance and standards for phototherapy and guidelines on the measurement of ultraviolet radiation levels in ultraviolet phototherapy . [2012] 
1.4.2 Risk of skin cancer and how to minimise risk 
1.4.2.1 
Do not use PUVA in people with psoriasis of any type and a genetic predisposition to skin cancer for example, xeroderma pigmentosum or familial melanoma. [2012] 
1.4.2.2 
Do not use PUVA when other appropriate treatments are available in: 
people with a personal history of skin cancer or 
people who have already received 150 PUVA treatments or 
children. [2012] 
1.4.2.3 
Use PUVA with caution or consider other treatment options in: 
people at risk of skin cancer (melanoma and non-melanoma type) – see NICE's cancer service guidance on improving outcomes for people with skin tumours including melanoma 
people with lighter skin types, such as skin types 1 or 2 on the Fitzpatrick scale 
people who are likely to require ciclosporin or long-term methotrexate 
young people. [2012] 
1.4.2.4 
Offer lifetime skin cancer surveillance to people treated with PUVA who have: 
had more than 150 PUVA treatments or 
developed skin cancer. [2012] 
1.4.2.5 
Ensure that a permanent record of the person's cumulative number of UV treatments is kept (for example, in a national record). [2012] 
1.5 Systemic treatment 
1.5.1 General recommendations 
1.5.1.1 
Responsibility for use of systemic treatment should be in specialist settings only. Certain aspects of supervision and monitoring may be delegated to other healthcare professionals and completed in non-specialist settings, in which case, such arrangements should be formalised. [2012] 
1.5.1.2 
When offering systemic treatment, tailor the choice of agent and dosing schedule to the needs of the individual and include consideration of: 
the person's age 
disease phenotype, pattern of activity and previous treatment history 
disease severity and impact 
the presence of psoriatic arthritis (in consultation with a rheumatologist) 
conception plans 
comorbidities 
the person's views. [2012] 
1.5.1.3 
Be aware of the benefits of, contraindications to and adverse effects associated with systemic treatments. Explain the risks and benefits to people undergoing this treatment (and their families or carers where appropriate), using absolute risks and natural frequencies when possible. Support and advice should be provided by healthcare professionals who are trained and competent in the use of systemic treatments. [2012] 
1.5.1.4 
When reviewing response to systemic treatment, take into account: 
disease severity compared with baseline (for example, PASI baseline to endpoint score) 
control of psoriatic arthritis disease activity (in consultation with a rheumatologist if necessary) 
the impact of the disease on the person's physical, psychological and social wellbeing 
the benefits versus the risks of continued treatment 
the views of the person undergoing treatment (and their family or carers where appropriate). [2012] 
1.5.1.5 
Monitor people using systemic treatment for all types of psoriasis in accordance with national and local medicine guidelines and policy. Take appropriate action in the event of laboratory abnormalities or adverse events. [2012] 
1.5.1.6 
Offer adjunctive topical treatment to people with psoriasis using systemic treatment to optimise treatment outcomes. [2012] 
1.5.1.7 
Offer people with psoriasis who are starting treatment with a systemic medicine the opportunity to participate in long-term safety registries (for example, the British Association of Dermatologists Biologic Interventions Register). [2012] 
1.5.2 Conventional systemic treatment 
1.5.2.1 
Offer conventional systemic treatments to people with any type of psoriasis if: 
it cannot be controlled with topical treatment and 
it has a significant impact on physical, psychological or social wellbeing and 
1 or more of the following apply: 
psoriasis is extensive (for example, more than 10% of body surface area affected or a PASI score of more than 10) or 
psoriasis is localised and associated with either significant functional impairment or high levels of distress (for example, severe nail disease or involvement at high-impact sites) or both, or 
phototherapy has been ineffective, cannot be used or has resulted in rapid relapse (rapid relapse is defined as greater than 50% of baseline disease severity within 3 months). [2012] 
Choice of medicines 
1.5.2.2 
Offer methotrexate as the first-choice conventional systemic treatment for people with psoriasis who fulfil the criteria for treatment (see previous recommendation 1.5.2.1) except in the circumstances described in recommendations 1.5.2.4 and 1.5.2.12. [2012] 
1.5.2.3 
In people with both active psoriatic arthritis and any type of psoriasis that fulfils the criteria for conventional systemic treatment (see recommendation 1.5.2.1) consider the choice of conventional systemic treatments in consultation with a rheumatologist. [2012] 
1.5.2.4 
Offer ciclosporin as the first-choice conventional systemic treatment for people who fulfil the criteria for conventional systemic treatment (see recommendation 1.5.2.1) and who: 
need rapid or short-term disease control (for example, a psoriasis flare) or 
have palmoplantar pustulosis or 
are considering conception (both men and women) and conventional systemic treatment cannot be avoided. [2012] 
1.5.2.5 
Consider changing from methotrexate to ciclosporin (or vice versa) when response to the first-choice conventional systemic treatment is inadequate. [2012] 
1.5.2.6 
Consider acitretin for adults, and in exceptional cases only for children and young people, in the following circumstances: 
if methotrexate and ciclosporin are not appropriate or have failed or 
for people with pustular forms of psoriasis. 
See the MHRA Drug Safety Update on oral retinoid medicines: revised and simplified pregnancy prevention educational materials for healthcare professionals and women (June 2019). Also see the summary of product characteristics for further information on this issue . [2012] 
Medicine regimens 
1.5.2.7 
Use incremental dosing of methotrexate (for example, starting with an initial dose of 5 mg to 10 mg once a week) and gradually increase up to an effective dose and a maximum of 25 mg a week. Assess the treatment response after 3 months at the target dose of methotrexate and stop treatment if the response is inadequate (for example, a decrease of less than 75% in PASI score or a decrease of less than 50% in PASI score and 5 points in DLQI score). [2012] 
1.5.2.8 
Use the lowest possible therapeutic dose of methotrexate to maintain remission. [2012] 
1.5.2.9 
Use 2.5 to 3 mg/kg a day of ciclosporin. Escalate to 5 mg/kg a day after 4 weeks only when there is no response to the lower dose or when rapid disease control is necessary (for example, in severe unstable disease). Assess the treatment response after 3 months at the optimum dose of ciclosporin and stop treatment if the response is inadequate (for example, less than a 75% decrease in PASI score, or less than a 50% decrease in PASI score and less than 5 points in DLQI score). [2012] 
1.5.2.10 
Use the lowest possible therapeutic dose of ciclosporin to maintain remission for up to 1 year. Consider other treatment options when disease relapses rapidly on stopping ciclosporin treatment (rapid relapse is defined as greater than 50% of baseline disease severity within 3 months of stopping treatment). Do not use ciclosporin continuously for more than 1 year unless disease is severe or unstable and other treatment options, including targeted immunomodulatory treatments, cannot be used. [2012] 
1.5.2.11 
Use incremental dosing of acitretin to minimise mucocutaneous side effects and achieve a target dose of 25 mg daily in adults. Consider dose escalation to a maximum of 50 mg daily when no other treatment options are available. Assess the treatment response after 4 months at the optimum dose of acitretin and stop treatment if the response is inadequate, for example: 
in plaque-type psoriasis, less than a 75% decrease in PASI score or less than a 50% decrease in PASI score and less than 5 points in DLQI score 
in pustular forms of psoriasis, not achieving clear or nearly clear on the static Physician's Global Assessment. 
See the MHRA Drug Safety Update on oral retinoid medicines: revised and simplified pregnancy prevention educational materials for healthcare professionals and women (June 2019). Also see the summary of product characteristics for further information on this issue . [2012] 
Methotrexate and risk of hepatotoxicity 
1.5.2.12 
When considering the risks and benefits of treating any type of psoriasis with methotrexate, be aware that methotrexate can cause a clinically significant rise in transaminases and that long-term treatment may be associated with liver fibrosis (see recommendations 1.5.2.13 to 1.5.2.16). [2012] 
Methotrexate and monitoring for hepatotoxicity 
1.5.2.13 
Before and during methotrexate treatment, offer the person with any type of psoriasis an evaluation for potential risk of hepatotoxicity. Use standard liver function tests and serial serum procollagen III levels to monitor for abnormalities during treatment with methotrexate, taking into account pre-existing risk factors (for example, obesity, diabetes and alcohol use), baseline results and trends over time. [2012] 
1.5.2.14 
When using serum procollagen III levels to exclude liver fibrosis or cirrhosis, be aware that the: 
test cannot be used in children and young people 
results may be unreliable in people with psoriatic arthritis 
estimated positive predictive value is 23% to 95% and the estimated negative predictive value is 89% to 100%. [2012] 
1.5.2.15 
Provide advice on modifiable risk factors for liver disease before and during treatment, including alcohol intake and weight reduction if appropriate in line with NICE's guidelines on alcohol-use disorders: prevention and overweight and obesity management . For further advice on how to support attitude and behavioural change, see NICE's guideline on behaviour change . [2012] 
1.5.2.16 
Seek timely specialist advice and consider referral to a clinician with expertise in liver disease if the results of liver tests are abnormal. [2012] 
1.5.3 Targeted immunomodulatory treatments 
1.5.3.1 
Targeted immunomodulatory treatments should be initiated and supervised only by consultant dermatologists experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of psoriasis. [2012] 
1.5.3.2 
When using the DLQI , healthcare professionals should take into account any physical, sensory or learning disabilities, or communication difficulties that could affect the responses to the DLQI and make any adjustments they consider appropriate. [2012] 
Psoriatic arthritis 
1.5.3.3 
If a person has both psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, take into account both conditions before starting or making changes to targeted immunomodulatory treatment, and manage their treatment in consultation with a rheumatologist. For medicines recommended as treatment options in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating psoriatic arthritis, see the section on pharmacological management in NICE's guideline on spondyloarthritis in over 16s . [2012] 
Plaque psoriasis in adults 
1.5.3.4 
If people with plaque psoriasis and their clinicians consider there to be a range of suitable medicines, after discussing the advantages and disadvantages of all the options, the least expensive should be used. Administration costs, dosages, price per dose and commercial arrangements should all be taken into account. [2025] 
1.5.3.5 
For medicines recommended as options in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating plaque psoriasis in adults, if the condition has a PASI score of 10 or more, a DLQI of more than 10 and has failed to respond to conventional systemic treatments and phototherapy, or these options are contraindicated or not tolerated, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
deucravacitinib (TA907, June 2023) 
bimekizumab (TA723, September 2021) 
risankizumab (TA596, August 2019) 
tildrakizumab (TA575, April 2019) 
certolizumab pegol (TA574, April 2019) 
guselkumab (TA521, June 2018) 
brodalumab (TA511, March 2018) 
dimethyl fumarate (TA475, September 2017) 
ixekizumab (TA442, April 2017) 
apremilast (TA419, November 2016) 
secukinumab (TA350, July 2015) 
ustekinumab (TA180, September 2009) 
adalimumab (TA146, June 2008) 
etanercept (TA103, July 2006) . 
1.5.3.6 
Infliximab is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating plaque psoriasis in adults, if the condition has a PASI score of 20 or more, a DLQI of more than 18 and has failed to respond to conventional systemic treatments or phototherapy, or these options are contraindicated or not tolerated. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on infliximab (TA134, 2008) . 
1.5.3.7 
For adults with plaque psoriasis who are receiving a targeted immunomodulatory treatment, continue treatment only if there is clear evidence of response (see definitions of response and timeframes in the relevant NICE technology appraisal guidance). [2025] 
Changing to an alternative targeted immunomodulatory treatment in plaque psoriasis 
1.5.3.8 
Consider changing to an alternative targeted immunomodulatory treatment in adults if: 
the psoriasis does not respond adequately to a first targeted immunomodulatory treatment (as defined in the relevant NICE technology appraisal guidance) or 
the psoriasis initially responds adequately but subsequently loses this response (secondary failure) or 
the first targeted immunomodulatory treatment cannot be tolerated or becomes contraindicated. [2012] 
1.5.3.9 
For adults in whom there is an inadequate response to a second targeted immunomodulatory treatment, seek supra-specialist advice from a clinician with expertise in targeted immunomodulatory treatments. [2012] 
Plaque psoriasis in children and young people 
Some of the treatment options in recommendation 1.5.3.10 may also be available to children and young people with plaque psoriasis under NHS England's commissioning medicines for children in specialised services policy . 
1.5.3.10 
For medicines recommended as options in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating plaque psoriasis in children and young people, if the condition has a PASI score of 10 or more and has failed to respond to conventional systemic treatments or phototherapy, or these options are contraindicated or not tolerated, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
secukinumab in children and young people aged 6 to 17 years (TA734, 2021) 
adalimumab in children and young people aged 4 years or older (TA455, 2017) 
etanercept in children and young people aged 6 years or older (TA455, 2017) 
ustekinumab in children and young people aged 12 years or older (TA455, 2017) . 
Generalised pustular psoriasis flares in adults 
1.5.3.11 
Spesolimab is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating generalised pustular psoriasis flares in some adults. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on spesolimab (TA1070, 2025) . 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline. 
Conventional systemic treatment 
Conventional systemic treatments are synthetic medicines that treat underlying systemic inflammation or immune system dysregulation rather than only improving symptoms. They include methotrexate and ciclosporin, but not targeted immunomodulatory treatments. 
Fitzpatrick scale 
The scale has 6 main skin types based on the colour of the skin and its reaction to sun exposure: 
type 1: always burns, never tans 
type 2: usually burns, tans minimally 
type 3: sometimes burns mildly, tans uniformly 
type 4: burns minimally, tans easily 
type 5: very rarely burns, tans very easily 
type 6: never burns, tans very easily. 
Psoriasis 
In this guideline, when we use the term 'psoriasis' we are referring to plaque psoriasis unless stipulated otherwise. Other types of psoriasis include guttate psoriasis and pustular (localised or generalised) forms. 
Targeted immunomodulatory treatments 
Targeted immunomodulatory treatments focus on specific pathways or molecules to manage inflammation and immune system dysregulation. They include biological medicines, such as monoclonal antibodies, and targeted synthetic medicines, such as small molecules like deucravacitinib and dimethyl fumarate. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
