Recommendations | Acutely ill adults in hospital: recognising and responding to deterioration | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Acute and critical care
Acutely ill adults in hospital: recognising and responding to deterioration
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG50 
Published: 
25 July 2007
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Physiological observations in acute hospital settings
Identifying patients whose clinical condition is deteriorating or is at risk of deterioration
Choice of physiological track and trigger system
Physiological parameters to be used by track and trigger systems
Critical care outreach services for patients whose clinical condition is deteriorating
Graded response strategy
Transfer of patients from critical care areas to general wards
Care on the general ward following transfer
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
The following guidance is based on the best available evidence. The full guideline gives details of the methods and the evidence used to develop the guidance. 
Physiological observations in acute hospital settings 
1.1 
Adult patients in acute hospital settings, including patients in the emergency department for whom a clinical decision to admit has been made, should have: 
physiological observations recorded at the time of their admission or initial assessment 
a clear written monitoring plan that specifies which physiological observations should be recorded and how often. The plan should take account of the: 
patient's diagnosis 
presence of comorbidities 
agreed treatment plan. 
Physiological observations should be recorded and acted upon by staff who have been trained to undertake these procedures and understand their clinical relevance. 
1.2 
As a minimum, the following physiological observations should be recorded at the initial assessment and as part of routine monitoring: 
heart rate 
respiratory rate 
systolic blood pressure 
level of consciousness 
oxygen saturation 
temperature. 
Identifying patients whose clinical condition is deteriorating or is at risk of deterioration 
1.3 
Physiological track and trigger systems should be used to monitor all adult patients in acute hospital settings. 
Physiological observations should be monitored at least every 12 hours, unless a decision has been made at a senior level to increase or decrease this frequency for an individual patient. 
The frequency of monitoring should increase if abnormal physiology is detected, as outlined in the recommendation on graded response strategy. 
Choice of physiological track and trigger system 
1.4 
Track and trigger systems ( NEWS2 [National Early Warning Score] has been endorsed by NHS England) should use multiple-parameter or aggregate weighted scoring systems, which allow a graded response. These scoring systems should: 
define the parameters to be measured and the frequency of observations 
include a clear and explicit statement of the parameters, cut-off points or scores that should trigger a response. 
Physiological parameters to be used by track and trigger systems 
1.5 
Multiple-parameter or aggregate weighted scoring systems used for track and trigger systems should measure: 
heart rate 
respiratory rate 
systolic blood pressure 
level of consciousness 
oxygen saturation 
temperature. 
1.6 
In specific clinical circumstances, additional monitoring should be considered; for example: 
hourly urine output 
biochemical analysis, such as lactate, blood glucose, base deficit, arterial pH 
pain assessment. 
Critical care outreach services for patients whose clinical condition is deteriorating 
1.7 
Staff caring for patients in acute hospital settings should have competencies in monitoring, measurement, interpretation and prompt response to the acutely ill patient appropriate to the level of care they are providing. Education and training should be provided to ensure staff have these competencies, and they should be assessed to ensure they can demonstrate them. 
1.8 
The response strategy for patients identified as being at risk of clinical deterioration should be triggered by either physiological track and trigger score or clinical concern. 
1.9 
Trigger thresholds for track and trigger systems should be set locally. The threshold should be reviewed regularly to optimise sensitivity and specificity. 
Graded response strategy 
No specific service configuration can be recommended as a preferred response strategy for individuals identified as having a deteriorating clinical condition. 
1.10 
A graded response strategy for patients identified as being at risk of clinical deterioration should be agreed and delivered locally. It should consist of the following 3 levels: 
Low-score group: 
Increased frequency of observations and the nurse in charge alerted. 
Medium-score group: 
Urgent call to team with primary medical responsibility for the patient. 
Simultaneous call to personnel with core competencies for acute illness. These competencies can be delivered by a variety of models at a local level, such as a critical care outreach team, a hospital-at-night team or a specialist trainee in an acute medical or surgical specialty. 
High-score group: 
Emergency call to team with critical care competencies and diagnostic skills. The team should include a medical practitioner skilled in the assessment of the critically ill patient, who possesses advanced airway management and resuscitation skills. There should be an immediate response. 
1.11 
Patients identified as 'clinical emergency' should bypass the graded response system. With the exception of those with a cardiac arrest, they should be treated in the same way as the high-score group. 
1.12 
For patients in the high- and medium-score groups, healthcare professionals should: 
initiate appropriate interventions 
assess response 
formulate a management plan, including location and level of care. 
1.13 
If the team caring for the patient considers that admission to a critical care area is clinically indicated, then the decision to admit should involve both the consultant caring for the patient on the ward and the consultant in critical care. 
Transfer of patients from critical care areas to general wards 
1.14 
After the decision to transfer a patient from a critical care area to the general ward has been made, he or she should be transferred as early as possible during the day. Transfer from critical care areas to the general ward between 10:00pm and 7:00am should be avoided whenever possible, and should be documented as an adverse incident if it occurs. 
Care on the general ward following transfer 
1.15 
The critical care area transferring team and the receiving ward team should take shared responsibility for the care of the patient being transferred. They should jointly ensure: 
there is continuity of care through a formal structured handover of care from critical care area staff to ward staff (including both medical and nursing staff), supported by a written plan 
that the receiving ward, with support from critical care if required, can deliver the agreed plan. 
The formal structured handover of care should include: 
a summary of critical care stay, including diagnosis and treatment 
a monitoring and investigation plan 
a plan for ongoing treatment, including drugs and therapies, nutrition plan, infection status and any agreed limitations of treatment 
physical and rehabilitation needs 
psychological and emotional needs 
specific communication or language needs. 
1.16 
When patients are transferred to the general ward from a critical care area, they should be offered information about their condition and encouraged to actively participate in decisions that relate to their recovery. The information should be tailored to individual circumstances. If they agree, their family and carers should be involved. 
1.17 
Staff working with acutely ill patients on general wards should be provided with education and training to recognise and understand the physical, psychological and emotional needs of patients who have been transferred from critical care areas. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Key priorities for implementation 
Back to top
