Recommendations | Suspected acute respiratory infection in over 16s: assessment at first presentation and initial management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Respiratory conditions
Respiratory infections
Suspected acute respiratory infection in over 16s: assessment at first presentation and initial management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG237 
Published: 
31 October 2023
Last updated: 
02 September 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 All first contact with NHS services
1.2 Remote contact with NHS services at first presentation
1.3 In-person contact with NHS services at first presentation
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations and has information about prescribing medicines (including off‑label use), professional guidelines, standards, and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
This guideline should be read alongside NICE's antimicrobial prescribing guidelines on: 
acute cough 
acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
acute sinusitis 
acute sore throat . 
This guideline does not cover people with known COVID‑19. See NICE's guidelines on COVID for advice on managing COVID‑19 infection. 
It does not cover the ongoing management of acute respiratory infection (ARI) after first assessment and initial management. 
For advice on: 
diagnosing, monitoring and managing chronic asthma, see NICE's guideline on asthma 
diagnosing and managing COPD in over 16s, see NICE's guideline on COPD 
diagnosing and managing pneumonia, see NICE's guideline on pneumonia 
identifying and managing tuberculosis, see NICE's guideline on tuberculosis . 
1.1 All first contact with NHS services 
These recommendations cover all people with symptoms and signs of an ARI who contact NHS services whether remotely or in person. 
1.1.1 
In people with a suspected ARI, think 'could this be sepsis?' and assess in line with NICE's guideline on suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over . 
1.1.2 
Offer self-care advice to people whose symptoms can be managed at home. Ensure they know the likely duration of illness and when and how to seek medical help, for example, if symptoms worsen rapidly or significantly, do not improve over a specified time, or they become systemically very unwell. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on all first contact with NHS services . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review A: signs, symptoms and early warning scores for predicting severe illness 
evidence review B: rapid tests to inform triage and antibiotic prescribing decisions 
evidence review C: diagnostic accuracy of point-of-care tests for viral versus bacterial infection 
evidence summary D: acute respiratory infection . 
1.2 Remote contact with NHS services at first presentation 
These recommendations cover people with symptoms and signs of an ARI using remote means such as telephone, video call, online app, email or text message for initial assessment by NHS services, including NHS 111, 999 call centres and general practice. 
1.2.1 
Approach all remote assessments in a holistic, person-centred way, including checking that the person is able to use any digital technology being suggested and offering alternatives, when necessary. 
1.2.2 
Assess people to determine whether their symptoms can be safely managed at home or whether they have symptoms and signs that require further investigation; for example, symptoms and signs of concern for lower respiratory tract infection include breathlessness or confusion that is new or increased. If symptoms can be managed at home, offer self-care advice (see recommendation 1.1.2 ). 
1.2.3 
Arrange or refer the person for a face-to-face assessment if: 
an adequate assessment cannot be made remotely (for example, because the person has difficulty communicating) 
a serious illness is suspected (for example, pneumonia or non-infective causes of symptoms and signs) 
they have a comorbidity that may be exacerbated by an ARI (for example, frailty or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) or they are immunosuppressed. 
Any decision regarding the urgency of a face-to-face assessment, and where to refer (when appropriate), should be based on severity of symptoms and rate of deterioration. 
1.2.4 
Do not routinely prescribe antimicrobials based on a remote assessment alone unless the person knows when and how to seek further medical help and there is a sound reason to prescribe remotely, for example: 
the person cannot or would find it very difficult to attend a face-to-face appointment and/or 
the severity of illness can be adequately assessed remotely and the risk of an alternative diagnosis is low and 
the prescriber is confident that antimicrobials are needed. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on remote contact with NHS services at first presentation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review A: signs, symptoms and early warning scores for predicting severe illness 
evidence review B: rapid tests to inform triage and antibiotic prescribing decisions 
evidence review C: diagnostic accuracy of point-of-care tests for viral versus bacterial infection 
evidence summary D: acute respiratory infection . 
1.3 In-person contact with NHS services at first presentation 
These recommendations cover people with symptoms and signs of an ARI who present in‑person at sites that provide NHS services, including general practice and community pharmacies. 
1.3.1 
For people with symptoms and signs of an ARI, use clinical assessment to make a diagnosis and decide whether to prescribe antimicrobials, either immediately or with a back-up prescription , and offer them self-care advice (see recommendation 1.1.2 ). If pneumonia is suspected, see also NICE's guideline on pneumonia: diagnosis and management . 
1.3.2 
Consider the person's ARI symptoms and signs in the context of their overall health and social circumstances. The threshold for treatment or referral for further assessment may be lower for people who are more likely to have a poor outcome, for example, people with comorbidities or multimorbidity and people who are frail. [amended November 2023] 
1.3.3 
Do not offer rapid point-of-care microbiological tests or influenza (flu) tests to people with suspected ARI to determine whether to prescribe antimicrobials. Testing may be indicated for surveillance or infection control. 
1.3.4 
If, after clinical assessment, it is unclear if antibiotics are needed for someone with a lower respiratory tract infection, consider a point-of-care C‑reactive protein (CRP) test to support clinical decision making and: 
offer immediate antibiotics if the CRP level is more than 100 mg/litre 
consider a back‑up antibiotic prescription if the CRP level is between 20 mg/litre and 100 mg/litre 
do not routinely offer antibiotics if the CRP level is less than 20 mg/litre. 
1.3.5 
Follow seasonal advice from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) on managing influenza-like illness. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on in-person contact with NHS services at first presentation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review A: signs, symptoms and early warning scores for predicting severe illness 
evidence review B: rapid tests to inform triage and antibiotic prescribing decisions 
evidence review C: diagnostic accuracy of point-of-care tests for viral versus bacterial infection 
evidence summary D: acute respiratory infection . 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline. 
Acute respiratory infection (ARI) 
An acute illness (present for 21 days or less) affecting the respiratory tract with symptoms such as cough, sore throat, fever, sputum production, breathlessness, wheeze or chest discomfort or pain, and no alternative explanation. 
Back-up prescription 
A prescription for use at a later date if symptoms worsen. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
