Overview | Ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage: diagnosis and initial management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Pregnancy
Ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage: diagnosis and initial management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG126 
Published: 
17 April 2019
Last updated: 
17 June 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Using this guideline 
Support and information 
Early pregnancy assessment services 
Symptoms and signs of ectopic pregnancy and initial assessment 
Diagnosis of viable intrauterine pregnancy and of tubal ectopic pregnancy 
Management of miscarriage 
Management of tubal ectopic pregnancy 
Anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage in women, trans men and non-binary people with complications, such as pain and bleeding, in early pregnancy (that is, up to 13 completed weeks of pregnancy). It aims to improve how early pregnancy loss is diagnosed, and the support that is given, to limit the psychological impact of their loss. 
For information on related topics, see our women's and reproductive health summary page . 
Last reviewed: 17 June 2026 
We reviewed the evidence on, and made new recommendations for, anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis. For more details see the update information . 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG154 (December 2012). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
Anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis 
It also includes recommendations on: 
Support and information 
Early pregnancy assessment services 
Symptoms and signs of ectopic pregnancy and initial assessment 
Diagnosis of viable intrauterine pregnancy and of tubal ectopic pregnancy 
Management of miscarriage 
Management of tubal ectopic pregnancy 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners 
Women, trans men and non-binary people with complications in early pregnancy (up to 13 completed weeks of pregnancy), their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was developed by the National Guideline Alliance (NGA) which is hosted by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG). This guideline was developed with complete independence from RCOG governance. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage 
Next page 
Using this guideline 
Back to top
