Overview | Motor neurone disease: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Motor neurone disease
Motor neurone disease: assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG42 
Published: 
24 February 2016
Last updated: 
23 July 2019
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and managing motor neurone disease (MND). It aims to improve care from the time of diagnosis, and covers information and support, organisation of care, managing symptoms and preparing for end of life care. 
MHRA advice on gabapentin:  In July 2019 we linked to new MHRA safety advice on prescribing gabapentin. As of 1 April 2019, because of a risk of abuse and dependence gabapentin is controlled under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 as a class C substance and is scheduled under the Misuse of Drugs Regulations 2001 as schedule 3. 
Last reviewed: 27 November 2024 
We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. For more information see the surveillance decision . 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG105 (July 2010). 
Next review:  This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
recognition and referral 
information and support at diagnosis 
cognitive assessments 
prognostic factors 
organisation of care 
planning for end of life 
managing symptoms 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals and social care practitioners caring for and supporting adults with MND 
Commissioners and providers of MND health and social care services 
Adults with MND, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Motor neurone disease 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
