Recommendations for research | Hyperparathyroidism (primary): diagnosis, assessment and initial management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Parathyroid disorders
Hyperparathyroidism (primary): diagnosis, assessment and initial management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG132 
Published: 
23 May 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
1 Bone turnover markers
2 Management after unsuccessful first surgery
3 Long-term outcomes of different management strategies
4 Managing primary hyperparathyroidism during pregnancy
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
1 Bone turnover markers 
What is the clinical utility of bone turnover markers in the diagnosis and management of primary hyperparathyroidism? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on assessment after diagnosis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: diagnostic tests . 
2 Management after unsuccessful first surgery 
What is the best and most cost-effective management strategy for people whose first surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism is not successful? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on unsuccessful surgery . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: management options in failed primary surgery . 
3 Long-term outcomes of different management strategies 
What are the long-term outcomes of different management strategies for primary hyperparathyroidism? Which strategies are most cost effective? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on all people with primary hyperparathyroidism . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: monitoring . 
4 Managing primary hyperparathyroidism during pregnancy 
What are the optimal management strategies for primary hyperparathyroidism during pregnancy? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on care during pregnancy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: pregnancy . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
