Overview | Gambling-related harms: identification, assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Addiction
Gambling-related harms: identification, assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG248 
Published: 
28 January 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Overview 
This guideline covers identifying, assessing and treating gambling-related harms. This includes people aged 18 and over who are experiencing gambling that harms, and people of any age affected by someone close to them who is experiencing gambling that harms. 
For information on how this guideline will be implemented, see the implementation statement . 
Last reviewed:  28 January 2025 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
case identification, initial support, referral and assessment 
information and support 
models of care and service delivery 
improving access to treatment 
treatment of gambling-related harms 
relapse and ongoing support 
interventions and support for families and affected others 
Who is it for? 
Commissioners and providers of gambling treatment and gambling support services 
Healthcare professionals and social care practitioners in all settings, including the criminal justice system 
People who experience gambling-related harms or who use gambling treatment and gambling support services, their families and affected others 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
