Key priorities for implementation | Varicose veins: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Varicose veins
Varicose veins: diagnosis and management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG168 
Published: 
24 July 2013
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Referral to a vascular service
Assessment and treatment in a vascular service
Non-interventional treatment
Key priorities for implementation 
The following recommendations have been identified as priorities for implementation. 
Referral to a vascular service 
Refer people to a vascular service if they have any of the following. 
Symptomatic primary or symptomatic recurrent varicose veins. 
Lower‑limb skin changes, such as pigmentation or eczema, thought to be caused by chronic venous insufficiency. 
Superficial vein thrombosis (characterised by the appearance of hard, painful veins) and suspected venous incompetence. 
A venous leg ulcer (a break in the skin below the knee that has not healed within 2 weeks). 
A healed venous leg ulcer. 
A vascular service is a team of healthcare professionals who have the skills to undertake a full clinical and duplex ultrasound assessment and provide a full range of treatment. Symptomatic veins are veins found in association with troublesome lower limb symptoms (typically pain, aching, discomfort, swelling, heaviness and itching). 
Assessment and treatment in a vascular service 
Assessment 
Use duplex ultrasound to confirm the diagnosis of varicose veins and the extent of truncal reflux, and to plan treatment for people with suspected primary or recurrent varicose veins. 
Interventional treatment 
For people with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux: 
Offer endothermal ablation (see the NICE interventional procedures guidance on radiofrequency ablation of varicose veins and endovenous laser treatment of the long saphenous vein ). 
If endothermal ablation is unsuitable, offer ultrasound‑guided foam sclerotherapy (see the NICE interventional procedures guidance on ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy for varicose veins ). 
If ultrasound‑guided foam sclerotherapy is unsuitable, offer surgery. 
If incompetent varicose tributaries are to be treated, consider treating them at the same time. 
Non-interventional treatment 
Do not offer compression hosiery to treat varicose veins unless interventional treatment is unsuitable. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Previous page 
Introduction 
Back to top
