Recommendations | Intrapartum care | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Intrapartum care
Intrapartum care 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG235 
Published: 
29 September 2023
Last updated: 
09 June 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Appendix A: Adverse outcomes for different places of birth 
Appendix B: Outcomes for different places of birth – by BMI at booking 
Appendix C: Outcomes for intravenous remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) compared with intramuscular pethidine 
Appendix D: Benefits and risks of birth out of water and water birth 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Antenatal education about labour
1.2 Service organisation
1.3 Planning place of birth
1.4 Care throughout labour in all birth settings
1.5 Transfer of care and changing place of birth
1.6 Pain relief during labour
1.7 Prelabour rupture of membranes at term
1.8 First stage of labour
1.9 Second stage of labour
1.10 Third stage of labour
1.11 Care of the newborn baby
1.12 Care of the woman after birth
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
This guideline uses specific, inclusive language to describe the population groups it covers (for example, pregnant women and pregnant trans and non-binary people) except when: 
the evidence for the recommendation has not been reviewed, and it is not certain from expert opinion whether it can cover more groups, or 
the evidence has been reviewed, but the information available for some groups at the time of development was too limited to make specific recommendations, or 
it was not possible to review the evidence, or seek expert opinion, for all recommendations. 
Healthcare professionals should use their clinical judgement when implementing recommendations for sex-specific guidance, taking into account the individual's circumstances, needs and preferences, and ensuring all people are treated with dignity and respect throughout their care. 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
Babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare 
Shared decision making 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines optimisation 
Decision making and mental capacity 
1.1 Antenatal education about labour 
1.1.1 
Give all women information antenatally about: 
what to expect in the latent first stage of labour 
how to work with any pain they experience 
how to contact their midwifery care team and what to do in an emergency. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.1.2 
Offer all women antenatal education about the signs of labour, consisting of: 
how to differentiate between Braxton Hicks contractions and active labour contractions 
the expected frequency of contractions and how long they last 
recognition of amniotic fluid ('waters breaking') 
description of normal vaginal loss. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.1.3 
For all women, discuss their preferences and choices for care during labour and birth as early as possible in their pregnancy, and record these choices. Emphasise that: 
making and recording care choices in advance will mean they will have more time to think about all their options 
they are free to make their decisions and change their mind at any time, including during labour or while giving birth 
choices and decisions may need to be discussed again if problems or changes occur during pregnancy or labour. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on antenatal education about labour . 
1.2 Service organisation 
1.2.1 
Commissioners and providers, including networks of providers, should ensure that all 4 birth settings (home, freestanding midwifery unit, alongside midwifery unit and obstetric unit) are available to all women (in the local area or in a neighbouring area). [2014, amended 2023] 
1.2.2 
Ensure that all women giving birth have timely access to an obstetric unit if they need transfer of care for medical reasons or because they request regional analgesia. Audit and publish transfer times and reasons for delay in transfers so women can be informed of local service availability. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.2.3 
Commissioners and providers, including networks of providers, should ensure that there are: 
robust protocols in place for transfer of care between settings (see also section 1.5 ) 
clear local pathways for the continued care of women who are transferred from one setting to another, including: 
when crossing provider boundaries 
if the nearest obstetric or neonatal unit is closed to admissions or the local midwifery-led unit is full. [2014] 
1.2.4 
Commissioners and providers, including networks of providers, should ensure that there are multidisciplinary clinical governance structures in place to enable the oversight of all birth settings. These structures should include, as a minimum, midwifery, obstetric, anaesthetic and neonatal expertise, and adequately supported user representation. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.3 Planning place of birth 
All women at low risk of complications 
1.3.1 
Explain to both multiparous and nulliparous women who are at low risk of complications that giving birth is generally very safe for both the woman and her baby. [2014] 
1.3.2 
Advise women that additional resources to help them plan their place of birth are available on the tools and resources page for this guideline and the NHS website . [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on planning place of birth . 
1.3.3 
Explain to both multiparous and nulliparous women that they may choose any birth setting (home, freestanding midwifery unit, alongside midwifery unit or obstetric unit), and support them in their choice of setting wherever they choose to give birth: 
Advise low-risk multiparous women that planning to give birth at home or in a midwifery-led unit (freestanding or alongside) is associated with a lower rate of interventions and the outcome for the baby is no different compared with an obstetric unit. 
Advise low-risk nulliparous women that planning to give birth in a midwifery-led unit (freestanding or alongside) is associated with a lower rate of interventions and the outcome for the baby is no different compared with an obstetric unit. Explain that if they plan birth at home, there is a small increase in the risk of an adverse outcome for the baby. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.3.4 
Ensure that all healthcare professionals involved in the care of pregnant women are familiar with the types and frequencies of serious medical problems that can affect babies (see appendix A ), in order to be able to provide this information to women if they request it. [2014] 
1.3.5 
Discuss with women the following information, including local statistics, about all local birth settings, and update them if this changes during their pregnancy: 
access to midwives, including: 
the likelihood of being cared for in labour by a familiar midwife 
the likelihood of receiving one-to-one care throughout labour (not necessarily being cared for by the same midwife for the whole of labour) 
access to medical staff (obstetric, anaesthetic and neonatal) 
availability of birthing pools 
access to pain relief, including Entonox (a 50:50 mixture of oxygen and nitrous oxide) and medicines (for example, pethidine, diamorphine, patient-controlled analgesia and regional analgesia) 
the likelihood of being transferred to an obstetric unit (if this is not the woman's chosen place of birth), the reasons why this might happen, the time it may take, the delay in obstetric or neonatal care this may cause, and how her birth companion will travel; refer to table 1 if no local data is available. 
More information on transfer to an obstetric unit for different groups of women is included in table 2 and table 4 . [2014, amended 2023] 
Table 1 Primary reasons for transfer to an obstetric unit by number of women transferred (% of total transferred from each setting) 
Main reason for transfer to an obstetric unit for each woman (there may be more than 1 reason) 
From home (n=3,529) 
From a freestanding midwifery unit (n=2,457) 
From an alongside midwifery unit (n=4,401) 
Delay during first or second stage of labour 
1,144 (32.4%) 
912 (37.1%) 
1,548 (35.2%) 
Abnormal fetal heart rate 
246 (7.0%) 
259 (10.5%) 
477 (10.8%) 
Request for regional analgesia 
180 (5.1%) 
163 (6.6%) 
585 (13.3%) 
Meconium staining 
432 (12.2%) 
301 (12.2%) 
538 (12.2%) 
Retained placenta 
250 (7.0%) 
179 (7.3%) 
203 (4.6%) 
Repair of perineal trauma 
386 (10.9%) 
184 (7.5%) 
369 (8.4%) 
Postpartum neonatal concerns 
180 (5.1%) 
63 (2.6%) 
5 (0.11%) 
Other 
711 (20.1%) 
396 (16.2%) 
676 (16.3%) 
Source: Birthplace in England research study, 2011 . 
Impact of BMI on choice of place of birth 
1.3.6 
Advise women that, in general, the higher their body mass index (BMI) at booking (and particularly with a BMI above 35 kg/m 2 ), the greater the likelihood of complications, so this may be something they wish to think about when planning their place of birth. Discuss with them that: 
these complications include unplanned caesarean birth, postpartum haemorrhage, transfer from home to an obstetric unit, stillbirth, neonatal death or the baby needing neonatal care 
the risk of complications may depend on whether the woman is nulliparous or multiparous, but in general the risks of complications are higher for nulliparous women with an increased BMI compared with multiparous women with an increased BMI 
in the event of complications arising, advanced care can generally be given more quickly in an obstetric unit or an alongside midwifery unit than at home or in a freestanding midwifery unit. 
For more detail on the risks associated with increased BMI in different places of birth, see appendix B . [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on impact of BMI on choice of place of birth . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: impact of BMI on choice of place of birth . 
Low-risk multiparous women 
1.3.7 
Using tables 2 and 3, explain to low-risk multiparous women that: 
planning birth at home or in a freestanding midwifery unit is associated with a higher rate of spontaneous vaginal birth than planning birth in an alongside midwifery unit, and these 3 settings are associated with higher rates of spontaneous vaginal birth than planning birth in an obstetric unit 
planning birth in an obstetric unit is associated with a higher rate of interventions, such as vaginal birth with forceps or ventouse, unplanned caesarean birth and episiotomy, compared with planning birth in other settings 
there are no differences in outcomes for the baby associated with planning birth in any setting. [2014, amended 2023] 
Table 2 Low-risk multiparous women: Rates of different modes of birth, transfer to an obstetric unit and obstetric interventions for each planned place of birth (number of incidences per 1,000 women giving birth by location) 
Type of birth 
Home 
Freestanding midwifery unit 
Alongside midwifery unit 
Obstetric unit 
Spontaneous vaginal birth 
984 
980 
967 
927 
Birth with forceps or ventouse 
9 
12 
23 
38 
Unplanned caesarean birth 
7 
8 
10 
35 
Transfer to an obstetric unit 
115 
94 
125 
10 
Regional analgesia (epidural and/or spinal) 
28 
40 
60 
121 
Episiotomy 
15 
23 
35 
56 
Blood transfusion 
4 
4 
5 
8 
Sources: Birthplace in England research study, 2011 ; Outcomes of planned home births and planned hospital births in low-risk women in Norway between 1990 and 2007 (Blix et al. 2012) . 
For obstetric unit transfer to an obstetric unit, the 10 cases noted in table 2 are the estimated transfer rate from one obstetric unit to a different obstetric unit owing to lack of capacity or expertise. For regional anaesthesia, Blix et al. reported epidural analgesia and the Birthplace in England study reported spinal or epidural analgesia. 
Table 3 Low-risk multiparous women: Outcomes for the baby for each planned place of birth (by number of babies per 1,000 births) 
Population 
Home 
Freestanding midwifery unit 
Alongside midwifery unit 
Obstetric unit 
Babies without serious medical problems 
997 
997 
998 
997 
Babies with serious medical problems 
3 
3 
2 
3 
Source: Birthplace in England research study, 2011 . 
Serious medical problems were combined in table 3: neonatal encephalopathy and meconium aspiration syndrome were the most common adverse events, together accounting for 75% of the total. Stillbirths after the start of care in labour and death of the baby in the first week of life accounted for 13% of the events. Fractured humerus and clavicle were uncommon outcomes (less than 4% of adverse events). For the frequency of these events (how often any of them actually occurred), see appendix A . 
Low-risk nulliparous women 
1.3.8 
Using tables 4 and 5, explain to low-risk nulliparous women that: 
planning birth at home or in a freestanding midwifery unit is associated with a higher rate of spontaneous vaginal birth than planning birth in an alongside midwifery unit, and these 3 settings are associated with higher rates of spontaneous vaginal birth than planning birth in an obstetric unit 
planning birth in an obstetric unit is associated with a higher rate of interventions, such as vaginal birth with forceps or ventouse, unplanned caesarean birth and episiotomy, compared with planning birth in other settings 
there are no differences in outcomes for the baby associated with planning birth in an alongside midwifery unit, a freestanding midwifery unit or an obstetric unit 
planning birth at home is associated with an overall small increase in the risk of a baby having a serious medical problem (about 4 more per 1,000 births) compared with planning birth in other settings. [2014, amended 2023] 
Table 4 Low-risk nulliparous women: Rates of different modes of birth, transfer to an obstetric unit and obstetric interventions for each planned place of birth (number of incidences per 1,000 women giving birth by location) 
Type of birth 
Home 
Freestanding midwifery unit 
Alongside midwifery unit 
Obstetric unit 
Spontaneous vaginal birth 
794 
813 
765 
688 
Birth with (forceps or ventouse) 
126 
118 
159 
191 
Unplanned caesarean birth 
80 
69 
76 
121 
Transfer to an obstetric unit 
450 
363 
402 
10 
Regional analgesia (epidural and/or spinal) 
218 
200 
240 
349 
Episiotomy 
165 
165 
216 
242 
Blood transfusion 
12 
8 
11 
16 
Sources: Birthplace in England research study, 2011 ; Outcomes of planned home births and planned hospital births in low-risk women in Norway between 1990 and 2007 (Blix et al. 2012) . 
For obstetric unit transfer to an obstetric unit, the 10 cases noted in table 4 are the estimated transfer rate from one obstetric unit to a different obstetric unit owing to lack of capacity or expertise. For regional anaesthesia, Blix et al. reported epidural analgesia and the Birthplace in England study reported spinal or epidural analgesia. 
Table 5 Low-risk nulliparous women: Outcomes for the baby for each planned place of birth (by number of babies per 1,000 births) 
Population 
Home 
Freestanding midwifery unit 
Alongside midwifery unit 
Obstetric unit 
Babies without serious medical problems 
991 
995 
995 
995 
Babies with serious medical problems 
9 
5 
5 
5 
Source: Birthplace in England research study, 2011 . 
Serious medical problems were combined in table 5: neonatal encephalopathy and meconium aspiration syndrome were the most common adverse events, together accounting for 75% of the total. Stillbirths after the start of care in labour and death of the baby in the first week of life accounted for 13% of the events. Fractured humerus and clavicle were uncommon outcomes (less than 4% of adverse events). For the frequency of these events (how often any of them actually occurred), see appendix A . 
Medical conditions and other factors that may affect planned place of birth 
1.3.9 
Use tables 6 to 9 as part of an assessment for a woman choosing her planned place of birth: 
tables 6 and 7 show medical conditions or other situations in which there is increased risk for the woman or baby during or shortly after labour, where care in an obstetric unit would be expected to reduce this risk 
the factors listed in tables 8 and 9 are not reasons in themselves for advising birth within an obstetric unit, but indicate that further consideration of birth setting may be needed 
discuss these risks and the additional care that can be provided in the obstetric unit with the woman so that she can make an informed choice about planned place of birth. [2007, amended 2014] 
Table 6 Medical conditions indicating increased risk and suggesting planned birth at an obstetric unit 
Disease area 
Medical condition 
Cardiovascular 
Confirmed cardiac disease 
Hypertensive disorders 
Respiratory 
Asthma requiring an increase in treatment or hospital treatment 
Cystic fibrosis 
Haematological 
Haemoglobinopathies, such as sickle-cell disease, beta-thalassaemia major 
History of thromboembolic disorders 
Immune thrombocytopenia purpura or other platelet disorder or platelet count below 100×10 9 /litre 
Von Willebrand's disease 
Bleeding disorder in the woman or unborn baby 
Atypical antibodies which carry a risk of haemolytic disease of the newborn 
Endocrine 
Hyperthyroidism 
Diabetes needing medication 
Infective 
Hepatitis B or C with abnormal liver function tests 
Toxoplasmosis – women receiving treatment 
Current active infection of chicken pox, rubella or genital herpes in the woman or baby 
Tuberculosis under treatment 
Immune 
Systemic lupus erythematosus 
Scleroderma 
Renal 
Abnormal renal function 
Renal disease requiring supervision by a renal specialist 
Neurological 
Epilepsy 
Myasthenia gravis 
Previous cerebrovascular accident 
Gastrointestinal 
Liver disease associated with current abnormal liver function tests 
Psychiatric 
Psychiatric disorder requiring current inpatient care 
Table 7 Other factors indicating increased risk and suggesting planned birth at an obstetric unit 
Factor 
Additional information 
Previous complications 
Unexplained stillbirth or neonatal death, or previous death related to intrapartum difficulty 
Previous baby with neonatal encephalopathy 
Pre-eclampsia requiring preterm birth 
Placental abruption with adverse outcome 
Eclampsia 
Uterine rupture 
Primary postpartum haemorrhage requiring additional treatment or blood transfusion 
Caesarean birth 
Shoulder dystocia 
Current pregnancy 
Multiple birth 
Placenta praevia 
Pre-eclampsia or pregnancy-induced hypertension 
Preterm labour or preterm prelabour rupture of membranes 
Placental abruption 
Anaemia – haemoglobin less than 85 g/litre at onset of labour 
Confirmed intrauterine death 
Substance misuse 
Alcohol dependency requiring assessment or treatment 
Gestational diabetes needing medication 
Malpresentation – breech or transverse lie 
Recurrent antepartum haemorrhage 
Small for gestational age in this pregnancy (less than third centile or reduced growth velocity on ultrasound as defined in the NHS Saving babies lives version 3 ) 
Abnormal fetal heart rate, umbilical or fetal doppler studies 
Ultrasound diagnosis of oligo- or polyhydramnios 
Previous gynaecological history 
Myomectomy 
Hysterotomy 
Table 8 Medical conditions indicating individual assessment is needed when planning place of birth 
Disease area 
Medical condition 
Cardiovascular 
Cardiac disease without intrapartum implications 
Haematological 
Atypical antibodies not putting the baby at risk of haemolytic disease 
Sickle-cell trait 
Thalassaemia trait 
Anaemia – haemoglobin 85 to 105 g/litre at onset of labour 
Endocrine 
Unstable hypothyroidism such that a change in treatment is needed 
Infective 
Group B streptococcus where intrapartum intravenous antibiotics are recommended 
Hepatitis B or C with normal liver function tests (as baby will need paediatric review after birth) 
Carrier of or infected with HIV 
Immune 
Non-specific connective tissue disorders 
Skeletal/Neurological 
Spinal abnormalities 
Previous fractured pelvis 
Neurological deficits 
Gastrointestinal 
Liver disease without current abnormal liver function 
Crohn's disease 
Ulcerative colitis 
Table 9 Other factors to take into account when planning place of birth 
Factor 
Additional information 
Previous complications 
Stillbirth or neonatal death with a known non-recurrent cause 
Pre-eclampsia developing at term 
Placental abruption with good outcome 
History of previous baby more than 4.5 kg 
Extensive vaginal, cervical, or third- or fourth-degree perineal trauma 
Retained placenta needing manual removal in theatre 
Previous term baby with jaundice requiring exchange transfusion 
Major gynaecological surgery 
Current pregnancy 
Antepartum bleeding of unknown origin (single episode after 24 weeks of pregnancy) 
Body mass index (BMI) at booking (see the section on impact of BMI on choice of place of birth ) 
Blood pressure of 140 mmHg systolic or 90 mmHg diastolic or more on 2 occasions 
Clinical or ultrasound suspicion of macrosomia 
Induction of labour 
Grand multiparity (parity 4 or more) 
Recreational drug use 
Under current outpatient psychiatric care 
Age 40 or over at booking 
Fibroids 
Fetal abnormality 
1.3.10 
If further discussion is wanted by either the midwife or the woman about the choice of planned place of birth, arrange this with an appropriately trained senior or consultant midwife and/or a senior or consultant obstetrician if there are obstetric issues. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.3.11 
When discussing the woman's choice of place of birth with her, do not disclose personal views or judgements about her choices. [2014] 
1.4 Care throughout labour in all birth settings 
1.4.1 
For all women giving birth in all birth settings, follow the principles in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services and the NICE guideline on shared decision making , and support the woman's choices. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.4.2 
When providing information on the benefits and risks of care options or suggested interventions: 
encourage the woman to ask questions 
if possible, give her time to think about the options and 
help her make a supported decision. 
Obtain consent before carrying out the chosen care option or intervention. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on care throughout labour in all birth settings . 
1.4.3 
All staff and organisations should ensure that all birth settings have a culture of respect for each woman as an individual undergoing a significant and emotionally intense life experience, so that the woman is in control, is listened to, her choices are supported, and she is cared for with compassion. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.4.4 
All staff should demonstrate, through their own words and behaviour, appropriate ways of relating to and talking about women and their birth companion(s), and of talking about birth and the choices to be made when giving birth. [2014, amended 2023] 
One-to-one care in all birth settings 
1.4.5 
Maternity services should: 
provide a model of care that supports one-to-one care in labour for all women and 
benchmark services and identify overstaffing or understaffing by using workforce planning models and/or woman-to-midwife ratios. [2014] 
1.4.6 
Do not leave a woman in established labour on her own except for short periods or at the woman's request. [2007] 
1.4.7 
For guidance on ensuring continuity of care, see recommendation 1.4.1 in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . [2016] 
Communication 
1.4.8 
When giving a woman (and her birth companions) information about care during labour: 
use clear, plain language and confirm with the woman that they have understood the information 
tailor the content and delivery of information to the needs and preferences of the woman 
ensure that the woman is empowered to make a supported decision with her healthcare team, which may include: 
using reliable interpreting services when needed (for example, for languages other than English, British Sign Language, or Makaton) 
using interpreters who are independent of the woman (rather than, for example, a family member or friend) 
using culturally sensitive language 
adapting communication when necessary, for example, by using healthcare passports for people with learning disabilities or autism. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on communication . 
1.4.9 
Treat all women in labour with kindness, dignity and respect. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.4.10 
Ensure that the woman is empowered, informed and central to making decisions about her care, and recognise that the way in which care is given is key to this. Support the woman so she: 
can continue to make decisions about her care 
feels confident that her care team is there to assist her 
understands that she can accept or decline care that is offered, can change her mind, and that decisions she makes will not affect how care is provided to her. 
To ensure this happens, establish a rapport with the woman, ask her about her wants and expectations for labour, and be aware of the importance of both tone and demeanour and the actual words used. Use this information to support her and guide her care through her labour. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.4.11 
To establish communication with the woman: 
greet her and her birth companion(s) with a smile and a personal welcome, introduce yourself and explain your role in her care 
ask her what she wants to be called 
maintain a calm, confident and professional approach 
respect the woman's personal space, privacy and dignity, and ask others to do the same (for example, knock and wait before entering the woman's room) 
ask how the woman is feeling and whether there is anything in particular she would like to discuss or if she has any concerns 
discuss the woman's labour and birth preferences, and review and discuss any written birth plan 
ensure the woman is aware of pain relief options, and provide both the opportunity to discuss these options and give information if she requests it to establish what her choices are 
encourage the woman to adapt the environment to meet her individual needs 
explain all procedures and observations before they take place and ask for consent for them, focusing on the woman rather than the technology or the documentation 
show the woman and her birth companion(s) how to summon help, and reassure her that she can do so whenever and as often as she needs to 
when leaving the room, let her know when you will return 
involve the woman in any handover of care to another professional, either when additional expertise has been brought in or at the end of a shift – this should occur in the room, when appropriate, with the woman at the centre of the handover discussion. [2007, amended 2023] 
Position and mobilisation 
1.4.12 
Encourage and help the woman to move and adopt whatever positions she finds most comfortable throughout labour, except lying flat on her back. [2007, amended 2023] 
Support 
1.4.13 
Encourage the woman to have support from birth companion(s) of her choice. [2007] 
Hygiene measures 
1.4.14 
Tap water may be used if cleansing is needed before vaginal examination. [2007] 
1.4.15 
Routine hygiene measures taken by staff caring for women in labour, including standard hand hygiene and single-use, non-sterile gloves, are appropriate to reduce cross-contamination between women, babies and healthcare professionals. [2007] 
1.4.16 
Selection of personal protective equipment for healthcare professionals must be based on an assessment of the risk of exposure to blood and/or bodily fluids, non-intact skin or mucous membranes. Standard infection control procedures to prevent transmission of recognised and unrecognised infections must be followed. See NHS England's national infection prevention and control manual . [2007, amended 2023] 
1.5 Transfer of care and changing place of birth 
Transfer of care refers to the transfer between midwifery-led care and obstetric-led care. This may or may not involve transport from one location to another. Women who are receiving midwifery-led care in an obstetric unit can have responsibility for their care transferred to being obstetric-led without being moved. 
1.5.1 
Base any decisions about transfer of care on clinical findings and discuss the options with the woman and her birth companion(s). [2014] 
1.5.2 
If contemplating transfer of care: 
talk with the woman and her birth companion(s) about the reasons for this and what they can expect, including the time needed for transfer 
address any concerns she has and try to allay any anxiety about the transfer 
ensure that her wishes are respected and her informed consent is obtained. [2014] 
1.5.3 
When arranging transfer of care, the midwife attending the labour should contact the ambulance service (if appropriate) and the coordinating midwife in the obstetric unit. The coordinating midwife should then alert the relevant healthcare professionals (obstetric, anaesthetic and neonatal). [2014] 
1.5.4 
Carry out transfer of care of women in labour as soon as possible after the decision to transfer has been made. Categorise transfers as: 
life-threatening emergency (ambulance service category 1) 
urgent, for example for pain relief (ambulance service category 2). [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on transfer of care and changing place of birth . 
1.5.5 
When arranging transfer from one location to another, ensure the following: 
before transfer, the woman is dressed, wrapped in a blanket or otherwise covered in a way that she feels is comfortable and appropriate 
the woman is made to feel as comfortable as possible before and during transfer 
any ambulance staff or other personnel involved are aware that some positions may make the woman uncomfortable or afraid and could affect her labour, so she should be encouraged to choose how to move and what position to adopt if possible, in accordance with ambulance service protocols 
communication and companionship are maintained: 
explain the arrangements for transfer to the woman and her birth companion(s) 
ensure a midwife who has been involved in the woman's care up to that point travels with her 
carry out a handover of care that involves the woman 
the woman is monitored throughout the transfer, as appropriate for her stage of labour, including intermittent auscultation of the fetal heart if possible and safe to do 
enable the woman's birth companion(s) to travel with her in the ambulance if that is what she wants and this is agreed by her care team and the ambulance crew. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.5.6 
If a woman is transferred to an obstetric unit after the birth (see the section on care of the woman after birth ), ensure that her baby goes with her. [2014] 
1.6 Pain relief during labour 
Attitudes to pain and pain relief in childbirth 
1.6.1 
Healthcare professionals should think about how their own values and beliefs inform their attitude to coping with pain in labour and ensure their care supports the woman's choice. [2007] 
1.6.2 
Take into account that every woman's experience of pain is unique and may be expressed in different ways, both verbally and non-verbally. In particular, this may vary because of: 
their cultural background and beliefs 
their socioeconomic status 
any neurodiverse conditions they may have. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on attitudes to pain and pain relief in childbirth . 
Non-pharmacological pain-relieving strategies 
1.6.3 
Advise women that breathing exercises, having a shower or bath, and massage may reduce pain during the latent first stage of labour. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.6.4 
Do not offer or advise aromatherapy, yoga or acupressure for pain relief during the latent first stage of labour. If a woman wants to use any of these techniques, support her choice. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.6.5 
If a woman chooses to use breathing and relaxation techniques in labour, support her choice. [2007] 
1.6.6 
If a woman chooses to use massage techniques in labour that have been taught to birth companions, support her choice. [2007] 
1.6.7 
Advise women who wish to use transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) that: 
TENS devices are not provided by the NHS, but if a woman wants to use TENS to manage her comfort during labour, support her choice 
there is very little evidence of its effectiveness in established labour, but no evidence of harm 
other forms of pain relief can be used alongside TENS if needed by the woman. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.6.8 
Do not offer acupuncture, acupressure or hypnosis during labour. If a woman wants to use any of these techniques, support her choice. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.6.9 
Support the playing of music of the woman's choice in labour. [2007] 
1.6.10 
Offer the woman the opportunity to labour in water for pain relief. (See also recommendation 1.9.24 for more information on water births ) [2007, amended 2025] 
1.6.11 
For women labouring in water, monitor the temperature of the woman and the water hourly to ensure that the woman is comfortable and not becoming pyrexial. The temperature of the water should not be above 37.5°C. [2007] 
1.6.12 
Keep baths and birthing pools clean using a protocol agreed with the local microbiology department or infection control guidance and, in the case of birthing pools, in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.6.13 
Support women and pregnant people with mobility issues to access water during labour and birth by doing an individualised needs assessment, and making reasonable adjustments for them based on this. [2025] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on water birth . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q: effects and safety of water immersion during the second stage of labour . 
Sterile water injections 
1.6.14 
Consider intracutaneous or subcutaneous sterile water injections as a pain relief option for women in labour with back pain. These injections can be given by a midwife trained in the use of sterile water injections. [2023] 
1.6.15 
Explain to the woman that sterile water injections can provide relief of back pain from 10 minutes after the injection for up to 3 hours, but there can be an initial stinging sensation. [2023] 
1.6.16 
If the woman chooses to have sterile water injections, give these at 4 different injection points around the Rhombus of Michaelis, using doses of 0.1 ml intracutaneously or 0.5 ml subcutaneously at each injection point. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on sterile water injections . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: sterile water injections . 
Inhalational analgesia 
1.6.17 
Ensure that Entonox (a 50:50 mixture of oxygen and nitrous oxide) is available in all birth settings as it may reduce pain in labour, but inform the woman that it may make her feel nauseous and light-headed. [2007] 
Pharmacological analgesia 
1.6.18 
Ensure that pethidine, diamorphine or other opioids are available in all birth settings. Inform the woman that these will provide limited pain relief during labour and may have significant side effects for both her (for example, drowsiness, nausea and vomiting) and her baby (for example, short-term respiratory depression and drowsiness, which may last several days and may make it more difficult to breastfeed). [2007, amended 2023] 
1.6.19 
If an intravenous or intramuscular opioid is used, also administer an antiemetic. [2007] 
1.6.20 
Women should not enter water (a birthing pool or bath) within 2 hours of opioid administration or if they feel drowsy. [2007] 
1.6.21 
Consider intravenous remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia (PCA), at 40 micrograms per bolus with a 2‑minute lockout period, as an option for women who want ongoing pain relief during labour and birth. 
In September 2023, this was an off-label use of remifentanil. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . [2023] 
1.6.22 
Only use remifentanil PCA in obstetric units because of the risk of respiratory depression in women that may need anaesthetic support. [2023] 
1.6.23 
Discuss the risks and benefits of remifentanil PCA with the woman and help them make a supported decision about its use. Explain that, with 40 micrograms of remifentanil compared with intramuscular pethidine: 
they are less likely to need an epidural or have a birth using forceps or ventouse if using remifentanil PCA 
they are more likely to have a spontaneous vaginal birth or need supplemental oxygen when using remifentanil PCA. 
For more detail on the risks and benefits associated with the use of remifentanil, see appendix C . [2023] 
1.6.24 
When using remifentanil PCA, ensure that: 
there is the continuous presence of a midwife trained in the care of women receiving remifentanil PCA (one-to-one care) 
there is continuous cardiotocography monitoring if there are other risk factors 
there is continuous monitoring of respiratory function (observation of breathing and pulse oximetry) 
units have clear guidelines on responding to respiratory depression 
supplemental oxygen is immediately available 
immediate anaesthetic support is available in case of respiratory depression. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia . 
Regional analgesia 
Information about regional analgesia 
1.6.25 
If a woman requests regional analgesia, talk with her about the benefits and risks and the effect it may have on her pain and her labour. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.6.26 
Provide information to women about epidural analgesia, including the following: 
it is available only in obstetric units so transfer will be necessary if she is in another setting 
it provides more effective pain relief than opioids 
it may not always be fully effective and may need to be adjusted or replaced 
complications during insertion of the epidural may cause a severe postnatal headache 
it is not associated with long-term backache 
it is not associated with a longer first stage of labour or an increased chance of an unplanned caesarean birth 
it is associated with a longer second stage of labour and an increased chance of birth with forceps or ventouse 
it will be accompanied by a more intensive level of monitoring and intravenous access, so mobility may be reduced. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.6.27 
If, after a discussion of the benefits and risks, a woman in labour chooses regional analgesia, support her decision. [2007, amended 2023] 
Care and observations for women with regional analgesia 
1.6.28 
Always secure intravenous access before starting regional analgesia. [2007] 
1.6.29 
Preloading and maintenance fluid infusion do not need to be administered routinely before establishing low-dose epidural analgesia and combined spinal–epidural analgesia. [2007] 
1.6.30 
Undertake the following additional observations for women with regional analgesia: 
during establishment of regional analgesia or after further boluses (10 ml or more of low-dose solutions), measure blood pressure every 5 minutes for 15 minutes 
if the woman is not pain-free 30 minutes after each administration of local anaesthetic or opioid solution, ask the anaesthetist to review 
assess the level of the sensory block hourly 
if the woman is not mobilising, assess the level of motor block hourly by asking the woman to do a straight leg raise. If she is unable to do this, ask the anaesthetist to review. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.6.31 
Encourage women with regional analgesia to adopt whatever positions, including upright, they find comfortable throughout labour, except lying flat on their back. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.6.32 
Advise women with an epidural in situ that if they have sufficient leg strength and sensation, as checked and confirmed by a midwife trained in caring for women with epidurals, they can mobilise with assistance, but their legs may feel heavier than usual. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on care and observations for women with regional analgesia . 
1.6.33 
Once established, continue regional analgesia until after completion of the third stage of labour and any necessary perineal repair. [2007] 
1.6.34 
On confirmation of full cervical dilatation in a woman with regional analgesia, unless the woman has an urge to push or the baby's head is visible, pushing may be delayed by 1 hour for multiparous women and up to 2 hours for nulliparous women, after which actively encourage her to push during contractions. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.6.35 
Do not routinely use oxytocin in the second stage of labour for women with regional analgesia. [2007] 
1.6.36 
Perform continuous cardiotocography for at least 30 minutes during establishment of regional analgesia and after administration of each further bolus of 10 ml or more. [2007, amended 2014] 
Establishing and maintaining regional analgesia 
1.6.37 
Use either epidural or combined spinal–epidural analgesia for establishing regional analgesia in labour. [2007] 
1.6.38 
If rapid analgesia is needed, use combined spinal–epidural analgesia. [2007] 
1.6.39 
Establish combined spinal–epidural analgesia with bupivacaine (or an equivalent local anaesthetic) and fentanyl. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.6.40 
Establish epidural analgesia with a low-concentration local anaesthetic and fentanyl solution. The initial dose is essentially a test dose, so administer it cautiously to ensure that inadvertent intrathecal or intravascular placement of the epidural catheter has not occurred. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.6.41 
Use low-concentration local anaesthetic and opioid solutions (0.0625% to 0.1% bupivacaine or equivalent combined with 2.0 micrograms per ml fentanyl) for maintaining epidural analgesia in labour. [2007] 
1.6.42 
Use patient-controlled epidural analgesia, programmed intermittent epidural bolus or intermittent bolus given by a trained healthcare professional for maintaining epidural analgesia. [2023] 
1.6.43 
Do not use high concentrations of local anaesthetic solutions (0.25% or above of bupivacaine or equivalent) routinely for either establishing or maintaining epidural analgesia. [2007] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on programmed intermittent epidural bolus . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: programmed intermittent epidural bolus . 
1.7 Prelabour rupture of membranes at term 
1.7.1 
Advise women with suspected rupture of membranes after 37+0 weeks to contact their midwife or maternity unit to have an initial triage assessment over the phone with a midwife. This should include when the membranes ruptured and an assessment of any risk factors, such as: 
meconium-stained liquor 
vaginal bleeding 
blood-stained liquor 
reduced fetal movements 
continuous abdominal pain 
unpleasant smelling liquor, or any change in the colour or smell of her vaginal loss 
the woman feeling unwell 
group B streptococcus carriage or infection in this or a previous pregnancy where a plan has been made for intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis in this pregnancy 
the baby has abnormal lie or presentation (for example, transverse lie or breech) 
fetal growth restriction 
low-lying placenta. 
If any of these factors are present or if there is any uncertainty, the woman should be advised to immediately attend the maternity unit for an urgent in-person review (see the recommendations on the assessment of a woman in the first stage of labour , and recommendations 1.7.3 and 1.7.4). [2023] 
1.7.2 
For women after 37+0 weeks with suspected rupture of the membranes but no risk factors on initial phone triage assessment (see recommendation 1.7.1): 
see the woman in person as soon as possible if she has any concerns or wishes to be induced immediately or 
within 12 hours and 
if anything changes or the woman has any concerns, advise her to call her midwife or maternity unit back sooner than the planned review. 
Offer to carry out the review at the woman's home, in a midwifery-led unit, or an assessment centre at an obstetric unit. [2023] 
1.7.3 
Do not carry out a speculum examination if it is certain that the membranes have ruptured. [2007] 
1.7.4 
If it is uncertain whether prelabour rupture of the membranes has occurred, offer the woman a speculum examination to determine whether the membranes have ruptured. Avoid digital vaginal examination in the absence of contractions. [2007] 
1.7.5 
Advise women presenting with prelabour rupture of the membranes at term that: 
the risk of serious neonatal infection is 1%, rather than 0.5% for women with intact membranes 
the risk of early-onset neonatal infection increases as the time between rupture of membranes and birth increases (as informed by NICE's guideline on neonatal infection ) 
intrapartum antibiotics are recommended in some situations (for details see the section on when to offer antibiotics during labour to prevent early-onset neonatal infection in NICE's guideline on neonatal infection ) 
some women and their babies may need postnatal monitoring and some babies may need antibiotics (for details see the section on assessment for early-onset neonatal infection and risk management after birth in NICE's guideline on neonatal infection ) 
60% of women with prelabour rupture of the membranes will go into labour within 24 hours. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.7.6 
Offer women with prelabour rupture of membranes at term (at or after 37+0 weeks) a choice of: 
expectant management for up to 24 hours or 
induction of labour as soon as possible (see the section on induction of labour in specific circumstances in NICE's guideline on inducing labour ). 
Discuss the benefits and risks of these options with the woman, and take into account her individual circumstances and preferences. [2023] 
1.7.7 
For women who choose expectant management after prelabour rupture of the membranes at term (at or after 37+0 weeks), offer induction of labour if labour has not started naturally after approximately 24 hours. (see the section on induction of labour in specific circumstances in NICE's guideline on inducing labour ). [2023] 
1.7.8 
Until the induction is started or if expectant management beyond 24 hours is chosen by the woman: 
do not offer lower vaginal swabs and measurement of maternal C‑reactive protein 
to detect any infection that may be developing, advise the woman to record her temperature every 4 hours during waking hours and to report immediately any change in the colour or smell of her vaginal loss 
inform the woman that bathing or showering is not associated with an increase in infection, but that having sexual intercourse may be. [2007] 
1.7.9 
Assess fetal movement and heart rate at initial contact and then every 24 hours after rupture of the membranes while the woman is not in labour, and advise the woman to report immediately any decrease in fetal movements. [2007] 
1.7.10 
If labour has not started 24 hours after rupture of the membranes, advise the woman to give birth where there is access to neonatal services (this may be in an obstetric unit or an alongside midwifery unit) and to stay in hospital for at least 12 hours after the birth. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.7.11 
If a woman has prelabour rupture of membranes at term (at or after 37+0 weeks) and has had a positive group B streptococcus test at any time in their current pregnancy, or a previous pregnancy where the baby developed group B streptococcus infection, offer immediate induction of labour, or caesarean birth if it had been planned. For advice on intrapartum antibiotics, see the section on intrapartum antibiotics in NICE's guideline on neonatal infection . [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on initial assessment of women reporting prelabour rupture of membranes . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: initial assessment of women reporting prelabour rupture of membranes . 
1.8 First stage of labour 
Definitions of the latent and established first stages of labour and early triage 
1.8.1 
For the purposes of this guideline, use the following definitions of labour: 
latent first stage of labour is a period of time, not necessarily continuous, when: 
there are contractions and 
there is some cervical change, including cervical position, consistency, effacement and dilatation up to 4 cm 
established first stage of labour is when: 
there are regular contractions and 
there is progressive cervical dilatation from 4 cm. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.8.2 
If a woman in labour contacts her midwife or maternity unit for advice, carry out an assessment of labour by telephone triage and determine whether a face-to-face assessment is needed. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.8.3 
Carry out a face-to-face early assessment of labour either: 
at home (regardless of planned place of birth) or 
in her planned place of birth (midwifery-led unit or obstetric unit), comprising one-to-one midwifery care for at least 1 hour. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.8.4 
Include the following in any early or triage assessment of labour: 
ask the woman how she is, and about her wishes, expectations and any concerns she has 
ask the woman about the baby's movements, including any changes 
give information about what the woman can expect in the latent first stage of labour and how to work with any pain she experiences 
give information about what to expect when she accesses care 
agree a plan of care with the woman, including guidance about who she should contact next and when 
provide guidance and support to the woman's birth companion(s). [2014] 
1.8.5 
The triage midwife should document the guidance that she gives to the woman. [2014] 
1.8.6 
If a woman seeks advice or attends a midwifery-led unit or obstetric unit with painful contractions, but is not in established labour: 
recognise that a woman may experience painful contractions without cervical change and offer her individualised support and analgesia if needed 
encourage her to remain at or return home, unless doing so leads to a significant risk that she could give birth without a midwife present or become distressed. [2014, amended 2023] 
Assessment of women in the first stage of labour 
1.8.7 
When performing an initial assessment of a woman in labour, listen to her story and support her preferences and her emotional and psychological needs. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.8.8 
Carry out an initial assessment to determine if midwifery-led care in any setting is suitable for the woman, irrespective of any previous plan including consultant-led care. This assessment should comprise the following: 
maternal factors: 
review and discuss the antenatal notes (including all antenatal screening results) 
review the personalised care plan 
review if there are any antenatal or intrapartum risk factors for fetal hypoxia (see the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour ) 
ask her about the length, strength and frequency of her contractions 
ask her about any pain she is experiencing and discuss her options for pain relief 
record her pulse, blood pressure, temperature and respiratory rate, and carry out urinalysis 
record if she has had any vaginal loss 
check if she needs intrapartum antibiotics for group B streptococcus prophylaxis and, if so, that these are available in her chosen place of birth if needed (see the section on intrapartum antibiotics in NICE's guideline on neonatal infection ) 
observations of the unborn baby: 
ask the woman about the baby's movements in the last 24 hours 
palpate the woman's abdomen to determine the fundal height, the baby's lie, presentation, position, engagement of the presenting part, and frequency and duration of contractions 
auscultate the fetal heart rate for a minimum of 1 minute immediately after a contraction; palpate the woman's pulse to differentiate between the heartbeats of the woman and the baby 
if there is uncertainty about whether the woman is in established labour, a vaginal examination may be helpful after a period of assessment, but is not always necessary 
if the woman appears to be in established labour, offer a vaginal examination. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.8.9 
When conducting a vaginal examination: 
be sure that the examination is necessary and will add important information to the decision-making process 
recognise that a vaginal examination can be very distressing for a woman, especially if she is already in pain, highly anxious and in an unfamiliar environment 
explain the reason for the examination and what will be involved 
ensure the woman's informed consent, privacy, dignity and comfort 
explain sensitively the findings of the examination and any impact on the birth plan to the woman and her birth companion(s) 
advise the woman that she can decline the examination before it starts, or ask to stop at any stage during the examination. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.8.10 
When performing a vaginal examination, determine: 
the station of the presenting part 
the position of the presenting part 
the presence or absence of caput or moulding 
cervical effacement 
cervical dilatation 
presence or absence of membranes. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on assessment of women in the first stage of labour . 
1.8.11 
Transfer the woman to obstetric-led care, following the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 , if any of the following are observed on initial assessment, taking into account that multiple risk factors may increase the urgency of the transfer, particularly if they have a cumulative effect: 
observations of the woman: 
pulse over 120 beats a minute on 2 occasions 15 to 30 minutes apart 
a single reading of either raised diastolic blood pressure of 110 mmHg or more or raised systolic blood pressure of 160 mmHg or more 
either raised diastolic blood pressure of 90 mmHg or more or raised systolic blood pressure of 140 mmHg or more on 2 consecutive readings taken 15 to 30 minutes apart 
respiratory rate of less than 9 or more than 21 breaths per minute on 2 occasions 15 to 30 minutes apart 
a reading of 2+ of protein on urinalysis and a single reading of either raised diastolic blood pressure (90 mmHg or more) or raised systolic blood pressure (140 mmHg or more) 
temperature of 38°C or above on a single reading, or 37.5°C or above on 2 consecutive readings 1 hour apart; for advice about intrapartum antibiotics, see the section on intrapartum antibiotics in NICE's guideline on neonatal infection 
fresh red bleeding or blood-stained liquor 
rupture of membranes more than 24 hours before the onset of established labour 
the presence of meconium (see the section on the presence of meconium ) 
pain reported by the woman that differs from the pain normally associated with contractions 
any risk factors recorded in the woman's notes that indicate the need for obstetric-led care 
observations of the unborn baby: 
non-cephalic fetal presentation 
high (4/5 to 5/5 palpable) or free-floating head in a nulliparous woman 
suspected or diagnosed small for gestational age 
diagnosed fetal growth restriction 
diagnosis of oligohydramnios or anhydramnios on ultrasound 
concerns about fetal monitoring, as described in the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour 
reduced fetal movements in the last 24 hours reported by the woman 
cord presentation. 
If none of these are observed, continue with midwifery-led care unless the woman requests transfer. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.8.12 
If any of the factors in recommendation 1.8.11 are observed but birth is imminent, assess whether birth in the current location is preferable to transferring the woman to an obstetric unit and discuss this with the woman and the coordinating midwife. [2014, amended 2023] 
Measuring fetal heart rate as part of initial assessment 
1.8.13 
Offer auscultation of the fetal heart rate at first contact with a woman in suspected or established labour, and at each further assessment. [2017, amended 2023] 
1.8.14 
For advice on the choice and method of fetal monitoring during labour, including risk assessment and indications for continuous cardiotocography, see the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour . [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on measuring fetal heart rate as part of the initial assessment . 
Controlling gastric acidity 
1.8.15 
Do not routinely offer proton pump inhibitors to low-risk women. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.8.16 
Consider proton pump inhibitors (for example, omeprazole) for women who receive opioids, or who have or develop risk factors that make a caesarean birth more likely. [2007, amended 2023] 
Eating and drinking 
1.8.17 
Explain to the woman or pregnant person that they should drink during labour when they are thirsty, and that isotonic drinks may be more beneficial than water. Also explain that there is no benefit to drinking any more than normal, and overconsumption may be harmful (see sections on fluid intake and output and confirmed peripartum hyponatraemia . [2007, amended 2025] 
1.8.18 
Inform the woman or pregnant person that they can eat a light diet in established labour if they wish, unless they have received opioids or they develop risk factors that make a caesarean birth more likely. [2007, amended 2025] 
Ongoing assessment during the first stage of labour 
1.8.19 
Record the following observations during the first stage of labour: 
half-hourly documentation of frequency of contractions 
hourly pulse 
4‑hourly temperature, blood pressure and respiratory rate 
offer a 4‑hourly vaginal examination (see recommendations 1.8.9 and 1.8.10 ), or in response to the woman's wishes if there is concern about progress (after abdominal palpation and assessment of vaginal loss). [2007] 
1.8.20 
Carry out an hourly risk assessment of the woman and her baby, and if any of the following risks have developed, transfer the woman to obstetric-led care (following the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 ), unless the risks of transfer outweigh the benefits. Take into account that multiple risk factors may increase the urgency of the transfer, particularly if they have a cumulative effect: 
observations of the woman: 
pulse over 120 beats/minute on 2 occasions 15 to 30 minutes apart 
a single reading of either raised diastolic blood pressure of 110 mmHg or more or raised systolic blood pressure of 160 mmHg or more 
either raised diastolic blood pressure of 90 mmHg or more or raised systolic blood pressure of 140 mmHg or more on 2 consecutive readings taken 15 to 30 minutes apart 
a reading of 2+ of protein on urinalysis and a single reading of either raised diastolic blood pressure (90 mmHg or more) or raised systolic blood pressure (140 mmHg or more) 
respiratory rate of less than 9 or more than 21 breaths per minute on 2 occasions 15 to 30 minutes apart 
temperature of 38°C or above on a single reading, or 37.5°C or above on 2 consecutive occasions 1 hour apart; for advice on intrapartum antibiotics, see the section on intrapartum antibiotics in NICE's guideline on neonatal infection 
fresh red bleeding or blood-stained liquor 
the new appearance of meconium (see the section on the presence of meconium ) 
pain reported by the woman that differs from the pain normally associated with contractions 
confirmed delay in the first stage of labour 
request by the woman for additional pain relief using regional analgesia 
obstetric emergency, including antepartum haemorrhage, cord prolapse, maternal seizure or collapse, or a need for advanced neonatal resuscitation 
observations of the unborn baby: 
any non-cephalic presentation, including cord presentation 
high (4/5 to 5/5 palpable) or free-floating head in a nulliparous woman 
suspected fetal growth restriction or macrosomia 
suspected anhydramnios or polyhydramnios 
any changes in the fetal heart rate pattern (see the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour ) 
If none of these are observed, continue with midwifery-led care unless the woman requests transfer. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.8.21 
Do not routinely use verbal assessment using a numerical pain score. [2007] 
1.8.22 
Use a pictorial record of labour (partogram) once labour is established. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.8.23 
Give ongoing consideration to the woman's emotional and psychological needs, including her desire for pain relief. [2007] 
1.8.24 
Encourage the woman to say if she needs more analgesia at any point during labour. [2007] 
Bladder care 
1.8.25 
Review bladder care for women at least every 4 hours. This should include: 
frequency of passing urine and bladder sensation 
fluid balance monitoring if sensation is abnormal or absent, if there is an inability to pass urine, or the woman is receiving intravenous fluids (including oxytocin) 
offering to insert a catheter if there are any ongoing concerns over the woman's ability to pass urine. [2023, amended 2025] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on bladder care . 
Fluid intake and output 
1.8.26 
Discuss with the woman or pregnant person that: 
it is important to drink during labour when thirsty (see recommendation 1.8.17) 
it is important to regularly empty the bladder (see recommendation 1.8.18) 
excessive intake of oral or intravenous fluids may be harmful as this can cause hyponatraemia (a sodium level of less than 130 mmol/L in a pregnant woman or pregnant person) and lead to maternal and neonatal seizures or death 
their midwife will ask about and check up on their fluid intake and output throughout labour 
fluid balance monitoring may be advised during labour to reduce the risk of hyponatraemia or dehydration. [2025] 
1.8.27 
Monitor and record fluid balance, if: 
there are any concerns about fluid intake, for example the woman or pregnant person is drinking too much (also take into account fluid intake before labour care began) 
the woman or pregnant person is receiving intravenous fluids 
the woman or pregnant person is receiving an oxytocin infusion 
there are any concerns about fluid output, for example there is an inability to pass urine, nausea, vomiting or diarrhoea 
there are certain medical conditions, such as haemorrhage or pre-eclampsia (also see NICE's guideline on hypertension in pregnancy ). [2025] 
1.8.28 
If there is a positive fluid balance of 1500 ml or more, or there are clinical concerns (for example, signs and symptoms of hyponatraemia): 
explain to the woman or pregnant person that it is possible they are developing, or have developed, hyponatraemia 
request an obstetric review 
offer a blood test to check their sodium level 
advise that they will need to be transferred to an obstetric setting if they are currently in a midwifery-led setting (see the section on transfer of care and changing place of birth ). [2025] 
1.8.29 
Do not routinely advise oral fluids or give intravenous fluids for the treatment of ketonuria in women and pregnant people who are not diabetic. [2025] 
Confirmed peripartum hyponatraemia 
1.8.30 
If the woman or pregnant person has peripartum hyponatraemia , follow local protocols for the management of hyponatraemia. [2025] 
1.8.31 
If the woman or pregnant person is hyponatraemic inform the following care staff as soon as possible, or immediately if the woman or pregnant person is symptomatic or their sodium level is less than 125 mmol/L: 
the consultant obstetrician 
the consultant anaesthetist 
the neonatal team 
the delivery suite coordinator. [2025] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendations, see the rationale and impact section on fluid balance and hyponatraemia . 
Full details about the committee's discussion are in the supporting document for the recommendations on fluid balance and peripartum hyponatraemia . 
Presence of meconium 
1.8.32 
As part of ongoing assessment, document the presence or absence of meconium. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.8.33 
If meconium is present, consider the character of the meconium and discuss the option of transfer to obstetric-led care with the woman. Explain that meconium: 
may increase the risk to the baby 
means that continuous cardiotocography monitoring may be advised (see the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour ) 
may mean that healthcare professionals trained in advanced neonatal life support are needed as soon as the baby is born. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.8.34 
If the woman wishes to be transferred, provided that it is safe to do so and the birth is unlikely to occur before transfer is completed, follow the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 . Take into account that the presence of other risk factors (in addition to meconium) may increase the urgency of the transfer. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.8.35 
Be aware that meconium is more common after full term but should still trigger a full risk assessment and discussion with the woman about the option of transfer to obstetric-led care. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on presence of meconium . 
Duration of the first stage 
1.8.36 
Inform women that, while the length of established first stage of labour varies between women: 
first labours last on average 8 hours and are unlikely to last over 18 hours 
second and subsequent labours last on average 5 hours and are unlikely to last over 12 hours. [2007] 
1.8.37 
Do not offer or advise clinical intervention if labour is progressing with no complications or concerns and the woman or pregnant person and baby are well. [2007, amended 2025] 
1.8.38 
In all stages of labour, women and pregnant people who have moved to specialist care pathways because of the development of complications can return to standard care if or when the complication is resolved. [2007, amended 2025] 
Interventions in the first stage 
1.8.39 
Do not routinely perform amniotomy if labour is progressing with no complications or concerns. [2007, amended 2025] 
1.8.40 
Do not routinely use combined early amniotomy with use of oxytocin. [2007] 
Delay in the first stage 
1.8.41 
If delay in the established first stage is suspected, take the following into account: 
parity 
cervical dilatation and rate of change 
uterine contractions 
station and position of presenting part. 
Offer the woman support, hydration, and appropriate and effective pain relief. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.8.42 
If delay in the established first stage is suspected, assess all aspects of progress in labour when diagnosing delay, including: 
cervical dilatation of less than 2 cm in 4 hours for first labours 
cervical dilatation of less than 2 cm in 4 hours or a slowing in the progress of labour for second or subsequent labours 
descent and rotation of the baby's head 
changes in the strength, duration and frequency of uterine contractions. [2007] 
1.8.43 
If delay in the established first stage of labour is suspected, discuss the findings (see recommendation 1.8.42) and the options available with the woman, and support her decision. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.8.44 
Offer all women with delay in the established first stage of labour support and effective pain relief. [2007] 
1.8.45 
Advise all women with suspected delay in the established first stage of labour to have a vaginal examination 2 hours later, and diagnose delay if progress is less than 1 cm. [2007] 
1.8.46 
If delay in the established first stage of labour is diagnosed, consider amniotomy for all women with intact membranes, after explanation of the procedure and advice that it will shorten labour by about an hour and may increase the strength and pain of contractions. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.8.47 
Do not advise transfer to obstetric-led care for amniotomy alone. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on delay in the first stage . 
1.8.48 
After amniotomy, advise the woman to have a repeat vaginal examination 2 hours later. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.8.49 
If there is no progress 2 hours after the amniotomy, diagnose delay and transfer the woman to obstetric-led care. Follow the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 . Take into account that the presence of other risk factors (in addition to delay) may increase the urgency of the transfer. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.8.50 
For all women with confirmed delay in the established first stage of labour, an obstetrician should offer a full assessment. The obstetric review should include abdominal palpation and vaginal examination and consideration of oxytocin. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.8.51 
Discuss the use of oxytocin with the woman and make a decision with her about its use. Explain that: 
her choice to start, stop or restart the oxytocin will be supported 
using oxytocin after spontaneous or artificial rupture of the membranes will bring forward the time of birth but will not influence the mode of birth or neonatal outcomes 
oxytocin will increase the frequency and strength of contractions and that its use will mean that her contractions and her baby's heartbeat will be monitored continuously using cardiotocography; see the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour 
oxytocin can cause hyperstimulation , which may increase the chance of transient fetal hypoxia, and if hyperstimulation occurs the dose will be reduced or stopped. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.8.52 
Offer the woman an epidural before oxytocin is started or if she requests it later. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.8.53 
When starting intravenous oxytocin in the first stage of labour: 
do not start separate intravenous fluids without a clinical indication (for example, the woman is not drinking, is dehydrated, or is hypotensive) 
monitor fluid balance. [2023] 
1.8.54 
If oxytocin is used in the first stage of labour, ensure that the time between increments of the dose is no more frequent than every 30 minutes. Increase oxytocin until there are 3 to 4 contractions in 10 minutes. [2023] 
1.8.55 
Use oxytocin in labour with caution. If the woman has contractions more frequently than 4 in 10 minutes, reduce or stop the oxytocin until the woman is having 4 or fewer contractions in 10 minutes. [2023] 
1.8.56 
Oxytocin must be discontinued immediately if the cardiotocography is pathological, and urgent obstetrician or senior midwife review sought. See the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour . [2023] 
1.8.57 
Consider restarting oxytocin in the first stage of labour if: 
obstetric review has been carried out and the cardiotocography is no longer pathological 
the woman agrees that it can be restarted. 
Base the dose when restarting on a full clinical assessment, taking into consideration the previous dose. [2023] 
1.8.58 
Advise the woman to have a vaginal examination 4 hours after the oxytocin infusion has led to regular contractions in established labour: 
if cervical dilatation has increased by less than 2 cm after 4 hours of oxytocin, further obstetric review is needed to assess whether a caesarean birth is advisable 
if cervical dilatation has increased by 2 cm or more, advise 4‑hourly vaginal examinations. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.8.59 
If oxytocin is restarted in the first stage of labour, base the timing of the next vaginal examination on a clinical assessment of the woman and her individual circumstances. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on the use of oxytocin in the first or second stage of labour . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: oxytocin in the first or second stage of labour . 
1.9 Second stage of labour 
Definition of the second stage 
1.9.1 
For the purposes of this guideline, use the following definitions of labour: 
passive second stage of labour: when there is full dilatation of the cervix (determined by either vaginal examination or noting other external signs of full dilatation) before or in the absence of involuntary or active pushing 
the passive second stage of labour may be up to 2 hours when a woman with an epidural in place has been advised to delay pushing (see recommendations 1.9.7 to 1.9.10 ) 
onset of the active second stage of labour is when: 
the baby is visible or 
there is involuntary or active pushing with full dilatation of the cervix. [2007, amended 2023] 
Assessment of women during the second stage of labour 
1.9.2 
Continue with observations of the woman and baby, and assessment of risk as described for the first stage of labour (see recommendations 1.8.19 and 1.8.20 ), but be aware that the frequency of fetal monitoring should increase. See the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour . [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on assessment of women during the second stage of labour . 
1.9.3 
Offer a vaginal examination (see recommendations 1.8.9 and 1.8.10 ) hourly in the active second stage, or in response to the woman's wishes (after abdominal palpation and assessment of vaginal loss). To assess progress, the vaginal examination should include: 
position of the head 
descent 
caput and moulding. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.9.4 
During the second stage of labour: 
continue to take the woman's emotional and psychological needs into account 
assess progress, which should include the woman's behaviour, the effectiveness of pushing and the baby's wellbeing, taking into account the baby's position and station at the onset of the second stage; these factors will assist in deciding the timing of further vaginal examinations and any need for transfer to obstetric-led care 
assess the frequency, strength and duration of contractions 
perform intermittent auscultation of the fetal heart rate immediately after a contraction for at least 1 minute, at least every 5 minutes. Palpate the woman's pulse every 5 minutes to differentiate between the 2 heartbeats; see the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour 
ongoing consideration should be given to the woman's position, hydration, coping strategies and pain relief throughout the second stage. [2007, amended 2023] 
The woman's position and pushing in the second stage 
1.9.5 
Advise a woman with an epidural in place during the second stage of labour that: 
lying flat on her back can lead to a decrease in blood pressure and may reduce placental blood flow 
lying on her side may increase the chance of a spontaneous vaginal birth, but she can use any other position she finds comfortable to give birth, including upright positions. [2023] 
1.9.6 
Advise a woman without an epidural in place during the second stage of labour that: 
lying flat on her back can lead to a decrease in blood pressure and may reduce placental blood flow 
she can use any other position she finds comfortable to give birth 
upright positions and keeping mobile may be beneficial (as they may reduce fetal heart rate abnormalities, episiotomy rates and improve her birthing experience). [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on position for birth . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: position for birth . 
1.9.7 
Advise women without an epidural in place that: 
spontaneous pushing may shorten the second stage of labour compared with directed pushing 
if directed pushing is used, pushing while exhaling may shorten the active second stage of labour for multiparous women. [2023] 
1.9.8 
If full dilatation of the cervix has been confirmed in a woman without an epidural in place, but she does not get an urge to push, offer to carry out further assessment after 1 hour. [2007] 
1.9.9 
Advise nulliparous women with an epidural that: 
directed pushing rather than spontaneous pushing may reduce the likelihood of having an unplanned caesarean birth 
delayed directed pushing (up to 2 hours after full dilatation) may shorten the active second stage of labour. [2023] 
1.9.10 
Advise multiparous women with an epidural that: 
delayed directed pushing (by 1 hour after full dilatation) may reduce the likelihood of needing birth with forceps or ventouse 
delayed directed pushing (by 1 hour after full dilatation) may shorten the active second stage of labour. [2023] 
1.9.11 
If pushing is ineffective or if requested by the woman, offer strategies to assist birth, such as support, change of position, emptying of the bladder and encouragement. [2007] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on pushing techniques . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: pushing techniques . 
Intrapartum interventions to reduce perineal trauma 
1.9.12 
Discuss the woman's preferences for techniques to reduce perineal trauma during birth and support her choices. [2023] 
1.9.13 
Once the presenting part distends the perineum in the second stage of labour, offer to apply a warm wet compress to the perineum and continue this until birth. Check the temperature of the compress is comfortable for the woman or pregnant person. Note, this recommendation does not apply to births in water. [2023, amended 2025] 
1.9.14 
Consider massage of the perineum with a water-soluble lubricant in the second stage of labour, if perineal massage is acceptable to the woman or pregnant person and they prefer this to a warm compress. Note, this recommendation does not apply to births in water. [2023, amended 2025] 
1.9.15 
Do not offer lidocaine spray to reduce pain in the second stage of labour. [2007] 
1.9.16 
Do not carry out a routine episiotomy during spontaneous vaginal birth. [2007] 
1.9.17 
Inform any woman with a history of severe perineal trauma that her risk of repeat severe perineal trauma is not increased in a subsequent birth, compared with women having their first baby. [2007] 
1.9.18 
Do not offer episiotomy routinely at vaginal birth after previous third- or fourth-degree trauma. [2007] 
1.9.19 
In order for a woman who has had previous third- or fourth-degree trauma to make an informed choice, talk with her about the future mode of birth, encompassing: 
current urgency or incontinence symptoms 
the degree of previous trauma 
risk of recurrence 
the success of the repair undertaken 
the psychological effect of the previous trauma 
management of her labour. [2007] 
1.9.20 
Inform any woman with infibulated genital mutilation of the risks of difficulty with vaginal examination, catheterisation and application of fetal scalp electrodes. Inform her of the risks of delay in the second stage and spontaneous laceration together with the possible need for defibulation in labour. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.9.21 
If an episiotomy is performed, the recommended technique is a mediolateral episiotomy originating at the vaginal fourchette and usually directed to the right side. The angle to the vertical axis should be between 45 and 60 degrees at the time of the episiotomy. [2007] 
1.9.22 
Perform an episiotomy if there is a clinical need, such as birth with forceps or ventouse or suspected fetal compromise. [2007] 
1.9.23 
Provide tested, effective analgesia before carrying out an episiotomy, except in an emergency because of acute fetal compromise. [2007] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on interventions to reduce perineal trauma . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: interventions to reduce perineal trauma . 
Water birth 
Also see recommendations 1.6.10 to 1.6.13 on labouring in water . 
1.9.24 
Consider birth in water for women and pregnant people. To help them make an informed choice, discuss that evidence on giving birth in water compared to out of water: 
showed that water birth may be associated with: 
a lower risk of severe perineal trauma (third or fourth degree tearing) for multiparous women and pregnant people 
a lower risk of postpartum haemorrhage (see also the recommendations on management of third stage of labour ) 
an increase in risk of snapping of the cord before cord clamping 
a lower risk of admission to the neonatal unit 
was inconclusive on risk of the baby dying (during or after birth), so it is not possible to say whether there is any difference between the 2 options. 
For more information, see the table of absolute risks in appendix D . [2025] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on water birth . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q: effects and safety of water immersion during the second stage of labour . 
Duration of the active second stage and definition of delay 
1.9.25 
For a nulliparous woman without an epidural: 
birth would be expected to take place within 3 hours of the start of the active second stage in most women 
after 1 hour of active pushing, reassess the clinical picture, including progress, contractions, and maternal and fetal wellbeing: 
if there are signs of progress (in terms of rotation or descent of the presenting part), encourage the woman to continue pushing 
if there are no signs of progress, offer vaginal examination and consider amniotomy if the membranes are intact; if there is still no progress, diagnose delay and escalate for senior review 
if birth is not imminent after 2 hours of pushing, refer the woman for a senior review and a decision on place and mode of birth. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.9.26 
For a multiparous woman without an epidural: 
birth would be expected to take place within 2 hours of the start of the active second stage in most women 
after 30 minutes of active pushing, reassess clinical picture, including progress, contractions, and maternal and fetal wellbeing: 
if there are signs of progress (in terms of rotation or descent of the presenting part), encourage the woman to continue pushing 
if there are no signs of progress, offer vaginal examination and consider amniotomy if the membranes are intact; if there is still no progress, diagnose delay and escalate for senior review 
if birth is not imminent after 1 hour of pushing, refer the woman for senior review and decision on place and mode of birth. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.9.27 
For a nulliparous woman with an epidural: 
birth would be expected to take place within 3 hours of the start of the active second stage in most women, but be aware that these women may have had a passive stage of up to 2 hours after full dilatation before commencing active pushing (see recommendation 1.9.9 ) 
after 1 hour of active pushing, reassess the clinical picture, including progress, contractions, and maternal and fetal wellbeing: 
if there are signs of progress (in terms of rotation or descent of the presenting part), encourage the woman to continue pushing 
if there are no signs of progress, offer vaginal examination and consider amniotomy if the membranes are intact; if there is still no progress, diagnose delay and escalate for senior review 
if birth is not imminent after 2 hours of pushing, refer the woman for a senior review and decision on place and mode of birth. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.9.28 
For a multiparous woman with an epidural: 
birth would be expected to take place within 2 hours of the start of the active second stage in most women, but be aware that these women may have had a passive stage of up to 1 hour after full dilatation before commencing active pushing (see recommendation 1.9.10 ) 
after 30 minutes of active pushing, reassess clinical picture, including progress, contractions, and maternal and fetal wellbeing: 
if there are signs of progress (in terms of rotation or descent of the presenting part), encourage the woman to continue pushing 
if there are no signs of progress, offer vaginal examination and consider amniotomy if the membranes are intact; if there is still no progress, diagnose delay and escalate for senior review 
if birth is not imminent after 1 hour of pushing, refer the woman for a senior review and decision on place and mode of birth. [2007, amended 2023] 
Delay in the second stage 
1.9.29 
If there is delay in the second stage of labour (see the section on the duration of the active second stage ), or if the woman is excessively distressed, provide support and sensitive encouragement and ask her if she needs analgesia or anaesthesia. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.9.30 
If there is delay in the second stage of labour and the decision is made to transfer the woman to obstetric-led care, follow the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 . Take into account that the presence of other risk factors (in addition to delay) may increase the urgency of the transfer. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.9.31 
An obstetrician should carry out an in-person assessment of a woman with confirmed delay in the second stage after transfer to obstetric-led care before contemplating the use of oxytocin. This should include: 
assessment and confirmation of fetal wellbeing (including presentation, position and heart rate) 
differentiation between the fetal and maternal heart rates 
confirmation that there are no signs of obstructed labour 
confirmation that contractions are infrequent or ineffective. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.9.32 
If the decision is made to start oxytocin in the second stage of labour, ensure that the time between increments of the dose is no more frequent than every 30 minutes. Increase oxytocin until there are 3 to 4 contractions in 10 minutes (see recommendation 1.8.54 ). [2023] 
1.9.33 
After initial obstetric assessment of a woman with delay in the second stage, maintain ongoing obstetric review every 15 to 30 minutes. [2007] 
Expediting birth 
1.9.34 
If the birth needs to be expedited for maternal or fetal reasons, assess both the risk to the baby and the safety of the woman. The assessment should include: 
the degree of urgency 
clinical findings on abdominal and vaginal examination 
the mode of birth (and whether to use forceps or ventouse if indicated) 
anticipated degree of difficulty, including the likelihood of success if birth with forceps or ventouse is attempted 
location 
any time that may be needed for transfer to obstetric-led care 
the need for additional analgesia or anaesthesia 
the woman's preferences. [2014] 
1.9.35 
Talk with the woman and her birth companion(s) about why the birth needs to be expedited and what the options are. [2014] 
1.9.36 
Inform the team about the degree of urgency. [2014] 
1.9.37 
Record the time at which the decision to expedite the birth is made. [2014] 
Birth with forceps or ventouse in delayed second stage 
1.9.38 
Offer birth with forceps or ventouse if there is concern about the baby's wellbeing, there is a prolonged second stage or the woman requests assistance. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.9.39 
If a woman declines a birth with forceps or ventouse: 
discuss her remaining options (vaginal birth, caesarean birth or reconsidering her decision about forceps or ventouse) 
advise her that her choices may be limited by clinical safety or degree of urgency (for example, if a caesarean birth is no longer an option because the baby's head is too low in the pelvis) 
support her decision. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on birth with forceps or ventouse in delayed second stage . 
1.9.40 
Base the choice of instrument on a balance of clinical circumstance and practitioner experience. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.9.41 
Discuss pain relief options for birth with forceps or ventouse. The option used should be based on the woman's preference and the clinical situation. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.9.42 
Ensure the level of pain relief is acceptable to the woman before using forceps or ventouse during birth. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.9.43 
Offer women who have had a birth with forceps or ventouse a single dose of intravenous co-amoxiclav (or a locally agreed alternative for women who are allergic to penicillin) within 6 hours after cord clamping. [2023] 
1.9.44 
Advise the woman to have a caesarean birth if vaginal birth is not possible. See the NICE guideline on caesarean birth . [2007] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on prophylactic antibiotics for birth with forceps or ventouse . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: prophylactic antibiotics for birth with forceps or ventouse . 
1.10 Third stage of labour 
1.10.1 
Recognise that the time immediately after the birth is when the woman and her birth companion(s) are meeting and getting to know the baby. Ensure that any care or interventions are sensitive to this and minimise separation or disruption of the mother and baby. [2014] 
Definition of the third stage 
1.10.2 
For the purposes of this guideline, use the following definitions: 
the third stage of labour is the time from the birth of the baby to the expulsion of the placenta and membranes 
active management of the third stage involves a package of care comprising the following components: 
routine use of uterotonic drugs 
cord clamping and cutting of the cord (see recommendation 1.10.14 ) 
controlled cord traction after signs of separation of the placenta 
physiological management of the third stage involves a package of care that includes the following components: 
no routine use of uterotonic drugs 
no clamping of the cord until pulsation has stopped, or after delivery of the placenta 
delivery of the placenta spontaneously or by maternal effort. [2014, amended 2023] 
Observations in the third stage 
1.10.3 
Record the following observations for a woman in the third stage of labour: 
her general physical condition, as shown by her colour, respiration and her own report of how she feels 
vaginal blood loss. [2014] 
1.10.4 
If there is postpartum haemorrhage, a retained placenta or maternal collapse, or any other concerns about the woman's wellbeing: 
carry out frequent observations to assess whether resuscitation is needed 
transfer her to obstetric-led care; follow the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 , taking into account that multiple risk factors may increase the urgency of the transfer, particularly if they have a cumulative effect. [2014, amended 2023] 
Management of the third stage 
1.10.5 
Discuss with the woman antenatally, during her initial assessment and in labour: 
the different options for managing the third stage of labour, and what to expect with each option 
the benefits and risks associated with active and physiological management of the third stage (see tables 10 and 11). [2023] 
Table 10 Outcomes that were more or less likely for women having active management of the third stage compared with physiological management 
Outcome 
Active management of the third stage of labour 
Physiological management of the third stage of labour 
Risk difference 
Haemorrhage of more than 500 mL 
About 68 women per 1,000 would be expected to have a haemorrhage of more than 500 mL (so 932 per 1,000 would not) 
About 188 women per 1,000 would be expected to have a haemorrhage of more than 500 mL (so 812 per 1,000 would not) 
About 120 per 1,000 fewer women would be expected to have a haemorrhage of more than 500 mL with active management, so for 880 there would be no difference 
Haemorrhage of more than 1 litre 
About 13 women per 1,000 would be expected to have a haemorrhage of more than 1 litre (so 987 per 1,000 would not) 
About 29 women per 1,000 would be expected to have a haemorrhage of more than 1 litre (so 971 per 1,000 would not) 
About 16 per 1,000 fewer women would be expected to have a haemorrhage of more than 1 litre with active management, so for 984 there would be no difference 
Need for blood transfusion 
About 13 women per 1,000 would be expected to need a blood transfusion (so 987 per 1,000 would not) 
About 35 women per 1,000 would be expected to need a blood transfusion (so 965 per 1,000 would not) 
About 22 per 1,000 fewer women would be expected to need a blood transfusion with active management, so for 978 there would be no difference 
Postpartum anaemia (haemoglobin less than 9 g/dL) 
About 30 women per 1,000 would be expected to have anaemia (so 970 per 1,000 would not) 
About 60 women per 1,000 would be expected to have anaemia (so 940 per 1,000 would not) 
About 30 per 1,000 fewer women would be expected to have anaemia with active management, so for 970 there would be no difference 
Need for further uterotonics 
About 47 women per 1,000 would be expected to need further uterotonics (so 953 per 1,000 would not) 
About 247 women per 1,000 would be expected to need further uterotonics (so 753 per 1,000 would not) 
About 200 per 1,000 fewer women would be expected to need further uterotonics with active management, so for 800 there would be no difference 
Side effects (nausea and vomiting, headache, hypertension, readmission for bleeding) 
About 186 women per 1,000 would be expected to have these side effects (so 814 per 1,000 would not) 
About 90 women per 1,000 would be expected to have these side effects (so 910 per 1,000 would not) 
About 96 per 1,000 more women would be expected to have these side effects with active management, so for 904 there would be no difference 
Table 11 Outcomes that were similar for both active and physiological management of the third stage 
Outcome 
Retained placenta beyond 1 hour or need for manual removal 
Antibiotics for bleeding (discharge to 6 weeks) 
Satisfied with third-stage management 
Felt in control during labour 
1.10.6 
Advise women that active management of the third stage of labour is associated with a lower risk of a postpartum haemorrhage or blood transfusion. [2014] 
1.10.7 
If a woman requests physiological management of the third stage: 
discuss her level of risk so she can make an informed decision and 
support her in her choice. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.10.8 
Document in her records the decision that is agreed with the woman about management of the third stage. [2014] 
1.10.9 
For a woman who is having a vaginal birth and has chosen to have an active third stage, discuss the choice of uterotonic for active management. Include that: 
oxytocin plus ergometrine may be more effective than oxytocin alone at reducing the risk of postpartum haemorrhage 
oxytocin plus ergometrine is advised if there are risk factors which could increase the risk of postpartum haemorrhage 
oxytocin plus ergometrine is more likely to lead to nausea and vomiting compared with oxytocin alone 
oxytocin plus ergometrine is contraindicated in women with severe hypertension, pre-eclampsia, eclampsia, or severe cardiac, hepatic or renal disease. [2023] 
1.10.10 
Offer antiemetics (for example, cyclizine) to women having oxytocin plus ergometrine. [2023] 
1.10.11 
For active management after vaginal birth, administer 10 units of oxytocin (by intramuscular injection), 5 units of oxytocin (by intravenous injection, see recommendation 1.10.12) or 5 units of oxytocin plus 500 micrograms of ergometrine (by intramuscular injection) immediately after the birth of the baby and before the cord is clamped and cut. [2023] 
1.10.12 
If oxytocin is used, administer it by: 
intramuscular injection or 
slow intravenous injection over 3 to 5 minutes for women who have received oxytocin during labour. [2023] 
1.10.13 
For women who have had a caesarean birth, offer carbetocin by slow intravenous injection for the prevention of postpartum haemorrhage. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on management of the third stage of labour . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review K: active and physiological management of the third stage 
evidence review L: route of administration of oxytocin in the third stage of labour 
evidence review M: uterotonics for prevention of postpartum haemorrhage . 
1.10.14 
After administering the uterotonic, clamp and cut the cord, but: 
do not clamp the cord earlier than 1 minute from the birth of the baby unless there is concern about the integrity of the cord or the baby has a heart rate below 60 beats a minute that is not getting faster 
clamp the cord before 5 minutes in order to perform controlled cord traction as part of active management 
if the woman requests that the cord is clamped and cut later than 5 minutes, support her choice. [2014, amended 2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee did not make any recommendations about the position of the baby during cord clamping, see the rationale and impact section on position of the baby during cord clamping . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review N: position of the baby during cord clamping . 
1.10.15 
After cutting the cord, perform controlled cord traction as part of active management only after administration of oxytocin and signs of separation of the placenta. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.10.16 
Record the timing of cord clamping in both active and physiological management. [2014] 
1.10.17 
Advise a change from physiological management to active management if either of the following occur: 
haemorrhage 
the placenta is not delivered within 1 hour of the birth of the baby. [2014] 
1.10.18 
Offer a change from physiological management to active management if the woman wants to shorten the third stage. [2014] 
1.10.19 
Do not use either umbilical oxytocin infusion or prostaglandin routinely in the third stage of labour. [2014] 
Prolonged third stage 
1.10.20 
Diagnose a prolonged third stage of labour if it is not completed within 30 minutes of the birth with active management or within 60 minutes of the birth with physiological management. Follow the recommendations on managing a retained placenta . [2014] 
Retained placenta 
1.10.21 
Secure intravenous access if the placenta is retained, and explain to the woman why this is needed. [2014] 
1.10.22 
Do not use umbilical vein agents if the placenta is retained. [2014] 
1.10.23 
Do not use intravenous oxytocic agents routinely to deliver a retained placenta. [2014] 
1.10.24 
Give intravenous oxytocic agents if the placenta is retained and the woman is bleeding excessively. [2014] 
1.10.25 
If the placenta is retained and there is concern about the woman's condition: 
offer a vaginal examination to assess the need to undertake manual removal of the placenta 
explain that this assessment can be painful and advise her to have analgesia. [2014] 
1.10.26 
If the woman reports inadequate analgesia during the assessment, stop the examination and address this immediately. [2014] 
1.10.27 
If the placenta is retained and the woman is not already in an obstetric unit, arrange transfer. Follow the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 , taking into account that multiple risk factors may increase the urgency of the transfer, particularly if they have a cumulative effect. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.10.28 
Do not carry out uterine exploration or manual removal of the placenta without an anaesthetic. [2014] 
Postpartum haemorrhage 
Risk factors for postpartum haemorrhage 
1.10.29 
Advise women with antenatal risk factors for postpartum haemorrhage to give birth in an obstetric unit, where more emergency treatment options are available. Risk factors include: 
previous postpartum haemorrhage over 1,000 mL or requiring blood transfusion 
placenta accreta spectrum 
pre-eclampsia 
maternal haemoglobin level below 85 g/litre at onset of labour 
BMI greater than 35 kg/m 2 
grand multiparity (parity 4 or more) 
antepartum haemorrhage or placental abruption 
overdistention of the uterus (for example, multiple pregnancy, polyhydramnios) 
existing uterine abnormalities (for example, fibroids) 
low-lying placenta. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.10.30 
Continue to assess risk factors for postpartum haemorrhage during labour, taking into account antenatal risk factors and any risk factors that have arisen during labour. These can include: 
induction or augmentation of labour with oxytocin or prostaglandins 
prolonged first or second stage of labour 
sepsis 
oxytocin use during labour 
precipitate labour 
birth with forceps or ventouse 
caesarean birth 
shoulder dystocia 
delay in delivery of the placenta. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.10.31 
Be aware that taking selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) or serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) antidepressants in the month before birth may result in a small increased risk of postpartum haemorrhage, and that this should be taken into account as part of the bleeding and thrombotic risk assessment. See the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) advice on the use of SSRI and SNRI antidepressants in the month before birth . [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on risk factors for postpartum haemorrhage . 
1.10.32 
If a woman has risk factors for postpartum haemorrhage, highlight these in her notes, and agree with her a care plan covering the third stage of labour. [2007] 
Management of postpartum haemorrhage 
1.10.33 
If a woman has a postpartum haemorrhage: 
call for help 
give immediate clinical treatment: 
emptying of the bladder and 
uterine massage and 
uterotonic drugs and 
intravenous fluids and 
controlled cord traction if the placenta has not yet been delivered 
continuously assess blood loss and the woman's condition, and identify the source of the bleeding 
consider giving supplementary oxygen (starting at 15 L/minute to obtain a target oxygen saturation of 94% to 98%, using a non-rebreathing mask with a reservoir bag) 
arrange for transfer of the woman to obstetric-led care (following the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 ). [2014, amended 2023] 
1.10.34 
Administer 1 of the following (see table 12) as first-line treatment for postpartum haemorrhage, taking into account which uterotonics have already been administered as part of active management of the third stage of labour. Offer further treatment for postpartum haemorrhage if needed. [2023] 
Table 12 Choice of uterotonics for the treatment of postpartum haemorrhage because of uterine atony [2023, amended 2024] 
Uterotonic used in the third stage of labour as prophylaxis 
Suggested first-line treatment of postpartum haemorrhage 
Suggested second-line treatment of postpartum haemorrhage 
Additional treatments that can be offered, depending on clinical need 
No uterotonic used – physiological management 
Oxytocin plus ergometrine by intramuscular injection (if contraindicated, give carboprost), or 
Oxytocin infusion as soon as intravenous access is available 
Carboprost intramuscular injection 
Carboprost intramuscular injection (can be repeated at intervals not less than 15 minutes up to a maximum of 8 doses), or 
Misoprostol 800 micrograms sublingually or rectally (may be used earlier if intravenous route not available) 
Oxytocin alone 
Ergometrine intramuscular injection (if contraindicated give carboprost), or 
Oxytocin infusion as soon as intravenous access is available 
Carboprost intramuscular injection 
Carboprost intramuscular injection (can be repeated at intervals not less than 15 minutes up to a maximum of 8 doses), or 
Misoprostol 800 micrograms sublingually or rectally (may be used earlier if intravenous route not available) 
Oxytocin plus ergometrine 
Carboprost intramuscular injection, or 
Oxytocin infusion as soon as intravenous access is available 
Repeat carboprost after 15 minutes 
Carboprost intramuscular injection (can be repeated at intervals not less than 15 minutes up to a maximum of 8 doses), or 
Misoprostol 800 micrograms sublingually or rectally (may be used earlier if intravenous route not available) 
Carbetocin 
Ergometrine intramuscular injection 
Carboprost intramuscular injection 
Carboprost intramuscular injection (can be repeated at intervals not less than 15 minutes up to a maximum of 8 doses), or 
Misoprostol 800 micrograms sublingually or rectally 
Please note that: 
Not all medicines in table 12 will be available in all settings, and this may impact on choice and order of use. 
A repeat dose of ergometrine or the combination of oxytocin and ergometrine may be given if other medicines are not available, for example in a home birth setting. Note that after intramuscular administration, oxytocin acts in about 2.5 minutes and the effects last about 30 minutes to 1 hour. Ergometrine acts in about 7 minutes and the effects last about 3 hours. 
In December 2024, this was an off-label use of misoprostol, so the dosage is included in table 12. Consult the BNF for dosages of other drugs listed. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
In September 2024, NHS England published a National Patient Safety Alert on the risks of oxytocin overdose during labour and childbirth which contains advice on actions needed. 
1.10.35 
In addition to uterotonic drugs, give tranexamic acid (1 g by intravenous injection over 10 minutes). Repeat if necessary after at least 30 minutes for managing continuing postpartum haemorrhage. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on the pharmacological management of postpartum haemorrhage . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review O: pharmacological management of postpartum haemorrhage . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2024 update to table 12 and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on uterotonics for postpartum haemorrhage . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review O: pharmacological management of postpartum haemorrhage . 
1.10.36 
Allocate a member of the healthcare team to stay with the woman and her birth companion(s), explain what is happening, answer any questions and offer support throughout the emergency situation. [2014] 
1.10.37 
If the haemorrhage continues: 
consider near-patient coagulation testing, if available 
consider administration of blood products (for example, packed red cells and clotting products) 
perform examination under anaesthetic 
ensure that the uterus is empty and repair any trauma 
consider balloon tamponade before surgical options. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.10.38 
Be aware that no particular surgical procedure can be recommended over any other for treating postpartum haemorrhage. [2014] 
1.10.39 
Ensure the maternity service and ambulance service have strategies in place to respond quickly and appropriately if a woman has a postpartum haemorrhage in any setting. [2014] 
1.11 Care of the newborn baby 
Initial assessment of the newborn baby and mother–baby bonding 
1.11.1 
Record the Apgar score routinely at 1 minute and 5 minutes for all births. [2007] 
1.11.2 
When assessing the colour element of the Apgar score: 
assess central oxygenation by looking inside the mouth at the mucous membranes and tongue 
assess peripheral oxygenation by looking at the colour of the nail beds. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on initial assessment of the newborn baby . 
1.11.3 
Record the time from birth to the onset of regular respirations. [2014] 
1.11.4 
If the baby is born in poor condition (for example, with abnormal breathing, heart rate or tone): 
follow recommendations on neonatal resuscitation   and 
take paired cord-blood samples for blood gas analysis, after double-clamping the cord using 2 clamps. 
Continue to evaluate and record the baby's condition until it is improved and stable. [2014] 
1.11.5 
Do not take paired cord-blood samples (for blood gas analysis) routinely. [2014] 
1.11.6 
Ensure that a second clamp to allow double-clamping of the cord is available in all birth settings. [2014] 
1.11.7 
Encourage women to have skin-to-skin contact with their babies as soon as possible after the birth. If the woman is not well enough, encourage her birth companion to have skin-to-skin contact instead. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.11.8 
In order to keep the baby warm, dry and cover them with a warm, dry blanket or towel while maintaining skin-to-skin contact with the woman. [2007] 
1.11.9 
Prioritise optimal baby airway positioning, ensuring the head is supported so the airway does not become obstructed during skin-to-skin contact and explain to the woman and her birth companion(s) how to maintain the baby's airway. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on optimal positioning during skin-to-skin contact . 
1.11.10 
Avoid separating the woman and her baby within the first hour of the birth for routine postnatal procedures, for example, weighing, measuring and bathing, unless these measures are requested by the woman or are necessary for the immediate care of the baby. [2007] 
1.11.11 
Encourage initiation of breastfeeding as soon as possible after the birth, ideally within 1 hour. [2007] 
1.11.12 
Offer parents vitamin K prophylaxis for their babies. Explain this is to prevent vitamin K deficiency bleeding, which is a rare but serious and sometimes fatal disorder. [2006, amended 2026] 
1.11.13 
Give vitamin K as an injection into the muscle because this is the method that works best. If parents do not want their baby to have vitamin K by injection, offer oral vitamin K as an alternative. Advise parents that oral vitamin K: 
may need to be given as multiple doses, including after the baby goes home, and 
should be given at the dose and time according to the manufacturer's instructions. [2006, amended 2026] 
For a short explanation of why the 2006 recommendations on vitamin K were reintroduced, see the rationale and impact section on vitamin K . 
1.11.14 
Record head circumference, and birth weight soon after the first hour following birth and plot on the centile chart. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.11.15 
Check the baby's body temperature is in the normal range. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.11.16 
Undertake an initial examination to detect any major physical abnormality and to identify any problems that need referral. [2007] 
1.11.17 
Undertake additional monitoring of the baby for women who have taken SSRI or SNRI antidepressants during pregnancy as these may result in a small increased risk of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn or neonatal withdrawal symptoms. See the NICE guideline on antenatal and postnatal mental health and the MHRA advice on the use of SSRI and SNRI antidepressants in pregnancy . [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on additional monitoring for babies exposed to antidepressants in utero . 
1.11.18 
Ensure that any examination or treatment of the baby is undertaken with the consent of the parents and either in their presence or, if this is not possible, with their knowledge. [2007] 
Neonatal resuscitation 
1.11.19 
In the first minutes after birth, evaluate the condition of the baby (specifically respiration, heart rate and tone) in order to determine whether resuscitation is needed according to nationally accredited guidelines on neonatal resuscitation. [2014] 
1.11.20 
All relevant healthcare professionals caring for women during birth should attend annually a course in neonatal resuscitation that is consistent with nationally accredited guidelines on neonatal resuscitation. [2014] 
1.11.21 
In all birth settings: 
bear in mind that it will be necessary to call for help if the baby needs resuscitation, and plan accordingly 
ensure that there are facilities for resuscitation, and for transferring the baby to another location if necessary 
develop emergency referral pathways for both the woman and the baby, and implement these if necessary. [2014] 
1.11.22 
If a newborn baby needs basic resuscitation, start with air. [2014] 
1.11.23 
Minimise separation of the baby and mother, taking into account the clinical circumstances. [2014] 
1.11.24 
Throughout an emergency situation in which the baby needs resuscitation, allocate a member of the healthcare team to talk with, and offer support to, the woman and any birth companion(s). [2014] 
Care of babies in the presence of meconium 
1.11.25 
In the presence of any degree of meconium: 
do not suction the baby's upper airways (nasopharynx and oropharynx) before birth of the shoulders and trunk 
do not suction the baby's upper airways (nasopharynx and oropharynx) if the baby has normal respiration, heart rate and tone 
do not intubate if the baby has normal respiration, heart rate and tone. [2014] 
1.11.26 
If there has been any degree of meconium and the baby does not have normal respiration, heart rate and tone, follow nationally accredited guidelines on neonatal resuscitation. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.11.27 
If there has been significant meconium and the baby is healthy, closely observe the baby within a unit with immediate access to a neonatologist. Perform these observations at 1 and 2 hours old and then 2‑hourly until 12 hours old. [2014] 
1.11.28 
If there has been non-significant meconium, observe the baby at 1 and 2 hours old in all birth settings. [2014] 
1.11.29 
If any of the following are observed after any degree of meconium, ask a neonatologist to assess the baby. Transfer both the woman and baby if they are at home or in a freestanding midwifery unit. Follow the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 , taking into account that multiple risk factors may increase the urgency of the transfer, particularly if they have a cumulative effect: 
respiratory rate above 60 breaths per minute 
the presence of grunting 
heart rate below 100 or above 160 beats per minute 
capillary refill time above 3 seconds 
body temperature of 38°C or above, or 37.5°C on 2 occasions 15 to 30 minutes apart 
oxygen saturation below 95% (measuring oxygen saturation is optional after non-significant meconium) 
presence of central cyanosis, confirmed by pulse oximetry if available. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.11.30 
Explain the findings to the woman, and inform her about what to look out for and who to talk to if she has any concerns. [2014] 
Babies born to women with prelabour rupture of the membranes at term 
1.11.31 
Closely observe any baby born to a woman with prelabour rupture of the membranes (more than 24 hours before the onset of established labour) at term for the first 12 hours of life (at 1, 2, 6 and 12 hours) in all settings. Include assessment of: 
temperature 
heart rate 
respiratory rate 
presence of respiratory grunting 
significant subcostal recession 
presence of nasal flare 
presence of central cyanosis, confirmed by pulse oximetry if available 
skin perfusion assessed by capillary refill 
floppiness 
concerns about general wellbeing and feeding. 
If any of these are observed, ask a neonatologist to assess the baby. Transfer both the woman and baby if they are at home or in a freestanding midwifery unit. Follow the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 and take into account that multiple risk factors may increase the urgency of the transfer, particularly if they have a cumulative effect. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.11.32 
If there are no signs of infection in the woman or in the baby, do not give antibiotics to either the woman or the baby, even if the membranes have been ruptured for over 24 hours. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.11.33 
If there is evidence of infection in the woman or in the baby, see the section on antibiotics for suspected early-onset infection in NICE's guideline on neonatal infection for advice on when to consider antibiotics. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.11.34 
Advise women with prelabour rupture of the membranes to inform their healthcare professionals immediately of any concerns they have about their baby's wellbeing in the first 5 days after birth, particularly in the first 12 hours when the risk of infection is greatest. [2007] 
1.11.35 
Do not perform blood, cerebrospinal fluid and/or surface culture tests in an asymptomatic baby. [2007] 
1.11.36 
Refer a baby with any symptom of possible sepsis, or born to a woman who has evidence of chorioamnionitis, to a neonatal care specialist immediately. [2007] 
1.12 Care of the woman after birth 
Initial assessment 
1.12.1 
Carry out the following observations of the woman after birth: 
record her temperature, pulse, blood pressure and respiratory rate. Transfer the woman (with her baby) to obstetric-led care if any of the relevant indications listed in recommendation 1.8.20 are met 
check uterine contraction and lochia 
examine the placenta and membranes: assess their condition, structure, cord vessels and completeness; transfer the woman (with her baby) to obstetric-led care if the placenta is incomplete 
make an early assessment of the woman's emotional and psychological condition in response to labour and birth; see the NICE guideline on postnatal care 
check for successful voiding of the bladder; if, after 6 hours, her bladder is palpable and she is unable to pass urine, advise catheterisation and consider transferring the woman (with her baby) to obstetric-led care. 
If transferring the woman to obstetric-led care, follow the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 and take into account that multiple risk factors may increase the urgency of the transfer, particularly if they have a cumulative effect. [2014, amended 2023] 
1.12.2 
Check that women who have had regional analgesia or anaesthesia can perform a straight leg raise by 4 hours after the last anaesthetic dose. If not, contact the obstetric anaesthetist for urgent review. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on care of the woman after birth . 
Perineal care 
1.12.3 
Define perineal or genital trauma caused by either tearing or episiotomy as follows: 
first degree – injury to skin only 
second degree – injury to the perineal muscles but not the anal sphincter 
third degree – injury to the perineum involving the anal sphincter complex: 
3a – less than 50% of external anal sphincter thickness torn 
3b – more than 50% of external anal sphincter thickness torn 
3c – internal anal sphincter torn 
fourth degree – injury to the perineum involving the anal sphincter complex (external and internal anal sphincter) and anal epithelium. [2007] 
1.12.4 
Before assessing for genital trauma: 
explain to the woman what is planned and why 
offer inhalational analgesia 
ensure good lighting 
position the woman so that she is comfortable and so that the genital structures can be seen clearly. [2007] 
1.12.5 
Offer all women systematic assessment, including a rectal examination, to exclude all genital tract trauma, including buttonhole tears. [2007, amended 2023] 
1.12.6 
Perform the initial examination gently and with sensitivity. It may be done in the immediate period after birth. [2007] 
1.12.7 
Include the following in a systematic assessment of genital trauma: 
further explanation of what is planned and why 
confirmation by the woman that tested effective local or regional analgesia is in place 
visual assessment of the extent of perineal trauma to include the structures involved, the apex of the injury and assessment of bleeding 
a rectal examination to assess whether there has been any damage to the external or internal anal sphincter if there is any suspicion that the perineal muscles are damaged. [2007] 
1.12.8 
Ensure that the timing of this systematic assessment does not interfere with mother–baby bonding unless the woman has bleeding that requires urgent attention. [2007] 
1.12.9 
Assist the woman to adopt a position that allows adequate visual assessment of the degree of trauma and for repair. Only maintain this position for as long as necessary for systematic assessment and repair. If it is not possible to adequately assess the trauma, transfer the woman (with her baby) to obstetric-led care, following the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 . [2007, amended 2014] 
1.12.10 
Seek advice from a more experienced midwife or obstetrician if there is uncertainty about the nature or extent of the trauma. Transfer the woman (with her baby) to obstetric-led care (following the general principles for transfer of care described in section 1.5 ) if the repair needs further surgical or anaesthetic expertise. [2007, amended 2014] 
1.12.11 
Document the systematic assessment and its results fully, possibly pictorially. [2007] 
1.12.12 
All relevant healthcare professionals should attend training in perineal/genital assessment and repair and ensure that they maintain these skills. [2007] 
1.12.13 
Undertake repair of the perineum as soon as possible to minimise the risk of infection and blood loss. [2007] 
1.12.14 
When carrying out perineal repair: 
ensure that tested effective analgesia is in place, using infiltration with up to 20 ml of 1% lidocaine or equivalent 
top up the epidural or insert a spinal anaesthetic if necessary. [2007] 
1.12.15 
If the woman reports inadequate pain relief at any point, address this immediately. [2007] 
1.12.16 
Advise the woman that in the case of first-degree trauma, the wound should be sutured in order to improve healing, unless the skin edges are well opposed. [2007] 
1.12.17 
Advise the woman that in the case of second-degree trauma, the muscle should be sutured in order to improve healing. [2007] 
1.12.18 
If the skin is opposed after suturing of the muscle in second-degree trauma, there is no need to suture it. [2007] 
1.12.19 
If the skin does need suturing, use a continuous subcuticular technique. [2007] 
1.12.20 
Undertake perineal repair using a continuous non-locked suturing technique for the vaginal wall and muscle layer. [2007] 
1.12.21 
Use an absorbable synthetic suture material to suture the perineum. [2007] 
1.12.22 
Offer rectal non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs routinely after perineal repair of first- and second-degree trauma provided these drugs are not contraindicated. [2007] 
1.12.23 
Observe the following basic principles when performing perineal repairs: 
repair perineal trauma using aseptic techniques 
check equipment and count swabs and needles before and after the procedure 
ensure good lighting is available to see and identify the structures involved 
ensure that trauma is repaired in the appropriate place with appropriate anaesthesia, according to the clinician's judgement 
ensure that good anatomical alignment of the wound is achieved and that consideration is given to the cosmetic results 
ensure that suture material has not been accidentally inserted through the rectal mucosa by carrying out a rectal examination after completing the repair 
after completion of the repair, document an accurate detailed account covering the extent of the trauma, the method of repair and the materials used 
give the woman information about the extent of the trauma, pain relief, diet, hygiene and the importance of learning to do pelvic floor exercises, what to expect as they recover, and where and when to seek advice or psychological support if needed. [2007, amended 2023] 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline. For other definitions, see the NICE glossary and the Think Local, Act Personal Care and Support Jargon Buster . 
Cephalic 
The baby is positioned head-down, ready to be born head-first through the vagina. 
Hyperstimulation 
This is overactivity of the uterus. It is variously defined as uterine tachysystole (5 or more contractions per 10 minutes for at least 20 minutes), and uterine hypersystole or hypertonicity (a contraction lasting at least 2 minutes). These may or may not be associated with changes in the fetal heart rate pattern (persistent decelerations, tachycardia, or increased or decreased short-term variability). 
Hyponatraemia 
Peripartum hyponatraemia occurs during labour and birth when the sodium concentration in the blood drops below 130 mmol/L and can have life-threatening consequences. Women or pregnant people in labour are predisposed to developing hyponatraemia because of lower baseline sodium level during pregnancy, lowered ability to excrete water in the third trimester and exposure to the anti-diuretic effect of oxytocin (both natural and synthetic). Maternal hyponatraemia also impacts the unborn baby because water crosses the placenta freely, which can lead to hyponatraemia in the newborn. 
Early symptoms and signs include headache, loss of appetite, nausea and lethargy, while more advanced symptoms and signs include agitation, confusion, seizures, depressed reflexes and coma. 
Significant meconium 
This is defined as dark green or black amniotic fluid that is thick or tenacious, or any meconium-stained amniotic fluid containing lumps of meconium. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
