Overview | Advocacy services for adults with health and social care needs | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Advocacy services for adults with health and social care needs
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG227 
Published: 
09 November 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Context 
Recommendations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Overview 
This guideline covers advocacy for people using health and social care services in all adult settings (including young people under 18 using adult services). It describes how to commission and deliver effective advocacy, as well as identifying who should be offered advocacy (including who is legally entitled to it). It also covers monitoring and improving advocacy services, and training and skills for advocates and practitioners. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
the legal right to advocacy and others who may benefit from it 
information about advocacy and improving access to it 
effective advocacy and enabling effective advocacy 
partnership working and relationships 
planning and commissioning services 
training and skills for advocates and for practitioners who work with them 
monitoring for quality improvement 
Who is it for? 
Commissioners and providers of health and social care services, and of advocacy services 
Integrated Care Boards 
Health and Wellbeing Boards 
Safeguarding Adults Boards 
Health and social care practitioners who work with advocates 
Advocates, including peer advocates, citizen advocates and professional advocates 
Training providers 
People using health or social care services, their families and carers and the public 
It may also be of interest to regulators. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Context 
Back to top
