Recommendations for research | Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Hypertension
Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG136 
Published: 
28 August 2019
Last updated: 
26 February 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The 2019 and 2022 guideline committees have made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Automated blood pressure monitoring in people with atrial fibrillation 
Which automated blood pressure monitors are suitable for people with hypertension and atrial fibrillation? [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on monitoring treatment and blood pressure targets for people without cardiovascular disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: monitoring the response to treatment . 
2 Thresholds for interventions in adults aged under 40 
In adults aged under 40 with hypertension (with or without type 2 diabetes), what are the appropriate risk and blood pressure thresholds for starting treatment? [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on starting antihypertensive drug treatment . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: initiating treatment . 
3 Blood pressure targets for people aged over 80 
What is the optimum blood pressure target for people aged over 80 with treated primary hypertension (with or without cardiovascular disease)? [2022] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on blood pressure targets for people with cardiovascular disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: targets . 
4 Step 1 treatment 
Are there subgroups of people with hypertension who should start on dual therapy? [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on step 1 treatment . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: step 1 treatment . 
5 Relaxation therapies 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of relaxation therapies for managing primary hypertension in adults in terms of reducing cardiovascular events and improving quality of life? [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on relaxation therapies . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: relaxation therapies . 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Same-day hospital specialist assessment 
Which people with extreme hypertension (220/120 mmHg or higher) or emergency symptoms should be referred for same-day hospital specialist assessment? [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the see rationale on identifying who to refer for same-day specialist review . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: same-day specialist review . 
7 Blood pressure targets for people with aortic aneurysm 
What are the optimal blood pressure targets in adults with hypertension and aortic aneurysm, and does this vary by age? [2022] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale and impact section on blood pressure targets for people with cardiovascular disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in the evidence review J: blood pressure targets . 
8 Blood pressure targets for people with prior ischaemic or haemorrhagic stroke 
What are the optimal blood pressure targets in adults with prior ischaemic or haemorrhagic stroke, and does this vary by age? [2022] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale and impact section on blood pressure targets for people with cardiovascular disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in the evidence review J: blood pressure targets . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
