Overview | COVID-19 rapid guideline: managing the long-term effects of COVID-19 | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
COVID-19
COVID-19 rapid guideline: managing the long-term effects of COVID-19 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG188 
Published: 
18 December 2020
Last updated: 
25 January 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
1 Identification 
2 Assessment 
3 Investigations and referral 
4 Planning care 
5 Management 
6 Follow‑up, monitoring and discharge 
7 Sharing information and continuity of care 
8 Service organisation 
9 Common symptoms 
Recommendations for research 
Rationales 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers identifying, assessing and managing the long-term effects of COVID-19, often described as ‘long COVID’. It makes recommendations on care in all healthcare settings for adults, children and young people who have new or ongoing symptoms 4 weeks or more after the start of acute COVID-19. It also includes advice on organising services for long COVID. 
NICE has also produced COVID-19 rapid guidelines on managing COVID-19 and haematopoietic stem cell transplantation . 
On 25 January 2024 , we transferred the guideline from the MAGICapp platform to the NICE website, changing the presentation. The recommendations are unchanged.  
On  11 November 2021 , we made new recommendations and updated existing recommendations on identification; planning care; multidisciplinary rehabilitation; follow up, monitoring and discharge; and service organisation. We also updated the list of common symptoms, emphasising that these may be different for children. 
Guideline development process 
This guideline uses the methods and process in  NICE's interim process and methods for guidelines developed in response to health and social care emergencies . 
This guideline was developed jointly by NICE, the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) and the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP). 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
1 Identification 
Back to top
