Principles of care | Fertility problems: assessment and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Fertility
Fertility problems: assessment and treatment
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG257 
Published: 
31 March 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Principles of care 
Initial advice to people concerned about delays in conception 
Advice about factors that can affect fertility 
Defining infertility and initial assessment 
Investigation of fertility problems and management strategies 
Management of male factor fertility problems 
Management of female factor fertility problems 
Unstimulated intrauterine insemination (IUI) 
Unexplained fertility problems in people trying to conceive through unprotected vaginal sexual intercourse 
Access criteria for in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Procedures used during in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) 
Donor insemination 
Oocyte donation 
Fertility preservation for medical indications 
Long-term safety of assisted reproductive technologies 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Providing information
1.2 Psychological effects of fertility problems
1.3 Generalist and specialist care
Principles of care 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
patient experience in adult NHS services 
shared decision making 
medicines adherence 
medicines optimisation 
multimorbidity . 
1.1 Providing information 
1.1.1 
See couples who experience problems in conceiving together because both partners are affected by decisions surrounding investigation and treatment. [2004] 
1.1.2 
Ensure that people have the opportunity to make informed decisions about their care and treatment via access to evidence-based information. Recognise these choices as an integral part of the decision-making process. Supplement verbal information with written or online information, for example, information from the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) . [2004, amended 2026] 
1.1.3 
Provide information about care and treatment options in a format that is accessible to people who have additional needs, such as people with physical, cognitive or sensory disabilities, and people who do not speak or read English. [2004] 
1.1.4 
Advise people who are thinking about using donor sperm to conceive to have treatment in a licensed fertility clinic to ensure clinical safety and legal parenthood. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2026 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on advice about conception using donor sperm . 
1.2 Psychological effects of fertility problems 
1.2.1 
When couples have fertility problems, inform both partners that stress in either or both partners can affect the couple's relationship and is likely to reduce libido and frequency of intercourse, which can contribute to the fertility problems. [2004 , amended 2013] 
1.2.2 
Inform people who experience fertility problems that they may find it helpful to contact a relevant organisation for support. [2004, amended 2026] 
1.2.3 
Offer counselling to people who experience fertility problems because fertility problems themselves, and the investigation and treatment of fertility problems, can cause psychological stress. [2004] 
1.2.4 
Offer counselling before, during and after investigation and treatment, irrespective of the outcome of these procedures. [2004] 
1.2.5 
Counselling should be provided by someone who is not directly involved in the management of the individual's or couple's fertility problems. [2004 , amended 2013] 
1.3 Generalist and specialist care 
1.3.1 
People who experience fertility problems should be treated by a specialist team because this is likely to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of treatment, and is known to improve people's satisfaction with treatment. [2004 , amended 2013] 
Next page 
Initial advice to people concerned about delays in conception 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
