Recommendations | Medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms: safe prescribing and withdrawal management for adults | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Medicines management
Medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms: safe prescribing and withdrawal management for adults
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG215 
Published: 
20 April 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Supporting people taking a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant
1.2 Making decisions about prescribing and taking a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant
1.3 Starting a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant
1.4 Reviewing a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant
1.5 Withdrawing a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off‑label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Supporting people taking a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant 
1.1.1 
Aim to foster collaborative, trusting and supportive relationships with people considering taking, and at all stages of prescribing and withdrawal management of, an opioid, benzodiazepine, gabapentinoid, Z‑drug or antidepressant. Follow the recommendations in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services , particularly those relating to: 
continuity of care and relationships 
enabling patients to actively participate in their care 
tailoring healthcare services to each person. 
1.1.2 
Ask people whether they would like to have support during appointments from a family member, carer, advocate or other person close to them. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on supporting people taking a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: patient information and support . 
1.2 Making decisions about prescribing and taking a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant 
1.2.1 
Before starting or continuing treatment with an opioid, benzodiazepine, gabapentinoid, Z‑drug or antidepressant, ensure that all suitable management options, including non-pharmacological approaches and watchful waiting, have been discussed with and offered to the person. 
1.2.2 
When making decisions about prescribing medicines, determine whether there are any factors that might increase the person's risk of developing problems associated with dependence, but do not withhold the medicine solely on the basis of one of these factors. Explain and discuss the risk with the person. Factors that might increase risk include: 
a comorbid mental health diagnosis 
a history of drug or alcohol misuse 
not having a clear, defined diagnosis to support the prescription 
taking an opioid together with a benzodiazepine. 
1.2.3 
During the first discussion about prescribing, give the person information and advice (in their preferred format) to help them balance the potential benefit of the medicine and other treatment options with the risk of long-term consequences. Use the NICE guidelines on shared decision making and decision making and mental capacity to support people when making decisions. 
1.2.4 
Recognise and acknowledge that decisions about medicines can be difficult for a person who is in distress. 
1.2.5 
Acknowledge that these decisions are also difficult for the prescriber particularly when supporting a person who is distressed, and in the presence of risk factors for developing problems associated with dependence, and that additional time may be required to consider options and consult with colleagues. 
1.2.6 
Consider delaying prescribing if the person needs more time to think about their options or the prescriber needs to consult with other members of the healthcare team. If prescribing is delayed, ensure that a follow-up appointment is arranged. 
1.2.7 
If a prescriber thinks that a medicine is not in the person's best interests but a shared decision about starting or continuing a medicine cannot be reached with the person, the prescriber should follow the advice on 'handling patient requests for medicines you don't think will benefit them' in the General Medical Council guidance: good practice in prescribing and managing medicines and devices . The prescriber should: 
not prescribe a medicine if they believe it is not in the person's best interests 
explain the reasons for their decision to the person 
document all discussions carefully and give a copy to the person 
offer the person a second opinion. 
1.2.8 
For people who find it difficult to communicate their symptoms, for example people with a learning disability or cognitive impairment: 
explore a range of methods to understand the person's symptoms, including discussion with family members, carers or an advocate if appropriate 
make necessary reasonable adjustments, for example increasing the appointment length, using short clear sentences or alternative methods of communication and visual aids during consultations, to help the person understand their options for treatment and the associated risks and benefits of each, and to express their view 
ensure that family members or carers are aware of the properties of any medicine prescribed, if appropriate. 
For more information, see the NICE guidelines on shared decision making , care and support of people growing older with learning disabilities and dementia . 
1.2.9 
Ensure that people with a learning disability or mental health problem have had a full assessment before prescribing a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant, to ensure that they do not have other unmet needs and that prescribing is the appropriate option. Consider involving the relevant specialist teams. 
For more information, see the NICE guideline on challenging behaviour and learning disabilities . 
1.2.10 
Prescribers must understand and take into account the principles set out in the Mental Capacity Act 2005 when working with individuals who may lack capacity to make decisions. 
For more information, see the NICE guideline on decision making and mental capacity . 
1.2.11 
Prescribers should use the Royal Pharmaceutical Society's Competency framework for all prescribers to support safe and effective prescribing and improve prescribing practice. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on making decisions about prescribing and taking a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review A: patient information and support 
evidence review B: prescribing strategies 
evidence review E: risk factors . 
1.3 Starting a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant 
Information and support for people starting a medicine 
See the  Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency's (MHRA's) safety advice on improving information supplied with gabapentinoids (pregabalin/gabapentin), benzodiazepines and Z-drugs  and  opioids: risk of dependence and addiction , including for details of discussions to have with people before starting these medicines. See also the MHRA's patient leaflets on the risks of addiction, dependence and withdrawal when using benzodiazepines , gabapentinoids and Z-drugs . 
1.3.1 
Before starting treatment with an opioid, benzodiazepine, gabapentinoid, Z‑drug or antidepressant, give the person verbal and written information (in their preferred format) about the medicine. Ensure that the information is evidence-based and understandable by the person. Explain to the person: 
the potential side effects of the medicine, whether these are likely to be temporary or permanent and whether they might improve or worsen over time 
any additional implications of taking the medicine if the person is pregnant or planning pregnancy 
what the options might be if the medicine does not work 
how difficult it might be to stop the medicine later and how that might be managed (see the section on withdrawing a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant ) 
that missing doses may lead to symptoms of withdrawal 
how to store medicines safely (for more information, see the NICE guideline on controlled drugs ). 
1.3.2 
Before starting treatment with an opioid, benzodiazepine, gabapentinoid or Z‑drug, explain and discuss with the person: 
that dependence is an expected effect of these medicines and is not a reason in itself to avoid the medicine 
the potential for developing problems associated with dependence 
the symptoms that suggest the development of problems associated with dependence and, if appropriate, the importance of making family members, carers or other people close to them aware of these symptoms. 
1.3.3 
Before starting treatment with an antidepressant or gabapentinoid, explain and discuss with the person: 
that any beneficial effect of the medicine may occur slowly, and they might experience side effects before noticing any benefit 
that many side effects are likely to ease over time. 
1.3.4 
Consider supplementing verbal and written information with details of peer support networks or online forums suitable for the person. 
Management planning 
1.3.5 
Discuss and agree a management plan with the person. Document the plan in the person's medical record and give them a copy in their preferred format. Include: 
what the medicine has been prescribed for, the intended outcomes of treatment and how these might be assessed 
the starting dose and intervals between dose adjustments or titrations 
who to contact if problems occur 
information about how long the medicine will take to work and how long they might be taking it for 
the duration of each prescription that will be issued 
the risks of taking more than the prescribed dose 
the symptoms and signs of an overdose and what they should do if this happens 
the plans for reviewing the medicine (including where and by whom this will be done) and the date of their next review. 
1.3.6 
Think about a strategy for regular reviews and include these in the management plan. Use regular reviews to: 
ensure that the benefits of the medicine continue to outweigh the potential harms 
check whether the dose needs to be adjusted and, if so, how to do this safely. 
Prescribing strategies 
1.3.7 
Take steps to reduce the risk of developing problems associated with dependence, for example starting at a low dose, and consider avoiding modified-release opioids. Explain the importance of these steps to the person. 
1.3.8 
Discuss with the person the range of doses likely to be safe and effective. Start with a low dose and agree frequent, regular reviews to ensure that timely adjustments can be made to test effectiveness, safety and acceptability and to find the lowest effective dose. Once an effective dose has been established, avoid automatically increasing the dose if the response is not sustained. 
1.3.9 
If the person's individual circumstances or the setting (for example, a secure setting) mean that usual prescribing practices are not suitable, adjust the prescription to ensure that: 
the medicine can be administered safely as part of the setting's routine 
the medicine does not pose a risk to the person or to others living in that setting. 
For more information, see the NICE guideline on physical health of people in prison . 
1.3.10 
The duration of each individual prescription: 
should reflect the management plan (see recommendation 1.3.5 ) 
should comply with best practice in controlled drugs prescribing 
must comply with relevant legislation (for more information, see the NICE guideline on controlled drugs ). 
Working with other healthcare professionals 
1.3.11 
When starting a prescription suggested by another healthcare professional, taking over a person's care, or deciding whether to continue a prescription made by another healthcare professional: 
take the same level of care you would take if you were starting the prescription 
follow the section on supporting people taking a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant to help establish the new relationship 
ensure that you have sufficient knowledge of the person's health and preferences to determine whether continued prescribing is in their best interests or whether careful withdrawal (in discussion with the person) would be more beneficial for them. 
1.3.12 
Healthcare professionals in secondary care who recommend a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant to be started or continued in primary care should explain to the person that: 
the medicine will be prescribed by their primary care team 
the primary care team will need to review the medicine 
if the primary care team declines to prescribe the medicine, or wishes to delay it, the secondary and primary care teams will discuss the medicine and involve the person in these discussions, explaining the reasons for any delay 
the secondary care team might not continue to manage and provide the medicine if this is agreed after discussions. 
1.3.13 
When transferring responsibility for prescribing from secondary to primary care, ensure that all relevant healthcare professionals have access to the management plan in the person's medical record. 
1.3.14 
If possible, ensure that 1 person has overall responsibility for a prescription. If the initial prescriber is unable to review the medicine, ensure there are arrangements for review by another healthcare professional and that effective communication, including sharing the person's records and management plan as needed, is in place to support this. 
Pharmacists working in primary care may play a key role in supporting prescribing. See the section on medication review in the NICE guideline on medicines optimisation . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on starting a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review A: patient information and support 
evidence review B: prescribing strategies 
evidence review E: risk factors 
evidence review F: monitoring . 
1.4 Reviewing a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant 
Frequency of reviews 
1.4.1 
Offer regular reviews (by phone, video or face to face) to people taking an opioid, benzodiazepine, gabapentinoid, Z‑drug or antidepressant. Base the frequency of reviews on: 
the person's preferences and circumstances 
the type of medicine they are taking and the dose 
factors that might indicate a need for frequent reviews, for example if: 
the person has additional care needs (such as people with a learning disability or cognitive impairment) 
the person is taking the medicine for the first time 
there are potential adverse effects or problems associated with dependence 
the medicine is being used outside its licensed indications 
there is potential for misuse of the medicine. 
For more information on antidepressants, see the NICE guidelines on depression in adults and depression in adults with a chronic physical health problem . 
1.4.2 
Consider increasing the frequency of reviews during dose adjustment. Take into account the person's clinical and support needs when agreeing review frequency. 
1.4.3 
Offer extra, unscheduled reviews when needed, for example if the person: 
reports adverse effects from the medicine 
becomes pregnant or is planning pregnancy 
has a change in their physical or mental health condition, or social circumstances 
starts taking medicines from a different prescriber 
requests a change in dose. 
1.4.4 
For guidance on reviewing medicines, see the section on medication review in the NICE guideline on medicines optimisation and the section on reviewing medicines in the NICE guideline on medicines adherence . 
Content of reviews 
1.4.5 
During the review, discuss with the person the benefits and risks of continuing the current dose, adjusting the dose or stopping the medicine. Base decisions on this discussion, taking into account, for example: 
the benefits or harms the person is experiencing from continuing the medicine 
any signs that the person is developing problems associated with dependence (such as running out of a medicine early, making frequent requests for dose increases or reporting loss of efficacy of a medicine that was previously working well) 
the person's preferences. 
1.4.6 
Agree and update the management plan with the person after each review, and give them a copy (see recommendation 1.3.5 ). Check that they know who to contact if they have problems or concerns. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on reviewing a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: monitoring . 
1.5 Withdrawing a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant 
Making shared decisions about withdrawing medicines 
1.5.1 
Discuss withdrawing an opioid, benzodiazepine, gabapentinoid, Z‑drug or antidepressant with the person if: 
it is no longer benefiting the person 
problems associated with dependence have developed 
the condition for which the medicine was prescribed has resolved 
the harms of the medicine outweigh the benefits 
the person wants to stop taking the medicine. 
1.5.2 
Explain the benefits the person can expect from reducing the medicine and aim to reach agreement using a shared decision-making approach. Allow enough time to explore the person's circumstances and preferences. 
1.5.3 
Understand that the person might be reluctant or anxious about discussing problems associated with dependence. Reassure them that dependence is an expected effect of these medicines and that problems associated with dependence sometimes develop. Be sensitive to the use of terminology that may apportion blame to the person or be perceived adversely. 
1.5.4 
Acknowledge and discuss with the person any differences between their views and your own about the risks and benefits of the medicine. 
1.5.5 
Be prepared for queries about prescribing decisions made previously. Explain that our understanding of the balance of risks and benefits of a medicine can change over time. If sufficient clinical detail is available, discuss the possibility that past prescribing was done in the person's best interests using the knowledge available at the time. 
1.5.6 
Do not stop a medicine abruptly (complete cessation with immediate effect) unless there are exceptional medical circumstances, such as the occurrence of serious side effects (for example, upper gastrointestinal bleeding from an antidepressant, respiratory depression from an opioid or severe ataxia from a gabapentinoid). In these circumstances, consider: 
scheduling more frequent reviews 
short-term use of medicines to treat the physical symptoms of withdrawal (for example, abdominal cramps and diarrhoea during withdrawal of an opioid). 
1.5.7 
When planning withdrawal from an opioid, benzodiazepine, gabapentinoid, Z‑drug or antidepressant, take into account: 
the urgency of the withdrawal, for example gradual withdrawal of a medicine that is no longer effective or necessary, or more rapid withdrawal of a medicine that is causing significant harm (the speed of rapid withdrawal depends on the type of medicine and the person's circumstances, see recommendation 1.5.6) 
whether the initial goal should be complete withdrawal or, for people who find complete withdrawal too difficult, whether dose reduction with ongoing review is a more realistic initial aim 
which medicine to reduce first, if the person will be withdrawing from more than 1 medicine 
factors that might increase the person's risk of problems during withdrawal, including: 
long duration of medicine use 
high dose of medicine 
history of withdrawal symptoms 
history of problems associated with dependence 
taking an antidepressant with a short half-life 
any concurrent medicines and how these might affect the person's response to withdrawal 
factors that might influence the timing of the start of the dose reduction, such as the person's circumstances and available support. 
Information and support for people withdrawing from a medicine 
1.5.8 
Before starting withdrawal: 
give the person information about the process of withdrawal that is tailored to their situation and the medicine they are taking 
explain how the withdrawal will be carried out 
consider providing details of sources of peer support, national and local support groups for people who are withdrawing from a medicine. 
1.5.9 
Discuss withdrawal symptoms with the person and tell them about the support that is available. When discussing withdrawal symptoms, explain that: 
withdrawal can be difficult, and may take several months or more 
support will be available throughout the withdrawal process 
withdrawal symptoms do not affect everyone, and it is not possible to predict who will be affected 
withdrawal symptoms vary widely in type and severity, can affect both physical and mental health, may occur at any time during withdrawal or be delayed in onset and can change over time or persist over a prolonged period 
there are options for managing withdrawal symptoms (see the section on identifying and managing withdrawal symptoms and the section on interventions to support withdrawal ) 
some people may experience withdrawal symptoms that can be difficult to distinguish from a re‑emergence of their original symptoms or a new disorder, and it is important to discuss these with a healthcare professional if they occur (see recommendation 1.5.17 ). 
Dose reduction 
1.5.10 
When agreeing a dose reduction schedule with the person: 
explain the risk of abrupt discontinuation and that the rate of safe withdrawal varies between people and can vary over time for the same person 
balance the risk of adverse events from continued exposure to the medicine with minimising the risk of withdrawal symptoms by slow dose reduction and withdrawal 
ensure that the planned rate of reduction is acceptable to the person 
explain that although withdrawal symptoms are to be expected, the reduction schedule can be modified to allow intolerable withdrawal symptoms to improve before making the next reduction 
consider giving the person additional control over the process of dose reduction (for example, by issuing their usual daily dose in a form that allows them to reduce the amount in small decrements at a pace of their choosing, rather than issuing successive prescriptions for reduced daily doses) 
agree regular intervals for reviewing and adjusting the reduction schedule as needed 
ensure the person knows who to contact if problems occur. 
1.5.11 
If the person is withdrawing from an opioid, benzodiazepine, Z‑drug or antidepressant, suggest a slow, stepwise rate of reduction proportionate to the existing dose, so that decrements become smaller as the dose is lowered, unless clinical risk is such that rapid withdrawal is needed (see recommendation 1.5.6 ). 
1.5.12 
If the person is withdrawing from a gabapentinoid, reduce the dose by a fixed amount at each decrement, unless clinical risk is such that rapid withdrawal is needed (see recommendation 1.5.6 ). 
1.5.13 
If the person is withdrawing from a benzodiazepine with a short half-life, consider switching to a benzodiazepine with a longer half-life. 
1.5.14 
If using a published withdrawal schedule, apply it flexibly to accommodate the person's preferences, changes to their circumstances and the response to dose reductions. 
1.5.15 
During withdrawal, offer continued management of the underlying condition for which the medicine was prescribed, if needed. 
1.5.16 
Ensure the plan for dose reduction or withdrawal is clearly recorded in the overall management plan. 
Identifying and managing withdrawal symptoms 
1.5.17 
Be aware that it can be difficult to distinguish between the re‑emergence of underlying conditions and the emergence of withdrawal symptoms. The following may indicate withdrawal symptoms rather than symptoms of an underlying condition: 
rapid or early onset of symptoms after a dose reduction or cessation of the medicine 
symptoms of the underlying illness that the person reports as qualitatively different or more intense than before 
new symptoms that the person has not experienced before. 
1.5.18 
Follow recommendation 1.2.8 for people who find it difficult to communicate their symptoms, for example people with a learning disability or cognitive impairment. 
1.5.19 
Use clinical judgement to determine the need for further investigation to rule out new pathology. 
1.5.20 
If distressing symptoms occur or worsen after a dose reduction: 
determine whether they are withdrawal symptoms or a re‑emergence of symptoms that were relieved by the medicine 
if the symptoms are new, think about delaying the next dose reduction, trying a smaller dose reduction or reverting to the previous dose. 
Interventions to support withdrawal 
1.5.21 
Do not treat withdrawal symptoms with another medicine that is associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms. 
1.5.22 
Do not offer sodium valproate or buspirone to aid withdrawal from a benzodiazepine. 
1.5.23 
Consider group cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) when withdrawing from a benzodiazepine. Discuss the timing of referral for CBT with the person. 
Strategies if withdrawal cannot be agreed or is unsuccessful 
1.5.24 
Follow recommendation 1.2.7 if a shared decision to withdraw cannot be reached and continuing the current prescription is not in the person's best interests. Be aware that medicines associated with dependence and withdrawal symptoms should not be stopped abruptly in most cases (see recommendation 1.5.6 ) and need to be reduced in line with the section on withdrawing medicines . 
1.5.25 
If continued use of the medicine may be particularly harmful for the person or others (for example, in a secure setting) and a dose reduction, or a more rapid reduction than the person wishes, is the safest option, consider: 
scheduling more frequent reviews 
short-term use of medicines to treat the physical symptoms of withdrawal (for example, abdominal cramps and diarrhoea during withdrawal of an opioid). 
1.5.26 
If dose reduction has been unsuccessful (for example because of intolerable withdrawal symptoms or a change in the person's physical, mental or social circumstances) and the current prescription needs to be continued: 
aim to stop any further escalation in dose 
make a plan to attempt dose reduction again at a later date 
clearly record the advice given to the person about the potential harms of continuing the medicine, and the reasons for continuing without a reduction, in the management plan. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on withdrawing a dependence-forming medicine or antidepressant . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review A: patient information and support 
evidence review C: safe withdrawal 
evidence review D: withdrawal symptoms . 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
