Overview | Metastatic malignant disease of unknown primary origin in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Metastases
Metastatic malignant disease of unknown primary origin in adults: diagnosis and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG104 
Published: 
26 July 2010
Last updated: 
26 April 2023
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing secondary cancer in people aged 18 and over when the site of the primary cancer is unknown. This includes people who have had treatment for cancer before. It aims to improve quality of life by offering advice on tests for identifying the site of the primary cancer and options for managing the person’s condition. 
This guideline covers carcinomas only and does not cover, for example, lymphoma, melanoma and sarcoma. For other NICE guidelines on cancer, see the cancer topic page . 
Last reviewed:  16 July 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will not update the diagnostic capabilities of comprehensive genomic profiling for patients presenting with cancer of unknown primary. See the July 2025 surveillance decision  for further details. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
organisation of services and support 
diagnosis 
factors influencing management decisions 
managing specific presentations 
systemic treatment 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Adults with cancer of unknown primary origin, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called metastatic malignant disease of unknown primary origin: diagnosis and management of metastatic malignant disease of unknown primary origin. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
