Overview | Hepatitis B (chronic): diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Hepatitis
Hepatitis B (chronic): diagnosis and management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG165 
Published: 
26 June 2013
Last updated: 
20 October 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and managing chronic hepatitis B in children, young people and adults. It aims to improve care for people with hepatitis B by specifying which tests and treatments to use for people of different ages and with different disease severities. 
Last reviewed: 14 October 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will not update the recommendations on antiviral treatment. See the  surveillance decision  for further details. 
Next review:  This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
assessment and referral in primary care 
assessment of liver disease in secondary specialist care 
antiviral treatment 
monitoring 
surveillance testing for hepatocellular carcinoma in adults 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with chronic hepatitis B and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called hepatitis B (chronic): diagnosis and management of chronic hepatitis B in children, young people and adults. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Liver disease 
Hepatitis B 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
