Overview | Thyroid cancer: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Thyroid cancer
Thyroid cancer: assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG230 
Published: 
19 December 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosis and management of thyroid cancer in people aged 16 and over. It aims to reduce variation in practice and increase the quality of care and survival for people with thyroid cancer. 
Last reviewed: 4 March 2026 
We simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines. This is a presentational change only, and no changes to practice are intended. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
information and support for people with thyroid cancer 
assessment and diagnosis 
initial treatment of differentiated thyroid cancer 
ongoing treatment with thyroid stimulating hormone suppression for differentiated thyroid cancer 
post-thyroidectomy monitoring of differentiated thyroid cancer 
follow up of differentiated thyroid cancer 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers of thyroid cancer services 
People with thyroid cancer, and their families and carers. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
