Overview | Hypothermia: prevention and management in adults having surgery | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Surgical care
Hypothermia: prevention and management in adults having surgery
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG65 
Published: 
23 April 2008
Last updated: 
14 December 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers preventing and managing inadvertent hypothermia in people aged 18 and over having surgery. It offers advice on assessing patients’ risk of hypothermia, measuring and monitoring temperature, and devices for keeping patients warm before, during and after surgery. 
Last reviewed: 14 December 2016 
We reviewed the evidence on measuring temperature, warming patients before induction of anaesthesia and warming patients after induction of anaesthesia. We changed and added some recommendations in sections 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
information for patients 
measuring temperature 
warming patients before their operation, including transfer to the operating theatre 
keeping patients warm during their operation, including ambient temperature in the operating theatre and temperature of intravenous fluids 
keeping patients warm after their operation 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Adults having surgery and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called inadvertent perioperative hypothermia: the management of inadvertent perioperative hypothermia in adults. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Surgical site infection 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
