Overview | Delirium: prevention, diagnosis and management in hospital and long-term care | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Delirium
Delirium: prevention, diagnosis and management in hospital and long-term care
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG103 
Published: 
28 July 2010
Last updated: 
18 January 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and treating delirium in people aged 18 and over in hospital and in long-term residential care or a nursing home. It also covers identifying people at risk of developing delirium in these settings and preventing onset. It aims to improve diagnosis of delirium and reduce hospital stays and complications. 
For advice on care for people with delirium related to alcohol use (delirium tremens) see the NICE guideline on alcohol-use disorders . 
Last reviewed: 18 January 2023 
In January 2023, we reviewed the evidence and made new recommendations on assessing and diagnosing delirium .  
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
think delirium and risk factor assessment 
indicators of delirium: at presentation and daily observations 
preventing delirium 
assessment and diagnosis 
treating delirium 
information and support 
Who is it for? 
NHS staff caring for patients in hospital (including critical care) and long-term residential care settings (including primary care healthcare professionals) 
Adults in hospital, long-term residential care or a nursing home who have, or are at high risk of developing, delirium; their family and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called delirium: prevention, diagnosis and management. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Mental wellbeing of older people in care homes 
Delirium in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
