5 Management | COVID-19 rapid guideline: managing the long-term effects of COVID-19 | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
COVID-19
COVID-19 rapid guideline: managing the long-term effects of COVID-19 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG188 
Published: 
18 December 2020
Last updated: 
25 January 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
1 Identification 
2 Assessment 
3 Investigations and referral 
4 Planning care 
5 Management 
6 Follow‑up, monitoring and discharge 
7 Sharing information and continuity of care 
8 Service organisation 
9 Common symptoms 
Recommendations for research 
Rationales 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
5.1 Self-management and supported self-management
5.2 Multidisciplinary rehabilitation
5.3 Additional support
5 Management 
These recommendations are for healthcare professionals providing care for people with ongoing symptomatic COVID-19 or post-COVID-19 syndrome in primary care and community settings or in multidisciplinary assessment and rehabilitation services. 
There are established treatments for managing the common symptoms often seen with ongoing symptomatic COVID-19 and post-COVID-19 syndrome, as set out in current national and local guidance, which can be followed for symptomatic relief. However, there is a lack of evidence for pharmacological interventions to treat the condition itself. 
5.1 Self-management and supported self-management 
5.1.1 
Give advice and information on self-management to people with ongoing symptomatic COVID‑19 or post‑COVID‑19 syndrome, starting from their holistic assessment. This should include: 
ways to self-manage their symptoms, such as setting realistic goals 
who to contact if they are worried about their symptoms or they need support with self‑management 
sources of advice and support, including support groups, social prescribing, online forums and apps 
how to get support from other services, including social care, housing and employment, and advice about financial support 
information about new or continuing symptoms of COVID-19 that the person can share with their family, carers and friends (see section 9 on common symptoms ). 
Advice for patients on managing common symptoms is available from the NHSinform website . [2020] 
5.1.2 
Explain that it is not known if over-the-counter vitamins and supplements are helpful, harmful or have no effect in the treatment of new or ongoing symptomatic COVID‑19 or post-COVID-19 syndrome. 
5.1.3 
Support people in discussions with their school, college or employer about returning to education or work, for example, by having a phased return. For advice on returning to work, follow national guidance, for example, NICE's guideline on workplace health: long-term sickness absence and capability to work . [2020] 
For a short explanation of why the panel made these recommendations, see the rationale section on self-management and supported self-management . 
Full details of the evidence and the panel's discussion are in: 
evidence review D: interventions 
evidence review E: monitoring and referral 
evidence review F: service models . 
5.2 Multidisciplinary rehabilitation 
Definition 
Rehabilitation: a set of interventions designed to optimise functioning, health and wellbeing, and reduce disability in people with health conditions in interaction with their environment. In the context of ongoing COVID-19 symptoms, this may include providing information, education, supported self-management, peer support, symptom management strategies and physical rehabilitation. (Informed by the World Health Organization's fact sheet on rehabilitation .) 
5.2.1 
Use a multidisciplinary approach to guide rehabilitation, including physical, psychological and psychiatric aspects of management. Ensure that any symptoms that could affect the person being able to start rehabilitation safely have been investigated first. See also the recommendation on multidisciplinary rehabilitation teams in section 8 on service organisation . [2020, amended 2021] 
5.2.2 
Work with the person (and their family or carers, if appropriate) to develop a personalised rehabilitation and management plan that is recorded in a rehabilitation prescription and should include: 
areas of rehabilitation and interventions based on their assessment 
helping the person to decide and work towards goals 
how to manage and monitor their symptoms, taking into account that these may fluctuate, and what to do if symptoms return or change. [2020, amended 2021] 
5.2.3 
Provide extra time or additional support (such as an interpreter or advocate) to people who would benefit during their consultations. [2020, amended 2021] 
5.2.4 
Encourage people to keep a record of, or use a tracking app to monitor, their goals, recovery and any changes in their symptoms (see also section 6 on follow-up, monitoring and discharge ). [2020] 
For a short explanation of why the panel made these recommendations, see the rationale section on multidisciplinary rehabilitation . 
Full details of the evidence and the panel's discussion are in: 
evidence review D: interventions 
evidence review E: monitoring and referral 
evidence review F: service models . 
5.3 Additional support 
5.3.1 
Consider additional support for people with ongoing symptomatic COVID‑19 or post‑COVID‑19 syndrome who may be vulnerable, for example, older people and people with complex needs. Additional support may include short‑term care packages, advance care planning and support with social isolation, loneliness and bereavement, if relevant. [2020, amended 2021] 
5.3.2 
Consider referral from 4 weeks for specialist advice for children and young people with ongoing symptomatic COVID-19 or post-COVID-19 syndrome. [2020, amended 2021] 
For a short explanation of why the panel made these recommendations, see the rationale section on additional support . 
Full details of the evidence and the panel's discussion are in: 
evidence review D: interventions 
evidence review E: monitoring and referral 
evidence review F: service models . 
Next page 
6 Follow‑up, monitoring and discharge 
Previous page 
4 Planning care 
Back to top
