Context | Sexually transmitted infections: condom distribution schemes | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health protection
Communicable diseases
Infectious disease prevention and control
Sexually transmitted infections: condom distribution schemes
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG68 
Published: 
06 April 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Committee discussion 
Context 
Glossary 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
Current practice
Policy and commissioning
Context 
In 2015 there were approximately 435,000 new diagnoses of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in England. Most were among heterosexual people under 25 and men who have sex with men ( Sexually transmitted infections and chlamydia screening in England: 2015 Public Health England). In the UK as a whole, 6,095 people were diagnosed with HIV in 2015 ( National HIV surveillance data tables Public Health England). Over half of these were men who have sex with men (3,320). In the heterosexual population a disproportionate number of diagnoses were among black Africans . 
Condoms can protect against many STIs including HIV, chlamydia and gonorrhoea. They offer less protection against STIs transmitted by skin-to-skin contact, such as genital herpes and warts. In the UK in 2011, the cost of treating STIs (excluding HIV) was estimated at £620 million ( Unprotected nation Family Planning Association). 
Cost can be a major barrier to condom use, particularly for poorer people ( Barriers to condom use Sakar 2008). Social norms and religious and cultural beliefs can also prevent people from using them because of stigma or embarrassment. 
Current practice 
Some condom schemes only provide free or cost-price condoms. Others combine this with information or support. The C‑Card scheme is probably the most widespread UK scheme. Local authorities commission these and define who is eligible. Typically they focus on people aged 13 to 24 (see Brook and Public Health England's C-Card condom distribution schemes ). 
Policy and commissioning 
This guideline will help local authorities and the NHS reduce STIs, a key objective in Department of Health's. A framework for sexual health improvement in England . 
Local authorities are responsible for commissioning and delivering all community and pharmacy contraceptive services. See Public Health England's, Making it work: a guide to whole system commissioning for sexual health, reproductive health and HIV . NHS England commissions contraception schemes provided as an additional service under the GP contract, and sexual health services in prisons. 
Next page 
Glossary 
Previous page 
Committee discussion 
Back to top
