Recommendations for research | Chronic pain (primary and secondary) in over 16s: assessment of all chronic pain and management of chronic primary pain | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Chronic and neuropathic pain
Chronic pain (primary and secondary) in over 16s: assessment of all chronic pain and management of chronic primary pain
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG193 
Published: 
07 April 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Psychological therapy – mindfulness for chronic primary pain 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of mindfulness therapy for managing chronic primary pain in people aged 16 years and over? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on psychological therapy for chronic primary pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: psychological therapy for chronic primary pain . 
2 Psychological therapy – CBT for insomnia in chronic primary pain 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) for insomnia or CBT for insomnia and pain for managing chronic primary pain in people aged 16 years and over? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on psychological therapy for chronic primary pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: psychological therapy for chronic primary pain . 
3 Manual therapies for chronic primary pain 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of manual therapy for managing chronic primary pain in people aged 16 years and over? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on manual therapy for chronic primary pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: manual therapy for chronic primary pain . 
4 Repeat courses of acupuncture for chronic primary pain 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of repeat courses of acupuncture or dry needling for managing chronic primary pain in people aged 16 years and over? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on acupuncture for chronic primary pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: acupuncture for chronic primary pain . 
5 Pharmacological interventions – gabapentinoids and local anaesthetics for complex regional pain syndrome 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of gabapentinoids or local anaesthetics for managing complex regional pain syndrome in people aged 16 years and over? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on pharmacological management for chronic primary pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: pharmacological management for chronic primary pain . 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Factors that may be barriers to successfully managing chronic pain, including chronic primary pain 
What risk factors enable stratification of treatment for people aged 16 years and over with chronic pain? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on assessing chronic pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: factors that may be barriers to successfully managing chronic pain (chronic primary pain and chronic secondary pain) . 
7 Social interventions for chronic pain, including chronic primary pain 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of social interventions aimed at improving the quality of life of people aged 16 years and over with chronic pain? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on social interventions for chronic pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: social interventions for chronic pain (chronic primary pain and chronic secondary pain) . 
8 Psychotherapy for chronic primary pain 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of psychodynamic psychotherapy for managing chronic primary pain in people aged 16 years and over? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on psychological therapy for chronic primary pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: psychological therapy for chronic primary pain . 
9 Relaxation therapy for chronic primary pain 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of relaxation therapies for managing chronic primary pain in people aged 16 years and over? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on psychological therapy for chronic primary pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: psychological therapy for chronic primary pain . 
10 Laser therapy for chronic primary pain 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of laser therapy for managing chronic primary pain in people aged 16 years and over? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on electrical physical modalities for chronic primary pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: electrical physical modalities for chronic primary pain . 
11 Transcranial magnetic stimulation for chronic primary pain 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of transcranial magnetic stimulation for managing chronic primary pain in people aged 16 years and over? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on electrical physical modalities for chronic primary pain . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: electrical physical modalities for chronic primary pain . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
