Overview | Fractures (complex): assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Fractures (complex): assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG37 
Published: 
17 February 2016
Last updated: 
23 November 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and managing pelvic fractures, open fractures and severe ankle fractures (known as pilon fractures and intra-articular distal tibia fractures) in pre-hospital settings (including ambulance services), emergency departments and major trauma centres. It aims to reduce deaths and long-term health problems by improving the quality of emergency and urgent care. 
The guideline should be read alongside the NICE guidelines on major trauma , major trauma: service delivery , spinal injury and fractures (non-complex) . 
Last reviewed: 23 November 2022 
We reviewed the evidence on negative pressure wound therapy and updated the recommendation on temporary dressings for open fractures after wound excision . 
Next review:  This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
managing pelvic fractures and open fractures in pre-hospital settings 
destination for people with suspected fractures 
assessing and managing vascular injury in hospital settings 
managing pelvic fractures and open fractures in hospital settings 
management of pilon and intra-articular distal tibia fractures in hospital settings 
documentation , and information and support for patients, family members and carers 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals and practitioners who provide care for people with complex fractures in pre-hospital and hospital settings 
People with complex fractures, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Trauma 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
