Overview | Psoriasis: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Skin conditions
Psoriasis
Psoriasis: assessment and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG153 
Published: 
24 October 2012
Last updated: 
01 September 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix: Information to facilitate discussion of risks and benefits of treatments for people with psoriasis 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and managing psoriasis in adults, young people and children. It aims to improve long-term disease control and quality of life for people with psoriasis. 
This guideline refers to NHS England commissioning policies. In Wales and Northern Ireland, follow Welsh or Northern Irish commissioning positions if applicable. 
Last reviewed: 4 March 2025 
We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the section on targeted immunomodulatory treatments . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
Updates planned and in progress: 
December 2025: We will not be updating the section on topical treatment of psoriasis affecting the trunk and limbs  because of the fluctuating price of combined calcipotriol monohydrate and betamethasone dipropionate. A July 2024 decision to update recommendations was based on a price decrease of combined calcipotriol monohydrate and betamethasone dipropionate which has not been maintained. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
principles of care 
assessment and referral 
topical treatment 
phototherapy (broad- or narrow-band narrowband ultraviolet B light and psoralen with local ultraviolet A) 
systemic treatment 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Children, young people and adults with a diagnosis of psoriasis, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called psoriasis: the assessment and management of psoriasis. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Psoriasis 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
