Recommendations | Myeloma: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood and bone marrow cancers
Myeloma: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG35 
Published: 
10 February 2016
Last updated: 
25 October 2018
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Communication and support
1.2 Laboratory investigations
1.3 Imaging investigations
1.4 Service organisation
1.5 Managing newly diagnosed myeloma
1.6 Managing acute renal disease caused by myeloma
1.7 Preventing and managing bone disease
1.8 Preventing and managing complications
1.9 Monitoring
1.10 Managing relapsed myeloma
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should also follow our guidance on: 
Haematological cancers: improving outcomes 
Improving outcomes in children and young people with cancer 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
Shared decision making 
1.1 Communication and support 
1.1.1 
Consider providing the following information to people with myeloma: 
the symptoms of myeloma and treatment‑related side effects (including steroid‑related side effects, infection and neuropathy) 
lifestyle measures to optimise bone health and renal function 
how to identify and report new symptoms (especially pain and spinal cord compression). 
1.2 Laboratory investigations 
Laboratory investigations for people with suspected myeloma 
For guidance on the setup of laboratory diagnostic services, see the section on integrated diagnostic reporting in NICE's guideline on haematological cancers . 
1.2.1 
Use serum protein electrophoresis and serum‑free light‑chain assay to confirm the presence of a paraprotein indicating possible myeloma or monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS). 
1.2.2 
If serum protein electrophoresis is abnormal, use serum immunofixation to confirm the presence of a paraprotein indicating possible myeloma or MGUS. 
1.2.3 
Do not use serum protein electrophoresis, serum immunofixation, serum‑free light‑chain assay or urine electrophoresis (urine Bence–Jones protein assessment) alone to exclude a diagnosis of myeloma. 
1.2.4 
When doing a bone marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy to confirm a diagnosis of myeloma, use morphology to determine plasma cell percentage and flow cytometry to determine plasma cell phenotype. 
Laboratory investigations to provide prognostic information 
1.2.5 
Use the same sample for all diagnostic and prognostic tests on bone marrow, so people only need to have one bone marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy. 
1.2.6 
When doing a bone marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy to provide prognostic information: 
Perform fluorescence in‑situ hybridisation (FISH) on CD138‑selected bone marrow plasma cells to identify the adverse risk abnormalities t(4;14), t(14;16), 1q gain, del(1p) and del(17p)(TP53 deletion). Use these abnormalities alongside International Staging System (ISS) scores to identify people with high‑risk myeloma. 
Consider performing FISH on CD138‑selected bone marrow plasma cells to identify the adverse risk abnormality t(14;20), and the standard risk abnormalities t(11;14) and hyperdiploidy. 
Consider performing immunophenotyping of bone marrow to identify plasma cell phenotype, and to inform subsequent monitoring. 
Consider performing immunohistochemistry (including Ki‑67 staining and p53 expression) on the trephine biopsy to identify plasma cell phenotype and give an indication of cell proliferation, to provide further prognostic information. 
1.2.7 
Perform serum‑free light‑chain assay and use serum‑free light‑chain ratio to assess prognosis. 
1.3 Imaging investigations 
Imaging for people with suspected myeloma 
1.3.1 
Offer imaging to all people with a plasma cell disorder suspected to be myeloma. 
1.3.2 
Consider whole‑body MRI as first‑line imaging. 
1.3.3 
Consider whole‑body low‑dose CT as first‑line imaging if whole‑body MRI is unsuitable or the person declines it. 
1.3.4 
Consider skeletal survey as first‑line imaging only if whole‑body MRI and whole‑body low‑dose CT are unsuitable or the person declines them. 
1.3.5 
Do not use isotope bone scans to identify myeloma‑related bone disease in people with a plasma cell disorder suspected to be myeloma. 
Imaging for people with newly diagnosed myeloma 
For guidance on imaging for people with suspected spinal cord compression, see the section on imaging investigations in NICE's guideline on spinal metastases and metastatic spinal cord compression . 
1.3.6 
For people with newly diagnosed myeloma or smouldering myeloma who have not had whole‑body imaging with 1 of the following, consider whole‑body imaging to assess for myeloma‑related bone disease and extra‑medullary plasmacytomas with one of: 
MRI 
CT 
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography CT (FDG PET‑CT). 
1.3.7 
Consider baseline whole‑body imaging with MRI or FDG PET‑CT for people who have non‑secretory myeloma or suspected or confirmed soft tissue plasmacytomas and have not already had either of these tests. 
1.4 Service organisation 
For guidance on the facilities needed to provide intensive inpatient chemotherapy and transplants for people with myeloma, and the structure and function of multidisciplinary teams, see NICE's guideline on improving outcomes in haematological cancers . 
For guidance on service organisation for young people, see NICE's cancer service guideline on improving outcomes in children and young people with cancer . 
1.4.1 
Each hospital treating people with myeloma who are not receiving intensive inpatient chemotherapy or a transplant should provide local access to: 
a multidisciplinary team specialising in myeloma 
supportive and palliative care, supported by: 
psychological support services 
a 24‑hour acute oncology and/or haematology helpline 
physiotherapy 
occupational therapy 
dietetics 
medical social services 
critical care 
clinical trials via the MDT specialising in myeloma 
dental services. 
1.4.2 
Each hospital treating myeloma should provide regional access through its network to: 
facilities for intensive inpatient chemotherapy or transplantation 
renal support 
spinal disease management 
specialised pain management 
therapeutic apheresis 
radiotherapy 
restorative dentistry and oral surgery 
clinical trials, in particular early phase trials. 
1.5 Managing newly diagnosed myeloma 
First‑line treatment 
NICE has a suite of technology appraisal guidance on myeloma either published or in development. These published technology appraisals cover NICE's position in relation to primary disease treatment, salvage therapy for relapsed myeloma and consolidation/maintenance therapy after primary management. The recommendations in this guideline complement the existing technology appraisals, giving further guidance in addition to the technology appraisals where myeloma‑related subgroups are not included. 
1.5.1 
Bortezomib is recommended as an option within its marketing authorisation, that is, in combination with dexamethasone, or with dexamethasone and thalidomide, for the induction treatment of adults with previously untreated multiple myeloma, who are eligible for high‑dose chemotherapy with haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. [This recommendation is from NICE technology appraisal guidance on bortezomib for induction therapy in multiple myeloma before high-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation .] 
1.5.2 
Thalidomide in combination with an alkylating agent and a corticosteroid is recommended as an option for the first‑line treatment of multiple myeloma in people for whom high‑dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplantation is considered inappropriate. [This recommendation is from NICE technology appraisal guidance on bortezomib and thalidomide for the first-line treatment of multiple myeloma .] 
1.5.3 
Bortezomib in combination with an alkylating agent and a corticosteroid is recommended as an option for the first‑line treatment of multiple myeloma if: 
high‑dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplantation is considered inappropriate and 
the person is unable to tolerate or has contraindications to thalidomide. [This recommendation is from NICE technology appraisal guidance on bortezomib and thalidomide for the first-line treatment of multiple myeloma .] 
First autologous stem cell transplantation 
1.5.4 
Consider using frailty and performance status measures that include comorbidities to assess the suitability of first autologous stem cell transplant for people with myeloma. 
1.5.5 
Do not use age or the level of renal impairment alone to assess the suitability of first autologous stem cell transplant for people with myeloma. 
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation 
1.5.6 
Take into account that allogeneic stem cell transplantation is only suitable for a small number of people with myeloma. 
1.5.7 
When assessing suitability of an allogeneic stem cell transplant for myeloma, take into account: 
whether the person has chemosensitive disease 
how many previous lines of treatment they have had 
whether a fully human leukocyte antigen (HLA) matched donor is available 
how graft‑versus‑host disease (GvHD) and other complications may get worse with age 
the risk of higher transplant‑related mortality and morbidity, versus the potential for long‑term disease‑free survival 
how outcomes could be improved with other, newer treatments 
the person's understanding of the procedure and its risks and benefits. 
1.5.8 
Consider allogeneic stem cell transplantation as part of a clinical trial if one is available. 
Primary plasma cell leukaemia 
1.5.9 
Consider bortezomib‑based, lenalidomide‑based, or both, combination induction chemotherapy for people with primary plasma cell leukaemia. 
1.5.10 
Consider high‑dose melphalan‑based autologous stem cell transplantation for people with primary plasma cell leukaemia if it is suitable. 
1.6 Managing acute renal disease caused by myeloma 
1.6.1 
Consider immediately starting a bortezomib‑ and dexamethasone‑based combination regimen for people with untreated, newly diagnosed, myeloma‑induced acute renal disease. 
1.6.2 
If a bortezomib‑based combination regimen is unsuitable for people with untreated, newly diagnosed, myeloma‑induced acute renal disease, consider immediately starting a thalidomide‑ and dexamethasone‑based combination regimen. 
In February 2016, this was an off-label use. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.6.3 
Do not do plasma exchange for myeloma‑induced acute renal disease. 
1.7 Preventing and managing bone disease 
Preventing bone disease 
1.7.1 
To prevent bone disease, offer people with myeloma: 
zoledronic acid or 
disodium pamidronate, if zoledronic acid is contraindicated or not tolerated or 
sodium clodronate, if zoledronic acid and disodium pamidronate are contraindicated, not tolerated or not suitable. 
1.7.2 
Consider immediately referring people with myeloma for dental assessment and treatment before starting zoledronic acid or disodium pamidronate. 
1.7.3 
For people who need urgent myeloma treatment, consider referring for dental assessment and treatment as soon as possible after they start treatment. 
Managing non‑spinal bone disease 
1.7.4 
Offer people with myeloma and non‑spinal bone disease who have not already started bisphosphonates: 
zoledronic acid or 
disodium pamidronate, if zoledronic acid is contraindicated or not tolerated or 
sodium clodronate, if zoledronic acid and disodium pamidronate are contraindicated, not tolerated or not suitable. 
1.7.5 
Assess the risk of fracture (in line with the NICE guideline on assessing the risk of fragility fractures in osteoporosis ) in people with myeloma and non‑spinal bone disease. 
1.7.6 
Consider surgical stabilisation followed by radiotherapy for non‑spinal bones that have fractured or are at high risk of fractures. 
1.7.7 
Consider radiotherapy for non‑spinal bones that have fractured or are at high risk of fracture if surgical intervention is unsuitable or not immediately needed. 
1.7.8 
Consider radiotherapy for people with myeloma and non‑spinal bone disease who need additional pain relief if: 
chemotherapy and initial pain management has not led to prompt improvement in pain control 
chemotherapy is unsuitable and current pain medication is not working. 
1.7.9 
Consider re‑treatment with radiotherapy if pain recurs or if there is regrowth of a previously treated lesion. 
1.7.10 
Consider seeking advice from or referral to specialists in palliative care or pain medicine for people with complex non‑spinal bone disease. 
Managing spinal bone disease 
1.7.11 
For guidance on treating metastatic spinal cord compression, see the NICE guideline on metastatic spinal cord compression . 
1.7.12 
Offer all people with myeloma and spinal bone disease: 
bisphosphonates as follows, if not already started: 
zoledronic acid or 
disodium pamidronate, if zoledronic acid is contraindicated or not tolerated or 
sodium clodronate, if zoledronic acid and disodium pamidronate are contraindicated, not tolerated or unsuitable 
systemic pain control, when relevant, using the NICE guidelines on neuropathic pain and opioids in palliative care . 
1.7.13 
Consider the following, in addition to other treatments, for all people with myeloma and spinal bone disease: 
interventional pain management 
bracing. 
1.7.14 
For people with radiological evidence of myeloma‑related spinal instability, consider immediate intervention with: 
spinal surgery, with or without radiotherapy 
cement augmentation, with or without radiotherapy 
radiotherapy alone, if spinal intervention is unsuitable or not currently needed. 
1.7.15 
In people with radiological evidence of myeloma‑related spinal bone disease without instability, consider: 
cement augmentation, with or without radiotherapy 
radiotherapy alone. 
1.8 Preventing and managing complications 
Preventing infection 
1.8.1 
Offer people with myeloma the seasonal influenza vaccination. 
1.8.2 
Consider extending the pneumococcal vaccination to people with myeloma who are under 65. 
1.8.3 
Consider intravenous immunoglobulin replacement therapy for people who have hypogammaglobulinaemia and recurrent infections. 
1.8.4 
Consider continuing aciclovir or equivalent antiviral prophylaxis after treatment with bortezomib or other proteasome inhibitors ends. 
In February 2016, this was an off-label use. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.8.5 
Consider aciclovir or equivalent antiviral prophylaxis for people who are taking both immunomodulatory drugs and high‑dose steroids. 
In February 2016, this was an off-label use. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.8.6 
Consider testing for hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV before starting myeloma treatment. 
Managing peripheral neuropathy 
1.8.7 
For guidance on the pharmacological management of neuropathic pain see the NICE guideline on neuropathic pain in adults . 
1.8.8 
Explain the symptoms of neuropathy to people with myeloma, and encourage them to tell their clinical team about any new, different or worsening neuropathic symptoms immediately. 
1.8.9 
If people who are receiving bortezomib develop neuropathic symptoms, consider immediately doing 1 or more of the following: 
switching to subcutaneous injections 
reducing to weekly doses 
reducing the dose. 
1.8.10 
Consider reducing the dose if people are taking a drug other than bortezomib and develop neuropathic symptoms. 
1.8.11 
Temporarily stop neuropathy‑inducing myeloma treatments if people develop either of the following: 
grade 2 neuropathy with pain 
grade 3 or 4 neuropathy. 
1.8.12 
If neuropathy does not improve despite stopping myeloma treatment and further treatment is needed, consider switching to myeloma treatments less likely to induce neuropathy. 
Preventing thrombosis 
Follow the recommendations in NICE's guideline on venous thromboemboslism in over 16s . 
Managing fatigue 
1.8.13 
If other treatable causes of anaemia have been excluded, consider erythropoietin analogues (adjusted to maintain a steady state of haemoglobin at 110 to 120 g/litre) to improve fatigue in people with myeloma who have symptomatic anaemia. 
1.9 Monitoring 
1.9.1 
Monitor smouldering myeloma every 3 months for the first 5 years, and then decide the frequency of further monitoring based on the long‑term stability of the disease. 
1.9.2 
Monitor myeloma at least every 3 months in people who have completed treatment for the condition and have recovered. Take into account any risk factors for progression, such as: 
high‑risk fluorescence in‑situ hybridisation (FISH) 
impaired renal function 
disease presentation. 
1.9.3 
Monitoring for myeloma and smouldering myeloma should include: 
assessment of symptoms related to myeloma and myeloma treatment and 
the following laboratory tests: 
full blood count 
renal function 
bone profile 
serum immunoglobulins and serum protein electrophoresis 
serum‑free light‑chain assay, if appropriate. 
1.9.4 
Do not offer people with myeloma or smouldering myeloma routine skeletal surveys for disease monitoring. 
1.9.5 
Consider symptom‑directed imaging for people with myeloma or smouldering myeloma if any new bone symptoms develop. 
1.9.6 
For people with myeloma and serological relapse or disease progression, consider 1 of the following (taking into consideration previous imaging tests): 
whole‑body MRI 
spinal MRI 
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography CT (FDG PET‑CT). 
1.9.7 
For people with smouldering myeloma and disease progression, consider one of the following (taking into consideration previous imaging tests): 
whole‑body MRI 
whole‑body low‑dose CT 
whole‑body CT 
spinal MRI 
FDG PET‑CT. 
1.10 Managing relapsed myeloma 
First relapse 
NICE has a suite of technology appraisal guidance on myeloma either published or in development. These published technology appraisals cover NICE's position in relation to primary disease treatment, salvage therapy for relapsed myeloma and consolidation/maintenance therapy after primary management. The recommendations in this guideline complement the existing technology appraisals, giving further guidance in addition to the technology appraisals where myeloma‑related subgroups are not included. 
1.10.1 
Bortezomib monotherapy is recommended as an option for the treatment of progressive multiple myeloma in people who are at first relapse having received 1 prior therapy and who have undergone, or are unsuitable for, bone marrow transplantation, under the following circumstances: 
the response to bortezomib is measured using serum M protein after a maximum of 4 cycles of treatment, and treatment is continued only in people who have a complete or partial response (that is, reduction in serum M protein of 50% or more or, where serum M protein is not measurable, an appropriate alternative biochemical measure of response), and 
the manufacturer rebates the full cost of bortezomib for people who, after a maximum of 4 cycles of treatment, have less than a partial response (as defined above). [This recommendation is from NICE technology appraisal guidance on bortezomib monotherapy for relapsed multiple myeloma .] 
1.10.2 
People currently receiving bortezomib monotherapy who do not meet the criteria in recommendation 1.10.1 should have the option to continue therapy until they and their clinicians consider it appropriate to stop. [This recommendation is from NICE technology appraisal guidance on bortezomib monotherapy for relapsed multiple myeloma .] 
Second autologous stem cell transplantation 
1.10.3 
Offer a second autologous stem cell transplant, if it is suitable, to people with relapsed myeloma who have: 
completed re‑induction therapy without disease progressionand 
had a response duration of more than 24 months after their first autologous stem cell transplant. 
1.10.4 
Consider a second autologous stem cell transplant, if it is suitable, for people with relapsed myeloma who have: 
completed re-induction therapy without disease progression and 
had a response duration of between 12 and 24 months after their first autologous stem cell transplant. 
1.10.5 
Be aware that a second autologous stem cell transplant is more likely to be suitable for people with relapsed myeloma if they have: 
had a good response to the first autologous stem cell transplant 
a lower International Staging System (ISS) stage 
not had many prior treatments 
good overall fitness, based on resilience, frailty and performance status 
no adverse fluorescence in‑situ hybridisation (FISH) results. 
Subsequent therapy 
1.10.6 
Lenalidomide in combination with dexamethasone is recommended, within its licensed indication, as an option for the treatment of multiple myeloma only in people who have received two or more prior therapies, with the following condition: 
The drug cost of lenalidomide (excluding any related costs) for people who remain on treatment for more than 26 cycles (each of 28 days; normally a period of 2 years) will be met by the manufacturer. [This recommendation is from NICE technology appraisal guidance on lenalidomide for the treatment of multiple myeloma in people who have received at least one prior therapy .] 
1.10.7 
People currently receiving lenalidomide for the treatment of multiple myeloma, but who have not received 2 or more prior therapies, should have the option to continue therapy until they and their clinicians consider it appropriate to stop. [This recommendation is from NICE technology appraisal guidance on lenalidomide for the treatment of multiple myeloma in people who have received at least one prior therapy .] 
1.10.8 
Pomalidomide, in combination with dexamethasone, is not recommended within its marketing authorisation for treating relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma in adults who have had at least 2 previous treatments, including lenalidomide and bortezomib, and whose disease has progressed on the last therapy. [This recommendation is from NICE technology appraisal guidance on pomalidomide for relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma previously treated with lenalidomide and bortezomib .] 
1.10.9 
People whose treatment with pomalidomide was started within the NHS before this guidance was published should be able to continue treatment until they and their NHS clinician consider it appropriate to stop. [This recommendation is from NICE technology appraisal guidance on pomalidomide for relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma previously treated with lenalidomide and bortezomib .] 
Terms used in this guideline 
Smouldering myeloma 
In this guideline, only recommendations that specifically refer to smouldering myeloma apply to this condition. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
