Overview | Drug misuse in over 16s: opioid detoxification | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Drug misuse
Drug misuse in over 16s: opioid detoxification 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG52 
Published: 
25 July 2007
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix: Contingency management – key elements in the delivery of a programme 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers helping adults and young people over 16 who are dependent on opioids to stop using drugs. It aims to reduce illicit drug use and improve people’s physical and mental health, relationships and employment. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on drug misuse in over 16s: psychosocial interventions . 
Last reviewed: 9 December 2024 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
providing information, advice and support 
supporting families and carers 
assessment 
pharmacological interventions 
treatment in community, residential, inpatient and prison settings 
specific psychosocial interventions 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People who work in specialist residential and community-based treatment settings 
People who work in prisons and criminal justice settings 
Adults and young people over 16 who misuse opioids and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called drug misuse – opioid detoxification. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Drug use disorders in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
