Recommendations for research | Suspected acute respiratory infection in over 16s: assessment at first presentation and initial management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Respiratory conditions
Respiratory infections
Suspected acute respiratory infection in over 16s: assessment at first presentation and initial management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG237 
Published: 
31 October 2023
Last updated: 
02 September 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1 Early warning scores in different settings
2 Point-of-care microbiological tests
3 Costing antimicrobial stewardship
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following key recommendations for research. 
1 Early warning scores in different settings 
How accurate are early warning scores such as NEWS2 and CRB65, when applied to remote assessments of people with a suspected ARI via: 
111 and 999 call centres? 
primary care? 
How can the scores help to make clinical decisions about care pathways, for example, sending people home, to ARI virtual wards , or to same day emergency care? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on remote contact with NHS services at first presentation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence summary D: acute respiratory infection . 
How accurate are early warning scores such as NEWS2 and CRB65, when applied to face-to-face assessments of people with a suspected ARI in: 
primary care, community pharmacy and other non-hospital, low-prevalence settings? 
ARI hubs ? 
How can the scores help to make clinical decisions about care pathways, for example, sending people home, to ARI virtual wards , or to same day emergency care? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on in-person contact with NHS services at first presentation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence summary D: acute respiratory infection . 
2 Point-of-care microbiological tests 
What is the role of point-of-care microbiological testing for guiding management in people with symptoms and signs of an ARI, taking into account good antimicrobial stewardship, cost, and clinical and cost effectiveness of the tests, and time taken to do the test and get a result? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on in-person contact with NHS services at first presentation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence summary D: acute respiratory infection . 
3 Costing antimicrobial stewardship 
How can we quantify the impact on antimicrobial resistance of interventions that safely reduce antibiotic prescribing, in terms of future healthcare costs and health-related quality of life? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on in-person contact with NHS services at first presentation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence summary D: acute respiratory infection . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
