Recommendations | Coeliac disease: recognition, assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Coeliac disease
Coeliac disease: recognition, assessment and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG20 
Published: 
02 September 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Implementation: getting started 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Recognition of coeliac disease
1.2 Serological testing for coeliac disease
1.3 Referral of people with suspected coeliac disease
1.4 Monitoring in people with coeliac disease
1.5 Non‑responsive and refractory coeliac disease
1.6 Information and support
1.7 Advice on dietary management
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in  NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines  explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Recognition of coeliac disease 
1.1.1 
Offer serological testing for coeliac disease to: 
people with any of the following: 
persistent unexplained abdominal or gastrointestinal symptoms 
faltering growth 
prolonged fatigue 
unexpected weight loss 
severe or persistent mouth ulcers 
unexplained iron, vitamin B12 or folate deficiency 
type 1 diabetes, at diagnosis 
autoimmune thyroid disease, at diagnosis 
irritable bowel syndrome (in adults) 
first‑degree relatives of people with coeliac disease. 
1.1.2 
Consider serological testing for coeliac disease in people with any of the following: 
metabolic bone disorder (reduced bone mineral density or osteomalacia) 
unexplained neurological symptoms (particularly peripheral neuropathy or ataxia) 
unexplained subfertility or recurrent miscarriage 
persistently raised liver enzymes with unknown cause 
dental enamel defects 
Down's syndrome 
Turner syndrome. 
1.1.3 
For people undergoing investigations for coeliac disease: 
explain that any test is accurate only if a gluten‑containing diet is eaten during the diagnostic process and 
advise the person not to start a gluten‑free diet until diagnosis is confirmed by a specialist, even if the results of a serological test are positive. 
1.1.4 
Advise people who are following a normal diet (containing gluten) to eat some gluten in more than 1 meal every day for at least 6 weeks before testing. 
1.1.5 
If people who have restricted their gluten intake or excluded gluten from their diet are reluctant or unable to re‑introduce gluten into their diet before testing: 
refer the person to a gastrointestinal specialist and 
explain that it may be difficult to confirm their diagnosis by intestinal biopsy. 
1.1.6 
Advise people who have tested negative for coeliac disease, particularly first‑degree relatives and people with type 1 diabetes, that: 
coeliac disease may present with a wide range of symptoms and 
they should consult their healthcare professional if any of the symptoms listed in recommendations 1.1.1 or 1.1.2 arise or persist. 
1.1.7 
Do not offer serological testing for coeliac disease in infants before gluten has been introduced into the diet. 
1.2 Serological testing for coeliac disease 
1.2.1 
All serological tests should be undertaken in laboratories with clinical pathology accreditation (CPA) or ISO15189 accreditation. 
1.2.2 
When healthcare professionals request serological tests to investigate suspected coeliac disease in young people and adults, laboratories should: 
test for total immunoglobulin A (IgA) and IgA tissue transglutaminase (tTG) as the first choice 
use IgA endomysial antibodies (EMA) if IgA tTG is weakly positive 
consider using IgG EMA, IgG deamidated gliadin peptide (DGP) or IgG tTG if IgA is deficient . 
1.2.3 
When healthcare professionals request serological tests to investigate suspected coeliac disease in children, laboratories should: 
test for total IgA and IgA tTG as the first choice 
consider using IgG EMA, IgG DGP or IgG tTG if IgA is deficient. 
1.2.4 
When laboratories test for total IgA, a specific assay designed to measure total IgA levels should be used. 
1.2.5 
Do not use human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DQ2 (DQ2.2 and DQ2.5)/DQ8 testing in the initial diagnosis of coeliac disease in non‑specialist settings. 
1.2.6 
Only consider using HLA DQ2 (DQ2.2 and DQ2.5)/DQ8 testing in the diagnosis of coeliac disease in specialist settings (for example, in children who are not having a biopsy, or in people who already have limited gluten ingestion and choose not to have a gluten challenge). 
1.2.7 
Laboratories should clearly communicate the interpretation of serological test results and recommended action to healthcare professionals. 
1.3 Referral of people with suspected coeliac disease 
1.3.1 
Refer young people and adults with positive serological test results to a gastrointestinal specialist for endoscopic intestinal biopsy to confirm or exclude coeliac disease. [In young people and adults, a positive serological test result is defined as unambiguously positive IgA tTG alone, or weakly positive IgA tTG and a positive IgA EMA test result. Note: In people who have IgA deficiency, a serologically positive result can be derived from any one of the IgG antibodies]. 
1.3.2 
Refer children with positive serological test results to a paediatric gastroenterologist or paediatrician with a specialist interest in gastroenterology for further investigation for coeliac disease. [Further investigation may include, but is not limited to, one or more of the following: an IgA EMA test to confirm serological positivity, HLA genetic testing, an endoscopic biopsy]. 
1.3.3 
Refer people with negative serological test results to a gastrointestinal specialist for further assessment if coeliac disease is still clinically suspected. 
1.3.4 
Healthcare professionals should have a low threshold for re‑testing people identified in recommendations 1.1.1 or 1.1.2 if they develop any symptoms consistent with coeliac disease. 
1.4 Monitoring in people with coeliac disease 
1.4.1 
Consider referring people with coeliac disease for endoscopic intestinal biopsy if continued exposure to gluten has been excluded and: 
serological titres are persistently high and show little or no change after 12 months or 
they have persistent symptoms, including diarrhoea, abdominal pain, weight loss, fatigue or unexplained anaemia. 
1.4.2 
Do not use serological testing alone to determine whether gluten has been excluded from the person's diet. 
1.4.3 
Offer an annual review to people with coeliac disease. During the review: 
measure weight and height 
review symptoms 
consider the need for assessment of diet and adherence to the gluten‑free diet 
consider the need for specialist dietetic and nutritional advice. 
1.4.4 
Refer the person to a GP or consultant if concerns are raised in the annual review. The GP or consultant should assess all of the following: 
the need for a dual‑energy X‑ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan (in line with the NICE guideline on osteoporosis: assessing the risk of fragility fracture ) or active treatment of bone disease 
the need for specific blood tests 
the risk of long‑term complications and comorbidities 
the need for specialist referral. 
1.5 Non‑responsive and refractory coeliac disease 
1.5.1 
Consider the following actions in people with coeliac disease who have persistent symptoms despite advice to exclude gluten from their diet: 
review the certainty of the original diagnosis 
refer the person to a specialist dietitian to investigate continued exposure to gluten 
investigate potential complications or coexisting conditions that may be causing persistent symptoms, such as irritable bowel syndrome, lactose intolerance, bacterial overgrowth, microscopic colitis or inflammatory colitis. 
1.5.2 
Diagnose refractory coeliac disease if the original diagnosis of coeliac disease has been confirmed, and exposure to gluten and any coexisting conditions have been excluded as the cause of continuing symptoms. 
1.5.3 
Refer people with refractory coeliac disease to a specialist centre for further investigation. 
1.5.4 
Consider prednisolone for the initial management of the symptoms of refractory coeliac disease in adults while waiting for specialist advice. 
See recommendations on managing glucocorticoid withdrawal in NICE's guideline on adrenal insufficiency . 
1.6 Information and support 
1.6.1 
Explain to people who are thought to be at risk of coeliac disease that a delayed diagnosis, or undiagnosed coeliac disease, can result in continuing ill health and serious long‑term complications. 
1.6.2 
Give people with coeliac disease (and their family members or carers, where appropriate) sources of information on the disease, including national and local specialist coeliac groups and dietitians with a specialist knowledge in coeliac disease. 
1.6.3 
A healthcare professional with a specialist knowledge of coeliac disease should tell people with a confirmed diagnosis of coeliac disease (and their family members or carers, where appropriate) about the importance of a gluten‑free diet and give them information to help them follow it. This should include: 
information on which types of food contain gluten and suitable alternatives, including gluten‑free substitutes 
explanations of food labelling 
information sources about gluten‑free diets, recipe ideas and cookbooks 
how to manage social situations, eating out and travelling away from home, including travel abroad 
avoiding cross contamination in the home and minimising the risk of accidental gluten intake when eating out 
the role of national and local coeliac support groups. 
1.6.4 
Be aware that people with coeliac disease may experience anxiety and depression. Diagnose and manage these issues in line with the following NICE guidelines: 
Depression in adults with a chronic physical health problem 
Depression in children and young people 
Generalised anxiety disorder and panic disorder (with or without agoraphobia) in adults 
Social anxiety disorder . 
1.6.5 
Explain to people with coeliac disease and their family members or carers (as appropriate) that the Department of Health's Green Book recommends immunisation against pneumococcus. 
1.7 Advice on dietary management 
1.7.1 
Advise people with coeliac disease (and their family members or carers, where appropriate) to seek advice from a member of their healthcare team if they are thinking about taking over‑the‑counter vitamin or mineral supplements. 
1.7.2 
Explain to people with coeliac disease (and their family members or carers, where appropriate) that they may need to take specific supplements such as calcium or vitamin D if their dietary intake is insufficient. 
1.7.3 
Explain to people with coeliac disease (and their family members or carers, where appropriate) that: 
they can choose to include gluten‑free oats in their diet at any stage and 
they will be advised whether to continue eating gluten‑free oats depending on their immunological, clinical or histological response. 
Terms used in this guideline 
IgA deficiency 
IgA deficiency is defined as total IgA less than 0.07 g per litre. 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
