Overview | Myalgic encephalomyelitis (or encephalopathy)/chronic fatigue syndrome: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
ME/CFS
Myalgic encephalomyelitis (or encephalopathy)/chronic fatigue syndrome: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG206 
Published: 
29 October 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing myalgic encephalomyelitis (or encephalopathy)/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) in children, young people and adults. It aims to improve awareness and understanding about ME/CFS and when to suspect it, so that people are diagnosed earlier. It includes recommendations on diagnosis, assessment and care planning, safeguarding, access to care and managing ME/CFS and its symptoms. 
These recommendations were developed based on evidence reviewed before the COVID-19 pandemic. We have not reviewed evidence on the effects of COVID-19, so it should not be assumed that these recommendations apply to people diagnosed with post-COVID-19 syndrome. NICE has produced a guideline on managing the long-term effects of COVID-19 . 
Last reviewed: 24 January 2025 
We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. For more information see the surveillance decision . 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG53 (published August 2007). 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
suspecting ME/CFS and diagnosis 
information and support , including advice when ME/CFS is suspected 
assessment and care and support planning 
safeguarding 
access to care and support 
managing ME/CFS 
symptom management 
flare-ups and relapse 
care for people with severe or very severe ME/CFS 
Who is it for? 
Health and social care professionals, including those working or providing input into educational and occupational health services 
Commissioners 
People with suspected or diagnosed ME/CFS, their families and carers and the public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was commissioned by NICE and developed at the National Guideline Centre which is hosted by the Royal College of Physicians. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
