Overview | Generalised anxiety disorder and panic disorder in adults: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Anxiety
Generalised anxiety disorder and panic disorder in adults: management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG113 
Published: 
26 January 2011
Last updated: 
15 June 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix: Assessing generalised anxiety disorder 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the care and treatment of people aged 18 and over with generalised anxiety disorder (chronic anxiety) or panic disorder (with or without agoraphobia or panic attacks). It aims to help people achieve complete relief of symptoms (remission), which is associated with better functioning and a lower likelihood of relapse. 
MHRA advice on antiepileptic drugs in pregnancy: In July 2022, we linked to the MHRA safety advice on pregabalin risks during pregnancy in the recommendation on drug treatment for people with generalised anxiety disorder who cannot tolerate selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors or serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors. 
Last reviewed: 7 May 2024 
We simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines (for example, the NICE guideline on service user experience in adult mental health ). 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE's guideline on anxiety: management of anxiety (CG22) and evidence summary ESUOM12, as well as NICE's guideline on common mental health disorders (CG123). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
principles of care for people with generalised anxiety disorder 
stepped care for people with generalised anxiety disorder 
stepped care for people with panic disorder 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Adults with a working diagnosis of generalised anxiety disorder or panic disorder (with or without agoraphobia), and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called generalised anxiety disorder and panic disorder (with or without agoraphobia) in adults: management in primary, secondary and community care. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Anxiety disorders 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
