Overview | Medicines adherence: involving patients in decisions about prescribed medicines and supporting adherence | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Medicines management
Medicines adherence: involving patients in decisions about prescribed medicines and supporting adherence 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG76 
Published: 
28 January 2009
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key principles 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers medicines adherence in people aged 18 and over. It recommends how to encourage adherence to medicines by supporting and involving people in decisions about their prescribed medicines. It aims to ensure that a person’s decision to use a medicine is an informed choice. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
patient involvement in decisions about medicines 
supporting adherence 
reviewing medicines 
communication between healthcare professionals 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Adults receiving prescribed medicines and their families and carers 
Is this guideline up to date? 
March 2019: We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. For more information, see the surveillance decision .  
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Osteoporosis 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
