Context | Self-harm: assessment, management and preventing recurrence | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Self-harm
Self-harm: assessment, management and preventing recurrence 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG225 
Published: 
07 September 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Context 
Self-harm is defined as intentional self-poisoning or self-injury irrespective of the apparent purpose of the act. Prevalence statistics are unreliable because it is a problem that is sometimes hidden, but a recent national study reported that 7.3% of girls aged 11 to 16, and 3.6% of boys aged 11 to 16, had self-harmed or attempted suicide at some point. The figures for 17‑ to 19‑year‑olds were 21.5% for girls and 9.7% for boys. Self-harm can occur at any age, but there is evidence that there has been a recent increase in self-harm among young people in England. 
Only a minority of people who have self-harmed present to hospital services, but it remains one of the commonest reasons for hospital attendance. Some estimates suggest upwards of 200,000 presentations in England every year, mostly for self‑poisoning. For some people, self-harm is a one-off episode but repetition is also common, with 20% of people repeating self‑harm within a year. People who have self-harmed are at greatly increased risk of suicide, with a 30‑ to 50‑fold increase in risk in the year after hospital presentation. 
Self-harm can present in a variety of locations including community, home, educational, custodial, social care and healthcare settings. However, much of the evidence on management comes from hospitals. Despite the potential seriousness, only about half of the people who present to emergency departments after an episode of self-harm are assessed by a mental health professional. Treatments include psychosocial and pharmacological interventions, and harm minimisation strategies. People who have self-harmed have often had contact with primary care. About half of the people who attend an emergency department after an episode of self-harm will have visited their GP in the previous month. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
