Recommendations for research | Fever in under 5s: assessment and initial management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Feverish illness
Fever in under 5s: assessment and initial management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG143 
Published: 
07 November 2019
Last updated: 
26 November 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. As part of the [2019] update, the guideline committee made an additional research recommendation on Kawasaki disease. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Symptoms and signs of serious illness 
The Guideline Development Group (GDG) recommends a UK-based epidemiological study on the symptoms and signs of serious illness. [2013] 
2 Management by remote assessment 
The GDG recommends that a UK study is undertaken to determine the validity of symptoms reported on remote assessment for children with fever. [2007] 
3 Diagnosis 
The GDG recommends that a UK study of the performance characteristics and cost-effectiveness of procalcitonin versus C-reactive protein in identifying serious bacterial infection in children with fever without apparent source be carried out. [2007] 
4 Antipyretics 
The GDG recommends that studies are conducted in primary care and secondary care to determine whether examination or re-examination after a dose of antipyretic medication is of benefit in differentiating children with serious illness from those with other conditions. [2007] 
5 Home-based antipyretic use 
The GDG recommends studies on home-based antipyretic use and parental perception of distress caused by fever. [2013] 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Thermometers and the detection of fever 
Measuring temperature in young babies: tympanic versus axilla electronic versus axilla chemical dot versus temporal artery. [2007] 
7 Management according to risk of serious illness 
The GDG recommends that research is carried out on referral patterns between primary and secondary care for children with fever, so the health economic impact of this and future guidelines can be estimated. [2007] 
8 Signs and symptoms of Kawasaki disease 
Which signs and symptoms (or combinations of signs and symptoms) predict a diagnosis of Kawasaki disease in children under 5 presenting with fever lasting 5 days or more? [2019] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on Kawasaki disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: signs and symptoms predicting Kawasaki disease . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
