Overview | Patient experience in adult NHS services: improving the experience of care for people using adult NHS services | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Patient and service user care
Patient experience in adult NHS services: improving the experience of care for people using adult NHS services
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG138 
Published: 
24 February 2012
Last updated: 
17 June 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Recommendations 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the components of a good patient experience. It aims to make sure that all adults using NHS services have the best possible experience of care. 
NICE has also produced guidelines on improving the experience of care for people using adult NHS mental health services and improving the experience of care and support for people using adult social care services . 
Last reviewed: 17 August 2021 
We found no new evidence that affects the recommendations in this guideline. See the review decision for more details. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
knowing the patient as an individual 
essential requirements of care 
tailoring healthcare services for each patient 
continuity of care and relationships 
enabling patients to actively participate in their care , including communication and information 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Non-clinical staff who come into contact with patients (for example, receptionists, clerical staff and domestic staff) 
People using adult NHS services and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
Acute respiratory infection in over 16s: initial assessment and management including virtual wards (hospital at home) 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
