Overview | Advanced breast cancer: diagnosis and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Breast cancer
Advanced breast cancer: diagnosis and treatment
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG81 
Published: 
23 February 2009
Last updated: 
19 February 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers care and support for people with advanced (stage 4) breast cancer. It aims to help them and their healthcare professionals make shared decisions about tests and treatments to improve outcomes and quality of life. 
For information on related topics, see our breast cancer summary page . 
Last reviewed: 19 February 2025 
For new and updated guidance on identifying and managing lymphoedema, see recommendations on managing local treatment complications in the NICE guideline on early and locally advanced breast cancer: diagnosis and management , which have updated and replaced the recommendations on lymphoedema in this guideline. 
This guideline has partially been updated by NICE guideline NG101 (2025 update). It also updates and replaces NICE technology appraisal guidance TA62 (2003), TA54 (2002) and TA30 (2001). 
Updates in progress: 
January 2023: We have checked the guideline and identified several areas for update. For details, see the  January 2023 surveillance decision . For progress on the update, see the guideline in development page . 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
diagnosis and assessment 
providing information and support for decision making 
systemic disease-modifying therapy 
supportive care 
managing complications 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Palliative care services 
People with advanced breast cancer, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Breast cancer 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
