Recommendations | Early and locally advanced breast cancer: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Breast cancer
Early and locally advanced breast cancer: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG101 
Published: 
18 July 2018
Last updated: 
14 April 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Providing information and psychological support
1.2 Pretreatment assessment
1.3 Assessment of tumour profile and genetic testing
1.4 Surgery to the breast and axilla
1.5 Breast reconstruction
1.6 Systemic anti-cancer therapy planning
1.7 Systemic anti-cancer therapy for all receptor subtypes
1.8 Triple negative (ER/PR/HER2-negative) breast cancer
1.9 HER2-positive breast cancer
1.10 Hormone receptor positive, HER2-negative breast cancer
Adjuvant treatment
1.11 Endocrine therapy for hormone receptor positive breast cancer
1.12 Adjuvant bisphosphonate therapy
1.13 Radiotherapy
1.14 Management of treatment side effects and menopausal symptoms
1.15 Follow-up
1.16 Lifestyle
1.17 Locally advanced inoperable disease
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Using inclusive language in healthcare is important for safety, and to promote equity, respect and effective communication with everyone. This guideline does not use inclusive language in whole or in part because: 
the evidence has not been reviewed, and it is not certain from expert opinion which groups the advice covers or 
the evidence has been reviewed, but the information available for some groups was too limited to make specific recommendations or 
only a very limited number of recommendations have been updated in direct response to new evidence or to reflect a change in practice. 
Healthcare professionals should use their clinical judgement when implementing the recommendations, taking into account the individual's circumstances, needs and preferences, and ensuring all people are treated with dignity and respect throughout their care. 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Providing information and psychological support 
1.1.1 
Ensure all people with breast cancer have a named clinical nurse specialist, or other specialist key worker with equivalent skills, to support them throughout diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. [2009, amended 2018] 
1.1.2 
Offer all people with breast cancer prompt access to specialist psychological support and, where appropriate, psychiatric services. [2009] 
1.1.3 
For information about identifying, treating and managing depression in people aged 18 and over who also have a chronic physical health problem such as cancer, see the recommendations in the NICE guideline on depression in adults with a chronic physical health problem . [2025] 
1.1.4 
Discuss opportunities for people with breast cancer to be involved in research, and encourage entry into clinical trials and other studies. [2018] 
1.1.5 
Discuss the potential preservation of fertility with people with brain tumours where treatment may have an impact on their fertility (see the recommendations on fertility preservation for medical indications in NICE's guideline on fertility problems ). [2018] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on providing information and psychological support . 
1.2 Pretreatment assessment 
1.2.1 
For people having investigations for early and locally advanced invasive breast cancer: 
perform pretreatment ultrasound evaluation of the axilla and 
if abnormal lymph nodes are identified, perform ultrasound-guided needle sampling. [2009] 
1.2.2 
Do not routinely use MRI of the breast as part of the preoperative assessment of people with biopsy-proven invasive breast cancer or ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). [2009] 
1.2.3 
Offer MRI of the breast as part of preoperative assessment to people with invasive breast cancer: 
if the extent of disease is not clear from clinical examination, mammography and ultrasound assessment for planning treatment 
if accurate mammographic assessment is difficult because of breast density 
to assess the tumour size if breast-conserving surgery is being considered for invasive lobular cancer. [2009] 
1.3 Assessment of tumour profile and genetic testing 
1.3.1 
Assess the oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status of all invasive breast cancers simultaneously at the time of initial histopathological diagnosis. [2018] 
1.3.2 
Assess the ER status of all invasive breast cancers using standardised and quality-assured immunohistochemical techniques, and report the results quantitatively. [2009] 
1.3.3 
Assess the PR status of all invasive breast cancers using standardised and quality-assured immunohistochemical techniques, and report the results quantitatively. [2018] 
1.3.4 
Assess the HER2 status of all invasive breast cancers using standardised and quality-assured techniques, and report the results quantitatively. [2009] 
1.3.5 
Ensure that the ER, PR and HER2 statuses are available and recorded at the preoperative and postoperative multidisciplinary team meetings when systemic treatment is discussed. [2018] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on predictive factors . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: adjuvant systemic therapy planning . 
Genetic testing 
1.3.6 
Offer genetic testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations to women under 50 years with triple-negative breast cancer , including those with no family history of breast or ovarian cancer (also see the recommendations on genetic testing in the NICE guideline on familial breast cancer ). [2017] 
1.4 Surgery to the breast and axilla 
1.4.1 
Treat all people with ER- positive invasive breast cancer with surgery and appropriate systemic therapy, rather than endocrine therapy alone, unless a significant comorbidity means surgery is not suitable for them. [2009] 
Paget's disease 
1.4.2 
Offer breast-conserving surgery with removal of the nipple–areolar complex as an alternative to mastectomy for people with Paget's disease of the nipple that has been assessed as localised. Offer oncoplastic repair techniques to maximise cosmesis. [2009] 
Further surgery after breast-conserving surgery 
1.4.3 
Offer further surgery (re-excision or mastectomy, as appropriate) after breast-conserving surgery where invasive cancer or DCIS is present at the radial margins ('tumour on ink'; 0 mm). [2018] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on surgery to the breast . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: surgery to the breast . 
1.4.4 
Consider further surgery (re-excision or mastectomy, as appropriate) after breast-conserving surgery for DCIS without invasive cancer if tumour cells are present within 2 mm of, but not at, the radial margins (greater than 0 mm and less than 2 mm). As part of the decision making: 
discuss the benefits and risks with the person 
take into account: 
the person's circumstances, needs and preferences 
any comorbidities 
tumour characteristics and potential treatments, including the use of radiotherapy (also see radiotherapy after breast-conserving surgery ) and other adjuvant therapies. [2024] 
1.4.5 
Consider further surgery (re-excision or mastectomy, as appropriate) after breast-conserving surgery for invasive cancer with or without DCIS if tumour cells are present within 1 mm of, but not at, the radial margins (greater than 0 mm and less than 1 mm). As part of the decision making: 
discuss the benefits and risks with the person 
take into account: 
the person's circumstances, needs and preferences 
any comorbidities 
tumour characteristics and potential treatments, including the use of radiotherapy (also see radiotherapy after breast-conserving surgery ) and other adjuvant therapies. [2024] 
1.4.6 
When discussing the benefits and risks of further surgery, follow the recommendations on: 
enabling patients to actively participate in their care in NICE's guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services 
and 
communicating risks, benefits and consequences in NICE's guideline on shared decision making . [2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2024 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on further surgery after breast-conserving surgery . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review N: further surgery after breast-conserving surgery based on tissue margins . 
Surgery to the axilla: ductal carcinoma in situ 
1.4.7 
Do not routinely perform SLNB for women with a preoperative diagnosis of DCIS who are having breast-conserving surgery, unless they are considered to be at high risk of invasive disease. People at high risk of invasive disease include those with a palpable mass or extensive microcalcifications. [2009] 
1.4.8 
Offer SLNB to all people who are having a mastectomy for DCIS. [2009] 
Surgery to the axilla: invasive breast cancer 
1.4.9 
Perform surgery using sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) rather than axillary lymph node clearance to stage the axilla for people with invasive breast cancer if they have: 
no evidence of lymph node involvement on ultrasound or 
a negative ultrasound-guided needle biopsy. [2009, amended 2023] 
1.4.10 
Perform SLNB using the dual technique with isotope and blue dye. [2009] 
Evaluation and management of a positive axillary lymph node identified by a preoperative ultrasound-guided needle biopsy 
1.4.11 
Offer axillary node clearance to people with invasive breast cancer who have a preoperative ultrasound-guided needle biopsy with pathologically proven lymph node metastases. [2009, amended 2018] 
Evaluation and management of a positive axillary lymph node identified by a sentinel lymph node biopsy (in people with a normal preoperative ultrasound-guided needle biopsy) 
1.4.12 
Offer further axillary treatment (axillary node clearance or radiotherapy) after SLNB to people who have 1 or more sentinel lymph node macrometastasis. [2018] 
1.4.13 
Discuss the benefits and risks of not having further axillary treatment after primary breast-conserving surgery (within clinical trials where available) with women who: 
have 1 or 2 sentinel lymph node macrometastases and 
have been advised to have whole-breast radiotherapy with systemic therapy (which may be endocrine therapy). [2018] 
1.4.14 
Do not offer further axillary treatment to people who only have micrometastases in their sentinel lymph nodes after primary surgery for invasive breast cancer. [2018] 
1.4.15 
Do not offer further axillary treatment to people who have isolated tumour cells in their sentinel lymph nodes after primary surgery for invasive breast cancer. Classify this as lymph node-negative breast cancer. [2018] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on evaluation and management of a positive axillary lymph node . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: management of the positive axilla . 
Audits 
1.4.16 
All breast units should audit their local, regional and distant recurrence rates after treatment, including systematically collecting data on radial margins and demographic information (such as socioeconomic status, age and ethnicity). [2009, amended 2024] 
1.4.17 
Breast units should audit their axillary recurrence rates. [2009] 
1.5 Breast reconstruction 
1.5.1 
Offer breast reconstruction to people after they have had mastectomy for breast cancer. [2023] 
1.5.2 
Be aware that some people may prefer not to have breast reconstruction surgery. [2018] 
1.5.3 
Offer both breast reconstruction options to women (immediate reconstruction and delayed reconstruction), whether or not they are available locally. [2018] 
1.5.4 
Offer immediate breast reconstruction to women who have been advised to have a mastectomy, including those who may need radiotherapy, unless they have comorbidities that rule out reconstructive surgery. [2018, amended 2023] 
1.5.5 
Discuss the benefits and risks of immediate breast reconstruction and delayed breast reconstruction with women. Topics to discuss include those in table 1 and: 
the timing of breast reconstruction surgery (at the same time as mastectomy or later) 
different breast reconstruction surgery options and what they involve 
how the timing of breast reconstruction surgery affects the options available 
the uncertainty over long-term outcomes in women having radiotherapy. [2018] 
Table 1 Breast reconstruction options for women who choose breast reconstruction 
Category 
Immediate breast reconstruction 
Delayed breast reconstruction 
Definition 
Reconstruction is started in the same operation as the mastectomy 
After a mastectomy, reconstruction is done in a separate operation 
Number and timing of operations 
More than 1 operation is usually needed to complete the reconstruction 
The total number of operations will vary. It may be affected by factors such as: 
type of reconstruction (for example, some are planned in stages; a prosthesis may be worn until reconstruction is complete) 
personal preferences (such as whether a nipple reconstruction is requested) 
Fewer operations may be needed 
More than 1 operation is usually needed to complete the reconstruction 
The total number of operations will vary. It may be affected by factors such as: 
type of reconstruction (for example, some are planned in stages; a prosthesis may be worn until reconstruction is complete) 
personal preferences (such as whether a nipple reconstruction is requested) 
More operations may be needed 
Breast reconstruction options available 
These will vary depending on personal preferences (such as breast size desired), current body shape, other health conditions, previous operations and lifestyle factors (such as hobbies) 
Not all hospitals or surgeons can offer all procedures. Travel to a different hospital may be needed for a specific option 
Options may be available that spare or preserve the breast skin (which may mean less scarring and a more natural look) 
Limited time to make a decision about options (which may include not having a reconstruction) before surgery 
These will vary depending on personal preferences (such as breast size desired), current body shape, other health conditions, previous operations and lifestyle factors (such as hobbies) 
Not all hospitals or surgeons can offer all procedures. Travel to a different hospital may be needed for a specific option 
Certain options that spare or preserve the breast skin may not be available 
More time to make a decision (which may include not having a reconstruction) and to plan reconstruction 
Benefits 
Breast shape remains, which may help maintain body image and have subsequent psychological benefits 
Lifestyle changes (such as losing weight and taking regular exercise) may be possible, which increase the options and lower the risks of reconstruction surgery 
Procedures (and associated recovery) can be planned around other commitments 
Risks 
Surgical complications can occur after any breast reconstruction and will vary by type of procedure and personal risk factors 
May be lower rates of: 
tissue breakdown 
surgery for flap removal if it cannot be used because of a complication (which may lead to delayed reconstruction and flat appearance for a period of time) 
procedures to improve symmetry 
Complications from the mastectomy or axillary surgery can occur during the recovery period 
Surgical complications can occur after any breast reconstruction and will vary by type of procedure and personal risk factors 
May be lower rates of: 
mastectomy site complications 
flap or implant failure (which may lead to delayed reconstruction and flat appearance for a period of time) 
capsular contracture (a scar layer around the implant that may lead to pain if severe) 
May need to interrupt hormone therapies (tamoxifen) for further surgery 
Satisfaction 
No clear differences in satisfaction with completed reconstructions 
No clear differences in satisfaction with completed reconstructions 
Reconstruction and adjuvant therapy (including radiotherapy and chemotherapy) 
Radiotherapy or chemotherapy can be given but may be delayed if there are complications from the mastectomy or reconstruction 
Immediate reconstructions using implants may be more affected by radiotherapy than immediate flap reconstructions 
May need adaptions to scans if a tissue expander is used. For example, may not be able to have MRI scans and may need modified radiotherapy planning 
Complications can also occur after mastectomy alone, which may delay chemotherapy or radiotherapy 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on breast reconstruction . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: postmastectomy radiotherapy . 
1.6 Systemic anti-cancer therapy planning 
Licensed indications for chemotherapy vary between different options and different regimens. Not all chemotherapy options are licensed for use in line with the recommendations in this guideline, and so some recommended uses may be off-label. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines and refer to the summary of product characteristics for individual products. 
1.6.1 
Consider systemic anti-cancer therapy (SACT) for people with invasive breast cancer, and ensure that recommendations are documented at the multidisciplinary team meeting. [2009, amended 2025] 
1.6.2 
Base recommendations about systemic anti-cancer therapy on multidisciplinary team assessment of the prognostic and predictive factors, and the possible risks and benefits of the treatment. Make decisions with the person after discussing these factors. [2009, amended 2025] 
1.6.3 
When discussing the benefits and risks of systemic anti-cancer therapy follow the recommendations on: 
enabling patients to actively participate in their care in NICE's guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services 
and 
communicating risks, benefits and consequences in NICE's guideline on shared decision making . [2025] 
1.6.4 
Use the PREDICT tool to estimate prognosis and the absolute benefits of adjuvant therapy for women with invasive breast cancer. [2018] 
1.6.5 
When using the PREDICT tool, be aware that: 
it is less accurate for: 
women under 30 with ER-positive breast cancer 
women aged 70 and over 
women with tumours larger than 50 mm 
it has not been validated in men, and 
the validation may have under-represented some ethnic groups. 
Take into account that the potential limitations in versions of PREDICT after 2.0 may differ from those listed here (also see the PREDICT tool frequently asked questions ). [2018, amended 2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on adjuvant therapy planning . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: adjuvant systemic therapy planning . 
Tumour profiling tests to guide systemic anti-cancer therapy decisions 
The NICE diagnostics guidance on tumour profiling tests provides evidence-based recommendations on tumour profiling tests to guide adjuvant chemotherapy decisions. 
1.7 Systemic anti-cancer therapy for all receptor subtypes 
Adjuvant chemotherapy 
If planning a course of treatment using a medicine covered by a technology appraisal, check the relevant technology appraisal and NHS commissioning criteria for any linked chemotherapy treatments. Take into account these may be different to the adjuvant chemotherapy regimen recommended in the following section, and use clinical judgement when choosing which treatments to use. 
1.7.1 
For people with breast cancer where adjuvant chemotherapy is indicated, offer a regimen that contains both a taxane and an anthracycline. [2018, amended 2023] 
1.7.2 
Discuss with people the benefits and risks of adding a taxane to anthracycline-containing regimens for adjuvant chemotherapy. Topics to discuss include those in table 2 and: 
the benefits of reduced cardiac toxicity and reduced nausea 
the risks of additional side effects, including neuropathy, neutropenia and hypersensitivity 
the different side effects and dosing frequencies of different docetaxel and paclitaxel regimens, and the additional clinic visits that may be needed 
that absolute benefit is proportional to absolute risk of recurrence. [2018] 
Table 2 Benefits and risks of adding a taxane to anthracycline-containing regimens and comparison of different taxane regimens [2018, amended 2023] 
Effect of adding a taxane to an anthracycline-containing regimen 
3‑weekly docetaxel 
Weekly or fortnightly paclitaxel 
Effect on survival: 
The benefit for an individual person will depend on the risk of their cancer returning. For people with low risk of recurrence, the benefits may not outweigh the risks or side effects 
Some evidence for improved outcomes, including reducing the risk of breast cancer returning and increasing the chance of surviving 
Some evidence for improved outcomes, including reducing the risk of breast cancer returning and increasing the chance of surviving 
Benefits 
Smaller doses of anthracyclines can be used, which can reduce the risk of side effects such as nausea and vomiting 
Smaller cumulative doses of individual medicines may reduce long-term side effects, for example, cardiac toxicity and risk of second malignancies 
Smaller doses of anthracyclines can be used, which can reduce the risk of side effects such as nausea and vomiting 
Smaller cumulative doses of individual medicines may reduce long-term side effects, for example, cardiac toxicity and risk of second malignancies 
Side effects 
Additional side effects may include joint and muscle pain, nerve damage, higher rates of febrile neutropenia and hypersensitivity reactions 
Some people have long-term hair loss (alopecia) after treatment with taxanes 
Additional side effects may include nerve damage and hypersensitivity reactions, but febrile neutropenia is less likely than with 3‑weekly docetaxel 
Some people have long-term hair loss (alopecia) after treatment with taxanes 
Weekly paclitaxel is tolerated best, but even fortnightly is better tolerated than 3‑weekly docetaxel 
Administration 
Visits to hospital every 3 weeks 
Visits to hospital every week or every 2 weeks 
Length of course 
9 to 12 weeks (3 to 4 cycles) 
8 to 12 weeks 
1.7.3 
Ensure weekly and fortnightly paclitaxel is available locally, as it is better tolerated than 3-weekly docetaxel, particularly in people with comorbidities. [2018, amended 2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on adjuvant chemotherapy for invasive breast cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: adjuvant chemotherapy . 
1.8 Triple negative (ER/PR/HER2-negative) breast cancer 
Neoadjuvant treatment of triple-negative breast cancer 
1.8.1 
Where neoadjuvant chemotherapy is indicated for people with triple-negative invasive breast cancer, offer a regimen that contains a platinum, a taxane and an anthracycline. Discuss the benefits and risks of this approach (see table 3), taking into account the person's circumstances, needs and preferences. [2025] 
Table 3 Benefits and risks of adding a platinum to neoadjuvant chemotherapy for triple-negative invasive breast cancer 
Category 
Effect of using a platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
Effect on overall survival 
Using a platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimen improves overall survival compared to a neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimen without a platinum. 
With a minimum follow-up of 3 years, when people had non-platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy then 81 out of 100 survived. 
When people had platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy then 85 out of 100 survived (an additional 4 people). 
Effect on disease free survival 
Using a platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimen improves disease-free survival compared to a neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimen without a platinum. 
With a minimum follow-up of 3 years, when people had non-platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy then 75 out of 100 were disease free. 
When people had platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy then 82 out of 100 were disease free (an additional 7 people). 
Effect on pathological complete response rate (no residual cancer found at surgery) 
Using a platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimen improves the chances of a pathological complete response in the breast and lymph nodes in the axilla, compared to a neoadjuvant chemotherapy regime without platinum. 
When people had non-platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy then 33 out of 100 had a pathological complete response. 
When people had platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy then 48 out of 100 had a pathological complete response (an additional 15 people). 
Effect on breast conservation rate 
No increase in the rate of breast conserving surgery was seen with platinum-based therapy. 
Side effects 
Using a platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy may mean that that the risks of having certain side effects are increased, but they may vary in severity and not everyone gets them. Neutropenic sepsis (reported as febrile neutropenia in the studies, see note in additional information), neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anaemia are seen more frequently with platinum-based chemotherapy. 
Additional information 
Data comes from trials with 3 to 8 years follow-up. 
Data comes from trials with younger people (median age ranged from 45 to 52 years old) with few comorbidities and good performance status. 
Data comes from trials that either have predominantly or entirely recruited people with female reproductive organs. The effects on people with male reproductive organs are unclear, but they may also benefit from platinum-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The effects on pregnant women are also unclear as no data was identified for this population. 
The data recorded in the trials was for febrile neutropenia and no data was identified specifically for neutropenic sepsis. The committee noted the partial overlap of this outcome with that of neutropenic sepsis and agreed that the potential for an increased risk of neutropenic sepsis (as a result of the detected increased risk of febrile neutropenia) was important to highlight as this could have a very severe outcome if left untreated. However, some people with febrile neutropenia will not have sepsis and not everyone with neutropenic sepsis will have a fever. (See the NICE clinical knowledge summary on neutropenic sepsis for more information and see also the NICE guideline on neutropenic sepsis: prevention and management in people with cancer .) 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on neoadjuvant treatment of triple-negative breast cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review S: platinum based neoadjuvant chemotherapy . 
Neoadjuvant and adjuvant treatment of triple negative breast cancer 
1.8.2 
Pembrolizumab is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance with chemotherapy for neoadjuvant treatment then continued alone as adjuvant treatment of triple-negative locally advanced breast cancer or early breast cancer at high risk of recurrence. For full details, see the guidance on pembrolizumab (TA851, 2022) . 
Adjuvant treatment of BRCA-mutation- positive HER2-negative breast cancer 
1.8.3 
Olaparib, alone or with endocrine therapy, is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for the adjuvant treatment of HER2‑negative high-risk early breast cancer that has been treated with neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy in adults with germline BRCA1 or 2 mutations. For full details, see the guidance on olaparib (TA886, 2023) . 
See also the section on adjuvant chemotherapy . 
For advice on germline genetic testing criteria relating to NICE recommended PARP inhibitor treatment (R444.1) see the National genomic test directory for rare and inherited disease from the National Genomic Test Directory . 
1.9 HER2-positive breast cancer 
Neoadjuvant treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer 
See also the section on neoadjuvant endocrine therapy . 
1.9.1 
For people with HER2-positive invasive breast cancer offer neoadjuvant chemotherapy where indicated and in line with the commissioning criteria for any related technology appraisal guidance. [2025] 
1.9.2 
Pertuzumab in combination with trastuzumab is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating HER2-positive breast cancer in adults that is locally advanced, inflammatory, or early-stage with a high risk of recurrence. For full details, see the guidance on pertuzumab (TA424, 2016) . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on neoadjuvant treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review T: neoadjuvant chemotherapy for people with HER2 positive breast cancer . 
Adjuvant treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer 
See also the sections on adjuvant endocrine therapy for ER-positive invasive breast cancer and adjuvant chemotherapy . 
1.9.3 
Trastuzumab emtansine is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for adjuvant treatment of HER2-positive early breast cancer if there is residual invasive disease in the breast or lymph nodes after neoadjuvant taxane-based and HER2-targeted therapy. For full details, see the guidance on trastuzumab emtansine (TA632, 2020) . 
1.9.4 
Pertuzumab with trastuzumab and chemotherapy is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for adjuvant treatment of HER2-positive early breast cancer only if there is lymph node-positive disease. For full details, see the guidance on pertuzumab (TA569, 2019) . 
1.9.5 
Offer adjuvant trastuzumab for people with T1c and above HER2-positive invasive breast cancer. Give this at 3-week intervals for 1 year in combination with surgery, chemotherapy, endocrine therapy and radiotherapy, as appropriate. [2009, amended 2023] 
1.9.6 
Consider adjuvant trastuzumab for people with T1a/T1b HER2-positive invasive breast cancer, taking into account any comorbidities, prognostic features, possible toxicity of chemotherapy and the person's preferences. [2018] 
1.9.7 
Use trastuzumab with caution in people with HER2-positive invasive breast cancer if they have any of the following: 
a baseline left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 55% or less 
a history of, or current, congestive heart failure 
a history of myocardial infarction 
angina pectoris needing medication 
cardiomyopathy 
cardiac arrhythmias needing medical treatment 
clinically significant valvular heart disease 
haemodynamic-effective pericardial effusion 
poorly controlled hypertension. [2009, amended 2018] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on biological therapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: adjuvant biological therapy . 
Extended adjuvant treatment for hormone receptor positive HER2-positive breast cancer 
1.9.8 
Neratinib is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for the extended adjuvant treatment of hormone receptor-positive, HER2-positive early breast cancer in some people who completed adjuvant trastuzumab-based therapy less than 1 year ago. For full details, see the guidance on neratinib (TA612, 2019) . 
1.10 Hormone receptor positive, HER2-negative breast cancer 
See also the section on endocrine therapy for hormone receptor positive breast cancer . 
Neoadjuvant treatment of ER-positive breast cancer 
See also the section on neoadjuvant endocrine therapy . 
1.10.1 
Consider neoadjuvant chemotherapy, where indicated, for people with ER-positive invasive breast cancer. [2018, amended 2025] 
Neoadjuvant treatment of ER-negative PR-positive breast cancer 
1.10.2 
Offer neoadjuvant chemotherapy to people with ER-negative PR- positive invasive breast cancer where indicated. [2018, amended 2025 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on neoadjuvant chemotherapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: neoadjuvant treatment of early and locally advanced breast cancer . 
Adjuvant treatment 
See also the sections on adjuvant systemic anti-cancer therapy for hormone receptor positive, HER2-negative breast cancer and adjuvant chemotherapy . 
Adjuvant treatment of BRCA-mutation-positive HER2-negative breast cancer 
1.10.3 
Olaparib, alone or with endocrine therapy, is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for the adjuvant treatment of HER2-negative high-risk early breast cancer that has been treated with neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy in adults with germline BRCA1 or 2 mutations. For full details, see the guidance on olaparib (TA886, 2023) . 
For advice on germline genetic testing criteria relating to NICE recommended PARP inhibitor treatment (R444.1), see the National genomic test directory for rare and inherited disease from the National Genomic Test Directory . 
1.11 Endocrine therapy for hormone receptor positive breast cancer 
Neoadjuvant endocrine therapy 
1.11.1 
Consider neoadjuvant endocrine therapy for postmenopausal women with ER-positive invasive breast cancer as an option to reduce tumour size if there is no definite indication for chemotherapy. [2018] 
1.11.2 
Advise premenopausal women that neoadjuvant chemotherapy may be more likely to produce a clinical response than neoadjuvant endocrine therapy, but that some tumours do respond to neoadjuvant endocrine therapy. [2018] 
1.11.3 
Discuss with women the benefits and risks of neoadjuvant endocrine therapy compared with neoadjuvant chemotherapy (see table 4). [2018] 
Table 4 Benefits and risks of neoadjuvant endocrine therapy compared with neoadjuvant chemotherapy for women with ER-positive/HER2-negative breast cancer 
Category 
Neoadjuvant endocrine therapy 
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
Definition 
Tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor started before surgery 
Only an option for women with ER-positive breast cancer 
Chemotherapy given before surgery 
Only an option for people who would be recommended adjuvant (after surgery) chemotherapy 
Administration 
Tablet taken once a day at home 
Intravenous administration in hospital, as an outpatient 
Effectiveness 
For postmenopausal women: may be as effective as neoadjuvant chemotherapy in terms of breast conservation rates and shrinking the tumour 
For premenopausal women: less effective than neoadjuvant chemotherapy at shrinking the tumour (but some tumours may respond so may be effective in some women) 
For postmenopausal women: effective at improving breast conservation rates and shrinking the tumour 
For premenopausal women: more effective than endocrine therapy at shrinking the tumour 
Potential disadvantages 
If neoadjuvant endocrine therapy is not effective, then women may proceed to surgery earlier or may still need to have chemotherapy, either before or after surgery 
– 
Side effects 
All endocrine therapies: menopausal symptoms such as hot flushes 
For tamoxifen: increased risk of thrombosis and endometrial cancer 
For aromatase inhibitors: joint and muscle pain, urogenital symptoms, bone density loss (may also occur with tamoxifen in premenopausal women) 
Side effects are usually reversible 
May allow women to avoid the additional side effects of chemotherapy (although women may still need adjuvant chemotherapy after surgery) 
Side effects may include nausea and vomiting, risk of infections that may be life threatening, fatigue, neuropathy, cardiac toxicity, diarrhoea, constipation, sore mouth, skin and nail changes, risk of blood clots, risk of second malignancies, fluid retention, allergic reactions and hair loss (alopecia) 
Side effects may persist long term 
Fertility and family planning 
Women should not become pregnant while taking tamoxifen, or within 2 months of stopping, because it may have adverse effects on the baby 
Often causes temporary infertility 
May cause permanent infertility 
Length of course 
May take longer than chemotherapy to shrink the tumour enough for breast-conserving surgery 
The duration of neoadjuvant chemotherapy is shorter than neoadjuvant endocrine therapy 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on neoadjuvant endocrine therapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: neoadjuvant treatment of early and locally advanced breast cancer . 
Adjuvant systemic anti-cancer therapy for hormone receptor positive, HER2-negative breast cancer 
1.11.4 
Abemaciclib with endocrine therapy is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for adjuvant treatment of hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative, node-positive early breast cancer at high risk of recurrence. For full details, see the guidance on abemaciclib (TA810, 2022) . 
Adjuvant endocrine therapy for ER-positive invasive breast cancer 
1.11.5 
Offer adjuvant endocrine therapy to people with ER-positive invasive breast cancer. [2025] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on adjuvant endocrine therapy for ER positive invasive breast cancer . 
People with female reproductive organs 
The following recommendations apply to women, and to trans men and non-binary people, who currently have ovaries. 
1.11.6 
Make a shared decision with premenopausal or perimenopausal people with ER-positive invasive breast cancer about the type of endocrine therapy that would be suitable for them. As part of this process: 
discuss the benefits and risks of using tamoxifen alone, or ovarian function suppression in combination with tamoxifen, or ovarian function suppression in combination with an aromatase inhibitor (see table 5) 
explain that the use of ovarian function suppression (in combination with tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor) may be most beneficial for people who are at higher risk of disease recurrence 
provide information about the potential side effects of each treatment option, including what to expect and how these could be managed if they develop (including possible referral to support services). 
See also the recommendations on bone health and menopausal symptoms . [2025] 
Table 5 The benefits and risks of using endocrine therapy in combination with ovarian function suppression (OFS) 
Category 
Effect of using OFS in combination with tamoxifen compared to tamoxifen alone 
Effect of using OFS in combination with aromatase inhibitor treatment (AIT) compared to tamoxifen alone 
Effect of using OFS in combination with AIT compared to OFS in combination with tamoxifen 
Effect on overall survival 
Using OFS in combination with tamoxifen improves overall survival compared to tamoxifen alone. 
It was not possible from the evidence to differentiate between OFS in combination with AIT compared to tamoxifen alone for overall survival. 
It was not possible from the evidence (from 4 trials pooled) to differentiate for overall survival. 
Effect on disease-free survival 
Using OFS in combination with tamoxifen improves disease-free survival compared to tamoxifen alone. 
Using OFS in combination with AIT improves disease-free survival compared to tamoxifen alone. 
It was not possible from the evidence (from 4 trials pooled) to differentiate for disease-free survival. However, the combined evidence reported in the SOFT and TEXT trials showed that OFS in combination with AIT improves disease-free survival compared to OFS in combination with tamoxifen. 
Side effects 
Using OFS in combination with tamoxifen compared to tamoxifen may mean that the risk of having certain side effects are increased. These may include vaginal dryness, hot flushes, sleep disturbances or insomnia, depression symptoms, decreased libido or dyspareunia and osteoporosis. But they may vary in severity, and not everyone gets these. 
Side effects could be made worse by having combination treatments 
Using OFS in combination with AIT compared to tamoxifen may mean that the risk of having certain side effects are increased. These may include vaginal dryness, hot flushes, insomnia, depression symptoms, dyspareunia, fractures and osteoporosis. But they may vary in severity, and not everyone gets these. 
Side effects could be made worse by having combination treatments 
Using either OFS in combination with AIT or OFS in combination with tamoxifen may mean that the risk of having certain side effects are increased compared to having tamoxifen alone. (See the relevant column for potential side effects.) But they may vary in severity, and not everyone gets these. 
The risk of having some side effects may be higher with one combination treatment than the other, but there is some uncertainty about this because the analysis was not designed to look at this definitively. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on adjuvant endocrine therapy for ER positive invasive breast cancer: people with female reproductive organs . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q: ovarian function suppression . 
Adjuvant endocrine therapy for ER-positive invasive breast cancer after menopause 
1.11.7 
Offer an aromatase inhibitor as the initial adjuvant endocrine therapy for women and people who are postmenopausal with ER-positive invasive breast cancer who are at medium or high risk of disease recurrence. Offer tamoxifen to women and people who are at low risk of disease recurrence, or if aromatase inhibitors are not tolerated or are contraindicated. [2009, amended 2018] 
People with male reproductive organs 
The following recommendations apply to men, and to trans women and non-binary people, who currently have testes. 
1.11.8 
Offer tamoxifen as adjuvant endocrine therapy for people with ER-positive invasive breast cancer who have male reproductive organs. [2009, amended 2025] 
1.11.9 
Consider testicular function suppression in combination with an aromatase inhibitor if tamoxifen is not suitable or not tolerated for people with ER-positive invasive breast cancer who have male reproductive organs. [2025] 
In March 2025, this was an off-label use for testicular function suppression and aromatase inhibitors. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.11.10 
Do not use an aromatase inhibitor alone in people with ER-positive invasive breast cancer who have male reproductive organs. [2025] 
1.11.11 
Discuss the benefits and risks of the possible treatment options with people with ER-positive invasive breast cancer who have male reproductive organs. Ensure the discussion covers information about potential side effects of endocrine therapy, including side effects specific to people with male reproductive organs such as erectile dysfunction and gynaecomastia (with testicular function suppression in combination with an aromatase inhibitor) and how support could be accessed if they develop these symptoms. [2025] 
1.11.12 
On starting testicular function suppression in combination with an aromatase inhibitor, assess bone mineral density in people with ER-positive invasive breast cancer who have male reproductive organs (also see the recommendations in the section on bone health ). [2025] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on adjuvant endocrine therapy for ER positive invasive breast cancer: people with male reproductive organs . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review R: testicular function suppression . 
Extended adjuvant endocrine therapy for ER positive invasive breast cancer 
1.11.13 
Discuss the benefits and risks of extended endocrine therapy (past the 5-year point) with people who this treatment may be suitable for (see table 6). [2018, amended 2023] 
1.11.14 
Offer extended endocrine therapy with an aromatase inhibitor for women and people who are postmenopausal with ER-positive invasive breast cancer who are at medium or high risk of disease recurrence and who have been taking tamoxifen for 2 to 5 years. Medium or high risk may include people who have lymph node-positive breast cancer, with tumours that are T2 or greater and higher grade. [2018] 
1.11.15 
Consider extended endocrine therapy (past the 5-year point) with an aromatase inhibitor for women and people who are postmenopausal with ER-positive invasive breast cancer who are at low risk of disease recurrence and who have been taking tamoxifen for 2 to 5 years. Low risk may include people with lymph node-negative breast cancer, with smaller or lower-grade tumours. [2018] 
In March 2025, this was an off-label use for aromatase inhibitors. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.11.16 
Consider extending the duration of tamoxifen therapy for longer than 5 years for people with ER-positive invasive breast cancer. [2018] 
Table 6 Effects of extended endocrine therapy 
Category 
Extended tamoxifen therapy (after an initial 5 years of tamoxifen therapy) 
Extended endocrine therapy with an aromatase inhibitor (after 5 years of tamoxifen therapy) 
Definition 
Continuing to take tamoxifen after 5 years of tamoxifen therapy 
Switching to an aromatase inhibitor after 5 years of tamoxifen therapy 
Who can take this therapy 
People with ER-positive invasive breast cancer 
Postmenopausal women with ER-positive invasive breast cancer 
Effect on breast cancer recurrence: 
The benefit for an individual person will depend on the risk of their cancer returning. For people with a low risk of recurrence, the benefits may not outweigh the risks or side effects 
Medium or high risk may include people who have lymph node-positive breast cancer, with tumours that are T2 or greater and higher grade. Low risk may include people with lymph node-negative breast cancer, with smaller or lower-grade tumours 
Evidence shows lower rates of breast cancer recurrence compared with 5 years of tamoxifen therapy in women 
Lower rates of breast cancer recurrence compared with 5 years of tamoxifen therapy 
In postmenopausal women, switching to an aromatase inhibitor may be more effective at reducing recurrence than continuing with tamoxifen 
Side effects: 
These are common side effects experienced during additional years taking endocrine therapy. Most effects are reversible when tablets are stopped 
Side effects of endocrine therapy will continue for additional years (for example, menopausal symptoms such as hot flushes) 
Side effects may differ in men 
With extended use of tamoxifen: increased risk of thrombosis and endometrial cancer, and possibly bone density loss in premenopausal women 
Side effects of endocrine therapy will continue for additional years (for example, menopausal symptoms such as hot flushes) 
With extended use of aromatase inhibitors: bone density loss, and joint and muscle pain 
Fertility and family planning 
For women, effects on fertility and family planning will continue for additional years as they should not become pregnant while taking tamoxifen, or within 2 months of stopping, because it may have adverse effects on the baby 
Not applicable as postmenopausal women only 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on extended endocrine therapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: endocrine therapy for invasive disease . 
Adjuvant endocrine therapy for ER-positive ductal carcinoma in situ 
1.11.17 
Discuss the benefits and risks (see table 7) of endocrine therapy after breast-conserving surgery for women with ER-positive DCIS. [2018] 
1.11.18 
Offer endocrine therapy after breast-conserving surgery for women with ER-positive DCIS if radiotherapy is recommended but not received. [2018] 
1.11.19 
Consider endocrine therapy after breast-conserving surgery for women with ER-positive DCIS if radiotherapy is not recommended. [2018] 
Table 7 Effects of endocrine therapy after breast-conserving surgery for women with ER-positive DCIS 
Category 
Endocrine therapy after breast-conserving surgery for women with ER-positive DCIS 
Definition 
Tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor for 5 years, taken as a once-daily tablet 
Effect on survival and disease recurrence: 
The benefit for an individual person will depend on the risk of their cancer returning. For people with low risk of recurrence, the benefits may not outweigh the risks or side effects 
Risk can be estimated using a range of standardised tools and clinical expertise 
No effect on survival at 5 or 10 years after diagnosis 
Lower rate of recurrence of DCIS and lower rate of invasive breast cancer, compared with women who did not receive endocrine therapy or radiotherapy after surgery 
Side effects 
All endocrine therapies: menopausal symptoms, such as hot flushes 
For tamoxifen: increased risk of thrombosis, endometrial cancer and possibly bone density loss in premenopausal women 
For aromatase inhibitors: joint and muscle pain, urogenital symptoms and bone density loss 
Fertility and family planning 
Effects on fertility and family planning as women should not become pregnant while taking tamoxifen, or within 2 months of stopping, because it may have adverse effects on the baby 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on endocrine therapy for DCIS . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: endocrine therapy for invasive disease . 
1.12 Adjuvant bisphosphonate therapy 
In March 2025, the use of bisphosphonates (zoledronic acid or sodium clodronate) in recommendations 1.12.1 and 1.12.2 was off-label. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.12.1 
Offer bisphosphonates (zoledronic acid or sodium clodronate) as adjuvant therapy to postmenopausal women with node-positive invasive breast cancer. [2018] 
1.12.2 
Consider bisphosphonates (zoledronic acid or sodium clodronate) as adjuvant therapy for postmenopausal women with node-negative invasive breast cancer and a high risk of recurrence. [2018] 
1.12.3 
Discuss the benefits and risks of bisphosphonate treatment with women, particularly the risk of osteonecrosis of the jaw, atypical femoral fractures and osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal. Follow the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency/Commission on Human Medicines (MHRA/CHM) advice on bisphosphonates . [2018] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on adjuvant bisphosphonate therapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: adjuvant bisphosphonates . 
1.13 Radiotherapy 
1.13.1 
Use a radiotherapy technique that minimises the dose to the lung and heart. [2018] 
1.13.2 
Use a deep inspiratory breath-hold radiotherapy technique for people with left-sided breast cancer to reduce the dose to the heart. [2018] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on radiotherapy techniques . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: breast radiotherapy . 
Radiotherapy after breast-conserving surgery 
1.13.3 
Offer whole-breast radiotherapy to women with invasive breast cancer who have had breast-conserving surgery with clear margins. [2018] 
1.13.4 
Consider partial-breast radiotherapy as an alternative to whole-breast radiotherapy for women who have had breast-conserving surgery for invasive cancer (excluding lobular type) with clear margins and who: 
have a low absolute risk of local recurrence (defined as women aged 50 and over with tumours that are 3 cm or less, N0, ER‑positive, HER2‑negative and grade 1 to 2), and 
have been advised to have adjuvant endocrine therapy for a minimum of 5 years. [2018] 
1.13.5 
If partial-breast radiotherapy (see recommendation 1.13.4) may be suitable for a woman, discuss the benefits and risks with them and reach a shared decision on its use. Topics to cover include that: 
local recurrence with partial-breast radiotherapy at 5 years is equivalent to that with whole-breast radiotherapy 
the risk of local recurrence beyond 5 years is not yet known 
there is a potential reduction in late adverse effects. [2018, amended 2023] 
1.13.6 
When giving partial-breast radiotherapy, use external beam radiotherapy. [2018] 
1.13.7 
Consider not using radiotherapy for women who: 
have had breast-conserving surgery for invasive breast cancer with clear margins and 
have a very low absolute risk of local recurrence (defined as women aged 65 and over with tumours that are T1N0, ER-positive, HER2-negative and grade 1 to 2) and 
are willing to take adjuvant endocrine therapy for a minimum of 5 years. [2018] 
1.13.8 
When considering not using radiotherapy (see recommendation 1.13.7), discuss the benefits and risks with the woman (see table 8) and explain that: 
without radiotherapy, local recurrence occurs in about 50 women per 1,000 at 5 years, and with radiotherapy, occurs in about 10 women per 1,000 at 5 years 
overall survival at 10 years is the same with or without radiotherapy 
there is no increase in serious late effects if radiotherapy is given (for example, congestive cardiac failure, myocardial infarction or secondary cancer). [2018] 
Table 8 Benefits and risks of radiotherapy compared with no radiotherapy in the low-risk group described in recommendation 1.13.7 
Category 
Radiotherapy 
No radiotherapy 
Effect on local recurrence 
On average, in 1,000 women, over 5 years local recurrence occurs in about 10 women, and does not occur in about 990 women 
On average, in 1,000 women, over 5 years local recurrence occurs in about 50 women, and does not occur in about 950 women 
Effect on survival 
No difference in overall survival at 10 years 
No difference in overall survival at 10 years 
Risks 
Possibility of short- and long-term adverse effects on the breast, and resulting cosmetic changes (such as skin soreness, changes to colour of skin, radiation fibrosis or stiffening of the breast tissue) 
No short- or long-term adverse effects on the breast, or cosmetic changes 
Side effects 
In this group of women at low risk, there is no increase in serious late side effects of radiotherapy (such as congestive cardiac failure, myocardial infarction or secondary cancer) 
No side effects of radiotherapy will occur 
Administration 
Given at the treatment centre 5 days a week for 3 weeks after surgery 
No need to attend the treatment centre for radiotherapy sessions 
1.13.9 
Consider adjuvant radiotherapy for women with DCIS following breast-conserving surgery with clear margins. Discuss the possible benefits and risks of radiotherapy (also see the section on surgery to the breast ) and make a shared decision about its use. [2009] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on radiotherapy after breast‑conserving surgery . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: breast radiotherapy . 
Radiotherapy after mastectomy 
1.13.10 
Offer adjuvant postmastectomy radiotherapy to people with node-positive (macrometastases) invasive breast cancer or involved resection margins. [2018] 
1.13.11 
Consider adjuvant postmastectomy radiotherapy for people with node-negative T3 or T4 invasive breast cancer. [2018] 
1.13.12 
Do not offer radiotherapy following mastectomy to people with invasive breast cancer who are at low risk of local recurrence (for example, most people who have lymph node-negative breast cancer). [2018, amended 2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on radiotherapy after mastectomy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: postmastectomy radiotherapy . 
Dose fractionation for external beam radiotherapy 
1.13.13 
Offer 26 Gy in 5 fractions over 1 week for people with invasive breast cancer having partial-breast, whole-breast or chest-wall radiotherapy, without regional lymph node irradiation, after breast-conserving surgery or mastectomy. [2023] 
1.13.14 
Consider 40 Gy in 15 fractions over 3 weeks for people with invasive breast cancer having partial-breast, whole-breast or chest-wall radiotherapy, without regional lymph node irradiation, after breast-conserving surgery or mastectomy when they: 
have a diagnosis that increases sensitivity to radiotherapy or 
have had implant-based reconstruction or 
have any other factor that could mean having radiotherapy over 3 weeks is more acceptable (such as high body mass index [BMI] or fibromyalgia). [2023] 
1.13.15 
When discussing the benefits and risks of the 2 regimens, follow the recommendations on: 
enabling patients to actively participate in their care in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services 
and 
communicating risks, benefits and consequences in the NICE guideline on shared decision making . [2023] 
1.13.16 
Offer 40 Gy in 15 fractions over 3 weeks for people with invasive breast cancer having regional lymph node irradiation, with or without whole-breast or chest-wall radiotherapy, after breast-conserving treatment or mastectomy. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on dose fractionation of external beam radiotherapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: effectiveness of different external beam hypofractionation radiotherapy regimens in people with early-stage or locally advanced invasive breast cancer . 
Breast boost following breast-conserving surgery 
1.13.17 
Offer an external beam boost to the tumour bed for women with invasive breast cancer and a high risk of local recurrence, following whole-breast radiotherapy. [2009, amended 2018] 
1.13.18 
Inform women of the risk of side effects associated with an external beam boost to the tumour bed following whole-breast radiotherapy. [2009, amended 2018] 
Radiotherapy to nodal areas 
1.13.19 
Do not offer adjuvant radiotherapy to regional lymph nodes to people with invasive breast cancer who have histologically lymph node-negative breast cancer. [2009, amended 2018] 
1.13.20 
Do not offer people with invasive breast cancer adjuvant radiotherapy to the axilla after axillary clearance. [2009, amended 2023] 
1.13.21 
Offer adjuvant radiotherapy to the supraclavicular fossa to people with invasive breast cancer and 4 or more involved axillary lymph nodes. [2009] 
1.13.22 
Offer adjuvant radiotherapy to the supraclavicular fossa to people with invasive breast cancer and 1 to 3 positive lymph nodes if they have other poor prognostic factors (for example, T3 and/or histological grade 3 tumours) and good performance status. [2009] 
1.13.23 
Consider including the internal mammary chain within the nodal radiotherapy target for people with node-positive (macrometastases) invasive breast cancer. [2018] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on radiotherapy to nodal areas . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: breast radiotherapy . 
Intraoperative radiotherapy 
1.13.24 
The Intrabeam radiotherapy system for adjuvant treatment of early invasive breast cancer during breast-conserving surgical tumour removal is not recommended in NICE technology appraisal guidance for routine commissioning. Use is recommended only using machines that are already available, and in conjunction with NHS England specified clinical governance, data collection and submission arrangements. For full details, see the guidance on the Intrabeam radiotherapy system (TA501, 2018) . [2018] 
Radiotherapy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
1.13.25 
Offer local treatment with mastectomy (or, in exceptional cases, breast-conserving surgery) followed by radiotherapy to people with locally advanced or inflammatory breast cancer that has been treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. [2009] 
1.13.26 
Offer postmastectomy radiotherapy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy if post-treatment histology shows node-positive (macrometastases) breast cancer or involved resection margins. [2018] 
1.13.27 
Offer postmastectomy radiotherapy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy if pretreatment investigations show node-positive (macrometastases) breast cancer. [2018] 
1.13.28 
Consider postmastectomy radiotherapy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy if post-treatment histology shows node-negative T3 breast cancer. [2018] 
1.13.29 
Consider postmastectomy radiotherapy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy if pretreatment investigations show node-negative T3 breast cancer. [2018] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on radiotherapy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: neoadjuvant treatment of early and locally advanced breast cancer . 
1.14 Management of treatment side effects and menopausal symptoms 
Lymphoedema: early identification and risk reduction 
1.14.1 
Inform people having breast cancer treatment about their risk of developing lymphoedema after treatment. Before treatment starts, give them information in a suitable format to take away and refer to. This should include: 
information on: 
risk reduction strategies, such as maintaining a healthy body weight, ways to reduce their risk of infection, and advice on skincare (for example, use of moisturiser and sunscreen) and physical activity 
early signs and symptoms, such as signs or sensations of swelling, or signs of infection 
awareness of skin changes, such as changes in skin colour and appearance of rashes 
how to self-monitor and identify these signs and symptoms 
how to collect baseline measurements of the limb. 
that there is no consistent evidence of increased risk of lymphoedema associated with air travel, travel to hot countries, manicures, hot tub use or sports injuries 
that there is no consistent evidence of increased risk of lymphoedema associated with medical procedures (for example, blood tests, injections, intravenous medicines and blood pressure measurement) on the treated side 
who to contact if signs or symptoms develop (see the section on follow-up ). [2018, amended 2025] 
1.14.2 
Make a shared decision on whether to perform medical procedures using the arm on the treated side. Base this on the person's preferences and clinical judgement, taking into account the person's clinical needs and the possibility of alternatives. [2018, amended 2025] 
1.14.3 
Ensure people who are at risk of, breast-cancer-related lymphoedema are aware that 
physical activity may improve their overall quality of life, and 
there is no indication that physical activity causes, or worsens, lymphoedema. 
For advice on a healthy lifestyle, see the section on lifestyle . [2025] 
1.14.4 
Do not offer compression therapy as a risk-reducing measure to people who are at risk of breast-cancer-related lymphoedema. [2025] 
Surgery for risk-reduction 
1.14.5 
For advice on the use of lymphovenous anastomosis during surgery with special arrangements for clinical governance, consent and audit or research, see the NICE interventional procedures guidance on lymphovenous anastomosis during axillary or inguinal node dissection for preventing secondary lymphoedema . [2025] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on lymphoedema: early identification and risk reduction . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review B: management of the positive axilla 
evidence review O: non-pharmacological prevention of lymphoedema in people who have, or have had, breast cancer . 
Specialist lymphoedema services 
1.14.6 
Ensure that people with breast cancer who develop lymphoedema are referred to a specialist lymphoedema service for further assessment, and to discuss possible management options (for example, conservative management, surgical options), as soon as possible. [2009, amended 2025] 
Lymphoedema education 
1.14.7 
Discuss the following topics with people with lymphoedema, and also provide them with information in a suitable format to take away and refer to later: 
lymphoedema and its management options 
skin and nailcare to prevent complications of lymphoedema 
support groups 
how to recognise the serious complications of lymphoedema that need urgent medical attention, for example cellulitis or deep vein thrombosis. [2025] 
Lymphoedema management 
1.14.8 
Assess people with lymphoedema for other treatable underlying factors (for example, nodal disease and cellulitis) before starting any lymphoedema management programme. [2025] 
1.14.9 
Offer compression therapy as the first stage of lymphoedema management. Make a shared decision with the person about the form of compression that is best for them. [2025] 
1.14.10 
If compression therapy is not appropriate or not comfortable, some people might wish to try kinesiology tape. [2025] 
1.14.11 
Reassure people that there is no evidence that physical activity (including upper limb exercise) will worsen their lymphoedema and explain that it may improve their overall quality of life. [2025] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2025 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on lymphoedema management . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review P: non-pharmacological management of lymphoedema in people who have, or have had, breast cancer . 
Arm and shoulder mobility 
1.14.12 
Ensure breast care units have documented local guidelines in place for postoperative physiotherapy that have been agreed with the physiotherapy department. Guidelines should cover: 
details of the upper limb exercises to be carried out after surgical or radiotherapy interventions 
situations where the exercises should be tailored for individual circumstances and needs 
who should give information and instructions, and at what points in the person's care this should happen 
how healthcare staff can best deliver information about the exercises. [2023] 
1.14.13 
Give people who are going to have surgery or radiotherapy for breast cancer instructions and information on upper limb exercises before their treatment begins: 
explain the benefits of doing the exercises 
explain when the exercises should be started 
ensure the information is in a format suitable for the person to take away to refer to later 
answer any questions the person may have on the exercises, or how to perform them 
give details about who to contact if more information is needed. 
Also see the section on communication in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . [2023] 
1.14.14 
Preoperatively identify people who are having surgery for breast cancer as being at high risk of developing shoulder problems if they have any of the following factors: 
any pre-existing shoulder conditions, such as: 
history of shoulder surgery 
shoulder trauma injury (fracture or shoulder dislocation) 
frozen shoulder 
osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis affecting the shoulder 
non-specific shoulder pain 
stiffness 
decreased function 
their BMI is over 30 kg/m 2 
they have axillary node clearance planned 
they have radiotherapy to the axilla or supraclavicular nodes planned. [2023] 
1.14.15 
After surgery, if a person with breast cancer needs previously unplanned axillary node clearance or radiotherapy to the axilla or supraclavicular nodes, identify them as being at high risk. [2023] 
1.14.16 
Offer supervised support when performing upper limb exercises to people who have been identified as being at high risk of developing shoulder problems after surgery for breast cancer (see recommendation 1.12.7 for assessment). [2023] 
1.14.17 
Consider supervised support when performing upper limb exercises for people who: 
are having surgery and have not been identified as being at high risk of developing shoulder problems (as defined by the criteria in recommendation 1.12.7), but who may still benefit from supervised support or 
are having radiotherapy without surgery. [2023] 
1.14.18 
Ensure supervised support for upper limb exercises: 
is available as either individual, group or virtual support, depending on the person's circumstances, needs and preferences 
is tailored to the person's needs (for example, modifying exercises for people with more complex needs) 
includes checking that the person is performing the activity correctly 
is delivered by physiotherapy staff members or other appropriately trained allied health professionals. [2023] 
1.14.19 
Refer people to the physiotherapy department for individual assessment and treatment if they report a persistent reduction in arm and shoulder mobility after breast cancer surgery or radiotherapy. [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2023 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on arm and shoulder mobility . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: strategies for reducing arm and shoulder problems after breast cancer surgery or radiotherapy . 
Menopausal symptoms 
See also recommendations in the NICE guideline on menopause and the section on covering people with a personal history of breast cancer . 
1.14.20 
Offer women information and counselling about the possibility of early menopause and menopausal symptoms associated with breast cancer treatment. [2009] 
1.14.21 
Stop systemic hormone replacement therapy (HRT) in women who are diagnosed with breast cancer. [2009] 
1.14.22 
Do not routinely offer HRT (including oestrogen/progestogen combination) to women with menopausal symptoms and a history of breast cancer. [2009, amended 2023] 
In March 2025, this was an off-label use of HRT, and HRT is contraindicated in women with a history of breast cancer. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.14.23 
In exceptional circumstances, offer HRT to women with severe menopausal symptoms and a history of breast cancer after a discussion of the associated risks. [2009, amended 2023] 
In March 2025, this was an off-label use of HRT, and HRT is contraindicated in women with a history of breast cancer. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.14.24 
Consider selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants for women with breast cancer for relieving menopausal symptoms, particularly hot flushes, but not for those taking tamoxifen. For guidance on safe prescribing of antidepressants (such as SSRIs) and managing withdrawal, see NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms . [2009, amended 2018] 
In March 2025, this was an off-label use of SSRIs. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.14.25 
Do not offer soy (isoflavone), red clover, black cohosh, vitamin E or magnetic devices to treat vasomotor symptoms in women with breast cancer. [2009, amended 2023] 
Bone health 
1.14.26 
Offer a baseline dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan to assess bone mineral density in women with invasive breast cancer who are not receiving bisphosphonates as adjuvant therapy and who: 
are starting adjuvant aromatase inhibitor treatment or 
have treatment-induced menopause or 
are starting ovarian ablation/suppression therapy. [2009, amended 2018] 
1.14.27 
Do not offer a DEXA scan to people with invasive breast cancer who are receiving tamoxifen alone. [2009, amended 2023] 
1.14.28 
Offer bisphosphonates to women identified by algorithms 1 and 2 in the guidance for the management of breast cancer treatment‑induced bone loss: a consensus position statement from a UK expert group (2008; this guidance is not NICE-accredited). [2009] 
1.15 Follow-up 
Follow-up imaging 
1.15.1 
Offer annual mammography for 5 years to all people who have had or are being treated for breast cancer, including DCIS. For women, continue annual mammography past 5 years until they enter the NHS Breast Screening Programme (NHSBSP) in England or the Breast Test Wales Screening Programme (BTWSP) in Wales. [2009, amended 2023] 
1.15.2 
Do not perform mammography of the ipsilateral soft tissues after mastectomy. [2009] 
1.15.3 
Do not routinely use ultrasound or MRI for post-treatment surveillance in people who have had treatment for invasive breast cancer or DCIS. [2009, amended 2023] 
Clinical follow-up 
1.15.4 
Ensure all people who have had treatment for breast cancer have an agreed, written care plan, recorded in their notes by a named healthcare professional (or professionals) from the multidisciplinary team. Give a copy to the person and to their GP. The plan should include: 
designated named healthcare professionals 
dates for review of any adjuvant therapy 
details of surveillance mammography 
signs and symptoms to look out for and seek advice on 
contact details for immediate referral to specialist care 
contact details for support services, for example, support for people with lymphoedema. [2009, amended 2023] 
1.16 Lifestyle 
1.16.1 
Advise people who have had or are being treated for breast cancer that a healthy lifestyle is associated with a lower risk of recurrence, and that this should include: 
achieving and maintaining a healthy weight (see the NICE guideline on overweight and obesity management ) 
limiting alcohol intake to below 5 units per week 
regular physical activity (see the NICE guideline on physical activity for adults ). [2018] 
1.16.2 
For guidance on smoking cessation, see the NICE guideline on tobacco: preventing uptake, promoting quitting and treating dependence . [2018] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on lifestyle . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: lifestyle . 
1.17 Locally advanced inoperable disease 
See also the NICE guideline on advanced breast cancer . 
1.17.1 
Eribulin is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating locally advanced breast cancer only when it has progressed after at least 2 chemotherapy regimens (which may include an anthracycline or a taxane, and capecitabine). For full details, see the guidance on eribulin (TA423, 2016) . 
Triple-negative breast cancer 
1.17.2 
For medicines recommended as options in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating triple negative, locally advanced breast cancer in some people, see the guidance on: 
talazoparib (TA952, 2024) 
sacituzumab govitecan (TA819, August 2022) 
pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy (paclitaxel or nab-paclitaxel) (TA801, June 2022) 
atezolizumab with nab-paclitaxel (TA639, 2020) . 
HER2-positive breast cancer 
1.17.3 
For medicines recommended as options in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating HER2-positive, locally advanced breast cancer in some people, see the guidance on: 
tucatinib with trastuzumab and capecitabine (TA786, 2022) 
pertuzumab, in combination with trastuzumab and docetaxel (TA509, 2018) 
trastuzumab emtansine (TA458, 2017) . 
Hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer 
1.17.4 
For medicines recommended as options in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative, locally advanced breast cancer in some people, see the guidance on: 
talazoparib (TA952, 2024) 
palbociclib with fulvestrant (TA836, October 2022) 
alpelisib plus fulvestrant (TA816, August 2022) 
abemaciclib with fulvestrant (TA725, September 2021) 
ribociclib with fulvestrant (TA687, March 2021) 
abemaciclib with an aromatase inhibitor (TA563, 2019) 
ribociclib with an aromatase inhibitor (TA496, December 2017) 
palbociclib with an aromatase inhibitor (TA495, December 2017) 
everolimus with exemestane (TA421, 2016) . 
Treatments not recommended 
1.17.5 
For medicines not recommended in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating locally advanced breast cancer in some people, see the guidance on: 
eribulin (TA515, March 2018) 
fulvestrant (TA503, January 2018) for untreated oestrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer 
fulvestrant (TA239, 2011) for oestrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer that has relapsed or progressed on or after anti-oestrogen therapy. 
Terms used in this guideline 
Triple negative breast cancer 
Triple negative breast cancer is defined as ER/PR/HER2, where each has been scored as negative according to local multidisciplinary team guidelines. 
Upper limb exercises 
Upper limb exercises predominantly focus on gentle shoulder range-of-movement exercises and stretches aimed at regaining full and pain-free range of movement of the shoulder following breast cancer surgery and/or radiotherapy. The term can also refer to exercises that progress onto strengthening the shoulder and arm. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
