Implementation: getting started | End of life care for infants, children and young people with life-limiting conditions: planning and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Children's social care
End of life care for infants, children and young people with life-limiting conditions: planning and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG61 
Published: 
07 December 2016
Last updated: 
25 July 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Implementation: getting started 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Implementation: getting started 
NICE has produced tools and resources to help you put this guideline into practice. 
Putting recommendations into practice can take time. How long may vary from guideline to guideline, and depends on how much change in practice or services is needed. Implementing change is most effective when aligned with local priorities. 
Changes recommended for clinical practice that can be done quickly – like changes in prescribing practice – should be shared quickly. This is because healthcare professionals should use guidelines to guide their work – as is required by professional regulating bodies such as the General Medical and Nursing and Midwifery Councils. 
Changes should be implemented as soon as possible, unless there is a good reason for not doing so (for example if it would be better value for money if a package of recommendations were all implemented at once). 
Different organisations may need different approaches to implementation, depending on their size and function. Sometimes individual practitioners may be able to respond to recommendations to improve their practice more quickly than large organisations. 
Here are some pointers to help organisations put NICE guidelines into practice: 
1. Raise awareness through routine communication channels, such as email or newsletters, regular meetings, internal staff briefings and other communications with all relevant partner organisations. Identify things staff can include in their own practice straight away. 
2. Identify a lead with an interest in the topic to champion the guideline and motivate others to support its use and make service changes, and to find out any significant issues locally. 
3. Carry out a baseline assessment against the recommendations to find out whether there are gaps in current service provision. 
4. Think about what data you need to measure improvement and plan how you will collect it. You may want to work with other health and social care organisations and specialist groups to compare current practice with the recommendations. This may also help identify local issues that will slow or prevent implementation. 
5. Develop an action plan , with the steps needed to put the guideline into practice, and make sure it is ready as soon as possible. Big, complex changes may take longer to implement, but some may be quick and easy to do. An action plan will help in both cases. 
6. For very big changes include milestones and a business case, which will set out additional costs, savings and possible areas for disinvestment. A small project group could develop the action plan. The group might include the guideline champion, a senior organisational sponsor, staff involved in the associated services, finance and information professionals. 
7. Implement the action plan with oversight from the lead and the project group. Big projects may also need project management support. 
8. Review and monitor how well the guideline is being implemented through the project group. Share progress with those involved in making improvements, as well as relevant boards and local partners. 
NICE provides a comprehensive programme of support and resources to maximise uptake and use of evidence and guidance. See NICE's into practice pages for more information . 
Also see Leng G, Moore V, Abraham S, editors (2014) Achieving high quality care – practical experience from NICE . Chichester: Wiley. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
