Overview | Urinary tract infection in under 16s: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Urological conditions
Urinary tract infection
Urinary tract infection in under 16s: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG224 
Published: 
27 July 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing first or recurrent upper or lower urinary tract infection (UTI) in babies, children and young people under 16. It aims to achieve more consistent clinical practice, based on accurate diagnosis and effective management. It does not cover babies, children and young people with urinary catheters in situ, neurogenic bladders, significant pre-existing urinary tract disorders (uropathies), underlying renal disease or immunosuppression, or recurrent UTI in sexually active girls and young women under 16. It also does not cover babies, children and young people in intensive care units. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
diagnosis 
acute management 
imaging tests 
surgical intervention 
follow up 
information and advice 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners 
Babies and children from birth up to the age of 16 years with UTI, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG54 (August 2007). 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Urinary tract infection in children and young people 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
