Recommendations | Osteoarthritis in over 16s: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Musculoskeletal conditions
Arthritis
Osteoarthritis in over 16s: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG226 
Published: 
19 October 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Diagnosis
1.2 Information and support
1.3 Non-pharmacological management
1.4 Pharmacological management
1.5 Follow-up and review
1.6 Referral for joint replacement
1.7 Arthroscopic procedures
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Diagnosis 
1.1.1 
Diagnose osteoarthritis clinically without imaging in people who: 
are 45 or over and 
have activity-related joint pain and 
have either no morning joint-related stiffness or morning stiffness that lasts no longer than 30 minutes. 
1.1.2 
Do not routinely use imaging to diagnose osteoarthritis unless there are atypical features or features that suggest an alternative or additional diagnosis. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on diagnosis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: additional benefit of imaging in the diagnosis of osteoarthritis . 
1.2 Information and support 
1.2.1 
When giving information to people with osteoarthritis, their families and carers, tailor it to their individual needs (such as language and culture), ensure it is in an accessible format and follow the recommendations on: 
enabling patients to actively participate in their care in NICE's guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services 
putting shared decision making into practice in NICE's guideline on shared decision making 
delivering an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity in NICE's guideline on multimorbidity . 
1.2.2 
Explain to people with osteoarthritis that: 
it is diagnosed clinically and usually does not need imaging to confirm the diagnosis and 
management should be guided by symptoms and physical function and 
the core treatments for the condition are therapeutic exercise and weight management (if appropriate), along with information and support. 
1.2.3 
Advise people with osteoarthritis where they can find further information on: 
osteoarthritis and how it develops (including flares and progression over time), and information that challenges common misconceptions about the condition 
specific types of exercise 
managing their symptoms 
how to access additional sources of information and support after consultations, such as peer-to-peer support and support groups 
benefits and limitations of treatment. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information and support . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: post-diagnostic information on osteoarthritis for people with osteoarthritis, their family and carers . 
1.3 Non-pharmacological management 
Therapeutic exercise 
1.3.1 
For all people with osteoarthritis, offer therapeutic exercise tailored to their needs (for example, local muscle strengthening, general aerobic fitness). 
1.3.2 
Consider supervised therapeutic exercise sessions for people with osteoarthritis. 
1.3.3 
Advise people with osteoarthritis that joint pain may increase when they start therapeutic exercise. Explain that: 
doing regular and consistent exercise, even though this may initially cause pain or discomfort, will be beneficial for their joints 
long-term adherence to an exercise plan increases its benefits by reducing pain and increasing functioning and quality of life. 
1.3.4 
Consider combining therapeutic exercise with an education programme or behaviour change approaches in a structured treatment package . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on therapeutic exercise . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review C: clinical and cost effectiveness of exercise for the management of osteoarthritis 
evidence review K: clinical and cost effectiveness of treatment packages for the management of osteoarthritis . 
Weight management 
1.3.5 
For people with osteoarthritis who are living with overweight or obesity: 
advise them that weight loss will improve their quality of life and physical function, and reduce pain 
support them to choose a weight loss goal 
explain that any amount of weight loss is likely to be beneficial, but losing 10% of their body weight is likely to be better than 5%. 
For guidance and information on weight management, including recommended interventions to support weight loss, see NICE's topic page on obesity . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on weight management . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: benefit of weight loss for the management of osteoarthritis for people living with overweight or obesity . 
Manual therapy 
1.3.6 
Only consider manual therapy (such as manipulation, mobilisation or soft tissue techniques): 
for people with hip or knee osteoarthritis and 
alongside therapeutic exercise. 
1.3.7 
If discussing manual therapy, explain to people with osteoarthritis that there is not enough evidence to support its use alone for managing osteoarthritis. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on manual therapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: clinical and cost-effectiveness of manual therapy for the management of osteoarthritis . 
Acupuncture 
1.3.8 
Do not offer acupuncture or dry needling to manage osteoarthritis. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on acupuncture . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: clinical and cost-effectiveness of acupuncture for people with osteoarthritis . 
Electrotherapy 
1.3.9 
Do not offer any of the following electrotherapy treatments to people with osteoarthritis because there is insufficient evidence of benefit: 
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) 
ultrasound therapy 
interferential therapy 
laser therapy 
pulsed short-wave therapy 
neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on electrotherapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: clinical and cost effectiveness of electrotherapy for the management of osteoarthritis . 
Devices 
For guidance on devices for knee osteoarthritis, see the NICE medical technologies guidance on AposHealth for knee osteoarthritis . 
1.3.10 
Consider walking aids (such as walking sticks) for people with lower limb osteoarthritis. 
1.3.11 
Do not routinely offer insoles, braces, tape, splints or supports to people with osteoarthritis unless: 
there is joint instability or abnormal biomechanical loading and 
therapeutic exercise is ineffective or unsuitable without the addition of an aid or device and 
the addition of an aid or device is likely to improve movement and function. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on devices . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: clinical and cost effectiveness of devices for the management of osteoarthritis . 
1.4 Pharmacological management 
Topical, oral and transdermal medicines 
1.4.1 
If pharmacological treatments are needed to manage osteoarthritis, use them: 
alongside non-pharmacological treatments and to support therapeutic exercise 
at the lowest effective dose for the shortest possible time. 
1.4.2 
Offer a topical non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) to people with knee osteoarthritis. 
1.4.3 
Consider a topical NSAID for people with osteoarthritis that affects other joints. 
1.4.4 
If topical medicines are ineffective or unsuitable, consider an oral NSAID for people with osteoarthritis and take account of: 
potential gastrointestinal, renal, liver and cardiovascular toxicity 
any risk factors the person may have, including age, pregnancy, current medication and comorbidities. 
Offer a gastroprotective treatment (such as a proton pump inhibitor) for people with osteoarthritis while they are taking an NSAID. 
1.4.5 
Do not routinely offer paracetamol or weak opioids unless: 
they are only used infrequently for short-term pain relief and 
all other pharmacological treatments are contraindicated, not tolerated or ineffective. 
Explain to people with osteoarthritis that there is no strong evidence of benefit for paracetamol. For more information about opioids, see NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms . 
1.4.6 
Do not offer glucosamine or strong opioids to people to manage osteoarthritis. 
1.4.7 
If the person with osteoarthritis asks about glucosamine or strong opioids, explain that: 
there is no strong evidence of benefit for glucosamine 
the risks of strong opioids outweigh the benefits. 
1.4.8 
Review with the person whether to continue treatment. Base the frequency of reviews on clinical need. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on topical, oral and transdermal medicines . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I , evidence review I: appendices A to D , evidence review I: appendices E to J : clinical and cost effectiveness of oral, topical and transdermal medicines for the management of osteoarthritis. 
Intra-articular injections 
1.4.9 
Do not offer intra-articular hyaluronan injections to manage osteoarthritis. 
1.4.10 
Consider intra-articular corticosteroid injections when other pharmacological treatments are ineffective or unsuitable, or to support therapeutic exercise. Explain to the person that these only provide short‑term relief (2 to 10 weeks). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on intra-articular injections . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: clinical and cost effectiveness of intra-articular injections for the management of osteoarthritis . 
1.5 Follow-up and review 
Follow-up appointments 
1.5.1 
Consider patient-initiated follow-up for most people with osteoarthritis. 
1.5.2 
Consider planned follow-up for people with osteoarthritis when their individual needs and preferences suggest that this is necessary, taking into account: 
treatments or interventions that need monitoring 
their ability to seek help for themselves 
their occupation and activities 
the severity of their symptoms or functional limitations. 
People with multiple long-term conditions are likely to benefit from a tailored approach in line with NICE's guideline on multimorbidity . 
1.5.3 
Advise people with osteoarthritis to seek follow-up if planned management is not working within an agreed follow-up time or they are having difficulties with the agreed approaches. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on follow-up and review . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: regular follow-up and review . 
Imaging for management of osteoarthritis 
1.5.4 
Do not routinely use imaging for follow-up or to guide non-surgical management of osteoarthritis. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on imaging for the management of osteoarthritis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: clinical and cost effectiveness of imaging during the management of osteoarthritis . 
1.6 Referral for joint replacement 
1.6.1 
Consider referring people with hip, knee or shoulder osteoarthritis for joint replacement if: 
their joint symptoms (such as pain, stiffness, reduced function or progressive joint deformity) are substantially impacting their quality of life and 
non-surgical management (for example, therapeutic exercise, weight loss, pain relief) is ineffective or unsuitable. 
1.6.2 
Use clinical assessment when deciding to refer someone for joint replacement, instead of systems that numerically score severity of disease. 
1.6.3 
Do not exclude people with osteoarthritis from referral for joint replacement because of: 
age 
sex or gender 
smoking 
comorbidities 
overweight or obesity, based on measurements such as body mass index (BMI). 
1.6.4 
If discussing referral for joint replacement, explain to the person with osteoarthritis that the risks of joint replacement can vary depending on the factors listed in recommendation 1.6.3. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on referral for joint replacement . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review O: indicators for referral for possible joint replacement surgery 
evidence review P: outcomes of joint replacement surgery dependent on body mass index 
1.7 Arthroscopic procedures 
1.7.1 
Do not offer arthroscopic lavage or debridement to people with osteoarthritis. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on arthroscopic procedures . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review N: clinical and cost effectiveness of arthroscopic procedures for the management of osteoarthritis . 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline. 
Atypical features 
Atypical features could include a history of recent trauma, prolonged morning joint‑related stiffness, rapid worsening of symptoms or deformity, the presence of a hot swollen joint, or concerns that may suggest infection or malignancy. 
Flares 
A temporary worsening of symptoms (pain, swelling and stiffness) that: 
is worse than normal 
may affect sleep, activity, function and psychological wellbeing 
may lead to change in therapy for at least 24 hours. 
Treatment package 
A treatment package is defined as any treatment for osteoarthritis (this could include: exercise, manual therapy, devices and pharmacological treatments) combined with one of the following: 
behaviour change approaches, including ways to reduce pain and straining when using joints, pain coping skills training (including spouse-assisted coping skills training), goal setting; motivational coaching; weight management counselling and workplace risk counselling 
an education programme given by 1 or more healthcare professionals over multiple sessions, including those based on behavioural theory. 
Walking aids 
Walking aids include walking sticks, crutches, walking frames and rollators. They support the person with osteoarthritis to move around independently and safely by improving their walking pattern and balance or reducing weight bearing on the affected joint. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
