Recommendations for research | Asthma: diagnosis, monitoring and chronic asthma management (BTS, NICE, SIGN) | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Respiratory conditions
Asthma
Asthma: diagnosis, monitoring and chronic asthma management (BTS, NICE, SIGN)
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG245 
Published: 
27 November 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Medicines for initial management 
What is the clinical and cost-effectiveness of regular 'fixed-dose' inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) regimens (using SABA [short-acting beta 2 agonist] as a reliever) compared with 'as-needed' strategies (for example ICS/formoterol) as the initial standard treatment for asthma in children aged 5 to 11 years? [BTS/NICE/SIGN 2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale and impact section on medicines for initial management in children aged 5 to 11 . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review P: drug classes for initial asthma management . 
2 Medicine combination and sequencing 
What is the best step-up treatment for people whose asthma is not controlled on a combination inhaler of ICS plus formoterol used as needed? [BTS/NICE/SIGN 2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale and impact section on medicine combination and sequencing in people aged 12 and over . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q: drug combinations and sequencing for asthma management . 
3 Diagnostic pathways 
What is the cost-effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed BTS/NICE/SIGN diagnostic pathways for asthma in children and young people aged 5 and over and in adults aged 17 and over? [BTS/NICE/SIGN 2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale and impact section on objective tests for diagnosing asthma in adults, young people and children aged 5 to 16 with a history suggestive of asthma . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review A: diagnostic test accuracy of spirometry in people suspected of asthma 
evidence review B: diagnostic test accuracy for bronchodilator reversibility in people suspected of asthma 
evidence review C: diagnostic test accuracy of peak expiratory flow variability for the diagnosis of asthma 
evidence review D: accuracy of skin prick test in children for the diagnosis of asthma 
evidence review E: diagnostic test accuracy of IgE in children 
evidence review F: diagnostic accuracy of fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) measures 
evidence review G: diagnostic accuracy of eosinophil blood count measures in the diagnosis of asthma 
evidence review H: bronchial challenge with histamine and methacholine for the diagnosis of asthma 
evidence review I: bronchial challenge test with mannitol 
evidence review J: bronchial challenge testing in response to exercise for the diagnosis of asthma 
evidence review K: diagnostic accuracy of combination of tests . 
4 Inhalers 
Can digital inhaler monitors cost-effectively improve adherence to preventer inhalers for people with asthma? Does this improve asthma control and who would benefit most from this intervention? [BTS/NICE/SIGN 2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale and impact section on digital inhalers . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review R: smart inhalers . 
5 Monitoring inhaler technique 
What is the current frequency and the current method being used to check the inhaler technique of people with asthma? What is the optimal frequency and the best method of checking inhaler technique to improve clinical outcomes for people with asthma? [NICE 2017] 
6 Monitoring asthma control using telehealthcare 
What is the long-term (more than 12 months) clinical and cost-effectiveness of using telehealthcare as a means to monitor asthma control in adults, young people and children? Methods of telehealthcare can include telephone interview (with healthcare professional involvement) and internet or smartphone-based monitoring support (no healthcare professional involvement). [NICE 2017] 
7 Decreasing pharmacological treatment 
In adults, young people and children with well-controlled asthma, what are the objective measurements and prognostic factors that indicate that a decrease in regular maintenance treatment is appropriate? [NICE 2017] 
8 Improving adherence to asthma medication 
What are the most clinically and cost-effective strategies to improve medicines adherence in adults, young people and children with asthma who are non-adherent to prescribed medicines? [NICE 2017] 
Other recommendations for research 
Increasing the dose of ICS within a personalised self-management programme for children and young people 
For children and young people with asthma that is managed in primary care, is there an advantage to increasing the ICS dose when asthma control has deteriorated compared with using the usual dose in a self-management programme? [NICE 2020] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale and impact section on self-management . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review from NG80: increasing ICS treatment within supported self-management for children and young people . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
