Overview | HIV testing: increasing uptake among people who may have undiagnosed HIV | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
HIV and AIDS
HIV testing: increasing uptake among people who may have undiagnosed HIV
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG60 
Published: 
01 December 2016
Last updated: 
26 September 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
The committee's discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers how to increase the uptake of HIV testing in primary and secondary care, specialist sexual health services and the community. It describes how to plan and deliver services that are tailored to the local prevalence of HIV, promote awareness of HIV testing and increase opportunities to offer testing to people who may have undiagnosed HIV. 
Last reviewed: 26 September 2025 
We amended recommendation 1.1.1 in the section on local prevalence to recommend the use of UK Health Security Agency's annual surveillance data on HIV. See the update information for more details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guidelines PH33 and PH34 (March 2011). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
offering and recommending HIV testing in different settings 
increasing opportunities for HIV testing 
promoting awareness and uptake of HIV testing 
reducing barriers to HIV testing 
Who is it for? 
Local authority and NHS commissioners of HIV testing services 
Providers of HIV testing services 
Practitioners working in services that offer HIV testing 
The general public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guidance. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
HIV testing: encouraging uptake 
Sexual health 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
