Overview | Neuropathic pain in adults: pharmacological management in non-specialist settings | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Chronic and neuropathic pain
Neuropathic pain in adults: pharmacological management in non-specialist settings 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG173 
Published: 
20 November 2013
Last updated: 
22 September 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Recommendations 
Additional information 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers managing neuropathic pain (nerve pain) with pharmacological treatments (drugs) in adults in non-specialist settings. It aims to improve quality of life for people with conditions such as neuralgia, shingles and diabetic neuropathy by reducing pain and promoting increased participation in all aspects of daily living. The guideline sets out how drug treatments for neuropathic pain differ from traditional pain management. 
Anti-epileptic medicines : Follow the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) safety advice on the use of valproate , valproate use in people younger than 55 years , valproate use in women and girls , valproate use in men , the use of topiramate and anti-epileptic drugs in pregnancy . 
Last reviewed: 22 September 2020 
We reviewed the evidence on treating sciatica and added new recommendations on pharmacological treatment to the NICE guideline on low back pain and sciatica . We updated the recommendations for research on sciatica in the full version of this guideline . 
Next review: This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
key principles of care 
treatments for all types of neuropathic pain except trigeminal neuralgia 
treatments for trigeminal neuralgia 
treatments that should not be started in non-specialist settings 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Adults with neuropathic pain, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called neuropathic pain – pharmacological management: the pharmacological management of neuropathic pain in adults in non-specialist settings. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
