Overview | Diverticular disease: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Digestive tract conditions
Diverticular disease
Diverticular disease: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG147 
Published: 
27 November 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the diagnosis and management of diverticular disease in people aged 18 years and over. It aims to improve diagnosis and care and help people get timely information and advice, including advice about symptoms and when to seek help. 
Last reviewed:  27 November 2019 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
See a 2-page visual summary of the recommendations on antimicrobial prescribing, including a table to support prescribing decisions 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
Management and advice for people with diverticulosis 
Diverticular disease, including symptoms and signs, management and advice 
Acute diverticulitis, including symptoms and signs, non-surgical management and surgery 
Information for people with diverticulosis, diverticular disease and acute diverticulitis 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals in primary and secondary care 
People with diverticular disease, their families and carers, and the public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
