Overview | Urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse in women: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Gynaecological conditions
Uterine prolapse
Urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse in women: management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG123 
Published: 
02 April 2019
Last updated: 
24 June 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and resources 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and managing urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse in women aged 18 and over. It also covers complications associated with mesh surgery for these conditions. 
In July 2018, the Government announced a period of ‘high vigilance restriction’ on the use of a group of procedures to treat stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse, in England. This followed a recommendation by Baroness Cumberlege, who is chairing an independent review of surgical mesh procedures and has heard from women and families affected by them. For details, see the letter from NHS England and NHS Improvement to trust medical directors . The high vigilance restriction period was  extended  in March 2019. 
Last reviewed: 26 March 2025 
We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the section on medicines for overactive bladder . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG171 (September 2013), NICE guideline CG40 (October 2006), NICE technology appraisal guidance 56 (February 2003), NICE interventional procedures guidance 154 (2006) and NICE advice ESNM2 (September 2012). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
organisation of specialist services 
collecting data on surgery and surgical complications 
urodynamic testing to assess urinary incontinence 
pelvic floor muscle training  and  absorbent containment products for urinary incontinence 
medicines  and  botulinum toxin type A injections for overactive bladder 
surgical management of stress urinary incontinence 
assessing pelvic organ prolapse 
non-surgical and surgical management of pelvic organ prolapse 
surgery for women with both stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse 
assessing and managing complications associated with mesh surgery 
These supplement the existing recommendations on: 
assessing urinary incontinence 
non-surgical management of stress urinary incontinence 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Service commissioners 
Women with urinary incontinence, pelvic organ prolapse, or complications associated with surgery for urinary incontinence or pelvic organ prolapse, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Urinary incontinence in women 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
