Implementation: getting started | Oral health promotion: general dental practice | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Oral and dental health
Oral health promotion: general dental practice
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG30 
Published: 
15 December 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Implementation: getting started 
Context 
The committee's discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Glossary 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1 The challenge: delivering patient‑centred oral health advice
2 The challenge: developing new incentives for general dental teams to improve people's oral health
Implementation: getting started 
This section highlights 2 areas of the guideline that could have a big impact on practice and be challenging to implement, along with the reasons why we are proposing change in these areas. (See the box at the start of each area.) This section also gives information on resources to help with implementation. 
1 The challenge: delivering patient‑centred oral health advice 
See the sections on oral health advice given by dentists and dental care professionals and how dentists and dental care professionals can adopt a patient centred approach . 
Developing a patient‑centred approach is an opportunity to improve current practice and reduce health inequalities. That is why training is so important. 
Training 
During their training to register with the General Dental Council (GDC), dentists and dental care professionals are required to develop the skills and knowledge needed to deliver patient‑centred oral health advice. The GDC could consider reviewing this when updating its educational requirements. In addition, as patient needs and contracts change, Health Education England could also consider what ongoing training dentists and dental care professionals need to deliver patient‑centred oral health advice. Training could: 
Provide dentists and dental care professionals with detailed information on how to give advice on improving and maintaining good oral health, in line with recommendation 12 in NICE's guideline on behaviour change: individual approaches. This includes : 
adopting a person‑centred approach when assessing people's needs and planning and developing a preventive care plan for them 
communicating effectively, for example, by using reflective listening and knowing how to show empathy and develop a rapport with people 
understanding the factors that may affect behaviour change, including psychological, social, cultural and economic factors 
addressing health inequalities by tailoring interventions to people's specific needs, including their cultural, social and economic needs and other 'protected characteristics' 
understanding behaviour change techniques and communication styles. 
Help dentists and dental care professionals learn about the benefits of oral health improvement, and how to tell people about these benefits (see Public Health England's Delivering better oral health ). This could include: 
why improving people's oral health makes a difference 
the most effective methods of delivering advice on how to improve oral health 
the links between health inequalities and oral health 
the needs of groups at high risk of poor oral health 
how good oral health contributes to people's overall health and wellbeing. 
Train dentists and dental care professionals in how to make the best use of the skill mix within their team. 
Encourage dentists and dental care professionals to recognise their professional responsibility, throughout their career, for keeping up‑to‑date with the evidence on, and their understanding of, how to improve people's oral health. 
2 The challenge: developing new incentives for general dental teams to improve people's oral health 
See the sections on oral health advice given by dentists and dental care professionals and how dentists and dental care professionals can adopt a patient centred approach . 
Commissioning and contracting arrangements that provide dental practices with appropriate incentives to maintain and improve people's oral health help dental teams to adopt a more preventive approach. 
Encouraging a preventive approach to oral health 
Dental practice teams may need encouragement to adopt a more preventive approach. Those with responsibility for planning and commissioning dental services, along with consultants in dental public health and directors of public health could: 
Encourage dental practices to compare their performance on one‑to‑one activities to prevent oral health problems with other local practices. 
Provide case studies of NHS dental practices of different sizes that operate a successful business model and, at the same time, deliver best practice preventive care for all patients. 
Align services with other local oral health activities and ensure oral health improvement in dental teams complements wider population approaches. See: 
NICE's guideline on oral health: local authorities and partners 
Public Health England's Local authorities improving oral health: commissioning better oral health for children and young people . 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
