Context | Drug misuse in over 16s: opioid detoxification | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Drug misuse
Drug misuse in over 16s: opioid detoxification 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG52 
Published: 
25 July 2007
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix: Contingency management – key elements in the delivery of a programme 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Context 
This guideline makes recommendations for the treatment of people who are undergoing detoxification for opioid dependence arising from the misuse of illicit drugs. It is concerned with opioid detoxification in community, residential, inpatient and prison settings, and will refer to the misuse of other drugs such as benzodiazepines, alcohol and stimulants only in so far as they impact on opioid detoxification. The guideline does not address the particular problems of detoxification of pregnant women and the related management of symptoms in neonates whose mothers misused opioids during pregnancy. 
Opioid detoxification refers to the process by which the effects of opioid drugs are eliminated from dependent opioid users in a safe and effective manner, such that withdrawal symptoms are minimised. With opioids, this process may be carried out by using the same drug or another opioid in decreasing doses, and can be assisted by the prescription of adjunct medications to reduce withdrawal symptoms. 
Opioid misuse is often characterised as a chronic condition with periods of remission and relapse. Although abstinence may be 1 of the long-term goals of treatment, it is not always achieved. However, detoxification is a key stage in achieving abstinence for people who are opioid dependent. 
Pharmacological approaches are the primary treatment option for opioid detoxification, with psychosocial interventions providing an important adjunct. 
In order to ensure that all people to whom this guidance applies obtain full benefit from the recommendations, it is important that effective keyworking systems are in place. Keyworking is an important element of care and helps to deliver high-quality outcomes for people who misuse drugs. Keyworkers have a central role in coordinating a care plan and building a therapeutic alliance with the service user. The benefits of a number of the recommendations in this guideline will only be fully realised in the context of properly coordinated care. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Appendix: Contingency management – key elements in the delivery of a programme 
Back to top
