Recommendations for research | Thyroid disease: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Thyroid disorders
Thyroid disease: assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG145 
Published: 
20 November 2019
Last updated: 
12 October 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Levothyroxine–liothyronine combination therapy for hypothyroidism 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of levothyroxine (T4) and liothyronine (T3) combination therapy compared with T4 alone for people with hypothyroidism whose symptoms have not responded sufficiently to T4 alone? Does DiO2 polymorphism affect the response to combination therapy with T4 and T3? 
To find out why the committee made the research recommendation on levothyroxine-liothyronine combination therapy for hypothyroidism see the rationale and impact section on managing primary hypothyroidism . 
2 Long-term health outcomes for people with subclinical hyperthyroidism 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of treatment (antithyroid drugs or radioactive iodine) for improving long-term health outcomes for people with subclinical hyperthyroidism? 
To find out why the committee made the research recommendation on improving long-term health outcomes for people with subclinical hyperthyroidism see the rationale and impact section on managing and monitoring subclinical hyperthyroidism . 
3 Antithyroid drugs in subgroups with Graves' disease 
Are there subgroups of people with Graves' disease who have a particularly good response to antithyroid drugs? 
To find out why the committee made the research recommendation on antithyroid drugs in subgroups of people with Graves' disease see the rationale and impact section on treatment for adults with Graves' disease . 
4 Long-term effectiveness and safety of radioactive iodine therapy for hyperthyroidism 
What is the long-term clinical and cost effectiveness, including safety, of radioactive iodine for hyperthyroidism? 
To find out why the committee made the research recommendation on long-term effectiveness and safety of radioactive iodine therapy see the rationale and impact section on treatment for adults with Graves' disease . 
5 Dosimetry-guided radioactive iodine therapy for hyperthyroidism 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of dosimetry-guided radioactive iodine strategies for hyperthyroidism? 
To find out why the committee made the research recommendation on the use of dosimetry-guided radioactive iodine therapy for hyperthyroidism see the rationale and impact section on treatment for adults with Graves' disease . 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Antithyroid drug regimens for T3 thyrotoxicosis due to Graves' disease 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of different durations of antithyroid drug regimens for people with T3 thyrotoxicosis due to Graves' disease? 
7 Levothyroxine for subclinical hypothyroidism in people under 65 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of levothyroxine for people under 65 with symptomatic subclinical hypothyroidism? 
8 Antithyroid drug regimens for Graves' disease 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of a block and replace regimen compared with a titration regimen of antithyroid drugs for Graves' disease? 
9 Percutaneous ablation for benign thyroid nodules 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of percutaneous thermal ablation for benign thyroid nodules? 
10 Iodine for subclinical hypothyroidism 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of iodine for people with subclinical hypothyroidism? 
11 Selenium for subclinical hypothyroidism 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of selenium for people with subclinical hypothyroidism? 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
