Recommendations for research | Venous thromboembolic diseases: diagnosis, management and thrombophilia testing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Embolism and thrombosis
Venous thromboembolic diseases: diagnosis, management and thrombophilia testing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG158 
Published: 
26 March 2020
Last updated: 
02 August 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Clinical and cost effectiveness of inferior vena caval filters in people with venous thromboembolism 
What is the short- and long-term clinical and cost effectiveness of inferior vena caval filters in people with venous thromboembolism (VTE)? [2020] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on inferior vena caval filters . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: inferior vena caval filters for people with VTE . 
2 Clinical and cost effectiveness of direct-acting oral anticoagulants based on individual patient data 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of direct-acting oral anticoagulants (DOACs) compared with each other, with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) plus a vitamin K antagonist (VKA), with LMWH alone, with placebo and with aspirin for the initial and long‑term treatment of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE) based on individual patient data from existing trials? [2020] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on anticoagulation treatment for confirmed DVT or PE . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: pharmacological treatment in people with suspected or confirmed DVT and/or PE . 
3 Prediction tools compared with clinical judgement 
What is the prognostic accuracy of a tool to predict both VTE recurrence and major bleeding compared with clinical judgement in people with unprovoked proximal DVT or PE? [2020] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on long-term anticoagulation for secondary prevention . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: what factors determine the optimum duration of pharmacological treatment for DVT or PE in people with a VTE? 
4 Lower-dose thrombolysis for people with acute PE and right ventricular dysfunction 
Does lower-dose thrombolysis reduce the risk of major bleeding and improve outcomes for people with acute PE and right ventricular dysfunction? [2015] 
5 Diagnosis of DVT 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of a whole‑leg ultrasound scan compared with a proximal leg vein ultrasound scan in the diagnosis of acute DVT? [2012] 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Treatment strategy for people who use intravenous drugs 
What is the optimal pharmacological treatment strategy for DVT or PE in people who use intravenous drugs? [2020] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on anticoagulation treatment for DVT or PE in people who use intravenous drugs . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: pharmacological treatment in people with suspected or confirmed DVT and/or PE . 
7 Predicting VTE recurrence and major bleeding 
What is the prognostic accuracy of a tool to predict both VTE recurrence and major bleeding after 3 months of initial anticoagulation treatment and in the long term? [2020] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on long-term anticoagulation for secondary prevention . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: what factors determine the optimum duration of pharmacological treatment for DVT or PE in people with a VTE? 
8 Thrombolytic therapy for DVT 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of clot removal using catheter‑directed thrombolytic therapy or pharmacomechanical thrombolysis compared with standard anticoagulation therapy for the treatment of acute proximal DVT? [2012] 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
