Overview | Meningitis (bacterial) and meningococcal disease: recognition, diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Meningitis and meningococcal septicaemia
Meningitis (bacterial) and meningococcal disease: recognition, diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG240 
Published: 
19 March 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers recognising, diagnosing and managing bacterial meningitis and meningococcal disease in babies, children, young people and adults. It aims to reduce death and disability by helping healthcare professionals recognise meningitis and treat it quickly and effectively. 
For recommendations on meningitis in babies up to and including 28 days corrected gestational age, see the NICE guideline on neonatal infection . 
This guideline does not cover people with immunodeficiency, confirmed viral, tuberculous or fungal meningitis, confirmed viral encephalitis, brain tumours, hydrocephalus, intracranial shunts, previous neurosurgical procedures, or known cranial or spinal anomalies that increase the risk of bacterial meningitis. 
Last reviewed: 19 March 2024 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG102 (published June 2010). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
recognising bacterial meningitis and meningococcal disease 
transfer to hospital and antibiotics before arrival at hospital 
investigations for suspected bacterial meningitis 
antibiotics for bacterial meningitis 
investigations for suspected meningococcal disease 
antibiotics for meningococcal disease 
follow-up care before hospital discharge and after hospital discharge 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with bacterial meningitis or meningococcal disease, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Meningitis (bacterial) and meningococcal disease 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
