Recommendations for research | Renal and ureteric stones: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Kidney conditions
Renal stones
Renal and ureteric stones: assessment and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG118 
Published: 
08 January 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1 Metabolic assessment
2 Alpha blockers and ureteroscopy
3 Preventive treatment following shockwave lithotripsy
4 Frequency of follow‑up imaging
5 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) – route of administration
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following key recommendations for research. 
1 Metabolic assessment 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of full metabolic assessment compared with standard advice alone, in people with recurrent calcium oxalate stones? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on metabolic testing . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: metabolic investigations . 
2 Alpha blockers and ureteroscopy 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of tamsulosin as an adjunct to ureteroscopy? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on medical expulsive therapy as adjunctive to shockwave lithotripsy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: medical expulsive therapy . 
3 Preventive treatment following shockwave lithotripsy 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of empirical potassium citrate or bendroflumethiazide as preventive treatment for people with small residual fragments following shockwave lithotripsy for renal and ureteric stones? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on preventing recurrence . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: dietary interventions and evidence review K: prevention of recurrence . 
4 Frequency of follow‑up imaging 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of 6‑monthly imaging for 3 years for people with recurrent calcium renal or ureteric stones? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on frequency of follow-up imaging . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: imaging for follow-up . 
5 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) – route of administration 
What is the most clinically and cost effective route of administration for NSAIDs in the management of acute pain thought to be due to renal or ureteric stones? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale on pain management . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: pain management . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
