Inclusions and exclusions | Blood transfusion | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Blood transfusion
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG24 
Published: 
18 November 2015
Last updated: 
26 February 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Reducing requirement for blood transfusion for people having surgery 
Red blood cell transfusion 
Platelet transfusion 
Fresh frozen plasma transfusion 
Cryoprecipitate transfusion 
Prothrombin complex concentrate transfusion 
Patient safety 
Patient information 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Inclusions and exclusions 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Inclusions and exclusions 
This guideline contains recommendations about general principles of blood transfusion, and applies to a range of conditions and different settings. It does not include recommendations relating to specific conditions. 
The guideline covers: 
the appropriate use of blood components 
alternatives to transfusion for surgical patients 
ensuring patient safety, including monitoring for transfusion reactions 
providing patients with information about transfusion. 
This guideline focuses on the general principles of transfusion. To do this, it was necessary to limit the scope by excluding: 
patient groups with special transfusion needs, such as fetuses, neonates and children under 1 year old, pregnant women, and patients with haemoglobinopathies. 
specialist areas already covered by NICE guidelines, for example, anaemia in chronic kidney disease, upper gastrointestinal bleeding and trauma and massive haemorrhage. 
the use and administration of blood products, such as intravenous immunoglobulin, anti‑D and recombinant activated factor VII. 
near‑patient testing for haemoglobin concentration and haemostasis. 
laboratory procedures relating to the safety and quality of blood, including pre‑transfusion compatibility testing. 
the diagnosis of anaemia. 
the management of anaemia in medical patients is out of the scope of this guidance, but it is important to note that the correct approach for managing anaemia in medical patients is important for avoiding unnecessary use of blood. 
Despite the lack of specific evidence in the paediatric population, a number of the recommendations have been considered applicable to children following extrapolation from evidence in adults. This was considered to be a reasonable approach to provide some guidance for this age group. However, it should be noted that the guidelines do not cover transfusion for neonates and infants less than a year of age due to the difficulties in extrapolating adult evidence to very young children. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
