Context | Indoor air quality at home | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health protection
Environment
Indoor air quality at home
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG149 
Published: 
08 January 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and resources 
Context 
People spend up to 90% of their lives indoors and 60% of that time at home. 
Indoor air pollutants come from many sources, including: 
building materials (including fittings and flooring) 
furniture and furnishings 
consumer products, including household and personal care products 
activities such as cooking and smoking 
biological sources, including mould, house dust mites, bacteria, pests and pet dander. 
Exposure to indoor air pollutants including, for example, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, particulates, biological agents and volatile organic compounds (VOCs), is widespread and can cause respiratory and other conditions, and premature death in some people. Asthma is a common respiratory condition, with over 5 million people receiving treatment for it in the UK. Indoor air pollutants such as dust mite allergens, nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter are small enough to get into the lungs, making the airways inflamed and swollen. This can exacerbate asthma symptoms and trigger asthma attacks. 
It is best practice to reduce pollutant sources and reduce emissions as much as possible, especially for those who are more vulnerable to health problems caused by poor indoor air quality. This includes children and people with respiratory and cardiovascular conditions ( Committee on the Medical Effects of Air Pollutants guidance on the health effects of air pollutants ). 
Usually the most effective way to deal with indoor pollutants is to either remove the source or reduce emissions from it. If these are not possible, the pollutant can be diluted by ventilation (for example, opening windows) to reduce exposure. But outdoor pollutants also enter through windows or gaps in the structure and are a significant contributor to indoor air quality, particularly in deprived areas (see the government's clean air strategy 2019 ). NICE has also produced a guideline on outdoor air pollution . 
This guideline covers the whole population. But special consideration has been given to those at increased risk of exposure to or adverse effects from poor indoor air quality. 
Next page 
Finding more information and resources 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
