Overview | Faecal incontinence in adults: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Digestive tract conditions
Faecal incontinence
Faecal incontinence in adults: management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG49 
Published: 
27 June 2007
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix: The algorithms 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and managing faecal incontinence (any involuntary loss of faeces that is a social or hygienic problem) in people aged 18 and over. It aims to ensure that staff are aware that faecal incontinence is a sign or a symptom, not a diagnosis. It aims to improve the physical and mental health and quality of life of people with faecal incontinence. 
Last reviewed: 21 June 2018 
We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. For more information, see the surveillance decision . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
good practice in managing faecal incontinence 
baseline assessment 
initial and specialised management 
specialist assessment 
long-term management 
management of specific groups 
surgery 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Care workers 
People with faecal incontinence and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called faecal incontinence: the management of faecal incontinence in adults. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Faecal incontinence in adults 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
