Overview | Dementia: assessment, management and support for people living with dementia and their carers | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Dementia
Dementia: assessment, management and support for people living with dementia and their carers
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG97 
Published: 
20 June 2018
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
About this guideline 
Person-centred care 
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing dementia (including Alzheimer’s disease). It aims to improve care by making recommendations on training staff and helping carers to support people living with dementia. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on mid-life approaches to delay or prevent the onset of dementia . 
Last reviewed: 24 October 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will not update the recommendations. See the surveillance decision  for further details. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
This guideline is an update of the NICE guideline on dementia (CG42, published November 2006) and replaces it. It also replaces recommendation 1.3 in the NICE technology appraisal guidance on donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine and memantine for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (TA217) and updates and replaces NICE evidence summary ESUOM40. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
involving people living with dementia in decisions about their care 
assessment and diagnosis 
interventions to promote cognition, independence and wellbeing 
pharmacological interventions 
managing non-cognitive symptoms 
supporting carers 
staff training and education 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare and social care professionals caring for and supporting people living with dementia 
Commissioners and providers of dementia health and social care services 
Housing associations, private and voluntary organisations contracted by the NHS or social services to provide care for people living with dementia 
People living with dementia, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Dementia 
Mental wellbeing of older people in care homes 
Next page 
About this guideline 
Back to top
