Recommendations | Joint replacement (primary): hip, knee and shoulder | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Musculoskeletal conditions
Joint replacement
Joint replacement (primary): hip, knee and shoulder
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG157 
Published: 
04 June 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Shared decision making and information for people offered hip, knee or shoulder replacement
1.2 Preoperative rehabilitation
1.3 Anaesthesia and analgesia
1.4 Tranexamic acid to minimise blood loss
1.5 Preventing infections
1.6 Avoiding implant selection errors
1.7 Procedures for primary elective knee replacement
1.8 Surgical approaches and implants for primary elective hip replacement
1.9 Procedures for primary elective shoulder replacement
1.10 Postoperative care
1.11 Long-term care
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off‑label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Shared decision making and information for people offered hip, knee or shoulder replacement 
1.1.1 
Follow the recommendations on communication, information and shared decision making in the NICE guidelines on patient experience in adult NHS services and shared decision making when discussing treatment with people offered primary elective hip, knee or shoulder replacement. 
1.1.2 
Support shared decision making by discussing treatment options with people offered primary elective hip, knee or shoulder replacement and their families or carers (as appropriate). Include in the discussions: 
the alternatives to joint replacement 
the potential benefits and risks of the available procedures and types of implant for joint replacement, including the possible need for more surgery in the future 
the options for anaesthesia and analgesia, and the potential benefits and risks of each option (see section on anaesthesia and analgesia ). 
1.1.3 
Give people offered primary elective hip, knee or shoulder replacement and their family members or carers (as appropriate) information that is: 
specific to the procedure they are being offered 
in a format they can easily understand 
provided starting at the first appointment, then whenever needed throughout their care. 
1.1.4 
Give information on primary elective hip, knee or shoulder replacement that includes: 
what to expect before, during and after surgery, including length of hospital stay, recovery and rehabilitation 
who to contact if they have questions or concerns before or after surgery 
preparing for surgery, including steps they can take to optimise their recovery (see section on preoperative rehabilitation ) 
pain after surgery and how it can be managed 
wound care 
returning to work 
returning to usual activities, for example playing sports, driving and sexual activity. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on shared decision making and information for people offered hip, knee or shoulder replacement . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: information needs . 
Decision aids for elective joint replacement 
The committee did not make recommendations for specific decision aids for elective joint replacement but recognised that they could have value in shared decision making. They made a recommendation for research on the components of a decision aid . 
For a short explanation of why the committee did not make a recommendation, see the rationale on decision aids for elective joint replacement . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: decision aids . 
1.2 Preoperative rehabilitation 
Preoperative rehabilitation for hip or knee replacement 
1.2.1 
Give people having hip or knee replacement advice on preoperative rehabilitation. Include advice on: 
exercises to do before and after surgery that will aid recovery 
lifestyle, including weight management, diet and smoking cessation (see NICE's guidance on lifestyle and wellbeing ) 
maximising functional independence and quality of life before and after surgery. 
Preoperative rehabilitation for shoulder replacement 
The committee were unable to make recommendations for practice in this area. They included preoperative rehabilitation for shoulder replacement in their recommendation for research on preoperative rehabilitation . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation on preoperative rehabilitation for hip or knee replacement and how it might affect practice, and why they were unable to make recommendations on preoperative rehabilitation for shoulder replacement, see the rationale and impact section on preoperative rehabilitation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: preoperative rehabilitation . 
1.3 Anaesthesia and analgesia 
Anaesthesia and analgesia for hip replacement 
1.3.1 
Offer people having primary elective hip replacement a choice of: 
regional anaesthesia in combination with local infiltration analgesia (LIA) or 
general anaesthesia in combination with LIA. 
Consider a nerve block that does not impair motor function as an alternative to LIA in either of the options above, provided it does not delay surgery significantly. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on anaesthesia and analgesia for hip replacement . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: anaesthesia for hip replacement . 
Anaesthesia and analgesia for knee replacement 
1.3.2 
Offer people having primary elective knee replacement a choice of: 
regional anaesthesia in combination with LIA or 
general anaesthesia in combination with LIA. 
Consider adding a nerve block that does not impair motor function to either of the options above, provided it does not delay surgery significantly. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on anaesthesia and analgesia for knee replacement . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: anaesthesia for knee replacement 
Anaesthesia and analgesia for shoulder replacement 
1.3.3 
Discuss the options for anaesthesia and analgesia with people having primary elective shoulder replacement, including general anaesthesia, regional anaesthesia, local infiltration analgesia and nerve blocks. 
The committee were unable to recommend specific options for anaesthesia and analgesia for shoulder replacement. They made recommendations for research on supplementary anaesthesia , and on regional compared with general anaesthesia or a combination in elective shoulder replacement . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on anaesthesia and analgesia for shoulder replacement . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: anaesthesia for shoulder replacement . 
1.4 Tranexamic acid to minimise blood loss 
In June 2020, tranexamic acid solution for injection was off label for topical (intra-articular) use. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
In these recommendations 'renal impairment' refers to mild to moderate renal impairment. See the summary of product characteristics for dosage reductions according to serum creatinine level. Tranexamic acid is contraindicated for people with severe renal impairment. 
1.4.1 
For primary elective hip or knee replacement: 
Give intravenous tranexamic acid. 
If there is no renal impairment, also apply 1 g to 2 g of topical (intra-articular) tranexamic acid diluted in saline after the final wash-out and before wound closure. Ensure that the total combined dose of tranexamic acid does not exceed 3 g. 
If there is renal impairment, give a reduced dose of intravenous tranexamic acid on its own. 
For primary elective shoulder replacement: 
Consider intravenous tranexamic acid. 
If there is no renal impairment, consider 1 g to 2 g of topical (intra-articular) tranexamic acid diluted in saline applied after the final wash-out and before wound closure. Ensure that the total combined dose of tranexamic acid does not exceed 3 g. 
If there is renal impairment and tranexamic acid is used, give a reduced dose of intravenous tranexamic acid on its own. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on tranexamic acid to minimise blood loss . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: tranexamic acid to minimise blood loss . 
1.5 Preventing infections 
Antibiotic or antiseptic agents in wound wash-out solutions 
1.5.1 
Follow the recommendations on antibiotic prophylaxis, wound irrigation and intracavity lavage, and antiseptics and antibiotics before wound closure in the NICE guideline on surgical site infections , for people having primary elective hip, knee or shoulder replacement. 
Ultra-clean air ventilation in operating theatres 
1.5.2 
Use ultra-clean air ventilation in operating theatres for primary hip, knee or shoulder elective joint replacement. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations see and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on preventing infections . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: wound lavage and evidence review I: ultra-clean air . 
1.6 Avoiding implant selection errors 
1.6.1 
Use 2 intraoperative 'stop moments', 1 before implantation and 1 before wound closure, to check all implant details and ensure compatibility of each component. 
1.6.2 
Consider intraoperative real-time data entry before implantation using a system that provides an alert of mismatched implant components, such as the National Joint Registry database. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on avoiding implant selection errors . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: wrong implant selection . 
1.7 Procedures for primary elective knee replacement 
Partial and total knee replacement 
1.7.1 
Offer a choice of partial or total knee replacement to people with isolated medial compartmental osteoarthritis. Discuss the potential benefits and risks of each option with the person. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on partial and total knee replacement . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: total knee replacement . 
Patella resurfacing 
1.7.2 
Offer resurfacing of the patella to people having primary elective total knee replacement. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on patella resurfacing . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: patella resurfacing . 
1.8 Surgical approaches and implants for primary elective hip replacement 
Surgical approaches for primary elective hip replacement 
1.8.1 
Consider a posterior or anterolateral approach for primary elective hip replacement. 
The committee were unable to make recommendations on the direct anterior, direct superior and supercapsular percutaneously assisted (SuperPATH) surgical approaches. They made a recommendation for research on surgical approaches in primary elective hip replacement . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation on surgical approaches for primary elective hip replacement and how it might affect practice and why they were unable to make recommendations on the direct anterior, direct superior and SuperPATH approaches, see the rationale and impact section on surgical approaches for primary elective hip replacement . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: hip replacement approach 
Implants for primary elective hip replacement 
1.8.2 
Prostheses for total hip replacement and resurfacing arthroplasty with rates (or projected rates) of revision of 5% or less at 10 years are recommended as options in NICE technology appraisal guidance for people with end-stage arthritis of the hip. For full details, see the guidance on total hip replacement and resurfacing arthroplasty (TA304, 2014) . 
1.9 Procedures for primary elective shoulder replacement 
Shoulder replacement for osteoarthritis with no rotator cuff tear 
1.9.1 
If glenoid bone is adequate, offer conventional total shoulder replacement to people having primary elective shoulder replacement for osteoarthritis with no rotator cuff tear. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on shoulder replacement for osteoarthritis with no rotator cuff tear . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review N: shoulder replacement – intact rotator cuff . 
Shoulder replacement for pain and functional loss for people with a previous proximal humeral fracture 
The committee were unable to make recommendations for practice in this area. They made a recommendation for research on procedures for shoulder replacement for people with a previous proximal humeral fracture . 
For a short explanation of why the committee did not make a recommendation, see the rationale on shoulder replacement for pain and functional loss for people with a previous proximal humeral fracture . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review O: hemiarthroplasty – proximal humeral fracture . 
1.10 Postoperative care 
Inpatient rehabilitation 
1.10.1 
A physiotherapist or occupational therapist should offer rehabilitation, on the day of surgery if possible and no more than 24 hours after surgery, to people who have had a primary elective hip, knee or shoulder replacement. Rehabilitation should include: 
advice on managing activities of daily living and 
home exercise programmes and 
mobilisation for people who have had knee or hip replacement or 
ambulation for people who have had shoulder replacement. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on inpatient rehabilitation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review P: inpatient hip and knee postoperative rehabilitation and evidence review Q: inpatient shoulder postoperative rehabilitation . 
Outpatient rehabilitation 
1.10.2 
For people who have had primary elective hip or knee replacement: 
a member of the physiotherapy or occupational therapy team should give advice on self-directed rehabilitation 
the advice should be given before the person leaves hospital 
the advice should be adjusted in line with recommendations 1.10.5 and 1.10.6 if needed. 
1.10.3 
For people who have had primary elective shoulder replacement: 
a member of the physiotherapy or occupational therapy team should give advice on: 
self-directed rehabilitation or 
supervised group rehabilitation or 
individual rehabilitation 
the advice should be given before the person leaves hospital 
the advice should be adjusted in line with recommendations 1.10.5 and 1.10.6 if needed. 
1.10.4 
Ensure that people who are undertaking self-directed rehabilitation have: 
a clear understanding of their rehabilitation goals and the importance of doing the exercises prescribed to achieve these goals 
a point of contact for advice and support. 
1.10.5 
Offer supervised group or individual outpatient rehabilitation to people who: 
have difficulties managing activities of daily living or 
have ongoing functional impairment leading to specific rehabilitation needs or 
find that self-directed rehabilitation is not meeting their rehabilitation goals. 
1.10.6 
Consider supervised group or individual outpatient rehabilitation for people with cognitive impairment. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on outpatient rehabilitation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review R: outpatient hip and knee postoperative rehabilitation and evidence review S: outpatient rehabilitation after shoulder replacement . 
Preventing venous thromboembolism 
For recommendations on reducing risk of hospital-acquired venous thromboembolism after elective hip, knee or shoulder replacement, see interventions for people having orthopaedic surgery in the NICE guideline on venous thromboembolism in over 16s . 
1.11 Long-term care 
Follow-up and monitoring 
The committee were unable to make recommendations for practice in this area. They made a recommendation for research on follow-up . 
Referral from primary care 
1.11.1 
Primary care practitioners should refer people who develop new or worsening pain, limp or loss of function related to their joint replacement to an orthopaedic surgical service. 
For a short explanation of why the committee did not make a recommendation, see the rationale on follow-up and monitoring in secondary care . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review T: long-term follow-up and monitoring 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
