Overview | Emergency and acute medical care in over 16s: service delivery and organisation | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Acute and critical care
Emergency and acute medical care in over 16s: service delivery and organisation
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG94 
Published: 
28 March 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers organising and delivering emergency and acute medical care for people aged over 16 in the community and in hospital. It aims to reduce the need for hospital admissions by giving advanced training to paramedics and providing community alternatives to hospital care. It also promotes good-quality care in hospital and joint working between health and social services. 
Recommendations 
The guideline includes recommendations on: 
first points of contact with emergency and acute care services 
alternatives to hospital care 
services within hospitals 
ward rounds, transfers and discharges 
monitoring and managing hospital bed capacity 
Who is it for? 
Commissioners and providers of health and social care 
Health and social care practitioners 
People with or at risk of a medical emergency or acute illness, and their families and carers 
Implementation statement 
We recognise that implementing this guideline will take time, with additional infrastructure and training needed in some areas. Service providers should note where the recommendations are consistent with other national initiatives, especially NHS England’s seven day services clinical standards . See putting this guideline into practice . 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Emergency and acute medical care in over 16s 
Acute respiratory infection in over 16s: initial assessment and management including virtual wards (hospital at home) 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
