Summary of the evidence | Impetigo: antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Impetigo: antimicrobial prescribing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG153 
Published: 
26 February 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendation for research 
Rationales 
Context 
Summary of the evidence 
Other considerations 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Antimicrobials
Choice of antibiotics
Course length
Route of administration
Summary of the evidence 
This is a summary of the evidence, for full details see the evidence review . 
Antimicrobials 
Efficacy of topical antibiotics 
The following topical antibiotics were shown to be more effective than placebo for the outcome of cure or improvement: 
mupirocin in adults, young people and children 
fusidic acid in children 
ozenoxacin in children. 
Efficacy of oral antibiotics 
Phenoxymethylpenicillin was not statistically significantly different compared with placebo in children for the outcome of cure or improvement. 
Topical antibiotics compared with antiseptics, steroids or antifungals 
There were no statistically significant differences in clinical effectiveness of the following comparisons for the outcome of cure or improvement: 
topical antibiotic (fusidic acid) compared with a topical antiseptic (hydrogen peroxide 1%) in children 
topical antibiotic (gentamicin) compared with a topical steroid (betamethasone valerate; age not reported) 
topical antibiotic (gentamicin) plus a topical steroid (betamethasone valerate) compared with a topical steroid (betamethasone valerate; age not reported) 
topical antibiotic (mupirocin) compared with a topical antifungal (terbinafine) in children. 
Safety of antibiotics 
There were no statistically significant differences in adverse effects for the following comparisons: 
topical mupirocin and placebo in adults, young people and children 
topical fusidic acid and disinfectants in children 
topical mupirocin and antifungals in children. 
No safety or tolerability data were reported for the other comparisons. 
The evidence for the efficacy and safety of antimicrobials is based on 1 systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials (RCTs; Koning et al. 2012 ) and 1 pooled-analysis of 2 RCTs ( Hebert et al. 2018 ). 
Choice of antibiotics 
Topical antibiotics 
There were no statistically significant differences in the clinical effectiveness of the following topical antibiotic comparisons for the outcome of cure or improvement: 
topical mupirocin compared with topical fusidic acid in adults, young people and children 
topical mupirocin compared with topical neomycin in children and young people 
topical mupirocin compared with topical polymyxin B plus neomycin (population not reported). 
Some differences were seen for cure or improvement for other topical antibiotic comparisons: 
topical fusidic acid was more effective than topical neomycin plus bacitracin in children 
topical gentamicin was more effective than topical neomycin in adults, young people and children. 
There were no statistically significant differences in adverse effects between topical mupirocin compared with topical polymyxin B plus neomycin (age not reported). 
The incidence of skin rash was increased with topical mupirocin compared with topical fusidic acid in adults, young people and children. 
No safety or tolerability data were reported for the other comparisons. 
Oral antibiotics 
There were no statistically significant differences in the clinical effectiveness of the following oral antibiotic comparisons for the outcome of cure or improvement: 
oral macrolides compared with oral penicillins in adults, young people and children 
oral erythromycin compared with oral amoxicillin in children 
oral azithromycin compared with oral erythromycin in adults, young people and children 
oral cefalexin compared with oral cefadroxil in children and young people 
oral cefalexin compared with oral erythromycin in children or oral azithromycin in adults 
oral cefaclor compared with oral azithromycin or oral co-amoxiclav in children 
oral cefadroxil compared with oral flucloxacillin in adults, young people and children. 
Some differences were seen for cure or improvement for other antibiotic comparisons: 
oral erythromycin was more effective than phenoxymethylpenicillin in children 
oral co-amoxiclav was more effective than oral amoxicillin in children and young people 
oral cefalexin was more effective than oral phenoxymethylpenicillin in children. 
There were no statistically significant differences in adverse effects for the following oral antibiotic comparisons: 
oral co-amoxiclav compared with oral amoxicillin in children and young people 
oral cefalexin compared with oral azithromycin in adults 
oral cefaclor compared with oral azithromycin in children 
oral cefaclor compared with co-amoxiclav in children. 
Some differences were seen in adverse effects for other oral antibiotic comparisons: 
there were more incidences of diarrhoea in children taking oral erythromycin compared with oral amoxicillin 
there were more incidences of stomach ache, rash, fever or vomiting but fewer incidents of diarrhoea in adults, young people and children taking oral cefadroxil compared with oral flucloxacillin. 
No safety or tolerability data were reported for the other comparisons. 
Dual antibiotics 
Oral plus topical antibiotics compared with topical antibiotics 
There were no statistically significant differences in the clinical effectiveness of the following antibiotic comparisons in children for the outcome of cure or improvement: 
oral cefdinir plus topical tetracycline compared with topical tetracycline 
oral minomycin plus topical tetracycline compared with topical tetracycline 
oral fosfomycin plus topical tetracycline compared with topical tetracycline. 
The evidence for choice of antibiotics is based on 1 systematic review and meta-analysis of RCTs ( Koning et al. 2012 ). 
Course length 
Shorter course antibiotics compared with longer course antibiotics 
A 3-day course of oral co-trimoxazole was not statistically significantly different compared with a 5-day course of oral co-trimoxazole for treatment success in children. 
The evidence for course length of antibiotics is based on 1 non-inferiority RCT ( Bowen et al. 2014 ). 
Route of administration 
Topical antibiotics compared with oral antibiotics 
There were no statistically significant differences in the clinical effectiveness of the following antibiotic comparisons for the outcome of cure or improvement: 
topical mupirocin compared with oral erythromycin in adults, young people and children 
topical mupirocin compared with oral cefalexin in children with impetigo, or in adults, young people and children with secondary impetigo 
topical mupirocin compared with oral ampicillin (age not reported) 
topical fusidic acid compared with oral erythromycin in newborn babies (aged 3 days to 14 days) with bullous impetigo 
topical chloramphenicol compared with oral erythromycin in newborn babies (aged 3 days to 14 days) with bullous impetigo. 
Oral erythromycin was more effective than topical neomycin plus bacitracin for the outcome of cure or improvement in newborn babies (aged 3 days to 14 days) with bullous impetigo. 
Topical mupirocin was not statistically significantly different compared with oral cefalexin for adverse effects in children. 
Topical mupirocin was associated with fewer gastrointestinal adverse events than oral erythromycin in adults, young people and children. 
No safety or tolerability data were reported for the other comparisons. 
Intramuscular antibiotics compared with oral antibiotics 
Intramuscular ceftriaxone was not statistically significantly different compared with oral cefadroxil for cure in children. 
Oral co-amoxiclav was non-inferior to intramuscular benzylpenicillin for treatment success in children. 
Intramuscular benzylpenicillin was associated with more adverse events than co-trimoxazole in children. 
The evidence for route of administration of antibiotics is based on 1 systematic review and meta-analysis of RCTs ( Koning et al. 2012 ), and 2 RCTs ( Al-Samman et al. 2014 and Bowen et al. 2014 ). 
Next page 
Other considerations 
Previous page 
Context 
Back to top
