Key priorities for implementation | Intravenous fluid therapy in children and young people in hospital | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Medicines management
Intravenous fluid therapy in children and young people in hospital
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG29 
Published: 
09 December 2015
Last updated: 
11 June 2020
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale 
Intravenous fluid therapy in children and young people in hospital implementation: getting started 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Assessment and monitoring
Fluid resuscitation
Routine maintenance
Replacement and redistribution
Managing hyponatraemia that develops during intravenous fluid therapy
Key priorities for implementation 
The following recommendations have been identified as priorities for implementation. The full list of recommendations is in the recommendations section. 
Assessment and monitoring 
In term neonates, children and young people who are receiving IV fluids, assess and document the following: 
Actual or estimated daily body weight. Record the weight from the current day, the previous day, and the difference between the two. If an estimate was used, the actual weight should be measured as soon as clinically possible. 
Fluid input, output and balance over the previous 24 hours. 
Any special instructions for prescribing, including relevant history. 
An assessment of the fluid status. 
The results of laboratory and point‑of‑care assessments, including: 
full blood count 
urea 
creatinine 
plasma electrolyte concentrations (including chloride, sodium and potassium; see recommendation 1.2.4 ) 
blood glucose (see recommendation 1.2.5 ) 
urinary electrolyte concentrations. 
Details of any ongoing losses (see recommendation 1.5.1 and the diagram of ongoing losses). 
Calculations of fluid needs for routine maintenance, replacement, redistribution and resuscitation. 
The fluid and electrolyte prescription (in ml per hour), with clear signatures, dates and times. 
Types and volumes of fluid input and output (urine, gastric and other), recorded hourly and with running totals. 
12-hourly fluid balance subtotals. 
24-hourly fluid balance totals. 
12-hourly reassessments of: 
the fluid prescription 
current hydration status 
whether oral fluids can be started 
urine and other outputs. 
Fluid resuscitation 
If children and young people need IV fluid resuscitation, use glucose‑free crystalloids that contain sodium in the range 131 to 154 mmol/litre, with a bolus of 10 ml/kg over less than 10 minutes. Take into account pre‑existing conditions (for example, cardiac disease or kidney disease), as smaller fluid volumes may be needed. 
Note that this is an off-label use for some intravenous fluid therapy preparations in some age groups. See prescribing medicines for more information. 
If term neonates need IV fluid resuscitation, use glucose‑free crystalloids that contain sodium in the range 131 to 154 mmol/litre, with a bolus of 10 to 20 ml/kg over less than 10 minutes. 
Note that this is an off-label use for some intravenous fluid therapy preparations in some age groups. See prescribing medicines for more information. 
Routine maintenance 
If children and young people need IV fluids for routine maintenance, initially use isotonic crystalloids that contain sodium in the range 131 to 154 mmol/litre. 
Measure plasma electrolyte concentrations and blood glucose when starting IV fluids for routine maintenance (except before most elective surgery), and at least every 24 hours thereafter. 
If there is a risk of water retention associated with non‑osmotic antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion, consider either: 
restricting fluids to 50–80% of routine maintenance needs or 
reducing fluids, calculated on the basis of insensible losses within the range 300–400 ml/m 2 /24 hours plus urinary output. 
Replacement and redistribution 
Consider isotonic crystalloids that contain sodium in the range 131 to 154 mmol/litre for redistribution. 
Note that this is an off-label use for some intravenous fluid therapy preparations in some age groups. See prescribing medicines for more information. 
Managing hyponatraemia that develops during intravenous fluid therapy 
If asymptomatic hyponatraemia develops in term neonates, children and young people, review the fluid status and take action as follows: 
If a child is prescribed a hypotonic fluid, change to an isotonic fluid (for example, 0.9% sodium chloride). 
Restrict maintenance IV fluids in children and young people who are hypervolaemic or at risk of hypervolaemia (for example, if there is a risk of increased ADH secretion) by either: 
restricting maintenance fluids to 50% to 80% of routine maintenance needs or 
reducing fluids, calculated on the basis of insensible losses within the range 300–400 ml/m 2 /24 hours plus urinary output. 
Be aware that the following symptoms are associated with acute hyponatraemia during IV fluid therapy: 
Headache. 
Nausea and vomiting. 
Confusion and disorientation. 
Irritability. 
Lethargy. 
Reduced consciousness. 
Convulsions. 
Coma. 
Apnoea. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
