Overview | Suspected neurological conditions: recognition and referral | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Brain cancers
Suspected neurological conditions: recognition and referral
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG127 
Published: 
01 May 2019
Last updated: 
02 October 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations for adults aged over 16 
Recommendations for children aged under 16 
Terms used in this guideline 
Rationale: recommendations for adults aged over 16 
Rationale: recommendations for children aged under 16 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the initial assessment of symptoms and signs that might indicate a neurological condition. It helps non-specialist healthcare professionals to identify people who should be offered referral for specialist investigation. 
Last reviewed: 2 October 2023 
We updated recommendations on suspected cancer pathway referrals for facial pain, gait unsteadiness and single limb weakness or hemiparesis in line with NHS England’s standard on faster diagnosis of cancer . People should have a diagnosis or ruling out of cancer within 28 days of referral. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations for: 
people aged 16 and over 
children and young people aged under 16 
Who is it for? 
Non-specialist healthcare professionals in primary and secondary care 
Healthcare professionals in neurology departments 
People with suspected neurological conditions, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Suspected neurological conditions: recognition and referral 
Next page 
Recommendations for adults aged over 16 
Back to top
