Recommendations | Non-Hodgkin lymphoma: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood and bone marrow cancers
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG52 
Published: 
20 July 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Diagnosis
1.2 Staging using fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography-CT (FDG-PET-CT)
1.3 Treating follicular lymphoma
1.4 Treating marginal zone lymphoma
1.5 Treating mantle cell lymphoma
1.6 Treating diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
1.7 Treating Burkitt lymphoma
1.8 Treating relapsed or refractory high-grade B-cell lymphoma
1.9 Treating relapsed or refractory primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma
1.10 Treating Waldenstrom's macroglobulinaemia
1.11 Treating peripheral T-cell lymphoma
1.12 Information and support
1.13 Follow-up for people with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
1.14 Survivorship
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information about shared decision making . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should also follow our guidance on: 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
Shared decision making 
Improving outcomes in haematological cancers 
COVID-19 rapid guideline on haematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
Recognition and referral for suspected cancer 
Care of dying adults in the last days of life . 
1.1 Diagnosis 
Malignant lymphoma is an HIV indicator condition, as described in EuroTEST's HIV indicator conditions . Also see recommendations 1.1.5 and 1.1.8 in the NICE guideline on HIV testing . 
Type of biopsy 
1.1.1 
Consider an excision biopsy as the first diagnostic procedure for people with suspected non-Hodgkin lymphoma. 
1.1.2 
Consider a needle core biopsy, taking the maximum number of cores of the largest possible calibre, for people with suspected non-Hodgkin lymphoma when the risk of a surgical procedure outweighs the potential benefits. 
1.1.3 
If a diagnosis is not possible after a needle core biopsy for people with suspected non-Hodgkin lymphoma, offer an excision biopsy (if surgically feasible) in preference to a second needle core biopsy. 
1.1.4 
Pathology departments should ensure that tissue from needle core biopsies is conserved so that further analysis can be done if needed. 
Diagnosing B-cell lymphomas: gene testing strategies 
1.1.5 
Consider using fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) to identify an MYC rearrangement in all people newly presenting with histologically high-grade B-cell lymphoma. 
1.1.6 
If an MYC rearrangement is found, use FISH to identify the immunoglobulin partner and the presence of BCL2 and BCL6 rearrangements. 
Stratifying high-grade B-cell lymphomas using laboratory techniques 
1.1.7 
Do not use immunohistochemistry to assess the prognostic value associated with cell of origin in people with diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma. 
1.1.8 
Interpret FISH results (MYC, BCL2 and BCL6 rearrangements) in the context of other prognostic factors, particularly the person's age and International Prognostic Index (IPI). 
1.1.9 
Explain FISH results and their potential prognostic value to people with B‑cell lymphoma. 
1.2 Staging using fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography-CT (FDG-PET-CT) 
Confirming staging 
1.2.1 
Offer FDG‑PET‑CT imaging to confirm staging for people with: 
stage 1 diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma by clinical and CT criteria 
stage 1 or localised stage 2 follicular lymphoma if disease is thought to be encompassable within a radiotherapy field 
stage 1 or 2 Burkitt lymphoma with other low-risk features. 
1.2.2 
For people with subtypes or stages of non‑Hodgkin lymphoma not listed in recommendation 1.2.1, consider FDG‑PET‑CT imaging to confirm staging if the results will change management. 
Assessing response to treatment for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
1.2.3 
Do not routinely offer FDG‑PET‑CT imaging for interim assessment during treatment for diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma. 
End-of-treatment assessment 
1.2.4 
Offer FDG‑PET‑CT imaging to assess response at completion of planned treatment for people with: 
diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma 
Burkitt lymphoma. 
1.2.5 
For people with subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma not listed in recommendation 1.2.4, do not routinely offer FDG‑PET‑CT imaging to assess response at completion of planned treatment unless the results will change management. 
1.2.6 
Consider FDG‑PET‑CT imaging to assess response to treatment before autologous stem cell transplantation for people with high-grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma. 
1.3 Treating follicular lymphoma 
First-line treatment for stage 2A follicular lymphoma 
1.3.1 
Offer local radiotherapy as first-line treatment to people with localised, stage 2A follicular lymphoma. 
1.3.2 
Consider 'watch and wait' (observation without therapy) as first-line management for people with stage 2A follicular lymphoma: 
who are asymptomatic and 
when treatment with a single radiotherapy volume is not suitable. 
1.3.3 
Offer the same treatments that might be offered to people with advanced (stages 3 and 4), symptomatic follicular lymphoma (see the section on treating advanced, symptomatic follicular lymphoma ) to people with stage 2A follicular lymphoma: 
who are symptomatic and 
when treatment with radiotherapy is not suitable. 
Treating advanced, asymptomatic follicular lymphoma 
1.3.4 
Offer rituximab induction therapy to people with advanced (stages 3 and 4) follicular lymphoma who are asymptomatic. 
In June 2026, this was an off-label use of rituximab. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Treating advanced, symptomatic follicular lymphoma 
All adults 
1.3.5 
Rituximab in combination with chemotherapy is recommended as an option for untreated stage 3 or 4 follicular lymphoma. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on rituximab (TA243, 2012) . 
1.3.6 
Rituximab maintenance therapy is recommended as an option for treating follicular lymphoma that has responded to first-line induction treatment with rituximab in combination with chemotherapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on rituximab (TA226, 2011) . 
Other treatment options may also be available. See the NHS England Cancer Drugs Fund list . 
Adults with a Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic Index score of 2 or more 
1.3.7 
Obinutuzumab is recommended as an option for untreated advanced follicular lymphoma in adults with a Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic Index score of 2 or more, as induction treatment with chemotherapy, then alone as maintenance therapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on obinutuzumab (TA513, 2018) . 
Treating advanced, relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma 
Systemic anticancer therapy 
1.3.8 
Obinutuzumab with bendamustine followed by obinutuzumab maintenance is recommended as an option for treating follicular lymphoma that has not responded or has progressed up to 6 months after treatment with rituximab or a rituximab-containing regimen. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on obinutuzumab with bendamustine (TA629, 2020) . 
1.3.9 
Lenalidomide with rituximab is recommended as an option for previously treated follicular lymphoma (grade 1 to 3A) in adults. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on lenalidomide with rituximab (TA627, 2020) . 
1.3.10 
Rituximab with chemotherapy followed by rituximab monotherapy for maintenance is recommended as an option for treating relapsed or refractory stage 3 or 4 follicular lymphoma. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on rituximab (TA137, 2008) . 
1.3.11 
Rituximab monotherapy is recommended as an option for treating relapsed or refractory stage 3 or 4 follicular lymphoma, if there is resistance to or intolerance of chemotherapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on rituximab monotherapy (TA137, 2008) . 
Other treatment options may also be available. See the NHS England Cancer Drugs Fund list . 
After 2 or more systemic anticancer therapies 
1.3.12 
Epcoritamab is recommended as an option for treating relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma after 2 or more lines of systemic treatment. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on epcoritamab (TA1139, 2026) . 
1.3.13 
For medicines not recommended for treating relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma after 2 or more systemic treatments, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
mosunetuzumab (TA892, 2023) 
idelalisib (TA604, 2019) . 
Chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR-T) therapy 
1.3.14 
Lisocabtagene maraleucel is recommended as an option for treating large B-cell lymphoma, including follicular lymphoma grade 3B, that is refractory to, or has relapsed within 12 months after first-line chemoimmunotherapy, in adults for whom an autologous stem cell transplant would be considered suitable. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on lisocabtagene maraleucel (TA1048, 2025) . 
1.3.15 
Axicabtagene ciloleucel is not recommended for treating relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on axicabtagene ciloleucel (TA894, 2023) . 
Consolidation with stem cell transplantation 
Autologous stem cell transplantation 
1.3.16 
Offer consolidation with autologous stem cell transplantation for people with follicular lymphoma in second or subsequent remission (complete or partial) who: 
have not already had a transplant and 
are fit enough for transplantation. 
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation 
1.3.17 
Consider consolidation with allogeneic stem cell transplantation for people with follicular lymphoma in second or subsequent remission (complete or partial): 
who are fit enough for transplantation and 
for whom a suitable donor can be found and 
who had an autologous stem cell transplantation that did not result in remission or cannot have an autologous stem cell transplantation (for example, because stem cell harvesting is not possible). 
1.3.18 
Treosulfan with fludarabine is recommended as an option for conditioning treatment before allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplant for people with malignant diseases for whom a reduced intensity regimen, such as low-dose busulfan with fludarabine, would be suitable. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on treosulfan with fludarabine (TA640, 2020) . 
Treating transformed follicular lymphoma 
1.3.19 
Consider consolidation with autologous stem cell transplantation for people: 
with transformation of previously diagnosed follicular lymphoma that has responded to treatment and 
who are fit enough for transplantation. 
1.3.20 
Consider consolidation with autologous or allogeneic stem cell transplantation for people: 
with transformation of follicular lymphoma who need more than 1 line of treatment for a response and 
who are fit enough for transplantation. 
1.3.21 
Do not offer consolidation with high-dose therapy and autologous or allogeneic stem cell transplantation to people with concurrent follicular lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma that have responded to first-line treatment. 
1.4 Treating marginal zone lymphoma 
Gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma 
Localised disease 
1.4.1 
Offer 1 or more lines of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) eradication therapy, without any concurrent therapy, to people with H. pylori-positive gastric MALT lymphoma (see NICE's guideline on gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and dyspepsia in adults ). 
1.4.2 
Consider H. pylori eradication therapy for people with H. pylori-negative gastric MALT lymphoma (see NICE's guideline on gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and dyspepsia in adults ). 
1.4.3 
Consider 'watch and wait' (observation without therapy), unless high-risk features are present, for people: 
with gastric MALT lymphoma that responds clinically and endoscopically to H. pylori eradication therapy and 
who have residual disease shown by surveillance biopsies of the stomach. 
1.4.4 
For people with residual MALT lymphoma after H. pylori eradication therapy who are at high risk of progression [H. pylori-negative at initial presentation or t(11:18) translocation], consider: 
chemotherapy (for example, chlorambucil or CVP) in combination with rituximab or 
gastric radiotherapy. 
In June 2026, this was an off-label use of rituximab. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.4.5 
For people with progressive gastric MALT lymphoma, offer: 
chemotherapy (for example, chlorambucil or CVP) in combination with rituximab or 
gastric radiotherapy. 
In June 2026, this was an off-label use of rituximab. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Disseminated disease 
1.4.6 
Offer H. pylori eradication therapy to people with disseminated H. pylori-positive gastric MALT lymphoma (see NICE's guideline on gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and dyspepsia in adults ). 
1.4.7 
Offer chemotherapy (for example, chlorambucil or CVP) in combination with rituximab to people with disseminated gastric MALT lymphoma who need treatment (for example, people who are symptomatic or with threatened vital organ function). 
In June 2026, this was an off-label use of rituximab. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.4.8 
Consider 'watch and wait' (observation without therapy) for people with disseminated gastric MALT lymphoma who: 
are asymptomatic and 
do not have threatened vital organ function. 
Non-gastric MALT lymphoma 
1.4.9 
For people with non-gastric MALT lymphoma, take into account the following before recommending any treatment: 
site of involvement and potential for organ dysfunction 
whether it is localised or disseminated 
the morbidity associated with any treatment proposed 
the person's overall fitness. 
1.4.10 
Offer chemotherapy (for example, chlorambucil or CVP) in combination with rituximab to people with non-gastric MALT lymphoma: 
when treatment with radiotherapy is not suitable or 
who have disseminated disease and need treatment. 
In June 2026, this was an off-label use of rituximab. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.4.11 
Consider radiotherapy for people with localised disease sites of non-gastric MALT lymphoma at any stage. 
1.4.12 
Consider 'watch and wait' (observation without therapy) for people: 
with clinically non-progressive, localised non-gastric MALT lymphoma that is unlikely to result in vital organ dysfunction and 
who are asymptomatic and 
when treatment with radiotherapy is not suitable. 
All marginal zone lymphoma 
1.4.13 
Zanubrutinib is recommended as an option for treating marginal zone lymphoma in adults after at least 1 anti-CD20-based treatment. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on zanubrutinib (TA1001, 2024) . 
Other treatment options may also be available. See the NHS England Cancer Drugs Fund list . 
1.5 Treating mantle cell lymphoma 
First-line treatment 
1.5.1 
Offer chemotherapy in combination with rituximab as first-line treatment for people with advanced mantle cell lymphoma who are symptomatic, taking the person's fitness into account when deciding the intensity. 
In June 2026, this was an off-label use of rituximab. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.5.2 
Consider cytarabine-containing immunochemotherapy for people with advanced mantle cell lymphoma who are fit enough to tolerate an intensive approach. 
In June 2026, this was an off-label use of cytarabine. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.5.3 
Consider radiotherapy for people with localised stage 1 or 2 mantle cell lymphoma. 
1.5.4 
Consider 'watch and wait' (observation without therapy) until disease progression for people with clinically non-progressive mantle cell lymphoma: 
who are asymptomatic and 
when treatment with radiotherapy is not suitable. 
1.5.5 
Bortezomib is recommended as an option for previously untreated mantle cell lymphoma in adults for whom haematopoietic stem cell transplantation is unsuitable. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on bortezomib (TA370, 2015) . 
Other treatment options may also be available. See the NHS England Cancer Drugs Fund list . 
Consolidation with stem cell transplantation 
1.5.6 
Consider consolidation with autologous stem cell transplantation for people: 
with chemosensitive mantle cell lymphoma (that is, there has been at least a partial response to induction chemotherapy) and 
who are fit enough for transplantation. 
Maintenance strategies 
1.5.7 
Consider maintenance rituximab, every 2 months until disease progression, for people with newly diagnosed mantle cell lymphoma: 
who are not fit enough for high-dose chemotherapy and 
whose disease has responded to R‑CHOP-based immunochemotherapy. 
In June 2026, this was an off-label use of rituximab. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.5.8 
Consider maintenance rituximab, every 2 months for 3 years, for people with newly diagnosed mantle cell lymphoma who are in remission after cytarabine-based induction and high-dose chemotherapy. 
In June 2026, this was an off-label use of rituximab. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Treating relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma 
1.5.9 
For medicines recommended as options for treating relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma in adults who have had 1 line of treatment only, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
zanubrutinib (TA1081, 2025) 
ibrutinib (TA502, 2018) . 
Other treatment options may also be available. See the NHS England Cancer Drugs Fund list . 
CAR-T therapy 
1.5.10 
Brexucabtagene autoleucel is recommended as an option through the Cancer Drugs Fund for treating relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma in adults who have previously had a Bruton's tyrosine kinase inhibitor. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on brexucabtagene autoleucel (TA677, 2021) . 
1.6 Treating diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
First-line systemic anticancer therapy 
1.6.1 
Polatuzumab vedotin with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and prednisolone is recommended as an option for untreated diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma in adults with an IPI score of 2 to 5. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on polatuzumab vedotin (TA874, 2023) . 
Radiotherapy in first-line treatment 
1.6.2 
Consider consolidation radiotherapy delivering 30 Gy to sites involved with bulk disease at diagnosis for people with advanced diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma that has responded to first-line immunochemotherapy. Balance the possible late effects of radiotherapy with the possible increased need for salvage therapy if it is omitted when deciding if the therapy is suitable. 
Central nervous system prophylaxis 
1.6.3 
Explain to people with diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma that they have an increased risk of central nervous system lymphoma if the testis, breast, adrenal gland or kidney is affected. 
1.6.4 
Explain to people with diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma that they may have an increased risk of central nervous system lymphoma if they meet 2 or more of the following criteria, and that their level of risk increases with the number of factors involved: 
elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 
age over 60 years 
poor performance status (ECOG score of 2 or more) 
more than 1 extranodal site involved 
stage 3 or 4 disease. 
1.6.5 
Offer central nervous system-directed prophylactic therapy to people with diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma: 
that involves the testis, breast, adrenal gland or kidney, or 
who have 4 or 5 of the factors associated with increased risk of central nervous system relapse listed in recommendation 1.6.4. 
1.6.6 
Consider central nervous system-directed prophylactic therapy for people with diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma who have 2 or 3 of the factors associated with increased risk of central nervous system relapse listed in recommendation 1.6.4. 
Treating relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
Systemic anticancer therapy 
1.6.7 
Glofitamab plus gemcitabine and oxaliplatin is recommended as an option for treating relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in adults if they have had 1 line of treatment only and are not eligible for an autologous stem cell transplant. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on glofitamab (TA1113, 2025) . 
1.6.8 
Polatuzumab vedotin with rituximab and bendamustine is recommended as an option for treating relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in adults who cannot have a haematopoietic stem cell transplant. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on polatuzumab vedotin (TA649, 2020) . 
1.6.9 
For medicines recommended as options for treating relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in adults after 2 or more systemic treatments, only if they have had polatuzumab vedotin, or if polatuzumab vedotin is contraindicated or not tolerated, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
epcoritamab (TA954, March 2024) 
loncastuximab tesirine (TA947, January 2024) . 
1.6.10 
Glofitamab is recommended as an option for treating relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in adults after 2 or more systemic treatments. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on glofitamab (TA927, 2023) . 
1.6.11 
Tafasitamab with lenalidomide is not recommended for treating relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in adults who cannot have an autologous stem cell transplant. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on tafasitamab (TA883, 2023) . 
CAR-T therapy 
1.6.12 
Lisocabtagene maraleucel is recommended as an option for treating large B-cell lymphoma, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, that is refractory to, or has relapsed within 12 months after first-line chemoimmunotherapy, in adults for whom an autologous stem cell transplant would be considered suitable. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on lisocabtagene maraleucel (TA1048, 2025) . 
1.6.13 
Axicabtagene ciloleucel is recommended as an option through the Cancer Drugs Fund for treating diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in adults for whom an autologous stem cell transplant is suitable if it has relapsed within 12 months after first-line chemoimmunotherapy or is refractory to first-line chemoimmunotherapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on axicabtagene ciloleucel (TA895, 2023) . 
1.6.14 
Axicabtagene ciloleucel is recommended as an option for treating relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in adults after 2 or more systemic therapies. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on axicabtagene ciloleucel (TA872, 2023) . 
Salvage therapy and consolidation with stem cell transplantation 
Salvage therapy 
1.6.15 
Offer salvage therapy with multi-agent immunochemotherapy to people with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma who are fit enough to tolerate intensive therapy, and: 
explain that the aim is to enable consolidation with autologous or allogeneic stem cell transplantation, but it is also beneficial even if not followed by transplantation 
consider R‑GDP immunochemotherapy, which is as effective as other commonly used salvage regimens and less toxic. 
Autologous stem cell transplantation 
1.6.16 
Offer consolidation with autologous stem cell transplantation to people: 
with chemosensitive diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma (that is, there has been at least a partial response to chemotherapy) and 
who are fit enough for transplantation. 
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation 
1.6.17 
Consider consolidation with allogeneic stem cell transplantation: 
for people with chemosensitive diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma (that is, there has been at least a partial response to chemotherapy) that relapses after autologous stem cell transplantation or 
when stem cell harvesting is not possible. 
1.6.18 
Treosulfan with fludarabine is recommended as an option for conditioning treatment before allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplant for people with malignant diseases for whom a reduced-intensity regimen, such as low-dose busulfan with fludarabine, would be suitable. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on treosulfan with fludarabine (TA640, 2020) . 
1.7 Treating Burkitt lymphoma 
First-line treatment 
1.7.1 
Offer intensive immunochemotherapy to people with Burkitt lymphoma who are fit enough to tolerate it. 
1.7.2 
If intensive immunochemotherapy will be offered to a person with Burkitt lymphoma, consider using one of the following: 
R‑BFM 
R‑CODOX‑M/R‑IVAC 
R‑HyperCVAD (HDMTX) 
R‑LMB. 
1.7.3 
For people with low-risk Burkitt lymphoma, consider using the less intensive DA‑EPOCH‑R regimen with intravenous methotrexate, intrathecal methotrexate or both. 
1.7.4 
Offer less intensive immunochemotherapy to people with Burkitt lymphoma who are not fit enough to tolerate intensive chemotherapy. 
1.7.5 
If less intensive immunochemotherapy will be offered to a person with Burkitt lymphoma, consider using one of the following, alone or with intravenous methotrexate, intrathecal methotrexate or both: 
R‑CHOP 
R‑CHEOP 
DA‑EPOCH‑R. 
1.8 Treating relapsed or refractory high-grade B-cell lymphoma 
1.8.1 
Loncastuximab tesirine is recommended as an option for treating relapsed or refractory high-grade B-cell lymphoma in adults after 2 or more systemic treatments, only if they have had polatuzumab vedotin, or if polatuzumab vedotin is contraindicated or not tolerated. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on loncastuximab tesirine (TA947, 2024) . 
Other treatment options may also be available. See the NHS England Cancer Drugs Fund list . 
CAR-T therapy 
1.8.2 
Lisocabtagene maraleucel is recommended as an option for treating large B‑cell lymphoma, including high-grade B-cell lymphoma, that is refractory to or has relapsed within 12 months after first-line chemoimmunotherapy, in adults for whom an autologous stem cell transplant would be considered suitable. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on lisocabtagene maraleucel (TA1048, 2025) . 
1.9 Treating relapsed or refractory primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma 
CAR-T therapy 
1.9.1 
Lisocabtagene maraleucel is recommended as an option for treating large B-cell lymphoma, including primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, that is refractory to or has relapsed within 12 months after first-line chemoimmunotherapy, in adults for whom an autologous stem cell transplant would be considered suitable. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on lisocabtagene maraleucel (TA1048, 2025) . 
1.9.2 
Axicabtagene ciloleucel is recommended as an option for treating relapsed or refractory primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma in adults after 2 or more systemic therapies. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on axicabtagene ciloleucel (TA872, 2023) . 
Other treatment options may also be available. See the NHS England Cancer Drugs Fund list . 
1.10 Treating Waldenstrom's macroglobulinaemia 
1.10.1 
Zanubrutinib is recommended as an option for treating Waldenstrom's macroglobulinaemia in adults who have had at least 1 treatment, only if bendamustine plus rituximab is also suitable. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on zanubrutinib (TA833, 2022) . 
1.10.2 
Ibrutinib is not recommended for treating Waldenstrom's macroglobulinaemia in adults who have had at least 1 previous therapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on ibrutinib (TA795, 2022) . 
1.11 Treating peripheral T-cell lymphoma 
First-line treatment 
1.11.1 
Consider CHOP chemotherapy as first-line treatment for people with peripheral T‑cell lymphoma. 
Consolidation therapy 
1.11.2 
Consider consolidation with autologous stem cell transplantation for people: 
with chemosensitive peripheral T‑cell lymphoma (that is, there has been at least a partial response to first-line chemotherapy) and 
who are fit enough for transplantation. 
1.12 Information and support 
1.12.1 
If 'watch and wait' (observation without therapy) is suggested for a person with non-Hodgkin lymphoma: 
explain to them (and their family members or carers, as appropriate) what this involves and why it is being advised 
address any increased anxiety that results from this approach. 
1.12.2 
Explain to people with low-grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma (and their family members or carers, as appropriate) the possibility of transformation to high-grade lymphoma. 
1.12.3 
Ensure that people with non-Hodgkin lymphoma have: 
a named key worker at diagnosis and during treatment and 
contact details for the specialist team after treatment. 
1.12.4 
Discuss exercise and lifestyle with people with non-Hodgkin lymphoma from diagnosis onwards. 
1.13 Follow-up for people with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
1.13.1 
For people in complete remission after first-line treatment with curative intent for diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma: 
offer regular clinical assessment 
consider stopping regular clinical assessment aimed at detecting relapse 3 years after completing treatment for people in ongoing complete remission 
offer urgent appointments to people who experience a recurrence of lymphoma symptoms or new symptoms that suggest disease relapse 
do not offer LDH surveillance for detecting relapse 
do not offer routine surveillance imaging (including chest X‑ray, CT and PET‑CT) for detecting relapse in people who are asymptomatic. 
1.14 Survivorship 
1.14.1 
Give people with non-Hodgkin lymphoma and their GPs end-of-treatment summaries, and discuss with them their personal and general risk factors, including late effects related to their lymphoma subtype or its treatment. 
1.14.2 
Give people with non-Hodgkin lymphoma when they complete treatment information about how to recognise possible relapse and late effects of treatment. 
1.14.3 
Consider switching surveillance of late effects of treatment to nurse-led or GP-led services 3 years after a person with non-Hodgkin lymphoma completes a course of treatment. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
