Overview | Stroke rehabilitation in adults | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Stroke and transient ischaemic attack
Stroke rehabilitation in adults
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG236 
Published: 
18 October 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers rehabilitation after stroke for over 16s. It aims to ensure people are assessed for common problems and conditions linked to stroke, and get the care and therapy they need. It includes recommendations on the organisation and delivery of rehabilitation in hospital and the community. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on the diagnosis and initial management of stroke transient ischaemic attack in over 16s . 
Last reviewed: 18 October 2023 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG162 (2013). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
intensity of stroke rehabilitation 
assessment for fatigue  and for  vision problems 
screening for hearing problems 
assessments and interventions to support mouth care ,  swallowing  and  walking 
managing shoulder pain  and  spasticity 
transfer of care from hospital to a community setting, including early supported discharge 
telerehabilitation 
community participation  and  return-to-work programmes 
It also includes recommendations on: 
organising rehabilitation services 
planning rehabilitation , including  goal setting 
screening, assessment and interventions for cognitive impairment  and  psychological changes , and  difficulties with communication  and  movement 
providing information and support 
self-care  and  long-term health and social support 
See the  2-page visual summary to aid discussions between healthcare professionals and people who have had a stroke about care and support . 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Social care practitioners 
Commissioners and providers 
Voluntary organisations 
All adults and young people aged 16 and over who have had a stroke and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health 
Stroke in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
