Recommendations for research | Diverticular disease: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Digestive tract conditions
Diverticular disease
Diverticular disease: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG147 
Published: 
27 November 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Non-surgical management of acute diverticulitis 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of antibiotics for the management of acute diverticulitis in primary care? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research and how it might affect practice, see the rationale section on non-surgical management of acute diverticulitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: non-surgical management of acute diverticulitis . 
2 Conservative management for preventing diverticular disease 
What is the most clinically and cost-effective conservative management for preventing diverticular disease in people with diverticulosis? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research and how it might affect practice, see the rationale section on diverticulosis management and advice . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: prevention of diverticular disease in patients with diverticulosis . 
3 Managing diverticular disease 
What is the most clinically and cost-effective treatment for diverticular disease? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research and how it might affect practice, see the rationale section on management and advice for people with diverticular disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: management of diverticular disease . 
4 Information and support 
What information and support do people with diverticulosis, diverticular disease or acute diverticulitis need? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research and how it might affect practice, see the rationale section on information for people with diverticulosis, diverticular disease and acute diverticulitis. 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q: information and support . 
5 Timing of surgery for complicated acute diverticulitis 
What are the clinically and cost-effective surgical approaches to managing complicated acute diverticulitis, including timing of surgery (elective or emergency)? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research and how it might affect practice, see the rationale section on timing of surgery for complicated acute diverticulitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: timing of surgery for complicated acute diverticulitis . 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Risk factors for diverticular disease for people with diverticulosis 
What are the risk factors for diverticulosis progressing to diverticular disease? 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
