Overview | Anaphylaxis: assessment and referral after emergency treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Allergies and anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis: assessment and referral after emergency treatment
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG258 
Published: 
27 May 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Using this guideline 
Documenting suspected anaphylaxis 
Timing of blood samples 
Period of observation 
Admission to inpatient care 
Referral to a specialist allergy service 
Discharge from A&E or inpatient care 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessment and referral for anaphylaxis. It aims to improve the quality of care for people with suspected anaphylaxis by detailing the assessments that are needed and recommending referral to specialist allergy services. 
NICE has also produced a  guideline on drug allergy . 
Last reviewed: 4 June 2026 
We reviewed this guideline and will not be updating the recommendations on measurement of mast cell tryptase in children aged under 16 years, the evidence for intranasal adrenaline or the recommendations for research. See the June 2026 surveillance decision for further details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG134 (December 2011). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
documenting suspected anaphylaxis 
timing of blood samples 
period of observation 
admission to inpatient care 
referral to a specialist allergy service 
discharge from A&E or inpatient care 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with suspected anaphylaxis and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called anaphylaxis: assessment to confirm an anaphylactic episode and the decision to refer after emergency treatment for a suspected anaphylactic episode. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Anaphylaxis 
Drug allergy 
Next page 
Using this guideline 
Back to top
