Assessing rehabilitation needs and goal setting | Rehabilitation for chronic neurological disorders including acquired brain injury | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Rehabilitation for chronic neurological disorders including acquired brain injury
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG252 
Published: 
15 October 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Designing and commissioning rehabilitation services 
Assessing rehabilitation needs and goal setting 
Rehabilitation planning and delivery 
Information, advice and learning as part of rehabilitation 
Rehabilitation to maintain, improve or support function 
Rehabilitation to support education, work, social and leisure activities, relationships and sex 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Inclusions and exclusions 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
1.5 Early discussion in community or hospital settings about prognosis and rehabilitation
1.6 Discharge for people admitted to hospital
1.7 When to undertake, or make a referral for, holistic rehabilitation needs assessment
1.8 Holistic rehabilitation needs assessment
1.9 Goal setting
Assessing rehabilitation needs and goal setting 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Health, mental health and social care practitioners should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
patient experience in adult NHS services 
babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare 
disabled children and young people up to 25 with severe complex needs 
service user experience in adult mental health 
people's experience in adult social care services 
shared decision making 
medicines optimisation 
multimorbidity 
transition from children's to adults' services 
transition between inpatient hospital settings and community or care home settings for adults with social care needs 
decision making and mental capacity 
supporting adult carers 
advocacy services for adults with health and social care needs 
home care: delivering personal care and practical support to older people living in their own homes 
integrated health and social care for people experiencing homelessness . 
1.5 Early discussion in community or hospital settings about prognosis and rehabilitation 
1.5.1 
Ensure that the need for rehabilitation is identified as early as possible in people with a suspected or confirmed chronic neurological disorder. 
1.5.2 
Offer the person, and their family or carers, if appropriate, a discussion soon after injury or diagnosis (before symptoms or impairments may have emerged) about their prognosis and how their rehabilitation needs may emerge or change over time. 
1.5.3 
If the person does not want to discuss their prognosis or rehabilitation needs, or wants to discuss either or both at a later date, offer and initiate further opportunities for discussions. 
1.5.4 
Following diagnosis or initial treatment for a chronic neurological disorder, the responsible clinician should give the person an initial contact for rehabilitation , and inform their GP of this contact. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on early discussion in community or hospital settings about prognosis and rehabilitation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: rehabilitation delivery and evidence review B: identification and referral . 
1.6 Discharge for people admitted to hospital 
Follow NICE's guideline on transition between inpatient hospital settings and community or care home settings for adults with social care needs , as appropriate. 
1.6.1 
At hospital discharge, the responsible clinician should ensure there is both a key clinical contact for medical advice and an initial contact for rehabilitation (unless the key clinical contact will fulfil this role) and inform their GP of these contacts. 
1.6.2 
If rehabilitation has begun, or elements of a rehabilitation needs assessment have been carried out before hospital discharge, the inpatient multidisciplinary team, and community and primary care practitioners should jointly agree who will be the initial contact for rehabilitation after discharge. 
1.6.3 
At the earliest opportunity, arrange for the provision of any urgent equipment, assistive technology or environmental adaptations the person needs at home, to support their rehabilitation and prevent delays to discharge. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on discharge for people admitted to hospital . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: rehabilitation delivery and evidence review B: identification and referral . 
1.7 When to undertake, or make a referral for, holistic rehabilitation needs assessment 
1.7.1 
Think about undertaking, or making a referral for, holistic rehabilitation needs assessment : 
as soon as a diagnosis is established or 
based on symptoms or impairment (even if a chronic neurological disorder is suspected but not yet confirmed). 
1.7.2 
To decide whether holistic assessment is needed, briefly assess all of the following: 
the person's social, psychological, emotional, cognitive and communication needs 
their physical health 
level of impairment 
the impact of their condition on their ability to participate in day-to-day activities. 
1.7.3 
If holistic rehabilitation needs assessment is not needed, tell the person how to ask for an assessment if their symptoms or level of functioning changes (for children this may be at key developmental stages). 
1.7.4 
Put in place processes for timely follow up with the person to check for changes to their symptoms or level of functioning and to decide whether they need holistic needs assessment. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on when to undertake, or make a referral for, holistic rehabilitation needs assessment . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: identification and referral . 
1.8 Holistic rehabilitation needs assessment 
Follow NICE's guidelines about supporting people to make decisions about their health, mental health and social care, as appropriate: 
advocacy services for adults with health and social care needs 
babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare (includes section on advocacy and support) 
decision making and mental capacity . 
Support and advocacy for making decisions during rehabilitation 
1.8.1 
Ensure the person is supported to make decisions about their health and social care, especially if they may have complex communication or cognitive needs or 'invisible' symptoms or impairments. This may include involving family, carers or others important to the person as representatives (if the person agrees), or formally appointed advocates. 
Initiating holistic rehabilitation needs assessment and who to involve 
1.8.2 
If a referral for a specific functional needs assessment is received, offer holistic rehabilitation needs assessment unless it is clear that any new rehabilitation needs can be identified through a specific functional needs assessment. 
1.8.3 
Be aware that a person may have multiple chronic neurological disorders, including a functional neurological disorder alongside another neurological disorder. If this is the case, undertake holistic rehabilitation needs assessment based on the impact of all disorders and agree a single rehabilitation plan . 
1.8.4 
The person initiating holistic rehabilitation needs assessment (which may be the responsible clinician) should: 
identify and contact the health, mental health and social care practitioners who might be needed and 
agree with the practitioners who is best placed to lead on and coordinate the assessment (the lead practitioner for holistic needs assessment and rehabilitation planning ) and 
make onward referrals to other health, mental health and social care practitioners if other needs that are not linked to rehabilitation are identified. 
1.8.5 
The lead practitioner for holistic needs assessment and rehabilitation planning should seek input from health, mental health and social care practitioners and other practitioners (including teachers, social prescribers and equipment providers) to inform the assessment. 
1.8.6 
Discuss who is important to the person, and if and how they would like them to be involved in their rehabilitation. Make sure the other people agree to their role in helping to deliver rehabilitation. 
1.8.7 
Complete holistic rehabilitation needs assessment in partnership with the person and those people important to their rehabilitation (see recommendation 1.8.6.). 
1.8.8 
Do not delay starting rehabilitation interventions while undertaking holistic needs assessment. 
What to cover 
1.8.9 
Ask the person about: 
their background, relationships, work, education, meaningful activities, spiritual and religious practices, and hobbies and interests 
their activities of daily living (including self-care skills and domestic and leisure activities) and how these have changed or are changing 
developmental milestones and play, in the case of children 
what would motivate them to engage in rehabilitation and what is most important in their life 
environmental and wider social factors that might encourage or prevent them from taking part in rehabilitation (for example, access to community resources and equipment for rehabilitation and housing). 
1.8.10 
In addition to their neurological condition or injury, think about how other health conditions, including mental health conditions, may affect the person's rehabilitation. 
1.8.11 
Think about the possible impact of any existing medication on impairment (for example, cognitive function) and review medication as part of rehabilitation planning. 
1.8.12 
Encourage the person to talk freely about how their life has been impacted by their neurological condition. 
1.8.13 
If the person has 'invisible' or less easily recognisable symptoms or impairments or lacks awareness and insight into the effects of their injury or condition, and therefore struggles to articulate their rehabilitation needs, assess using multiple methods, including observation. 
1.8.14 
Assess the person's need for information, advice and training about how their condition or injury is impacting their functioning and ability to carry out their usual day-to-day activities. 
1.8.15 
Identify rehabilitation interventions that will help the person, and their family or carers, if appropriate, to prepare psychologically and physically for future changes to impairment and functioning. This is especially important if the person has a rapidly progressing condition. 
1.8.16 
Assess the person's functioning, symptoms and impairment in the following areas: 
pain (see the section on pain management ) 
fatigue (see the section on fatigue ) 
physical activity and exercise (see the section on physical activity and exercise ) 
stability, mobility and limb function (see the section on stability, mobility and limb function ) 
emotional health and mental wellbeing (see the section on emotional health and mental wellbeing ) 
cognitive function (see the section on cognitive function ) 
speech, language and communication (see the section on speech, language and communication ) 
eating, drinking and swallowing (see the section on eating, drinking and swallowing ) 
independent living needs, equipment and environmental adaptations (see the section on independent living, equipment and environmental adaptations ) 
bladder and bowel function (see NICE's guidelines on urinary incontinence in neurological disease: assessment and management and faecal incontinence in adults: management ). 
1.8.17 
Assess for vision and hearing problems and take into account how these might impact the person's rehabilitation. 
1.8.18 
As part of holistic needs assessment, find out how the person's functioning, abilities and needs vary, or are likely to vary: 
in different real-life environments, for example, their home, place of education or work, and places they visit such as shops or leisure centres 
at different times of the day and from day to day 
over the longer term. 
1.8.19 
Assess the need for rehabilitation to enable the person to participate in every aspect of their daily life. See the section on rehabilitation to support education, work, social and leisure activities, relationships and sex . 
1.8.20 
Do not exclude someone from any aspect of holistic needs assessment based on their communication, memory, learning or other cognitive difficulties. 
1.8.21 
Make reasonable adjustments and adaptations to enable a person with communication, memory, learning or other cognitive difficulties to engage in rehabilitation. 
Related assessments 
1.8.22 
Use the NHS continuing healthcare guidance to determine if someone is eligible for continuing NHS healthcare at home. 
1.8.23 
Discuss with the person, and their family or carers, if appropriate, whether they have social care needs and whether a social care needs assessment is required. For more information, see NICE's guideline on social work with adults experiencing complex needs . 
1.8.24 
For children and young people with severe complex needs, assess their rehabilitation needs as part of an education, health and care plan (EHCP), which should cover special educational needs, social care and healthcare, including rehabilitation. For more information, see NICE's guideline on disabled children and young people up to 25 with severe complex needs . 
1.8.25 
Be aware that people who have experienced trauma as a direct result of their injury or condition, or prior life experiences, or both, may need adaptations to assessment, rehabilitation and support plans. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on holistic rehabilitation needs assessment . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: rehabilitation delivery , evidence review B: identification and referral , evidence review C: assessment, planning and review , evidence review D: personal care and activities of daily living and evidence review G: rehabilitation for cognitive function . 
1.9 Goal setting 
1.9.1 
Explain the process and reasons for goal setting to the person. 
1.9.2 
Work collaboratively with the person to agree long-term rehabilitation goals, broken down into short-term steps, that focus on what is most important to the person. 
1.9.3 
Use age-specific approaches to engage children and young people in goal setting conversations. 
1.9.4 
Agree goals based on the person's wishes and aspirations that: 
focus on optimising participation in the most important aspects of the person's life 
aim to improve, maintain or reduce deterioration in functioning over time 
incorporate the need for psychological adaptation, acceptance and recovery 
take account of developmental challenges, in the case of children and young people. 
1.9.5 
When agreeing goals, discuss the potential for both positive and negative outcomes, including the impact that future changes in the person's functioning may have and the need to review goals regularly in this context. 
1.9.6 
Allow sufficient time during consultations with the person, and their family or carers, if appropriate, for goal setting, and later for rehabilitation planning. 
1.9.7 
Tailor the timeframe for reviewing goals to the person's condition, situation and nature of the goal. 
1.9.8 
Frequently adjust rehabilitation goals and plans, including for children and young people in response to their growth and developmental stage. 
For education, training and work 
1.9.9 
Ask the person about their aspirations and goals in relation to staying in, returning to, or leaving work, education or training. 
1.9.10 
Use information from discussions with the person (see recommendation 1.9.9), together with the person's likely developmental trajectory in the case of a child or young person, when setting education and work goals with them. 
1.9.11 
Work with the person to identify their strengths, motivations and rehabilitation needs in relation to work, education or training provision. 
1.9.12 
Review the person's goals connected to work, education or training whenever their rehabilitation needs are being reassessed. 
See also the sections on rehabilitation to support education for children and young people , and rehabilitation and the workplace . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on goal setting . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: assessment, planning and review and evidence review K: access to support for education, employment and social participation . 
Next page 
Rehabilitation planning and delivery 
Previous page 
Designing and commissioning rehabilitation services 
Back to top
