Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen | Suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over: recognition, assessment and early management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over: recognition, assessment and early management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG253 
Published: 
19 November 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Could this be sepsis? 
Face-to-face assessment 
Evaluating risk 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Training and education 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.9 Choice of antibiotic therapy for people with suspected sepsis
1.10 Using oxygen for people with suspected sepsis
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
Babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare 
Decision making and mental capacity 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines optimisation 
Multimorbidity 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
Shared decision making . 
1.9 Choice of antibiotic therapy for people with suspected sepsis 
Everyone 
1.9.1 
When the source of infection is confirmed or microbiological results are available: 
review the choice of antibiotic(s) and 
change the antibiotic(s) according to results, using a narrower-spectrum antibiotic, if appropriate. [2024] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2024 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on managing suspected sepsis: type and timing of antibiotics . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: managing and treating suspected sepsis in acute hospital settings; antibiotic treatment in people with suspected sepsis . 
1.9.2 
For all people with suspected sepsis and a clear source of infection, use existing local antimicrobial guidance. [2016] 
1.9.3 
For guidance on antibiotics for meningococcal disease, see the NICE guideline on bacterial meningitis and meningococcal disease: 
outside of hospital, see the section on transfer to hospital and antibiotics before arrival at hospital 
in hospital, see the section on antibiotics for meningococcal disease in hospital . [2016, amended 2025] 
1.9.4 
Follow the recommendations in NICE's guideline on antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use when prescribing and using antibiotics to treat people with suspected or confirmed sepsis. [2016] 
Under 18s 
1.9.5 
For people aged 16 to 18 with suspected community acquired sepsis of any cause, give ceftriaxone 80 mg/kg once a day with a maximum dose of 4 g daily at any age. [2016, amended 2024] 
1.9.6 
For people aged 16 to 18 with suspected sepsis who are already in hospital, or who are known to have previously been infected with or colonised with ceftriaxone-resistant bacteria, consult local guidelines for choice of antibiotic. [2016, amended 2024] 
People aged 18 or over 
1.9.7 
For people aged 18 years or over who need an empirical intravenous antimicrobial for suspected sepsis but who have no confirmed diagnosis, use an intravenous antimicrobial from the agreed local formulary and in line with local (where available) or national guidelines. [2016] 
1.10 Using oxygen for people with suspected sepsis 
1.10.1 
Give oxygen to achieve a target saturation of 94% to 98% for people aged 18 years or over or 88% to 92% for those at risk of hypercapnic respiratory failure. [2016] 
1.10.2 
Oxygen should be given to people aged 16 to 18 with suspected sepsis who have signs of shock or oxygen saturation (SpO2) of less than 92% when breathing air. Treatment with oxygen should also be considered for children with an SpO2 of greater than 92%, as clinically indicated. [2016] 
Be aware that some pulse oximeters can underestimate or overestimate oxygen saturation levels, especially if the saturation level is borderline. Overestimation has been reported in people with dark skin. See also the NHS England Patient Safety Alert on the risk of harm from inappropriate placement of pulse oximeter probes . 
Next page 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Previous page 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Back to top
