Context | Neonatal infection: antibiotics for prevention and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Neonatal infection: antibiotics for prevention and treatment 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG195 
Published: 
20 April 2021
Last updated: 
13 May 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Using this guideline 
Information and support for parents and carers 
Prevention and risk reduction 
Risk factors and clinical indicators: early-onset neonatal infection 
Risk factors and clinical indicators: late-onset neonatal infection 
Investigations before starting antibiotics for early-onset or late-onset neonatal infection 
Principles around use of antibiotics for early-onset or late-onset neonatal infection 
Investigations during antibiotic treatment for early-onset or late-onset infection 
Investigations and treatments for site-specific infections 
Antibiotics for early-onset neonatal infection 
Antibiotics for late-onset neonatal infection 
Antifungals to prevent fungal infection during antibiotic treatment for late-onset neonatal infection 
Meningitis: babies with early-onset or late-onset infection in neonatal units 
Therapeutic drug monitoring for babies receiving gentamicin 
Care setting and care after discharge 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Context 
Neonatal bacterial infection is a significant cause of mortality and morbidity in newborn babies. Parent organisations and the scientific literature report that there can be unnecessary delays in recognising and treating sick babies. In addition, concern about the possibility of neonatal infection is common. This concern is an important influence on the care given to pregnant women, trans men and non-binary people and newborn babies. There is wide variation in how the risk of neonatal infection is managed in healthy babies. The approach taken by the NHS needs to: 
prevent neonatal infection when possible 
prioritise the treatment of sick babies 
minimise the impact of management pathways on healthy women, trans men and non-binary people and babies 
use antibiotics wisely to avoid the development of resistance to antibiotics. 
These drivers have not always been addressed consistently in the NHS, and this guideline was commissioned to ensure they would be addressed in future. 
Five key principles underpin the recommendations in this guideline: 
Unless it is dangerous, families should be offered choice. The guideline includes recommendations to support families in making choices through provision of information and, when appropriate, reassurance. 
Intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis should be administered in a timely manner to all eligible women, trans men and non-binary people who choose it. 
Babies with suspected neonatal infection should receive treatment as quickly as possible. 
Antibiotic exposure should be minimised in babies who do not have a neonatal infection. 
An integrated system of clinical care is needed to allow full implementation of the guideline recommendations. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
