Overview | Type 2 diabetes in adults: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diabetes
Type 2 diabetes in adults: management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG28 
Published: 
02 December 2015
Last updated: 
18 February 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Using this guideline 
Individualised care 
Education 
Dietary advice and interventions 
Blood glucose management 
Person-centred medicine 
Initial medicines 
How to introduce medicines 
Reviewing medicines 
Further medication 
Insulin-based treatments 
Complications 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers care and management for adults (aged 18 and over) with type 2 diabetes. It focuses on education, dietary advice, managing cardiovascular risk, managing blood glucose levels, and identifying and managing long-term complications. 
For information on related topics, see our cardiometabolic disease prevention and treatment summary page . 
Last reviewed: 18 February 2026 
We reviewed the evidence on medicines for type 2 diabetes, and made and updated recommendations for people with no relevant comorbidities and for people with common comorbidities. We also made changes to recommendations on insulin, in the context of the withdrawal of insulin products and known brand shortages. For more details, see update information . 
This guideline updates and replaces: 
NICE guidelines CG66 (published May 2008) and CG87 (published May 2009) 
NICE technology appraisal guidance 203 and 248 
NICE evidence summaries ESNM20, ESNM26 and ESNM59. 
For recommendations on hypertension in people with type 2 diabetes, see the  NICE guideline on hypertension in adults .  
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
individualised care  and  person-centred medicine 
managing blood glucose levels , including  HbA1c measurement and targets 
initial medicines 
reviewing medicines 
further medication 
insulin-based treatments 
complications 
See the 2-page visual summary on factors to take into account when choosing, reviewing and changing medicines . 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Adults with type 2 diabetes, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Type 2 diabetes in adults 
Next page 
Using this guideline 
Back to top
