Recommendations | Insect bites and stings: antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Insect bites and stings: antimicrobial prescribing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG182 
Published: 
22 September 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Rationales 
Summary of the evidence 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
1.1 Managing insect bites and stings
Terms used in the guideline
Recommendations 
1.1 Managing insect bites and stings 
Assessment and advice 
1.1.1 
Be aware that: 
a rapid-onset skin reaction from an insect bite or sting is likely to be an inflammatory or allergic reaction, rather than an infection 
most insect bites or stings will not need antibiotics. 
1.1.2 
Assess the type and severity of the insect bite or stings to identify: 
a local inflammatory or allergic skin reaction 
erythema migrans (bullseye rash), a sign of Lyme disease (see the NICE guideline on Lyme disease ) 
symptoms or signs of an infection 
a systemic reaction (see the recommendations on referral and seeking specialist advice ). 
1.1.3 
Advise people with an insect bite or sting that: 
a community pharmacist can advise about self‑care treatments 
skin redness and itching are common and may last for up to 10 days 
it is unlikely that the skin will become infected 
avoiding scratching may reduce inflammation and the risk of infection 
they should seek medical help if symptoms worsen rapidly or significantly at any time, or they become systemically unwell. 
1.1.4 
For people with a known or suspected tick bite, follow the NICE guideline on Lyme disease . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations, see the rationale section on assessment and advice . 
For more details, see the evidence review . 
Treating a local inflammatory or allergic skin reaction 
1.1.5 
Do not offer an antibiotic for an insect bite or sting in people who do not have symptoms or signs of an infection. 
1.1.6 
Be aware that people may wish to consider oral antihistamines (in people aged over 1 year) to help relieve itching, even though there is uncertainty about their effectiveness in managing insect bites or stings. Some antihistamines cause sedation, which may help at night. 
Treating an infected insect bite or sting 
1.1.7 
For people with an insect bite or sting who have symptoms or signs of an infection, see the recommendations on choice of antibiotic in the NICE guideline on cellulitis and erysipelas . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations, see the rationale section on treatment . 
For more details, see the summary of the evidence . 
Reassessment 
1.1.8 
Reassess people with an insect bite or sting if: 
symptoms or signs of an infection develop (see the NICE guideline on cellulitis and erysipelas ) 
their condition worsens rapidly or significantly, or they become systemically unwell 
they have severe pain out of proportion to the wound, which may indicate the presence of toxin‑producing bacteria. 
1.1.9 
When reassessing people with an insect bite or sting, take account of other possible diagnoses such as Lyme disease (see the NICE guideline on Lyme disease ). 
Referral and seeking specialist advice 
1.1.10 
Refer people with an insect bite or sting to hospital if they have symptoms or signs suggesting a more serious illness or condition, such as a systemic allergic reaction (see the NICE guideline on anaphylaxis ). 
1.1.11 
Consider referral or seeking specialist advice for people with an insect bite or sting if: 
they are systemically unwell 
they are severely immunocompromised, and have symptoms or signs of an infection 
they have had a previous systemic allergic reaction to the same type of bite or sting 
it is in the mouth or throat, or around the eyes 
it has been caused by an unusual or exotic insect 
they have fever or persisting lesions associated with a bite or sting that occurred while travelling outside the UK. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations, see the rationale section on referral and seeking specialist advice . 
For more details, see the evidence review . 
Terms used in the guideline 
Cellulitis and erysipelas 
Infections of the tissues under the skin (subcutaneous), which usually result from a contaminated break in the skin. Both conditions are characterised by acute localised inflammation and oedema. The lesions are more superficial in erysipelas and have a well-defined, raised margin. 
Erythema migrans 
Erythema migrans is an expanding rash often seen in the early stage of Lyme disease, and can also (but less commonly) be caused by southern tick-associated rash illness. It usually becomes visible from 1 to 4 weeks (but can appear from 3 days to 3 months) after a tick bite and lasts for several weeks. 
Insect bite or sting 
For the purpose of this guideline, 'insect bites' also includes bites from spiders and ticks. Insects may bite with their mouthparts when feeding or defending themselves. Stings come from bees, wasps and hornets and are used only for defence. 
Next page 
Rationales 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
