Overview | Harmful sexual behaviour among children and young people | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Children's social care
Harmful sexual behaviour among children and young people
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG55 
Published: 
20 September 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Committee discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Glossary 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers children and young people who display harmful sexual behaviour, including those on remand or serving community or custodial sentences. It aims to ensure these problems don’t escalate and possibly lead to them being charged with a sexual offence. It also aims to ensure no-one is unnecessarily referred to specialist services. 
‘Young people’ refers mainly to those aged 10 to 18 but also includes people up to 25 with special educational needs or a disability. 
This guideline does not discuss people who have experienced sexual abuse. NICE has published a guideline on child abuse and neglect . 
Last reviewed: 30 July 2024 
We simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines (for example, the  NICE guideline on transition from children's to adults' services ). This is a presentational change only, and no changes to practice are intended. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations  
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
multi-agency approach and universal services 
early help assessment 
risk assessment for children and young people referred to harmful sexual behaviour services 
engaging with families and carers before an intervention begins 
developing and managing a care plan for children and young people displaying harmful sexual behaviour 
developing interventions for children and young people displaying harmful sexual behaviour 
supporting a return to the community for 'accommodated' children and young people 
Who is it for? 
Social workers, social and residential care practitioners and foster carers 
Child and adolescent harmful sexual behaviour and mental health services 
Neighbourhood and community support police officers and youth offending teams 
Schools and youth services 
National adolescent forensic services 
Primary care, sexual health, drug and alcohol services 
People who exhibit harmful sexual behaviour, their families and other members of the public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
