Other considerations | Secondary bacterial infection of eczema and other common skin conditions: antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Secondary bacterial infection of eczema and other common skin conditions: antimicrobial prescribing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG190 
Published: 
02 March 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Summary of the evidence 
Other considerations 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Medicines safety
Medicines adherence
Resource implications
Other considerations 
Medicines safety 
As with all antibiotics, extended or recurrent use of topical fusidic acid may increase the risk of developing antimicrobial resistance. See the BNF for more information. 
About 10% of the general population claim to have a penicillin allergy. This is often because of a skin rash that occurred while taking a course of penicillin as a child. Fewer than 10% of people who think they are allergic to penicillin are truly allergic. See the NICE guideline on drug allergy for more information. 
Cholestatic jaundice and hepatitis can occur with flucloxacillin up to 2 months after stopping treatment, with risk factors being increasing age and use for more than 14 days ( BNF information on flucloxacillin ). 
Macrolides should be used with caution in people with a predisposition to QT‑interval prolongation ( BNF information on erythromycin ). 
See the summaries of product characteristics for information on contraindications, cautions, drug interactions and adverse effects of individual medicines. 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines adherence may be a problem for some people taking antibiotics that need frequent dosing or longer treatment duration (see the NICE guideline on medicines adherence ). 
Resource implications 
Recommended antibiotics are available as generic formulations. See the NHS Drug Tariff for costs. 
See the evidence review for more information. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Summary of the evidence 
Back to top
