3 COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome | Obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome and obesity hypoventilation syndrome in over 16s | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Respiratory conditions
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome and obesity hypoventilation syndrome in over 16s
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG202 
Published: 
20 August 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
1 Obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome 
2 Obesity hypoventilation syndrome 
3 COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
4 Information for people with OSAHS, OHS or COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
3.1 Initial assessment for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome
3.2 Prioritising people for rapid assessment by a sleep service
3.3 Diagnostic tests for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome
3.4 Lifestyle advice for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome
3.5 Treatments for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome
3.6 Managing rhinitis in people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome
3.7 Follow-up and monitoring for people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome
3.8 Supporting adherence to treatment for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome
3 COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Please note that the following guidance from the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) and the UK government is relevant to these recommendations: 
DVLA guidance on assessing fitness to drive: a guide for medical professionals 
DVLA guidance on excessive sleepiness and driving 
UK government guidance on COVID-19: infection prevention and control . 
COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome occurs in people who have both chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome (OSAHS). The combined effect of these conditions on ventilatory load, gas exchange, comorbidities and quality of life is greater than either condition alone. 
Recommendations in this guideline cover assessment and treatment of OSAHS in people with COPD. For recommendations on the diagnosis and management of COPD, see the NICE guidelines on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in over 16s and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (acute exacerbation): antimicrobial prescribing . 
3.1 Initial assessment for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
When to suspect COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
3.1.1 
Take a sleep history and assess people for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome if they have confirmed COPD with: 
features of OSAHS (see recommendation 1.1.1 ) or 
features of nocturnal hypoventilation such as: 
waking headaches 
peripheral oedema 
hypoxaemia (arterial oxygen saturation less than 94% on air) 
unexplained polycythaemia. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on when to suspect COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: when to suspect OSAHS, OHS and COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
Assessment scales and tests for suspected COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
3.1.2 
When assessing people with suspected COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome: 
Use the Epworth Sleepiness Scale in the preliminary assessment of sleepiness. 
Consider using the STOP-Bang Questionnaire , as well as the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. 
3.1.3 
Do not use the Epworth Sleepiness Scale alone to determine if referral is needed, because not all people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome have excessive sleepiness. 
3.1.4 
Offer spirometry to assess the severity of COPD in people with suspected COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome (see the recommendations on spirometry in NICE's guideline on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in over 16s ). 
Reducing the risk of transmission of infection when using spirometry 
3.1.5 
Be aware that spirometry is an aerosol-generating procedure and, if there is a risk of airborne infection, such as COVID‑19, appropriate infection control precautions should be taken. 
For more information, see the UK government guidance on COVID-19: infection prevention and control and local guidance. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on assessment scales and tests for suspected COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: assessment tools for people with suspected OSAHS, OHS or COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
3.2 Prioritising people for rapid assessment by a sleep service 
See also recommendation 4.1.1 on providing information for people with suspected COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome who are being referred to a sleep service . 
3.2.1 
When referring people with suspected COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome to a sleep service, include the following information in the referral letter to facilitate rapid assessment: 
results of the person's sleepiness score 
how sleepiness affects the person 
body mass index (BMI) 
severity and frequency of exacerbations of COPD 
use of oxygen therapy at home 
comorbidities 
occupational risk 
oxygen saturation and blood gas values, if available 
any history of acute non-invasive ventilation. 
3.2.2 
Within the sleep service, prioritise people with suspected COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome for rapid assessment if any of the following apply: 
they have severe hypercapnia (PaCO 2 [partial pressure of carbon dioxide] over 7.0 kPa when awake) 
they have hypoxaemia (arterial oxygen saturation less than 94% on air) 
they have acute ventilatory failure 
they have a vocational driving job 
they have a job for which vigilance is critical for safety 
they are pregnant 
they have unstable cardiovascular disease, for example, poorly controlled arrhythmia, nocturnal angina, heart failure or treatment-resistant hypertension 
they are undergoing preoperative assessment for major surgery 
they have non-arteritic anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on prioritising people for rapid assessment by a sleep service . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: prioritisation for rapid assessment at a sleep centre of people with suspected OSAHS, OHS or COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
3.3 Diagnostic tests for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
See also section 4 on providing information for people who have been diagnosed with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
Diagnosing ventilatory failure 
3.3.1 
Measure arterial or arterialised capillary blood gas when the person with suspected COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome is awake, to assess for ventilatory failure. 
3.3.2 
Do not delay treatment for acute ventilatory failure to carry out further investigations for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome. 
Diagnosing OSAHS or nocturnal hypoventilation in people with suspected COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
3.3.3 
Offer respiratory polygraphy, either in hospital or at home, to diagnose OSAHS in people with suspected COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome. 
3.3.4 
Consider adding transcutaneous carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) monitoring during sleep to respiratory polygraphy to provide additional information to guide treatment. 
3.3.5 
Do not use oximetry alone to diagnose OSAHS or nocturnal hypoventilation in people with suspected COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on diagnostic tests for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: diagnostic tests for OSAHS, OHS and COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
3.4 Lifestyle advice for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
3.4.1 
For people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome, follow recommendation 1.4.1 on lifestyle advice for people with OSAHS . Prioritise advice on stopping smoking and follow the recommendations on smoking cessation in NICE's guideline on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in over 16s . 
3.5 Treatments for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
See also section 4 on providing information for people starting treatment for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
CPAP and non-invasive ventilation 
3.5.1 
Consider continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) as first-line treatment for people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome if they do not have severe hypercapnia (PaCO 2 of 7.0 kPa or less). 
3.5.2 
Consider non-invasive ventilation instead of CPAP for people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome with nocturnal hypoventilation if they have severe hypercapnia (PaCO 2 greater than 7.0 kPa). 
3.5.3 
Consider heated humidification in addition to CPAP for people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome and upper airway side effects such as nasal and mouth dryness, and CPAP-induced rhinitis. 
Reducing the risk of transmission of infection when using CPAP or non-invasive ventilation 
3.5.4 
Be aware that CPAP and non-invasive ventilation are aerosol-generating procedures and, if there is a risk of airborne infection, such as COVID‑19, appropriate infection control precautions should be taken. These may include setting up the device at home by video consultation or with precautions in hospital. 
For more information, see NICE's guideline on managing COVID-19 , the UK government guidance on COVID-19: infection prevention and control , and local guidance. 
Oxygen therapy 
3.5.5 
Consider supplemental oxygen for people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome if hypoxaemia persists once control of apnoea and nocturnal hypoventilation has been optimised by CPAP or non-invasive ventilation, and address any additional underlying causes of hypoxaemia where possible. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on treatments for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: positive airway pressure therapy variants for OSAHS, OHS and COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome and evidence review I: oxygen therapy . 
3.6 Managing rhinitis in people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
3.6.1 
For people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome, follow the recommendations on managing rhinitis in people with OSAHS . 
3.7 Follow-up and monitoring for people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
3.7.1 
Tailor follow-up to the person's overall treatment plan, which may include lifestyle changes and treating comorbidities. It may also include discussions about care planning (for example, COPD exacerbation action plan and advance care planning) for those with severe COPD. See the recommendations on self-management in the NICE guideline on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in over 16s and tailoring healthcare services for each patient in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . 
Follow-up for people using CPAP or non-invasive ventilation 
3.7.2 
Offer face-to-face, video or phone consultations, including review of telemonitoring data (if available), to people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome having non-invasive ventilation or CPAP. This should include: 
an initial consultation within 1 month and 
subsequent follow-up according to the person's needs and until optimal control of symptoms, apnoea–hypopnoea index (AHI) or oxygen desaturation index (ODI), oxygenation and hypercapnia is achieved. 
3.7.3 
When non-invasive ventilation or CPAP (with or without oxygen therapy) has been optimised for people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome and their symptoms are controlled, consider 6‑monthly to annual follow-up according to the person's needs. 
3.7.4 
Offer people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome having non-invasive ventilation or CPAP access to a sleep and ventilation service for advice, support and equipment between follow-up appointments. 
Follow-up for drivers with excessive sleepiness 
3.7.5 
Ensure follow-up is in line with Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency guidance on assessing fitness to drive . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on follow-up for people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: monitoring . 
Monitoring treatment efficacy for people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
3.7.6 
Assess the effectiveness of treatment with CPAP or non-invasive ventilation in people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome by reviewing the following: 
symptoms of OSAHS and nocturnal hypoventilation, including the Epworth Sleepiness Scale and vigilance, for example, when driving 
severity of OSAHS, using AHI or ODI 
improvement in oxygenation and hypercapnia while awake and asleep 
adherence to therapy 
telemonitoring or download information from the device (if available). 
3.7.7 
Explore with the person their understanding and experience of treatment, and review the following: 
mask type and fit, including checking for leaks 
nasal and mouth dryness, and need for humidification 
other factors affecting sleep disturbance such as insomnia, restless legs and shift work 
sleep hygiene 
cleaning and maintenance of equipment. 
3.7.8 
Be aware that some symptoms associated with COPD such as cough and wheeze, and certain medications such as theophyllines, may adversely affect sleep quality. 
3.7.9 
For people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome having supplemental oxygen therapy, review whether this is still needed after treatment with non-invasive ventilation or CPAP has been optimised. 
3.7.10 
Consider stopping CPAP or non-invasive ventilation and using a symptom-management approach for people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome who have severe COPD if, despite treatment optimisation, CPAP or non-invasive ventilation does not improve their symptoms or quality of life, or adds to the burden of therapy. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on monitoring treatment efficacy for people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: demonstration of efficacy . 
3.8 Supporting adherence to treatment for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
3.8.1 
Offer people with COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome educational or supportive interventions, or a combination of these, tailored to the person's needs and preferences, to improve adherence to CPAP and non-invasive ventilation. 
3.8.2 
Interventions to support adherence to treatment for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome should be given by trained specialist staff when treatment is started and as needed at follow-up. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on supporting adherence to treatment for COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review N: adherence . 
Next page 
4 Information for people with OSAHS, OHS or COPD–OSAHS overlap syndrome 
Previous page 
2 Obesity hypoventilation syndrome 
Back to top
