Overview | Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Gynaecological conditions
Heavy menstrual bleeding
Heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG88 
Published: 
14 March 2018
Last updated: 
24 May 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and managing heavy menstrual bleeding (menorrhagia). It aims to help healthcare professionals investigate the cause of heavy periods that are affecting a woman’s quality of life and to offer the right treatments, taking into account the woman’s priorities and preferences. 
For information on related topics see our women's and reproductive health summary page . 
In May 2021 , we reinstated recommendations on the use of ulipristal acetate (Esmya) for uterine fibroids in line with updated MHRA safety advice on the risk of serious liver injury , including the measures that should be put in place to mitigate this risk. 
Last reviewed: 19 December 2024 
We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the section on management of HMB . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG44 (January 2007). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes updated recommendations on: 
investigations for the cause of heavy menstrual bleeding 
management of heavy menstrual bleeding 
It also includes recommendations on: 
history, physical examination and tests 
information for women 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers of heavy menstrual bleeding services 
Women with heavy menstrual bleeding, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Heavy menstrual bleeding 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
