Overview | Violence and aggression: short-term management in mental health, health and community settings | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Violence and aggression: short-term management in mental health, health and community settings 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG10 
Published: 
28 May 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Person-centred care 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Implementation: getting started 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the short-term management of violence and aggression in adults (aged 18 and over), young people (aged 13 to 17) and children (aged 12 and under). It is relevant for mental health, health and community settings. The guideline aims to safeguard both staff and people who use services by helping to prevent violent situations and providing guidance to manage them safely when they occur. 
Last reviewed: 11 July 2024 
We checked this guideline and are updating it. For more information, see the surveillance decision . See the  guideline in development page  for progress on the update. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG25 (February 2005). 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
principles for managing violence and aggression 
anticipating and reducing the risk of violence and aggression 
preventing violence and aggression 
using restrictive interventions in inpatient psychiatric settings 
managing violence and aggression in emergency departments , and community and primary care settings 
managing violence and aggression in children and young people 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Adults, young people and children with a mental health problem who use services in mental health, health and community settings, and their families and carers  
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Violent and aggressive behaviours in people with mental health problems 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
