Overview | Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in over 16s: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Respiratory conditions
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in over 16s: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG115 
Published: 
05 December 2018
Last updated: 
26 July 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or COPD (which includes emphysema and chronic bronchitis) in people aged 16 and older. It aims to help people with COPD to receive a diagnosis earlier so that they can benefit from treatments to reduce symptoms, improve quality of life and keep them healthy for longer. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on antimicrobial prescribing for acute exacerbations of COPD . 
Last reviewed: 12 January 2022 
We checked this guideline and it will not be updated at this time. For more information, see the surveillance decision . 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG101 (June 2010), and evidence summaries ESNM8, ESNM9, ESNM21, ESNM33, ESNM47, ESNM49, ESNM52, ESNM54, ESNM57, ESNM72, ES17 and ES18. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
NICE has also produced a  visual summary covering non-pharmacological management and use of inhaled therapies .  
Recommendations 
In July 2019, we reviewed the evidence and made new recommendations on: 
inhaled triple therapy for stable COPD 
systemic corticosteroids for managing exacerbations 
These supplement the existing recommendations on: 
diagnosing COPD using symptoms, spirometry and other tests 
managing stable COPD using nebulisers, oral therapy and pulmonary rehabilitation 
multidisciplinary management of stable COPD, including physiotherapy, occupational therapy, nutrition and palliative care 
managing exacerbations of COPD in primary care and in hospital 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with COPD and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in adults 
Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
