Overview | Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health protection
Environment
Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG70 
Published: 
30 June 2017
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Committee discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Glossary 
Finding more information and committee details 
Overview 
This guideline covers road-traffic-related air pollution and its links to ill health. It aims to improve air quality and so prevent a range of health conditions and deaths. 
Recommendations 
This guideline recommends taking a number of actions in combination, because multiple interventions, each producing a small benefit, are likely to act cumulatively to produce significant change. It includes recommendations on: 
planning 
development management 
clean air zones 
reducing emissions from public sector transport services and vehicle fleets 
smooth driving and speed reduction 
walking and cycling 
awareness raising 
Who is it for? 
Local authority staff working in: planning, local air quality management and public health, including environmental health 
Staff working in transport and highways authorities 
Local government elected members 
Employers 
Healthcare professionals, people working in the voluntary sector, non-governmental organisations and education 
Members of the public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guidance. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
