Overview | Intrapartum care for women with existing medical conditions or obstetric complications and their babies | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Intrapartum care
Intrapartum care for women with existing medical conditions or obstetric complications and their babies
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG121 
Published: 
06 March 2019
Last updated: 
25 April 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers care during labour and birth for women who need extra support because they have a medical condition or complications in their current or previous pregnancy. The guideline also covers women who have had no antenatal care. It aims to improve experiences and outcomes for women and their babies. 
For information on intrapartum care for healthy women and their babies and other related topics see our women's and reproductive health summary page . 
Last reviewed: 25 April 2019 
We replaced recommendations on continuous cardiotocography for women with a previous caesarean section with links to our guideline on caesarean birth. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
heart disease ,  bleeding disorders and  subarachnoid haemorrhage 
asthma ,  long-term systemic steroids and  obesity 
acute kidney injury and chronic kidney disease 
sepsis  and  intrapartum haemorrhage 
previous caesarean section  and  labour after 42 weeks 
small-for-gestational-age baby  and  large-for-gestational-age baby 
no antenatal care 
Who is it for? 
Pregnant women, their families and carers 
Obstetricians, midwives, anaesthetists and other healthcare professionals caring for women in labour 
Providers and commissioners of maternity services 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Intrapartum care: existing medical conditions and obstetric complications 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
