Overview | Reducing sexually transmitted infections | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Lifestyle and wellbeing
Sexual health
Reducing sexually transmitted infections
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG221 
Published: 
15 June 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers interventions to prevent sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in people aged 16 and over. It aims to reduce the transmission of all STIs, including HIV, and includes ways to help increase the uptake of STI testing and vaccines for human papillomavirus (HPV) and hepatitis A and B. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
reducing the risk of people getting and transmitting STIs 
improving uptake and increasing the frequency of STI testing 
partner notification 
HPV and hepatitis A and B vaccination in gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men 
pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV 
Who is it for? 
Commissioners of sexual health services 
Providers of sexual health services, including GPs who offer level 1 or level 2 sexual health services and abortion services 
Healthcare professionals and others involved in delivering or signposting to sexual health services 
Voluntary organisations and advocacy groups that provide or have an interest in STI prevention 
People who are sexually active, and their family and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline replaces NICE guideline PH3 (February 2007) and NICE evidence summary ESNM78. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
HIV testing: encouraging uptake 
Sexual health 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
