Overview | Caesarean birth | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Intrapartum care
Caesarean birth
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG192 
Published: 
31 March 2021
Last updated: 
10 June 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers when to offer and discuss caesarean birth, procedural aspects of the operation, and care after caesarean birth. It aims to improve the consistency and quality of care for women and pregnant people who are thinking about having a caesarean birth or have had a caesarean birth in the past and are now pregnant again. 
For information on related topics, see our women's and reproductive health summary page . 
Last reviewed: 10 June 2025 
We deleted recommendation 1.4.33 on oxytocin and replaced it with a link to a recommendation on carbetocin in NICE's guideline on intrapartum care. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG132 (November 2011). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes updated recommendations on: 
placenta accreta spectrum 
It also includes recommendations on: 
benefits and risks of caesarean and vaginal birth 
prevention and management of hypothermia and shivering 
surgical techniques and medication for caesarean birth 
care of the woman after caesarean birth 
recovery after caesarean birth 
planned caesarean birth 
factors affecting the likelihood of emergency caesarean birth during intrapartum care 
procedural aspects of caesarean birth 
care of the baby born by caesarean birth 
pregnancy and childbirth after caesarean birth 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners 
Pregnant women and pregnant people, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called caesarean section. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Caesarean birth 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
