Overview | Antenatal and postnatal mental health: clinical management and service guidance | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Postnatal care
Antenatal and postnatal mental health: clinical management and service guidance
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG192 
Published: 
17 December 2014
Last updated: 
11 February 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers recognising, assessing and treating mental health problems in women who are planning to have a baby, are pregnant, or have had a baby or been pregnant in the past year. It covers depression, anxiety disorders, eating disorders, drug- and alcohol-use disorders and severe mental illness (such as psychosis, bipolar disorder and schizophrenia). It promotes early detection and good management of mental health problems to improve women’s quality of life during pregnancy and in the year after giving birth. 
Anti-epileptic medicines : Follow the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) safety advice on the use of valproate , valproate use in people younger than 55 years , valproate use in women and girls and anti-epileptic drugs in pregnancy . 
Last reviewed: 30 May 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will not update the recommendation on the GAD-2 cut-off point for suspecting anxiety . See the surveillance decision  for further details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG45 (February 2007) and section 1.5.6 of NICE guideline CG62 (March 2008). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
principles of care 
treatment decisions, advice and monitoring 
recognising mental health problems 
assessment and care planning 
providing interventions 
treating specific mental health problems 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners 
Social services 
Voluntary and private sectors 
Women who have, or are at risk of, mental health disorders during pregnancy and the postnatal period and their partners, families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Antenatal and postnatal mental health 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
