Overview | Diabetic foot problems: prevention and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diabetes
Diabetic foot problems: prevention and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG19 
Published: 
26 August 2015
Last updated: 
11 October 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers preventing and managing foot problems in children, young people and adults with diabetes. It aims to reduce variation in practice, including antibiotic prescribing for diabetic foot infections. 
For information on related topics, see our cardiometabolic disease prevention and treatment summary page . 
Last reviewed: 3 July 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will update the recommendations on treatment for diabetic foot ulcer in specific relation to considering topical oxygen therapy. See the  surveillance decision  for further details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guidelines CG10 (January 2004) and CG119 (March 2011), and the recommendation on foot care in NICE guideline CG15 (July 2004). 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
See a 4-page visual summary of the antimicrobial prescribing recommendations, including tables to support prescribing decisions. 
Recommendations 
The guideline includes recommendations on: 
care in hospital within the first 24 hours 
care across all care settings 
assessing the risk of developing a diabetic foot problem 
diabetic foot problems 
diabetic foot ulcer 
diabetic foot infection 
Charcot arthropathy 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals caring for people with diabetes 
Commissioners and providers of diabetes foot care services 
People with diabetes, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guidance. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Type 1 diabetes in adults 
Type 2 diabetes in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
