Recommendations for research | Bipolar disorder: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder: assessment and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG185 
Published: 
24 September 2014
Last updated: 
02 September 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendation for research, based on its review of evidence, to improve NICE guidance and patient care in the future. The committee's full set of recommendations for research are detailed in the full guideline . 
1 Maintenance treatment 
In the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder, what is the relative effect on quality of life of lithium, an antipsychotic (haloperidol, olanzapine, quetiapine or risperidone), or a combination of lithium and an antipsychotic? 
Why this is important 
Lithium and antipsychotic medication are known to reduce the risk of relapse when used long‑term in people with bipolar disorder. Relapses do still occur and the response is usually to add another mood‑stabilising drug. However, lithium and antipsychotics are associated with a number of side effects, some of which can adversely affect physical health. The relative effects of lithium, an antipsychotic or a combination of these drugs, regarding efficacy, tolerability, cost effectiveness and quality of life, are unknown. Such information is important to people with bipolar disorder to help them make an informed choice about the treatment options available to them, and to the NHS to inform the best use of resources. 
The suggested programme of research should involve a pragmatic 3‑arm RCT comparing lithium monotherapy with antipsychotic monotherapy (haloperidol, olanzapine, quetiapine or risperidone) and a combination of lithium and an antipsychotic. The study should last at least 1 year with the primary outcome being quality of life. Symptom control, relapse, function and economic outcomes should also be measured. 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
