Overview | Dementia, disability and frailty in later life – mid-life approaches to delay or prevent onset | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diet, nutrition and obesity
Dementia, disability and frailty in later life – mid-life approaches to delay or prevent onset 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG16 
Published: 
20 October 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Who should take action? 
Context 
Considerations 
Recommendations for research 
References 
Summary of the methods used to develop this guideline 
The evidence 
Gaps in the evidence 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers mid-life approaches to delay or prevent the onset of dementia, disability and frailty in later life. The guideline aims to increase the amount of time that people can be independent, healthy and active in later life. 
Recommendations 
The guideline includes recommendations on promoting a healthy lifestyle to reduce the risk of or delay the onset of disability, dementia and frailty by helping people to: 
stop smoking 
be more active 
reduce their alcohol consumption 
improve their diet and, 
lose weight and maintain a healthy weight if necessary. 
Who is it for? 
Commissioners, managers and practitioners with public health as part of their remit, working in the public, private and third sector 
The public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Dementia 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
