Summary of the evidence | Human and animal bites: antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Human and animal bites: antimicrobial prescribing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG184 
Published: 
04 November 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Rationale and impact 
Summary of the evidence 
Other considerations 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
Antibiotic efficacy
Choice of antibiotic
Course length
Route of administration
Summary of the evidence 
This is a summary of the evidence, for full details see the evidence review . 
The evidence included 1 systematic review ( Medeiros et al. 2001 ) and 2 randomised controlled trials ( Quinn et al. 2010 , Broder et al. 2004 ). These studies considered various prophylactic antibiotics compared with no antibiotic or placebo for managing animal and human bites. No evidence was identified for choice of antibiotic, course length or route of administration. 
Antibiotic efficacy 
If no route of administration for an antibiotic is given in the evidence review , no details were reported in the primary study. 
For human bites 
Prophylactic antibiotics (oral cefaclor, intravenous cefazolin, intravenous benzylpenicillin, and oral cefalexin or penicillin) were shown to be more effective than placebo at reducing signs of infection after human bites in adults. 
For animal bites 
There was no difference between prophylactic antibiotics (oral phenoxymethylpenicillin, oral dicloxacillin, oxacillin, oral cefalexin, oral erythromycin, co‑trimoxazole, cloxacillin and oral co‑amoxiclav) and no treatment or placebo in signs of infection after dog bites in adults, young people and children. 
One small study suggests that there was no difference between a prophylactic antibiotic (oxacillin) and placebo in signs of infection after cat bites in adults. 
By bite type 
There was no difference between prophylactic antibiotics (oxacillin, oral phenoxymethylpenicillin, oral dicloxacillin, oral cefalexin and oral erythromycin) and no treatment or placebo in the incidence of infection in adults, young people and children when treating puncture, laceration or avulsion wounds. 
By bite location 
There was no difference between prophylactic antibiotics (oral dicloxacillin, oral cefalexin, oral erythromycin, oral phenoxymethylpenicillin, co‑trimoxazole, oral cefaclor, intravenous cefazolin and intravenous penicillin) and no treatment or placebo in the incidence of infection in adults, young people and children when treating trunk, head and neck, hand or arm wounds. 
Choice of antibiotic 
There was no evidence identified about the choice of antibiotic. 
Course length 
There was no evidence identified about the course length of antibiotics. 
Route of administration 
There was no evidence identified about the route of administration of antibiotics. 
Next page 
Other considerations 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
