Overview | Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid modification | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Acute coronary syndromes
Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid modification
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG238 
Published: 
14 December 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Using this guideline 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers identifying and assessing risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in adults without established CVD. It covers lifestyle changes and lipid-lowering treatment (including statins) for primary and secondary prevention of CVD, and includes guidance for people who also have diabetes or chronic kidney disease. 
For people with familial hypercholesterolaemia, see the NICE guideline on familial hypercholesterolaemia . 
Last reviewed: 2 September 2025 
We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the sections on lipid-lowering treatment for primary prevention of CVD , lipid-lowering treatment for secondary prevention of CVD , treatment if statins are contraindicated or not tolerated and lipid-lowering treatments that should not be used or not used routinely . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG181 (July 2014). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
identifying and assessing CVD risk for people without established CVD 
aspirin for primary prevention of CVD 
lifestyle changes for the primary and secondary prevention of CVD 
initial lipid measurement and referral for specialist review 
discussions and assessment before starting statins 
lipid-lowering treatment for primary prevention of CVD 
lipid-lowering treatment for secondary prevention of CVD 
statins for primary or secondary prevention of CVD in people with chronic kidney disease 
optimising statin treatment 
treatment if statins are contraindicated or not tolerated 
assessing response to treatment 
lipid-lowering treatments that should not be used or not used routinely 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Adults who are at risk of CVD or who have CVD 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Cardiovascular risk assessment and lipid modification 
Type 1 diabetes in adults 
Type 2 diabetes in adults 
Chronic kidney disease in adults 
Next page 
Using this guideline 
Back to top
