Finding and controlling the source of infection | Suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over: recognition, assessment and early management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over: recognition, assessment and early management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG253 
Published: 
19 November 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Could this be sepsis? 
Face-to-face assessment 
Evaluating risk 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Training and education 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
Babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare 
Decision making and mental capacity 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines optimisation 
Multimorbidity 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
Shared decision making . 
1.11 Everyone 
1.11.1 
Tailor investigations of the sources of infection to the person's clinical history and to findings from examination. [2016] 
1.11.2 
Consider urine analysis and chest X‑ray to identify the source of infection in all people with suspected sepsis. [2016] 
1.11.3 
Consider imaging of the abdomen and pelvis if no likely source of infection is identified after clinical examination and initial tests. [2016] 
1.11.4 
Involve the relevant surgical team early on if surgical or radiological intervention is suitable for the source of infection. The surgical team or interventional radiologist should: 
seek senior advice about the timing of intervention 
carry the intervention out as soon as possible, in line with the advice received. [2024] 
For guidance on contraindications to lumbar puncture, see the section on lumbar puncture in the NICE guideline on bacterial meningitis and meningococcal disease . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2024 recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on finding and controlling the source of infection . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: early management of suspected sepsis (except antibiotic therapy) in the NEWS2 population, in acute hospital settings . 
Next page 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Previous page 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Back to top
