Overview | Care of dying adults in the last days of life | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Care of dying adults in the last days of life
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG31 
Published: 
16 December 2015
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Context 
Recommendations 
Implementation: getting started 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the clinical care of adults (18 years and over) who are dying during the last 2 to 3 days of life. It aims to improve end of life care for people in their last days of life by communicating respectfully and involving them, and the people important to them, in decisions and by maintaining their comfort and dignity. The guideline covers how to manage common symptoms without causing unacceptable side effects and maintain hydration in the last days of life. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
recognising when people are entering the last few days of life 
communicating and shared decision-making 
clinically assisted hydration 
medicines for managing pain, breathlessness, nausea and vomiting, anxiety, delirium, agitation, and noisy respiratory secretions 
anticipatory prescribing 
Who is it for? 
Health and social care professionals caring for people who are dying, including those working in primary care, care homes, hospices, hospitals and community care settings such as people’s own homes 
Commissioners and providers of care for people in the last days of life 
People who are dying, their families, carers and other people important to them 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Care of dying adults in the last days of life 
Next page 
Context 
Back to top
