Overview | Workplace health: management practices | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Lifestyle and wellbeing
Mental health and wellbeing
Workplace health: management practices 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG13 
Published: 
24 June 2015
Last updated: 
24 March 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Committee discussion 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers how to improve the health and wellbeing of employees, with a focus on organisational culture and the role of line managers. 
In March 2016 , we added recommendations about older employees, aged over 50 in paid or unpaid work. 
Recommmendations 
The guideline includes recommendations on: 
organisational commitment 
mental wellbeing at work  and  physical work environment 
fairness ,  participation and trust 
senior leadership 
line managers’ role  and  leadership style 
training, including support for older employees 
job design 
monitoring and evaluation 
Who is it for? 
Employers, senior leadership and managers (including line managers), human resource teams and all those with a remit for workplace health 
Employees, people who are self-employed, and other members of the public 
Is this guideline up to date? 
August 2017: We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. For more information, see the surveillance decision .  
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Healthy workplaces: improving employee mental and physical health and wellbeing 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
