Overview | Cancer of the upper aerodigestive tract: assessment and management in people aged 16 or over | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Head and neck cancers
Cancer of the upper aerodigestive tract: assessment and management in people aged 16 or over
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG36 
Published: 
10 February 2016
Last updated: 
06 June 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and managing cancers of the upper aerodigestive tract in people aged 16 or over. These are cancers of the airways of the head and neck, including the mouth, throat, larynx (voicebox) and sinuses. The guideline aims to reduce variation in practice and improve survival. 
For recommendations on when to refer people from primary care to a specialist, see the NICE guideline on recognition and referral for suspected cancer . 
Last reviewed: 23 June 2026 
We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the section on systemic anticancer therapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck airways . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice.  
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
information and support 
investigation 
treatment of early  and  advanced stage disease 
response assessment after chemoradiotherapy 
HPV-related disease 
less common upper aerodigestive tract cancers 
optimising rehabilitation and function 
follow-up and treatment of late effects 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals working in secondary and tertiary care  
People aged 16 or over with cancer of the upper aerodigestive tract, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Head and neck cancer 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
