Recommendations | Drug misuse prevention: targeted interventions | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Drug misuse
Drug misuse prevention: targeted interventions
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG64 
Published: 
22 February 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
The committee's discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Glossary 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Delivering drug misuse prevention activities as part of existing services
1.2 Assessment
1.3 Children and young people assessed as vulnerable to drug misuse
1.4 Adults assessed as vulnerable to drug misuse
1.5 People at risk of using drugs
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Delivering drug misuse prevention activities as part of existing services 
1.1.1 
Deliver drug misuse   prevention activities for people in groups at risk through a range of existing statutory, voluntary or private services, including: 
health services, such as primary care services, community-based health services, mental health services, sexual and reproductive health services, drug and alcohol services, and school nursing and health visiting services 
specialist services for people in groups at risk 
community-based criminal justice services, including adult, youth and family justice services 
accident and emergency services. 
1.1.2 
Ensure activities targeting groups at risk are consistent with any population-level (universal) activities aimed at preventing drug misuse. 
1.2 Assessment 
1.2.1 
At routine appointments and opportunistic contacts with statutory and other services, such as those listed in recommendation 1.1.1 in the section on delivering drug misuse prevention activities as part of existing services , assess whether someone is vulnerable to drug misuse . Examples of routine appointments and opportunistic contacts include: 
health assessments for children and young people who are looked after or care leavers , including initial assessments, any reviews and contacts 
appointments with GPs, nurses, school nurses or health visitors 
attendances at emergency departments as a result of alcohol or drug use 
contacts with the community-based criminal justice system. 
1.2.2 
Use a consistent, locally agreed approach to assessment that is respectful, non-judgemental and proportionate to the person's presenting vulnerabilities. For an example for young people, see the Royal College of Psychiatrists practice standards for young people with substance misuse problems . 
1.2.3 
Discuss the person's circumstances, taking account of their age and developmental stage. The initial discussion could include: 
their physical and mental health and their personal, social, educational or employment circumstances (which may trigger a more in-depth assessment) 
any drug use (including the type used and how often). 
If the person is already misusing drugs, see NICE's guidelines on psychosocial interventions and opioid detoxification for drug misuse in people aged 16 years and older, needle and syringe programmes , and alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis and management of physical complications . 
1.2.4 
Think about the immediate safety of the person being assessed and any people under their care, and whether any action is needed. 
1.2.5 
Discuss with the person what their priorities are and take into account how these might affect next steps or referral to other services. 
1.3 Children and young people assessed as vulnerable to drug misuse 
1.3.1 
Consider skills training for children and young people who are assessed as vulnerable to drug misuse . If skills training is delivered to children and young people, ensure that their carers or families also receive skills training. For older children and young people, think about whether providing information (see recommendations in the section on adults assessed as vulnerable to drug misuse ) may be a more appropriate approach. 
1.3.2 
Ensure any skills training is: 
commissioned as part of existing services (see recommendation 1.1.1 in the section on delivering drug misuse prevention activities as part of existing services ) 
delivered as part of activities designed to increase resilience and reduce risk 
delivered by people competent to provide skills training. 
1.3.3 
If skills training is offered to children and young people and their carers or families, ensure it helps children and young people develop a range of personal and social skills, such as: 
listening 
conflict resolution 
refusal 
identifying and managing stress 
making decisions 
coping with criticism 
dealing with feelings of exclusion 
making healthy behaviour choices. 
Ensure that personal and social skills training for children and young people who are looked after and care leavers puts particular emphasis on how to deal with feelings of exclusion. 
1.3.4 
If skills training is offered to children and young people and their carers and families, ensure that it helps carers and families develop a range of skills, such as: 
communication 
developing and maintaining healthy relationships 
conflict resolution 
problem solving. 
Ensure that skills training for foster carers includes using behaviour reinforcement strategies alongside the other skills listed. 
1.3.5 
Take into account the age, developmental stage, presenting vulnerabilities, cultural context, religion, ethnicity and any other specific needs or preferences of the child or young person when deciding: 
whether to offer training sessions to children and young people and their carers or families together, or whether to offer separate sessions 
the content of the skills training 
whether to provide individual or group-based sessions 
the number of sessions needed (a minimum of 2 sessions should be offered) 
where to hold the sessions 
how long each session should last. 
For more information, see the Department of Health's quality criteria for young people friendly services . 
1.3.6 
Discuss and agree a plan for follow-up at the skills training sessions, to assess whether additional skills training or referral to specialist services is needed. 
1.4 Adults assessed as vulnerable to drug misuse 
1.4.1 
Offer adults who are assessed as vulnerable to drug misuse (see the section on assessment ) the following: 
clear information on drugs and their effects 
advice and feedback on any existing drug use 
information on local services and where to find further advice and support (see recommendation 1.5.3 in the section on people at risk of using drugs ). 
This information should be provided at the same time as the assessment. 
1.4.2 
Offer information and advice both verbally and in writing. Provide advice in a non-judgemental way and tailor it to the person's preferences, needs and level of understanding about their health. Ensure that information and advice is delivered in line with NICE's guidelines on general approaches to behaviour change , individual approaches to behaviour change and patient experience in adult NHS services . 
1.4.3 
Discuss and agree a plan for follow-up at the assessment, to determine whether additional information or referral to specialist services is needed. 
1.5 People at risk of using drugs 
1.5.1 
Consider providing information about drug use in settings that groups who use drugs or are at risk of using drugs may attend. These settings could include: 
nightclubs or festivals 
wider health services, such as sexual and reproductive health services or primary care 
supported accommodation or hostels for people without permanent accommodation 
gyms (to target people who are taking, or considering taking, image- and performance-enhancing drugs). 
1.5.2 
Consider providing information in different formats, including web-based information (such as digital and social media) and printed information (such as leaflets). 
1.5.3 
Consider providing information on: 
drugs and their effects (for example, the NHS webpage on drug addiction ) 
local services and where to find further advice and support 
online self-assessment and feedback to help people assess their own drug use. 
1.5.4 
Ensure that information provided is in line with NICE guidelines on general approaches to behaviour change , individual approaches to behaviour change and patient experience in adult NHS services . 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines terms that have been used in a specific way for this guideline. For general definitions, please see the glossary . 
Care leavers 
People aged 25 or under who have been looked after by a local authority for at least 13 weeks since age 14, and who were looked after by the local authority at school leaving age or after that date. 
Children and young people who are looked after 
Children and young people looked after by the state for whom the Children Act 1989 applies. The term includes children and young people who are subject to a care order or temporarily classed as looked after on a planned basis for short breaks or respite care. The term also includes those in residential care, foster care or boarding school, or with birth parents, other family or carers. It includes children and young people in placements out of the child or young person's home area. Children and young people who are in young offender or other secure institutions are not included in this definition, because this group is outside the scope of the guideline. 
Drugs 
Drugs described in the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 and the Psychoactive Substances Act 2016, as well as new psychoactive substances (often described as 'legal highs'), solvents, volatile substances, image- and performance-enhancing drugs, prescription-only medicines and over-the-counter medicines. 
Drug misuse 
Dependence on, or regular excessive consumption of, psychoactive substances, leading to physical, mental or social problems. This term does not include occasional or experimental drug use in adults. 
Groups at risk 
Groups at risk of drug misuse, including: 
people who have mental health problems 
people who are being sexually exploited or sexually assaulted 
people involved in commercial sex work 
people who are lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender 
people not in employment, education or training (including children and young people who are excluded from school or who truant regularly) 
children and young people whose carers or families use drugs 
children and young people who are looked after or care leavers 
children and young people who are in contact with young offender teams but not in secure environments (prisons and young offender institutions) 
people who are considered homeless 
people who attend nightclubs and festivals 
people who are known to use drugs occasionally or recreationally. 
Prevention 
Preventing or delaying drug use, preventing people who are already using some drugs from using other drugs, and preventing people who already experiment or use drugs occasionally from using drugs regularly and excessively. 
Treatment 
The clinical management of drug misuse or dependence. This could comprise, for example, pharmacotherapy, psychosocial therapy or a combination of these. 
Vulnerable to drug misuse 
People in groups at risk who may be particularly vulnerable to drug misuse. This may include people: 
in multiple groups at risk 
whose personal circumstances put them at increased risk 
who may already be using drugs on an occasional basis 
who may already be regularly excessively consuming another substance, such as alcohol. 
Young people 
People aged 10 to 18. This term also includes people aged up to 25 who have special educational needs or a disability (consistent with the Children and Families Act 2014). 
Next page 
The committee's discussion 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
