Rehabilitation to support education, work, social and leisure activities, relationships and sex | Rehabilitation for chronic neurological disorders including acquired brain injury | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Rehabilitation for chronic neurological disorders including acquired brain injury
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG252 
Published: 
15 October 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Designing and commissioning rehabilitation services 
Assessing rehabilitation needs and goal setting 
Rehabilitation planning and delivery 
Information, advice and learning as part of rehabilitation 
Rehabilitation to maintain, improve or support function 
Rehabilitation to support education, work, social and leisure activities, relationships and sex 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Inclusions and exclusions 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
1.22 Rehabilitation to support education for children and young people
1.23 Rehabilitation and the workplace
1.24 Participating in social and leisure activities
1.25 Family life and friendships
1.26 Intimate and sexual relationships, and sex
Rehabilitation to support education, work, social and leisure activities, relationships and sex 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Health, mental health and social care practitioners should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
patient experience in adult NHS services 
babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare 
disabled children and young people up to 25 with severe complex needs 
service user experience in adult mental health 
people's experience in adult social care services 
shared decision making 
medicines optimisation 
multimorbidity 
transition from children's to adults' services 
transition between inpatient hospital settings and community or care home settings for adults with social care needs 
decision making and mental capacity 
supporting adult carers 
advocacy services for adults with health and social care needs 
home care: delivering personal care and practical support to older people living in their own homes 
integrated health and social care for people experiencing homelessness . 
1.22 Rehabilitation to support education for children and young people 
Follow NICE's guideline on disabled children and young people up to 25 with severe complex needs , as appropriate. 
1.22.1 
As soon as possible after suspecting or diagnosing a chronic neurological disorder in a child or young person, inform their nursery, school or college. 
1.22.2 
Provide the nursery, school or college with information about the child's or young person's condition, their prognosis and rehabilitation needs. 
1.22.3 
Discuss and agree the support, equipment, adaptations (including environmental adaptations) or adjustments needed to facilitate the child's or young person's rehabilitation and participation in education. 
1.22.4 
Ensure there is: 
a named rehabilitation practitioner that education practitioners can contact if they are concerned about the rehabilitation needs of the child or young person 
two-way communication and information sharing between rehabilitation and education practitioners, including during periods of transition, for example, when the child or young person moves to a different nursey, school or college, or their teachers change. 
1.22.5 
Discuss at regular intervals whether the nursery, school or college is still suitable for the child or young person or whether a different education setting is needed. 
1.22.6 
Regularly review education, health and care plans if they include rehabilitation provision, especially if the child or young person has a chronic neurological disorder that is progressive or fluctuating. 
See also the section on goal setting for education, training and work . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on rehabilitation to support education for children and young people . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: access to support for education, employment and social participation and evidence review L: support to access education . 
1.23 Rehabilitation and the workplace 
Follow NICE's guideline on workplace health: long-term sickness absence and capability to work , as appropriate. 
See also the section on 'what access to work is' in GOV.UK's Access to Work: get support if you have a disability or health condition . 
These recommendations apply to paid, including self-employment, and voluntary work. 
1.23.1 
When assessing the person's ability to remain in, or return to work, take into account: 
their retained skills, strengths and motivations 
whether their rehabilitation needs are likely to increase or decrease. 
1.23.2 
If the person is unable to remain in, or return to, a specific work role, provide support to enable them to leave work or change their role. 
1.23.3 
Discuss remaining in, or returning to, work with the person and their employer as early as possible and: 
consider undertaking a work capacity evaluation, and 
help set expectations, and identify and solve any barriers that could prevent the person remaining in, or returning to work, and 
collaborate with specific professions in the workplace as needed, for example, occupational health, human resources and legal teams. 
1.23.4 
When planning return to work follow recommendation 1.16.4 in NICE's guideline on stroke rehabilitation in adults , which is applicable to people with other forms of chronic neurological disorder. 
1.23.5 
For an employer carrying out a workplace assessment with the person, identify potential barriers to effective working and develop solutions and strategies to overcome them. 
1.23.6 
Ask the person if and how they want any workplace adjustments (for example, the provision of a support worker or time to access rehabilitation) or changes to their role to be explained to their work colleagues and what information should remain confidential. 
1.23.7 
When undertaking vocational rehabilitation , use the most appropriate environment to assess rehabilitation needs and deliver rehabilitation interventions. This may be in the workplace, a hospital clinic, community setting or the person's home. 
1.23.8 
Check the effectiveness of workplace adjustments and review vocational rehabilitation whenever rehabilitation needs that might impact on work are being reassessed. 
1.23.9 
The employer should discuss and agree any workplace adjustments for addressing future rehabilitation needs with the person and seek advice from rehabilitation practitioners as needed. 
See also the section on goal setting for education, training and work . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on rehabilitation and the workplace . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: access to support for education, employment and social participation and evidence review M: support to access employment . 
1.24 Participating in social and leisure activities 
1.24.1 
Talk to the person about any barriers preventing them from achieving their social participation goals and work together to overcome these barriers. Barriers could relate to: 
the need for support, which may be practical, physical, emotional or cognitive 
the impact of other people's attitudes and behaviours 
cultural, social or socioeconomic factors 
availability of suitable facilities. 
1.24.2 
Recognise that social participation goals may involve simple, everyday social activities, for example, coffee with a friend or attending play groups. 
1.24.3 
Help the person to identify social clubs and activities in their local community that might address their social participation goals. 
1.24.4 
Help with any risk assessments and form filling required to enable participation in social and leisure activities, if needed. 
1.24.5 
Support the person to explain to organisers of social or leisure clubs or activities, including faith-based activities, any adjustments and adaptations needed to enable them to access the venue or activity. 
1.24.6 
When planning travel, social and leisure activities, take into account toileting needs and availability of accessible public toilets. 
1.24.7 
Consider online options for social activities if in-person activities are scarce, for example, in rural areas, or if travel is challenging. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on participating in social and leisure activities . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: access to support for education, employment and social participation and evidence review N: support for social participation . 
1.25 Family life and friendships 
1.25.1 
Offer the person the opportunity to discuss rehabilitation needs and set rehabilitation goals connected with family life and friendships, including relationships at school and home for children and young people, and parenting and caring relationships. 
1.25.2 
Identify any physical, cognitive, communication, emotional or social barriers to family life and friendships as part of rehabilitation assessment, goal setting rehabilitation and planning. 
1.25.3 
If the person needs support to maintain and develop parenting and caring relationships: 
discuss how they feel about these relationships in the context of their rehabilitation needs 
address any physical, cognitive, communication, emotional or social barriers to parenting and caring responsibilities 
help them to access parental support services, if needed 
provide targeted rehabilitation interventions, for example, to address specific impairments that impact on caring for another person. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on family life and friendships . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: access to support for education, employment and social participation and evidence review N: support for social participation . 
1.26 Intimate and sexual relationships, and sex 
1.26.1 
Provide information about intimate or sexual relationships and sex. This might involve having: 
information clearly displayed in healthcare settings 
sex aids or equipment available to show and discuss. 
1.26.2 
Offer the person the opportunity to discuss rehabilitation needs and set rehabilitation goals connected with intimate or sexual relationships and sex. 
1.26.3 
Rehabilitation practitioners should seek advice and support to ensure they are competent and confident discussing rehabilitation needs connected with intimate or sexual relationships and sex. 
1.26.4 
Rehabilitation practitioners should know when and how to signpost to other services for specialist advice and support about intimate or sexual relationships and sex, for example, psychosexual or couples counselling, or continence management. See also the section on interventions for emotional health and wellbeing . 
1.26.5 
Rehabilitation practitioners should seek specialist advice, or signpost to a specialist service, if potential safeguarding or consent issues are raised in connection with intimate or sexual relationships and sex. 
1.26.6 
When discussing, assessing and providing interventions connected with intimate or sexual relationships and sex, take into account the person's gender identity, sexual orientation, and any religious and cultural beliefs. 
1.26.7 
Identify and address any physical, cognitive, communication, emotional or social barriers to intimate or sexual relationships and sex. 
1.26.8 
Use appropriate methods to gather initial information about intimate or sexual relationship and sex, for example, by asking the person to complete a questionnaire in their own time. 
1.26.9 
Ask the person how they might talk about intimacy, sex and sexual functioning with partners and potential partners and provide support with this, for example, advice on sharing relevant personal medical information. 
1.26.10 
Address rehabilitation needs connected with intimate or sexual relationships and sex through: 
targeted rehabilitation of specific impairments or disabilities 
provision of information 
training for carers or potential sexual partners 
provision of, or signposting to, sex aids or equipment. 
1.26.11 
Address any barriers within health and social care settings that may restrict rehabilitation in relation to the person's rehabilitation goals around sex and intimacy. For example, provide door locks where it is safe and appropriate to do so, remove restrictions on internet access, and do not use restrictive clothing and splints. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on intimate and sexual relationships, and sex . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: access to support for education, employment and social participation and evidence review N: support for social participation . 
Next page 
Terms used in this guideline 
Previous page 
Rehabilitation to maintain, improve or support function 
Back to top
