Overview | Oesophago-gastric cancer: assessment and management in adults | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Oesophageal cancer
Oesophago-gastric cancer: assessment and management in adults 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG83 
Published: 
24 January 2018
Last updated: 
04 July 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and managing oesophago-gastric cancer (oesophageal cancer, gastro-oesophageal junction cancer and gastric cancer) in adults, including radical and palliative treatment and nutritional support. It aims to reduce variation in practice through better organisation of care and support, and improve quality of life and survival by giving advice on the most suitable treatments depending on cancer type, stage and location. 
This guideline refers to NHS England commissioning policies. In Wales and Northern Ireland, follow Welsh or Northern Irish commissioning positions if applicable. 
Last reviewed: 13 May 2026 
We added links to relevant NICE technology appraisal guidance in the sections on radical treatment and palliative management . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. We also simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
radical  and  palliative  treatment 
nutritional support 
follow-up 
service organisation 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals involved in the care of people with oesophago-gastric cancer 
Commissioners of oesophago-gastric cancer services 
People with oesophago-gastric cancer, their family members and carers, and the public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Oesophago-gastric cancer 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
