Recommendations for research | Prostate cancer: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Prostate cancer
Prostate cancer: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG131 
Published: 
09 May 2019
Last updated: 
15 December 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
As part of the 2021 update, the guideline committee made an additional recommendation for research on the diagnostic accuracy of staging investigations for Cambridge Prognostic Group (CPG) 3 prostate cancer. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Follow up during active surveillance 
What is the most suitable surveillance protocol (including the role of digital rectal examination [DRE] and prostate-specific antigen [PSA] measures) for people for whom active surveillance is appropriate, as assessed by multiparametric MRI and biopsy, when there are no clinical concerns during follow up? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on multiparametric MRI for active surveillance . 
2 Follow up after radical treatment 
What is the most clinically and cost-effective follow‑up protocol for people with prostate cancer who have had radical treatment, with specific regard to risk stratification, duration of follow up, frequency of follow‑up appointments, the type of examination or blood tests, and the roles of primary and secondary care in follow up? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on follow up . 
3 Diagnosis of clinically significant cancer 
What is the most clinically and cost-effective pathway for diagnosing clinically significant prostate cancer? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on MRI and biopsy . 
4 Progression of cancer 
What is the most clinically and cost-effective pathway for excluding the clinically significant progression of cancer in people with CPG 1, 2 and 3 prostate cancer? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on multiparametric MRI for active surveillance . 
5 Natural history of prostate cancer 
What is the natural history of people with a Likert score on MRI of less than 3 without biopsy at long-term follow up? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on MRI and biopsy . 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Staging investigations for CPG 3 prostate cancer 
What is the diagnostic accuracy of staging investigations for CPG 3 prostate cancer? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on risk stratification for localised or locally advanced prostate cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: risk stratification for localised prostate cancer . 
7 Diagnosing prostate cancer 
In patients with negative MRI (Likert score 1 or 2), what is the next best diagnostic investigation to rule out clinically significant prostate cancer? 
What is the diagnostic accuracy of transperineal mapping biopsy compared with transperineal non-mapping biopsy in the diagnosis of clinically significant prostate cancer? 
8 Zoledronic acid 
What is the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of different scheduling of zoledronic acid in the prevention and reduction of skeletal events in people with hormone-refractory prostate cancer? 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
