Overview | Post-traumatic stress disorder | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Anxiety
Post-traumatic stress disorder 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG116 
Published: 
05 December 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers recognising, assessing and treating post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in children, young people and adults. It aims to improve quality of life by reducing symptoms of PTSD such as anxiety, sleep problems and difficulties with concentration. Recommendations also aim to raise awareness of the condition and improve coordination of care. 
Last reviewed: 8 April 2025 
We found no new evidence that affects the recommendations in this guideline. See the surveillance decision for further details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG26 (March 2005). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
access to care  and  supporting transitions between services 
principles of care , including providing support and information 
management of PTSD in children, young people and adults 
care for people with PTSD and complex needs 
These supplement the existing recommendations on: 
recognition of PTSD 
assessment and coordination of care 
language and culture 
disaster planning 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Other professionals who work with people at risk of or who have PTSD, including in criminal justice and education services and non-government organisations 
Commissioners and providers, including directors of public health, NHS trust managers and managers in clinical commissioning groups 
People at risk of or who have PTSD (including complex PTSD), their families and carers, and the public 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Anxiety disorders 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
