Person-centred care | Violence and aggression: short-term management in mental health, health and community settings | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Violence and aggression: short-term management in mental health, health and community settings 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG10 
Published: 
28 May 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Person-centred care 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Implementation: getting started 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Person-centred care 
This guideline offers best practice advice on the care of service users with mental health problems whose behaviour is violent or aggressive. 
Service users and healthcare professionals have rights and responsibilities as set out in the NHS Constitution for England – all NICE guidance is written to reflect these. Treatment and care should take into account individual needs and preferences. Service users should have the opportunity to make informed decisions about their care and treatment, in partnership with their healthcare professionals. If the service user is under 16, their family or carers should also be given information and support to help the child or young person to make decisions about their treatment. Healthcare professionals should follow the Department of Health's advice on consent . If someone does not have capacity to make decisions, healthcare professionals should follow the code of practice that accompanies the Mental Capacity Act and the supplementary code of practice on deprivation of liberty safeguards . 
NICE has produced guidance on the components of good patient experience in adult NHS services. All healthcare professionals should follow the recommendations in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . 
NICE has also produced guidance on the components of good service user experience. All healthcare professionals and social care practitioners working with people using adult NHS mental health services should follow the recommendations in the NICE guideline on service user experience in adult mental health . 
If a young person is moving between paediatric and adult services, care should be planned and managed according to the best practice guidance described in the Department of Health's Transition: getting it right for young people . 
Adult and paediatric healthcare teams should work jointly to provide assessment and services to young people with mental health problems whose behaviour is violent or aggressive. Diagnosis and management should be reviewed throughout the transition process, and there should be clarity about who is the lead clinician to ensure continuity of care. 
Next page 
Key priorities for implementation 
Previous page 
Introduction 
Back to top
