Management | Lung cancer: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Lung cancer
Lung cancer: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG122 
Published: 
28 March 2019
Last updated: 
08 March 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Using this guideline 
Support from clinical nurse specialists 
Diagnosis and staging 
Management 
Palliative interventions and supportive and palliative care 
Follow-up and patient perspectives 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.3 Stop smoking interventions and services
1.4 Assessing people with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) for treatment with curative intent
1.5 Surgery and radiotherapy with curative intent for NSCLC
1.6 Multimodality treatment for NSCLC with curative intent
1.7 Systemic anticancer therapy for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
1.8 Assessing people with small-cell lung cancer (SCLC)
1.9 Surgery for early-stage SCLC
1.10 First-line treatment for limited-stage SCLC
1.11 First-line treatment for extensive-stage SCLC
1.12 Subsequent treatment for SCLC that has relapsed after first-line treatment
Management 
1.3 Stop smoking interventions and services 
1.3.1 
Inform people that smoking increases the risk of pulmonary complications after lung cancer surgery. [2011] 
1.3.2 
Advise people to stop smoking as soon as the diagnosis of lung cancer is suspected and tell them why this is important. [2011] 
1.3.3 
Do not postpone surgery for lung cancer to allow people to stop smoking. [2011] 
Follow the section on stop-smoking interventions in NICE's guideline on tobacco: preventing uptake, promoting quitting and treating dependence . 
1.4 Assessing people with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) for treatment with curative intent 
Perioperative mortality 
1.4.1 
When evaluating surgery as an option for people with NSCLC, consider a global risk score such as Thoracoscore to estimate the risk of death. Ensure the person is aware of the risk before they give consent for surgery. [2011] 
Cardiovascular function 
1.4.2 
Avoid surgery within 30 days of myocardial infarction. [2011] 
1.4.3 
Seek a cardiology review for people with: 
an active cardiac condition or 
3 or more risk factors or 
poor cardiac functional capacity. [2011] 
1.4.4 
Offer surgery without further investigations to people with 2 or fewer risk factors and good cardiac functional capacity. [2011] 
1.4.5 
Optimise any primary cardiac treatment and begin secondary prophylaxis for coronary disease as soon as possible. [2011] 
1.4.6 
Continue anti-ischaemic treatment in the perioperative period, including aspirin, statins and beta‑blockers. [2011] 
1.4.7 
For people with coronary stents, discuss perioperative anti-platelet treatment with a cardiologist. [2011] 
1.4.8 
Consider revascularisation (percutaneous intervention or coronary artery bypass grafting) before surgery for people with chronic stable angina and conventional indications for revascularisation. [2011] 
Lung function 
1.4.9 
Perform spirometry and transfer factor (TLCO) testing before proceeding with treatment with curative intent. [2011, amended 2019] 
1.4.10 
Offer people surgery if they have a forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) within normal limits and good exercise tolerance. [2011] 
1.4.11 
Before surgery, perform a functional segment count to predict postoperative lung function. [2011] 
1.4.12 
Offer people with predicted postoperative FEV1 or TLCO below 30% the option of treatment with curative intent if they accept the risks of dyspnoea and associated complications. [2011, amended 2019] 
1.4.13 
Consider shuttle walk testing (using a distance walked of more than 400 m as a cut-off for good function) to assess the fitness of people with moderate to high risk of postoperative dyspnoea. [2011] 
1.4.14 
Consider cardiopulmonary exercise testing to measure oxygen uptake (VO 2 max) and assess lung function in people with moderate to high risk of postoperative dyspnoea, using more than 15 ml/kg/minute as a cut-off for good function. [2011] 
Assessment before radiotherapy with curative intent 
1.4.15 
A clinical oncologist specialising in thoracic oncology should determine suitability for radiotherapy with curative intent, taking into account performance status and comorbidities. [2011] 
1.5 Surgery and radiotherapy with curative intent for NSCLC 
Terminology used for cancer staging classification changes over time. The guideline recommendations were developed using the 7th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system . 
Surgery 
1.5.1 
For people with NSCLC who are well enough and for whom treatment with curative intent is suitable, offer lobectomy (either open or thoracoscopic). [2019] 
1.5.2 
Offer more extensive surgery (bronchoangioplastic surgery, bilobectomy, pneumonectomy) only when needed to obtain clear margins. [2011] 
1.5.3 
Perform hilar and mediastinal lymph node sampling or en bloc resection for all people having surgery with curative intent. [2011] 
1.5.4 
For people with T3 NSCLC with chest wall involvement who are having surgery, aim for complete resection of the tumour using either extrapleural or en bloc chest wall resection. [2005] 
Surgery or radiotherapy for people not having lobectomy 
1.5.5 
For people with stage 1 to 2a (T1a to T2b, N0, M0) NSCLC who decline lobectomy or in whom it is contraindicated, offer radical radiotherapy with stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR) or sublobar resection. [2019] 
Radical radiotherapy for people not having surgery 
1.5.6 
Offer pulmonary function tests (including lung volumes and transfer factor) before radical radiotherapy for NSCLC. [2005] 
1.5.7 
Include people receiving radiotherapy with curative intent in a national quality assurance programme. [2011] 
1.5.8 
For people with stage 1 to 2a (T1a to T2b, N0, M0) NSCLC who decline surgery or in whom any surgery is contraindicated, offer SABR. If SABR is contraindicated, offer either conventional or hyperfractionated radiotherapy. [2019] 
1.5.9 
Consider radical radiotherapy (either conventional or hyperfractionated) for people with stage 3a NSCLC who: 
are eligible for this treatment and 
cannot tolerate, or decline, chemoradiotherapy (with or without surgery). [2019] 
1.5.10 
For people with stage 3b NSCLC who cannot tolerate or who decline chemoradiotherapy, consider radical radiotherapy (either conventional or hyperfractionated) if they are eligible for this treatment. [2019] 
Radiotherapy fractionation 
1.5.11 
If using SABR, follow the SABR Consortium guidance on fractionation . [2019] 
1.5.12 
If conventionally fractionated radical radiotherapy is used, offer either: 
55 Gy in 20 fractions over 4 weeks or 
60 to 66 Gy, in 30 to 33 fractions, over 6 to 6.5 weeks. [2019] 
Why the committee made the recommendations 
For people with NSCLC who are well enough and for whom treatment with curative intent is suitable, the evidence showed that lobectomy provides better survival outcomes than stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR). Lobectomy is a good compromise between preserving pulmonary function and being more likely to remove cancerous cells compared with sublobar resection. 
For people with stage 1 to 2a (T1a to T2b, N0, M0) NSCLC, the evidence showed that: 
if they decline lobectomy or it is contraindicated, sublobar resection and SABR both provide better survival outcomes than conventionally fractionated radiotherapy, although it is not clear which of these 2 is better 
if they decline any surgery or it is contraindicated, SABR provides better survival outcomes than conventionally fractionated radiotherapy, and people often prefer it because it involves fewer hospital visits 
if surgery and SABR are contraindicated, conventionally fractionated radiotherapy provides better survival outcomes than no radiotherapy. 
For people with stage 3a or 3b NSCLC who cannot tolerate chemoradiotherapy or who decline it, the evidence was not strong enough to recommend conventional radiotherapy over hyper-fractionated regimens or vice versa. However, people who cannot tolerate chemoradiotherapy may also be unable to tolerate radical radiotherapy, so this will not be an option for everyone with stage 3a or 3b NSCLC. For an explanation of the recommendations covering surgery in this group, see the rationale on management of stage 3a N2 NSCLC . 
55 Gy in 20 fractions is the most common conventional radical radiotherapy regimen in the UK. If conventionally fractionated radiotherapy is used, a total radiation dose of 60 Gy provides better survival outcomes and fewer adverse events than 74 Gy. A total dose of 60 to 66 Gy is also normal NHS practice. 
There are not many randomised controlled trials comparing SABR with surgery (lobectomy or sublobar resection). SABR is non-invasive, so if it is as effective as surgery then it may be a preferable option for many people with lung cancer. There are also various factors that may make SABR less costly than surgery. For example, it is usually delivered as outpatient treatment. There might also be subgroups for whom different forms of surgery or SABR might be the most cost-effective options. The committee made a recommendation for research on SABR compared with surgery to investigate these uncertainties. 
How the recommendations might affect practice 
The new recommendations on SABR are a change from the 2011 guideline and improve choice for people with NSCLC. However, practice has also changed since 2011, and SABR is now widely used, so implementing the recommendations may not involve a significant change in practice. The remaining changes to the recommendations reflect current practice. 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: radiotherapy with curative intent for NSCLC . 
1.6 Multimodality treatment for NSCLC with curative intent 
Terminology used for cancer staging classification changes over time. The guideline recommendations were developed using the 7th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system . For the AJCC staging system used in a NICE technology appraisal, see the relevant technology appraisal guidance. 
1.6.1 
Ensure that all people whose condition is potentially suitable for multimodality treatment (surgery, radiotherapy and systemic anticancer therapy in any combination) are assessed by a thoracic oncologist and by a thoracic surgeon. [2011] 
1.6.2 
Treat Pancoast tumours in the same way as other types of NSCLC. Offer multimodality treatment according to resectability, stage of the tumour and performance status of the person. [2011] 
1.6.3 
For people with operable stage 3a N2 NSCLC who can have surgery and are well enough for multimodality treatment, consider chemoradiotherapy with surgery. [2019] 
1.6.4 
Discuss the benefits and risks with the person before starting chemoradiotherapy with surgery, including that it: 
improves progression-free survival 
may improve overall survival. [2019] 
1.6.5 
For people with stage 3a N2 NSCLC who are having chemoradiotherapy and surgery, ensure that their surgery is scheduled for 3 to 5 weeks after completion of the chemoradiotherapy. [2019] 
1.6.6 
Multidisciplinary teams that provide chemoradiotherapy with surgery should have expertise in multimodality treatment and in all of the individual components. [2019] 
1.6.7 
Centres performing lung resections for lung cancer should validate their data for the National Lung Cancer Audit. [2019] 
Why the committee made the recommendations 
The available evidence showed that chemoradiotherapy and surgery are more effective than chemoradiotherapy alone in people who are well enough for surgery and when the disease is operable. For chemotherapy and surgery, there was no evidence that survival outcomes were better than for chemoradiotherapy, so the additional costs of including surgery outweighed the benefits. 
The key benefit associated with chemoradiotherapy and surgery is the longer progression‑free survival time. An analysis of multiple trials showed improved progression-free survival and cost effectiveness for chemoradiotherapy with surgery, compared with chemoradiotherapy alone. There was an 89% probability that chemoradiotherapy and surgery improved average overall survival time compared with chemoradiotherapy. However, the evidence in favour of chemoradiotherapy and surgery involved indirect comparisons, and no head-to-head trials showed meaningful differences in overall survival for any of the interventions. And as with any major surgery, there is a perioperative mortality risk for people who have chemoradiotherapy and surgery. 
The 3 to 5 week wait for surgery is recommended to give people time to recover from the chemoradiotherapy. 
Chemoradiotherapy with surgery is not often offered in current practice. In addition, there are specific factors to take into account when offering all these treatments together. Therefore, multidisciplinary teams providing it should have expertise both in the combined therapy, and in all the individual components. 
Immunotherapy has been shown to be effective in a variety of NSCLC indications but there is currently no evidence on whether it is clinically or cost effective for people with stage 3a N2 NSCLC following surgery. The committee made a recommendation for research on immunotherapy after multimodality treatment to address this. 
How the recommendations might affect practice 
The committee felt that chemoradiotherapy and surgery is offered far less often than chemoradiotherapy alone or chemotherapy and surgery for people with NSCLC stage 3a N2. Therefore, these recommendations could lead to a change in current practice. 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: management of NSCLC stage IIIA-N2 . 
Perioperative systemic anticancer therapy for potentially resectable NSCLC 
Neoadjuvant treatment 
1.6.8 
Nivolumab in combination with chemotherapy is recommended as an option for neoadjuvant treatment of resectable (tumours at least 4 cm or node positive) NSCLC. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on nivolumab (TA876, 2023) . 
Neoadjuvant and adjuvant treatment 
1.6.9 
Durvalumab in combination with platinum-based chemotherapy is recommended as an option for neoadjuvant (then continued alone as adjuvant) treatment of resectable (tumours at least 4 cm or node positive) NSCLC without epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations or anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangements. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on durvalumab (TA1030, 2025) . 
1.6.10 
Pembrolizumab in combination with platinum-based chemotherapy is recommended as an option for neoadjuvant (then continued alone as adjuvant) treatment of resectable NSCLC with a high risk of recurrence. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on pembrolizumab (TA1017, 2024) . 
Adjuvant treatment 
1.6.11 
Offer postoperative systemic anticancer therapy to people with good performance status (WHO 0 or 1) and T1a to 4, N1 to 2, M0 NSCLC. [2011] 
1.6.12 
Consider postoperative systemic anticancer therapy for people with good performance status (WHO 0 or 1) and T2b to 4, N0, M0 NSCLC with tumours greater than 4 cm in diameter. [2011] 
1.6.13 
Offer a platinum-based combination chemotherapy regimen for adjuvant chemotherapy. [2011] 
1.6.14 
Osimertinib is recommended as an option for adjuvant treatment of completely resected stage 1b to 3a NSCLC with EGFR exon 19 deletions or EGFR exon 21 (L858R) substitution mutations. It should be stopped at 3 years, or earlier if there is disease recurrence or unacceptable toxicity. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on osimertinib (TA1043, 2025) . 
1.6.15 
Alectinib is recommended as an option for adjuvant treatment of completely resected stage 1b (tumours at least 4 cm) to 3a ALK-positive NSCLC. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on alectinib (TA1014, 2024) . 
1.6.16 
For medicines recommended as options for adjuvant treatment of completely resected NSCLC with a high risk of recurrence after platinum-based chemotherapy in some people, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
atezolizumab for NSCLC with a programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) score of 50% or more and without EGFR mutations or ALK rearrangements (TA1071, June 2025) 
pembrolizumab (TA1037, February 2025) . 
Locally advanced unresectable NSCLC 
1.6.17 
Consider chemoradiotherapy for people with stage 2 or 3 NSCLC whose condition is not suitable for or who decline surgery. Balance potential benefit in survival with the risk of additional toxicities. [2011] 
1.6.18 
Durvalumab is recommended as an option for treating locally advanced unresectable NSCLC with PD-L1 expression on 1% or more of tumour cells if disease has not progressed after concurrent platinum-based chemoradiation. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on durvalumab (TA798, 2022) . 
1.7 Systemic anticancer therapy for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer 
We have produced treatment pathways bringing together NICE-recommended treatment options from this guideline and relevant technology appraisal guidance on advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC; squamous and non-squamous). The treatment pathways cover the recommended treatment options at each decision point. 
These are available to view as individual pathways (linked below), or grouped together in a single interactive PDF of all treatment pathways for squamous and non-squamous advanced non-small-cell lung cancer . 
We have also produced fully accessible summaries of the treatment pathways . 
Also see the section on multimodality treatment for NSCLC with curative intent . 
Squamous NSCLC 
No targetable mutations, PD-L1 below 50% 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with no targetable mutations and PD-L1 below 50% 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with no targetable mutations and PD-L1 below 50% 
No targetable mutations, PD-L1 50% or higher 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with no targetable mutations and PD-L1 50% or higher 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with no targetable mutations and PD-L1 50% or higher 
RET fusion positive, PD-L1 below 50% 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with RET fusion positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with RET fusion positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
RET fusion positive, PD-L1 50% or higher 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with RET fusion positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with RET fusion positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
KRAS G12C positive, PD-L1 below 50% 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with KRAS G12C positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with KRAS G12C positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
KRAS G12C positive, PD-L1 50% or higher 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with KRAS G12C positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with KRAS G12C positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
METex14 skipping alteration, PD-L1 below 50% 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with METex14 skipping alteration squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with METex14 skipping alteration squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
METex14 skipping alteration, PD-L1 50% or higher 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with METex14 skipping alteration squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with METex14 skipping alteration squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
BRAF V600 positive, PD-L1 below 50% 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with BRAF V600 positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with BRAF V600 positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
BRAF V600 positive, PD-L1 50% or higher 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with BRAF V600 positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with BRAF V600 positive squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
Non-squamous NSCLC 
No targetable mutations, PD-L1 below 50% 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with no targetable mutations and PD-L1 below 50% 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with no targetable mutations and PD-L1 below 50% 
No targetable mutations, PD-L1 50% or higher 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with no targetable mutations and PD-L1 50% or higher 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with no targetable mutations and PD-L1 50% or higher 
RET fusion positive, PD-L1 below 50% 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with RET fusion positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with RET fusion positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
RET fusion positive, PD-L1 50% or higher 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with RET fusion positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with RET fusion positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
KRAS G12C positive, PD-L1 below 50% 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with KRAS G12C positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with KRAS G12C positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
KRAS G12C positive, PD-L1 50% or higher 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with KRAS G12C positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with KRAS G12C positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
METex14 skipping alteration, PD-L1 below 50% 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with METex14 skipping alteration non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with METex14 skipping alteration non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
METex14 skipping alteration, PD-L1 50% or higher 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with METex14 skipping alteration non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with METex14 skipping alteration non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
BRAF V600 positive, PD-L1 below 50% 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with BRAF V600 positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with BRAF V600 positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 below 50% 
BRAF V600 positive, PD-L1 50% or higher 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with BRAF V600 positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with BRAF V600 positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer, with PD-L1 50% or higher 
ROS-1 positive 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with ROS-1 positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with ROS-1 positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer 
EGFR-TK positive 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with EGFR-TK positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with EGFR-TK positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer 
ALK positive 
Systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with ALK positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer 
Fully accessible summary of systemic anticancer therapy: treatment options for people with ALK positive non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer 
Neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase (NTRK) fusion-positive solid tumours 
1.7.1 
Larotrectinib is recommended as an option through the Cancer Drugs Fund for treating locally advanced or metastatic NTRK fusion-positive solid tumours when there are no other satisfactory treatment options. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on larotrectinib (TA630, May 2020) . 
Treatments not recommended for squamous and non-squamous advanced NSCLC 
1.7.2 
For medicines not recommended for treating advanced NSCLC in some people, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
cemiplimab with platinum-based chemotherapy for untreated advanced NSCLC (TA1108, November 2025) 
amivantamab for EGFR-TK positive advanced NSCLC (TA850, December 2022) 
pralsetinib for RET fusion-positive advanced NSCLC (TA812, August 2022) 
nivolumab with ipilimumab and chemotherapy for untreated metastatic NSCLC without EGFR or ALK mutations (TA724, September 2021) 
necitumumab for EGFR-TK positive advanced squamous NSCLC (TA411, September 2016) 
ramucirumab after platinum-based chemotherapy (TA403, August 2016) 
gefitinib for EGFR-TK positive advanced NSCLC (TA374, December 2015) 
erlotinib for NSCLC without EGFR mutations that has progressed after chemotherapy (TA374, December 2015) 
erlotinib for maintenance treatment after platinum-based first-line chemotherapy (TA227, June 2011) 
pemetrexed after chemotherapy (TA124, August 2007) . 
1.8 Assessing people with small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) 
1.8.1 
Arrange for people with SCLC to have an assessment by a thoracic oncologist within 1 week of deciding to recommend treatment. [2011] 
1.9 Surgery for early-stage SCLC 
Terminology used for cancer staging classification changes over time. The guideline recommendations were developed using the 7th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system . 
1.9.1 
Consider surgery in people with early-stage SCLC (T1 to 2a, N0, M0). [2011] 
1.10 First-line treatment for limited-stage SCLC 
Terminology used for cancer staging classification changes over time. The guideline recommendations were developed using the 7th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system . For the AJCC staging system used in a NICE technology appraisal, see the relevant technology appraisal guidance. 
1.10.1 
Offer people with limited-stage SCLC (broadly corresponding to T1 to 4, N0 to 3, M0) 4 to 6 cycles of cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy. Consider substituting carboplatin in people with impaired renal function, poor WHO performance status (score of 2 or more) or significant comorbidity. [2011] 
1.10.2 
Offer twice-daily radiotherapy with concurrent chemotherapy to people with limited-stage SCLC (broadly corresponding to T1 to 4, N0 to 3, M0) and a WHO performance status of 0 or 1, if they present with disease that can be encompassed in a radical thoracic radiotherapy volume. Start the radiotherapy during the first or second cycle of chemotherapy. [2019] 
1.10.3 
If the person declines or is unable to have twice-daily radiotherapy, offer once-daily radiotherapy. [2019] 
1.10.4 
Offer sequential radical thoracic radiotherapy to people with limited-stage SCLC (broadly corresponding to T1 to 4, N0 to 3, M0) who are not well enough for concurrent chemoradiotherapy but who respond to chemotherapy. [2019] 
1.10.5 
Offer prophylactic cranial irradiation at a dose of 25 Gy in 10 fractions to people with limited-stage SCLC and a WHO performance status of 0 to 2, if their disease has not progressed on first-line treatment. [2011, amended 2019] 
1.10.6 
Durvalumab is recommended as an option for treating limited-stage SCLC that has not progressed after platinum-based chemoradiotherapy in adults. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on durvalumab (TA1099, 2025) . 
Why the committee changed the recommendations 
The evidence showed a survival benefit from twice-daily radiotherapy compared with once-daily. However, the committee agreed that some people with SCLC will not be well enough to tolerate twice-daily radiotherapy, so they recommended giving people the option of once-daily radiotherapy. 
The committee noted that, in practice, radiotherapy is not started in chemotherapy cycle 1, because this is when planning for the radiotherapy often takes place (see the recommendation on twice-daily radiotherapy with concurrent chemotherapy in the section on first-line treatment for limited-stage SCLC ). However, there was no new evidence on when to start radiotherapy, so the 2019 recommendation on this is the same as the original 2011 recommendation. 
There were limited data available on whether continuous radiotherapy with concurrent chemotherapy was more effective than alternating radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Because of the limited data, and the committee's experience that people prefer to complete treatment as quickly as possible, the 2019 recommendation on concurrent therapy (see the recommendation on twice-daily radiotherapy with concurrent chemotherapy) is the same as the 2011 recommendation. 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: chemoradiotherapy for limited stage SCLC . 
1.11 First-line treatment for extensive-stage SCLC 
Terminology used for cancer staging classification changes over time. The guideline recommendations were developed using the 7th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system . For the AJCC staging system used in a NICE technology appraisal, see the relevant technology appraisal guidance. 
1.11.1 
Offer platinum-based combination chemotherapy to people with extensive-stage SCLC (broadly corresponding to T1 to 4, N0 to 3, M1a/b – including cerebral metastases) if they are fit enough. [2011] 
1.11.2 
Assess the person's condition before treatment for extensive-stage SCLC (broadly corresponding to T1 to 4, N0 to 3, M1a/b) and offer up to a maximum of 6 cycles of chemotherapy, depending on response and toxicity. [2011] 
1.11.3 
For medicines recommended as options for untreated extensive-stage SCLC in people who have an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 or 1, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
durvalumab with etoposide and either carboplatin or cisplatin (TA1041, 2025) 
atezolizumab with etoposide and carboplatin (TA638, 2020) . 
1.11.4 
Consider thoracic radiotherapy with prophylactic cranial irradiation for people with extensive‑stage SCLC who have had a partial or complete response to chemotherapy within the thorax and at distant sites. [2019] 
1.11.5 
Consider prophylactic cranial irradiation for people with extensive-stage SCLC and a WHO performance status of 0 to 2, if their disease has responded to first-line treatment. [2019] 
Why the committee made the recommendations 
Thoracic radiotherapy 
There was some uncertainty in the evidence. However, the study most relevant to UK practice showed that thoracic radiotherapy improves long-term survival for people who have had a partial or complete response to chemotherapy, if they live longer than 1 year after the radiotherapy. The committee specified that thoracic radiotherapy should be given alongside prophylactic cranial irradiation. In addition, the reviewed clinical trials gave thoracic radiotherapy alongside prophylactic cranial irradiation. 
Prophylactic cranial irradiation 
The evidence showed that prophylactic cranial irradiation improves survival versus best supportive care. 
Prophylactic cranial irradiation can adversely affect quality of life, and the survival benefits are limited. There is also some evidence from a study outside the UK that routine MRI follow-up may be more cost effective. The committee made a recommendation for research on prophylactic cranial irradiation compared with routine MRI follow-up in extensive-stage SCLC , to provide evidence more relevant to the UK and to see if MRI could identify people who need whole-brain radiotherapy and so reduce the number of people having unnecessary treatment. 
How the recommendations might affect practice 
Thoracic radiotherapy 
The 2011 recommendation only recommended thoracic radiotherapy for people with a complete response to chemotherapy at distant sites. Therefore, this recommendation could increase the number of people who are given thoracic radiotherapy. 
Prophylactic cranial irradiation 
It is likely that the recommendation reflects current clinical practice. 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: thoracic radiotherapy for extensive stage SCLC and evidence review H: prophylactic cranial irradiation for extensive stage SCLC . 
1.12 Subsequent treatment for SCLC that has relapsed after first-line treatment 
1.12.1 
Offer people with SCLC that has relapsed after first-line treatment assessment by a thoracic oncologist. [2011] 
1.12.2 
Inform people whose disease has not responded to first-line treatment that there is very limited evidence that second-line chemotherapy will be of benefit. [2011] 
1.12.3 
Offer people with relapsed SCLC in whom chemotherapy is suitable treatment with an anthracycline-containing regimen or further treatment with a platinum-based regimen to a maximum of 6 cycles. [2011] 
1.12.4 
Oral topotecan is recommended as an option for treating relapsed SCLC in some people. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on topotecan (TA184, 2009) . 
1.12.5 
Offer radiotherapy for palliation of local symptoms to people with SCLC that has relapsed after first-line treatment. [2011] 
1.12.6 
Tarlatamab is not recommended for treating extensive-stage SCLC in adults whose cancer has progressed after 2 or more lines of treatment, including platinum-based chemotherapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on tarlatamab (TA1091, 2025) . 
Next page 
Palliative interventions and supportive and palliative care 
Previous page 
Diagnosis and staging 
Back to top
