Overview | Coexisting severe mental illness (psychosis) and substance misuse: assessment and management in healthcare settings | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Drug misuse
Coexisting severe mental illness (psychosis) and substance misuse: assessment and management in healthcare settings
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG120 
Published: 
23 March 2011
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing and managing people aged 14 years and over with coexisting severe mental illness (psychosis) and substance misuse. It aims to help healthcare professionals guide people with psychosis with coexisting substance misuse to stabilise, reduce or stop their substance misuse, to improve treatment adherence and outcomes, and to enhance their lives. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on coexisting severe mental illness and substance misuse: community health and social care services . 
Last reviewed: 7 May 2024 
We simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines (for example, the NICE guideline on service user experience in adult mental health ). This is a presentational change only, and no changes to practice are intended. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
principles of care 
recognising psychosis with coexisting substance misuse 
primary care 
secondary care mental health services 
substance misuse services 
inpatient mental health services and staffed accommodation 
specific issues for young people with psychosis and coexisting substance misuse 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
People working in services delivered by the third sector and commissioned by the NHS 
People with psychosis with coexisting substance misuse, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called psychosis with substance misuse in over 14s: assessment and management. The name was changed to clarify the population and show how the recommendations in this guideline fit with those made for community health and social care services . 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Coexisting severe mental illness and substance misuse 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
