Overview | Fertility problems: assessment and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Fertility
Fertility problems: assessment and treatment
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG257 
Published: 
31 March 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Principles of care 
Initial advice to people concerned about delays in conception 
Advice about factors that can affect fertility 
Defining infertility and initial assessment 
Investigation of fertility problems and management strategies 
Management of male factor fertility problems 
Management of female factor fertility problems 
Unstimulated intrauterine insemination (IUI) 
Unexplained fertility problems in people trying to conceive through unprotected vaginal sexual intercourse 
Access criteria for in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Procedures used during in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) 
Donor insemination 
Oocyte donation 
Fertility preservation for medical indications 
Long-term safety of assisted reproductive technologies 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and treating health-related fertility problems. It aims to reduce variation in practice and improve how fertility problems are investigated and managed. 
For information on related topics, see our  women's and reproductive health summary page . 
Last reviewed:  31 March 2026 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG156 (February 2013). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
investigation of fertility problems and management strategies 
management of ovulation disorders , and tubal and uterine surgery 
unexplained fertility problems in people trying to conceive through unprotected vaginal sexual intercourse 
endometriosis 
access criteria for IVF treatment and procedures used during IVF 
intracytoplasmic sperm injection 
fertility preservation for medical indications 
These supplement the existing recommendations on: 
principles of care and advice for people concerned about delays in conception 
investigating and managing fertility problems 
unstimulated intrauterine insemination 
donor insemination and  oocyte donation 
long-term safety of assisted reproductive technologies . 
See the 3-page visual summary on conception by vaginal sexual intercourse or artificial insemination, and assessment and treatment of specific fertility problems . 
Who is it for? 
The recommendations apply to people who: 
have health-related fertility problems, or 
may need interventions to preserve fertility because they have a high risk of fertility problems because of clinical conditions, or medical or surgical interventions. 
People with health-related fertility problems are those who: 
have a known clinical cause of infertility, or 
do not achieve a pregnancy:
after 12 months of regular unprotected sexual intercourse, or 
after 6 cycles of artificial insemination. 
The guideline applies to all people seeking assessment and treatment for health-related fertility problems who meet these criteria, regardless of their sexual orientation, partnership status or gender identity. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Cancer services for children and young people 
Fertility problems 
Next page 
Principles of care 
Back to top
