Glossary | Flu vaccination: increasing uptake | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Influenza
Flu vaccination: increasing uptake
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG103 
Published: 
22 August 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
The committee's discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Glossary 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Brief intervention
Care home
Carer's assessment
Full participation vaccination strategy
Primary care
Secondary care
Glossary 
For other public health and social care terms see the Think Local, Act Personal Care and Support Jargon Buster . 
Brief intervention 
A brief intervention involves oral discussion, negotiation or encouragement, with or without written or other support or follow-up. It may also involve a referral for further interventions, directing people to other options, or more intensive support. Brief interventions can be delivered by anyone who is trained in the necessary skills and knowledge. These interventions are often carried out when the opportunity arises, typically taking no more than a few minutes for basic advice. 
Care home 
This covers 24‑hour accommodation with either non-nursing care (for example, a residential home) or nursing care. 
Carer's assessment 
People who care informally on an unpaid basis for a family member or friend have the right to discuss with their local council what their own needs are, separate to the needs of the person they care for. The assessment covers anything the carer thinks would help them with their own health or with managing other aspects of their life. The council will use the information to decide what help it can offer. 
Full participation vaccination strategy 
A full participation strategy is one in which a range of approaches are used to maximise uptake and in which the expectation is that all front-line staff should be vaccinated. The full participation approach includes agreed mechanisms enabling staff to opt out if they wish. 
Primary care 
The day-to-day healthcare given by a healthcare provider. Typically this provider acts as the first contact and principal point of continuing care for patients within a healthcare system, and coordinates other specialist care that the patient may need. In the UK, people access primary care services through local general practice, community pharmacy, optometrist, dental surgery and community hearing care providers. 
Secondary care 
Secondary care is often acute healthcare (elective care or emergency care) provided by medical specialists in a hospital or other secondary care setting. Patients are usually referred by a primary care professional such as a GP. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Recommendations for research 
Back to top
