Overview | Overweight and obesity management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diet, nutrition and obesity
Overweight and obesity management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG246 
Published: 
14 January 2025
Last updated: 
08 January 2026
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
General principles of care 
Preventing overweight, obesity and central adiposity 
Identifying and assessing overweight, obesity and central adiposity 
Discussing results and referral 
Behavioural overweight and obesity management interventions 
Physical activity and diet 
Medicines and surgery 
Digital technologies for delivering multidisciplinary weight-management services to adults 
Planning and delivering overweight and obesity services and interventions 
Monitoring and evaluating services and interventions 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the prevention and management of overweight, obesity and central adiposity in children, young people and adults. It brings together and updates all NICE's previous guidelines on overweight and obesity. It does not cover pregnancy. 
See also, the section on healthy eating, physical activity and weight management during pregnancy in the NICE guideline on maternal and child nutrition . 
Last reviewed: 8 January 2026 
We amended recommendations 1.10.5, 1.10.10 and 1.10.11 and the corresponding rationale sections to clarify that waist-to-height ratios should only be used to classify the degree of central adiposity in children and young people aged 5 years and over. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline NG7 (2015), NICE guideline CG189 (2014), NICE guideline PH53 (2014), NICE guideline PH47 (2013), NICE guideline PH46 (2013), NICE guideline PH42 (2012) and NICE guideline CG43 (2006). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
general principles of care 
prevention in schools and nurseries 
identification, assessment and referral 
specific advice for people from ethnic minority backgrounds 
behavioural overweight and obesity management interventions 
dietary advice 
raising awareness of interventions 
planning and funding services and interventions 
multidisciplinary teams for children 
These supplement the existing recommendations on: 
general principles of care 
information and support to help people maintain a healthier weight 
local or regional strategic partnerships to prevent overweight and obesity 
physical activity 
medicines for overweight and obesity 
surgical interventions 
monitoring and evaluating services and interventions. 
See the 1-page visual summaries on principles of care and the potential care journey . 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People who work in, and are responsible for providing, services in the wider public, private, voluntary and community sectors 
Childcare settings, nurseries and schools 
Employers 
People using services, their families and carers, and the public 
Members of the public, particularly those living with overweight or obesity, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Promoting health and preventing premature mortality in black, Asian and other minority ethnic groups 
Overweight and obesity management 
Next page 
General principles of care 
Back to top
