Overview | Service user experience in adult mental health: improving the experience of care for people using adult NHS mental health services | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Mental health services
Service user experience in adult mental health: improving the experience of care for people using adult NHS mental health services
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG136 
Published: 
14 December 2011
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the components of a good experience of service use. It aims to make sure that all adults using NHS mental health services have the best possible experience of care. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on good experience of care for all adults using NHS services . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
access to care 
assessment 
community care 
assessment and referral in crisis 
hospital care 
discharge and transfer of care 
assessment and treatment under the Mental Health Act 
Who is it for? 
Health and social care professionals and practitioners 
Non-clinical staff (for example, receptionists, clerical staff and domestic staff) who come into contact with people using services 
People using adult NHS mental health services, their families and carers 
Is this guideline up to date? 
We checked this guideline in January 2021 . We found no new evidence that affects the recommendations in this guideline. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Service user experience in adult mental health services 
Suicide prevention 
Self‑harm 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
