Recommendations for research | Thyroid cancer: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Thyroid cancer
Thyroid cancer: assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG230 
Published: 
19 December 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Molecular tests 
In fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) samples that are adequate but cannot differentiate between benign and malignant samples, what is the clinical and cost effectiveness of molecular testing for thyroid cancer? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on management and further sampling after initial FNAC . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: molecular testing . 
2 Duration of follow up 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness for different durations of follow-up for people with differentiated thyroid cancer who have had treatment? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on follow up . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q: length and frequency of follow up . 
3 Active surveillance compared with surgery 
For people with stage 1 differentiated thyroid cancer, what is the clinical and cost effectiveness of active surveillance compared with surgery? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on surgery and active surveillance for primary tumours . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: initial treatments for differentiated thyroid cancer . 
4 Duration of thyroid-stimulating hormone suppression 
For people with differentiated thyroid cancer who have had surgery and radioactive iodine (RAI), what is the optimal duration of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) suppression? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on long-term duration of TSH suppression . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review N: duration of TSH suppression . 
Other recommendations for research 
5 Radioactive iodine 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of radioactive iodine (RAI) after total or completion thyroidectomy for people with T2 disease and no adverse pathological features? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on RAI for initial ablation . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: radioactive iodine versus no radioactive iodine . 
6 Thyroid peroxidase antibody testing 
For people with indeterminate cytopathology, what is the clinical and cost effectiveness of thyroid peroxidase antibody testing? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on thyroid peroxidase antibody testing . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: indications for blood tests . 
7 Imaging for further staging 
For people with differentiated thyroid cancer who have initial ultrasound evidence of extensive local spread (T2N1), what is the clinical and cost effectiveness of CT, MRI or F-18 FDG PET-CT scanning, with or without ultrasound, as part of a further staging strategy? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on imaging for further staging . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: imaging for further staging . 
8 External beam radiotherapy compared with usual care 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) for people with residual or recurrent thyroid cancer? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on external beam radiotherapy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: external beam radiotherapy versus no external beam radiotherapy . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
