Recommendations for research | Chronic kidney disease: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Kidney conditions
Chronic kidney disease
Chronic kidney disease: assessment and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG203 
Published: 
25 August 2021
Last updated: 
24 November 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
As part of the 2021 update, the guideline committee made 18 recommendations for research on chronic kidney disease (CKD). They prioritised 5 key recommendations for research. They also retained some recommendations for research from previous guidelines. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Creatinine-based estimate of eGFR – existing calculations 
In adults, children and young people from black, Asian and other minority ethnic groups with CKD living in the UK, which existing eGFR calculations are the most accurate? [2021] 
2 Creatinine-based estimate of eGFR – improving accuracy of calculations 
In adults, children and young people from black, Asian and other minority ethnic groups with CKD living in the UK, what biomarkers or factors, other than ethnicity, improve the diagnostic accuracy of eGFR calculations? [2021] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale on creatinine-based estimate of GFR . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: diagnostic accuracy of eGFR calculations in adults, children, and young people from black, Asian and other minority ethnic groups with CKD . 
3 Risk assessment for black, Asian and minority ethnic groups 
What is the accuracy of the 4-variable Kidney Failure Risk Equation in adults, children and young people with CKD from black, Asian and minority ethnic groups living in the UK? [2021] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale on risk assessment, referral criteria and shared care . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: the best combination of measures to identify increased risk of progression in adults, children and young people . 
4 Managing anaemia – optimal Hb levels for children and young people 
What is the efficacy and safety of different aspirational haemoglobin (Hb) targets for children and young people with CKD undergoing treatment for anaemia? [2021] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale on optimal Hb levels . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: aspirational haemoglobin target range for children and young people with CKD . 
5 Hyperphosphatemia in people with CKD stage 4 or 5 
What are people with CKD and their family members and carers views and beliefs about taking oral phosphate binders? [2021] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale on hyperphosphataemia in people with CKD stage 4 or 5 . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: use of phosphate binders . 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Cystatin-C equations 
What is the diagnostic accuracy of cystatin-C equations to estimate GFR as a measurement of kidney function in adults, young people and children in the UK? [2021] 
7 Investigations for proteinuria 
In children and young people, what is the accuracy of reagent strips for detecting albumin in urine? [2021] 
What is the effect of measuring proteinuria with albumin:creatinine ratio compared with protein:creatinine ratio on the timing of treatment changes in children and young people with CKD? [2021] 
8 Frequency of monitoring 
For adults, children and young people with CKD, what is the optimal monitoring frequency for albumin:creatinine ratio? [2021] 
9 Risk assessment, referral criteria and shared care 
What is the association between risk factors and CKD outcomes in children and young people? [2021] 
What is the accuracy of the 4-variable Kidney Failure Risk Equation in children and young people living in the UK? [2021] 
10 Frequency of review 
What is the most clinical and cost-effective frequency of review for children and young people with CKD? [2021] 
11 Managing anaemia 
For adults, children and young people with CKD and anaemia, what is the diagnostic accuracy of eGFR thresholds of 60, 45, and 30 ml/min/1.73 m 2 for determining whether the anaemia is due to CKD? [2021] 
For adults, children and young people with CKD and anaemia who are on peritoneal dialysis, what amount of intravenous (IV) iron is most clinically and cost effective in managing anaemia and its associated outcomes (including quality of life)? [2021] 
What are the long-term consequences of high ferritin levels (above 800 micrograms/litre) in children and young people with CKD? [2021] 
12 Phosphate binders 
Which binders are the most clinically and cost effective in controlling serum phosphate in adults, children and young people with stage 4 or 5 CKD who are not on dialysis? [2021] 
In adults with stage 4 or 5 CKD, including those on dialysis, what is the clinical and cost effectiveness and safety of long-term calcium acetate combined with magnesium carbonate for controlling serum phosphate? [2021] 
13 Self-management of CKD 
Does the provision of educational and supportive interventions to people with CKD by healthcare professionals increase the person's skills and confidence in managing their conditions and improve clinical outcomes? [2014] 
14 Antiplatelet therapy 
For people with CKD at the highest risk of cardiovascular disease, what is the clinical effectiveness of low-dose aspirin compared with placebo for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease? [2014] 
15 Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system antagonists 
For people aged over 75 years with CKD, what is the clinical effectiveness of renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (RAAS) antagonists ? [2014] 
16 Vitamin D supplements in the management of CKD–mineral and bone disorders 
In people with hyperparathyroidism secondary to CKD, does treatment with vitamin D or vitamin D analogues improve patient-related outcomes? [2014] 
17 Management of anaemia of CKD with concurrent illness 
What is the optimal management (in terms of clinical and cost effectiveness) of anaemia of CKD in people who are receiving erythropoietic stimulating agents (ESAs) and have a significant concurrent acute infectious illness? [2015] 
18 Treatment of ESA resistance in people on haemodialysis 
What is the most effective type of intervention to treat people on haemodialysis with ESA‑resistant anaemia? [2015] 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
