Overview | Depression in adults: treatment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Depression
Depression in adults: treatment and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG222 
Published: 
29 June 2022
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers identifying, treating and managing depression in people aged 18 and over. It recommends treatments for first episodes of depression and further-line treatments, and provides advice on preventing relapse, and managing chronic depression, psychotic depression and depression with a coexisting diagnosis of personality disorder. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on depression in adults with a chronic physical health problem . 
Last reviewed: 30 January 2026 
We reviewed this guideline and will not update the recommendations. See the  surveillance decision  for further details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG90 (October 2009). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
principles of care 
recognition and assessment 
choice and delivery of treatments 
treatment for a new episode of less severe depression 
treatment for a new episode of more severe depression 
behavioural couples therapy 
preventing relapse 
further-line treatment 
chronic depressive symptoms 
depression in people with a diagnosis of personality disorder 
psychotic depression 
electroconvulsive therapy , transcranial magnetic stimulation and treatment-resistant depression 
access, coordination and delivery of care . 
See visual summaries on the recommendations for: 
discussing first-line treatments for less severe depression 
discussing first-line treatments for more severe depression 
preventing relapse 
further-line treatment 
treatment options for chronic depression, depression with personality disorder or psychotic depression 
the matched care model 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Other professionals who have direct contact with, or provide health and other public services for, people with depression 
Commissioners and providers of services for people with depression 
People with depression, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called depression in adults: recognition and management. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Depression in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
