Overview | Epilepsies in children, young people and adults | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Epilepsy
Epilepsies in children, young people and adults
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG217 
Published: 
27 April 2022
Last updated: 
30 January 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
1 Diagnosis and assessment of epilepsy 
2 Information and support 
3 Referral to tertiary specialist services 
4 Principles of treatment, safety, monitoring and withdrawal 
5 Treating epileptic seizures in children, young people and adults 
6 Treating childhood-onset epilepsies 
7 Treating status epilepticus, repeated or cluster seizures, and prolonged seizures 
8 Non-pharmacological treatments 
9 Psychological, neurobehavioural, cognitive and developmental comorbidities in epilepsy 
10 Reducing the risk of epilepsy-related death including sudden unexpected death in epilepsy 
11 Service provision and transition 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing epilepsy in children, young people and adults in primary and secondary care, and referral to tertiary services. It aims to improve diagnosis and treatment for different seizure types and epilepsy syndromes, and reduce the risks for people with epilepsy. 
MHRA advice on antiepileptic drugs in pregnancy: Recommendations on carbamazepine, gabapentin, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, pregabalin and zonisamide have taken into account the MHRA updated safety advice on antiepileptic drugs in pregnancy . 
MHRA advice on valproate: Recommendations on valproate have been updated following publication of the MHRA guidance on the use of valproate , valproate use in people younger than 55 years , valproate use in women and girls and valproate use in men . Valproate must not be started for the first time in people (male or female) younger than 55 years, unless 2 specialists independently consider and document that there is no other effective or tolerated treatment, or there are compelling reasons that the reproductive risks do not apply. Valproate must not be used in women and girls of childbearing potential (including young girls who are likely to need treatment into their childbearing years), unless other options are unsuitable and the Pregnancy Prevention Programme is in place. Boys and men should be advised to use effective contraception (condoms, plus contraception used by a female sexual partner) throughout the valproate treatment period and for 3 months after stopping valproate. Men taking valproate who are planning a family within the next year should discuss potential fertility risks and treatment options with a healthcare professional. 
MHRA advice on topiramate: Recommendations on topiramate have taken into account the MHRA guidance on the use of topiramate . Topiramate should not be used in women of childbearing potential unless the conditions of the Pregnancy Prevention Programme are fulfilled. 
Last reviewed: 25 November 2025 
We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the section on treating childhood-onset epilepsies . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG137 (January 2012) and NICE evidence summaries ESNM7, ESNM17 and ESNM37. 
Next review: In January 2025, sulthiame was licensed for use in the UK. We are reviewing recommendations 6.4.2 to 6.4.4 in section 6.4 on self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes . See the guideline in development page for progress on the update. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
referral, assessment and diagnosis 
information and support 
principles of treatment ,  treating epileptic seizures  and  treating childhood-onset epilepsies 
non-pharmacological treatments 
status epilepticus, repeat or cluster seizures, and prolonged seizures 
managing comorbidities 
reducing the risk of epilepsy-related death 
referral to tertiary services 
epilepsy specialist nurses  and  transition from children’s to adults’ services 
See the 1-page visual summary of the recommendations for people with epilepsy and a learning disability . 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals in primary, secondary and tertiary care 
Commissioners, providers and voluntary organisations 
The guideline may also be useful for people with epilepsy, their families and carers to understand the care NICE recommends and support shared decision making. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Epilepsies in children, young people and adults 
Next page 
1 Diagnosis and assessment of epilepsy 
Back to top
