Recommendations for research | Abdominal aortic aneurysm: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Aortic aneurysms
Abdominal aortic aneurysm: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG156 
Published: 
19 March 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Monitoring frequencies and repair thresholds 
What are the most effective and cost-effective frequencies for monitoring people with unruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) of different diameters, and what is the optimal AAA threshold size (inner-to-inner maximum anterior-posterior diameter on ultrasound) for repair? 
Why this is important 
More frequent monitoring increases the chances of identifying aneurysms that have grown large enough to be considered for repair. However, monitoring requires resources and the absolute risk of AAA rupture is relatively low, so there are opportunity costs to consider. It is important to establish how often aneurysms should be monitored to keep the risk of rupture as low as possible while making the best use of NHS resources. 
The optimal threshold for repair of an AAA is not clear. There is good evidence that in most cases people do not need repair for aneurysms measuring smaller than 5.5 cm (inner-to-inner maximum anterior-posterior aortic diameter) on ultrasound. However, for some people a threshold above 5.5 cm may be more appropriate. 
2 Effectiveness of endovascular aneurysm repair and open surgical repair of complex unruptured and ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms 
What is the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of complex endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) versus open surgical repair in people for whom open surgical repair is suitable for: 
elective repair of an unruptured AAA or 
emergency repair of a ruptured AAA? 
Why this is important 
EVAR is a widely performed non-invasive alternative to open surgical repair. However, it is more expensive. Although standard EVAR has been shown to produce no long-term benefit over open surgical repair in people with an unruptured infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm, it is less clear whether this is the same in people with who would need complex EVAR to repair their AAA. The committee's view was that, because current practice is subject to strong prior beliefs about the relative benefits and harms of EVAR and open surgical repair for complex AAA, randomisation is critical to provide an unbiased estimate of comparative effectiveness. 
3 Macrolides for slowing aneurysm growth and reducing the risk of rupture 
What are the benefits and harms of macrolides (such as azithromycin) for reducing AAA growth rates and the risk of rupture? 
Why this is important 
Small AAAs are currently managed by monitoring, until the aneurysm reaches a diameter at which surgical repair is considered. There are currently no non-surgical interventions available to prevent AAAs from growing, and subsequently rupturing. A randomised controlled trial would be useful to determine whether macrolides reduce the rate of AAA growth and the risk of rupture. 
4 Metformin for slowing aneurysm growth and reducing the risk of rupture 
What are the benefits and harms of metformin for reducing AAA growth rates and the risk of rupture? 
Why this is important 
Observational study data suggest an association between diabetes and slower AAA growth, and it has been proposed that this may be due to the use of metformin. A randomised controlled trial is needed to determine whether metformin reduces the rate of AAA growth and the risk of rupture. 
5 Tranexamic acid for preventing and treating excessive blood loss during EVAR or open surgical repair 
Does tranexamic acid reduce blood loss and so improve survival in people who are having repair (EVAR or open surgical repair) of a ruptured AAA? 
Why this is important 
Tranexamic acid is used to reduce blood loss in major trauma, postpartum bleeding and surgery. By slowing down blood loss from a ruptured AAA, the use of tranexamic acid may improve survival from ruptured AAA. A randomised controlled trial is needed to determine whether tranexamic acid improves survival in people having EVAR or open surgical repair of a ruptured AAA. 
6 Prehabilitation (including preoperative exercise programmes) for improving the outcome of aneurysm repair 
What is the clinical effectiveness and cost effectiveness of prehabilitation, including preoperative exercise programmes, for improving outcomes of people who are having repair of an AAA? 
Why this is important 
NHS providers have started devoting resources to prehabilitation programmes, based on a relatively small body of evidence. Research is needed to determine if prehabilitation is effective and the optimal form it should take. 
Other recommendations for research 
7 Direct oral anticoagulants after abdominal aortic aneurysm repair 
What are the benefits of postoperative use of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) for improving outcomes after repair of AAA? 
8 Permissive hypotension 
Does permissive hypotension improve survival of patients undergoing repair of ruptured AAA? 
9 Surveillance after endovascular aneurysm repair 
What are the risks, benefits and cost implications of different surveillance protocols in people who have undergone EVAR? 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
