Recommendations | Food allergy in under 19s: assessment and diagnosis | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Allergies and anaphylaxis
Food allergy in under 19s: assessment and diagnosis 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG116 
Published: 
23 February 2011
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Assessment and allergy-focused clinical history
Diagnosis
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
The following guidance is based on the best available evidence. The full guideline gives details of the methods and the evidence used to develop the guidance. 
Assessment and allergy-focused clinical history 
1.1.1 
Consider the possibility of food allergy in children and young people who have one or more of the signs and symptoms in table 1, below. Pay particular attention to persistent symptoms that involve different organ systems. 
Table 1 Signs and symptoms of possible food allergy 
– 
IgE-mediated 
Non-IgE-mediated 
The skin 
Pruritus 
Erythema 
Acute urticaria – localised or generalised 
Acute angioedema – most commonly of the lips, face and around the eyes 
Pruritus 
Erythema 
Atopic eczema 
The gastrointestinal system 
Angioedema of the lips, tongue and palate 
Oral pruritus 
Nausea 
Colicky abdominal pain 
Vomiting 
Diarrhoea 
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 
Loose or frequent stools 
Blood and/or mucus in stools 
Abdominal pain 
Infantile colic 
Food refusal or aversion 
Constipation 
Perianal redness 
Pallor and tiredness 
Faltering growth in conjunction with at least one or more gastrointestinal symptoms above (with or without significant atopic eczema) 
The respiratory system (usually in combination with one or more of the above symptoms and signs) 
Upper respiratory tract symptoms (nasal itching, sneezing, rhinorrhoea or congestion [with or without conjunctivitis]) 
Lower respiratory tract symptoms (cough, chest tightness, wheezing or shortness of breath) 
Lower respiratory tract symptoms (cough, chest tightness, wheezing or shortness of breath) 
Other 
Signs or symptoms of anaphylaxis or other systemic allergic reactions 
– 
Note: this list is not exhaustive. The absence of these symptoms does not exclude food allergy 
1.1.2 
Consider the possibility of food allergy in children and young people whose symptoms do not respond adequately to treatment for: 
atopic eczema (for information about treatment for atopic eczema, see NICE's guideline on atopic eczema in under 12s ) 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (for information about gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, see NICE's guideline on gastro-oesophageal reflux disease in children and young people ) 
chronic gastrointestinal symptoms, including chronic constipation. 
Someone with apparent symptoms of food allergy may be suffering from coeliac disease; for information about coeliac disease, see NICE's guideline on coeliac disease . 
1.1.3 
If food allergy is suspected (by a healthcare professional or the parent, carer, child or young person), a healthcare professional with the appropriate competencies (either a GP or other healthcare professional) should take an allergy-focused clinical history tailored to the presenting symptoms and age of the child or young person. This should include: 
any personal history of atopic disease (asthma, eczema or allergic rhinitis) 
any individual and family history of atopic disease (such as asthma, eczema or allergic rhinitis) or food allergy in parents or siblings 
details of any foods that are avoided and the reasons why 
an assessment of presenting symptoms and other symptoms that may be associated with food allergy (see recommendation 1.1.1), including questions about: 
the age of the child or young person when symptoms first started 
speed of onset of symptoms following food contact 
duration of symptoms 
severity of reaction 
frequency of occurrence 
setting of reaction (for example, at school or home) 
reproducibility of symptoms on repeated exposure 
what food and how much exposure to it causes a reaction 
cultural and religious factors that affect the foods they eat 
who has raised the concern and suspects the food allergy 
what the suspected allergen is 
the child or young person's feeding history, whether they were breastfed or formula-fed and the age of weaning 
the mother's diet, if the child is currently being breastfed 
details of any previous treatment, including medication, for the presenting symptoms and the response to this 
any response to the elimination and reintroduction of foods. 
1.1.4 
Based on the findings of the allergy-focused clinical history, physically examine the child or young person, paying particular attention to: 
growth and physical signs of malnutrition (for information about faltering growth, see NICE's guideline on faltering growth ) 
signs indicating allergy-related comorbidities (atopic eczema, asthma and allergic rhinitis). 
Diagnosis 
Food allergy can be classified into IgE-mediated and non-IgE-mediated allergy. IgE-mediated reactions are often immediate and frequently have a rapid onset. Non-IgE-mediated reactions are generally characterised by delayed reactions. 
IgE-mediated food allergy 
1.1.5 
Based on the results of the allergy-focused clinical history, if IgE-mediated allergy is suspected, offer the child or young person a skin prick test and/or blood tests for specific IgE antibodies to the suspected foods and likely co-allergens 
1.1.6 
Tests should only be undertaken by healthcare professionals with the appropriate competencies to select, perform and interpret them. 
1.1.7 
Skin prick tests should only be undertaken where there are facilities to deal with an anaphylactic reaction. 
1.1.8 
Choose between a skin prick test and a specific IgE antibody blood test based on: 
the results of the allergy-focused clinical history and 
whether the test is suitable for, safe for and acceptable to the child or young person (or their parent or carer) and 
the available competencies of the healthcare professional to undertake the test and interpret the results. 
1.1.9 
Do not carry out allergy testing without first taking an allergy-focused clinical history. Interpret the results of tests in the context of information from the allergy-focused clinical history. 
1.1.10 
Do not use atopy patch testing or oral food challenges to diagnose IgE-mediated food allergy in primary care or community settings. 
Non-IgE-mediated food allergy 
1.1.11 
Based on the results of the allergy-focused clinical history, if non-IgE-mediated food allergy is suspected, trial elimination of the suspected allergen (normally for between 2–6 weeks) and reintroduce after the trial. Seek advice from a dietitian with appropriate competencies, about nutritional adequacies, timings of elimination and reintroduction, and follow-up. (For people undergoing investigation for coeliac disease, see NICE's guideline on coeliac disease .) 
Providing information and support to the child or young person and their parent or carer 
1.1.12 
Based on the allergy-focused clinical history, offer the child or young person and their parent or carer, information that is age-appropriate about the: 
type of allergy suspected 
risk of severe allergic reaction 
potential impact of the suspected allergy on other healthcare issues, including vaccination 
diagnostic process, which may include: 
an elimination diet followed by a possible planned rechallenge or initial food reintroduction procedure 
skin prick tests and specific IgE antibody testing, including the safety and limitations of these tests 
referral to secondary or specialist care. 
1.1.13 
Offer the child or young person and their parent or carer, information that is relevant to the type of allergy (IgE-mediated, non-IgE-mediated or mixed). 
1.1.14 
If a food elimination diet is advised as part of the diagnostic process (see recommendation 1.1.11 ), offer the child or young person and their parent or carer, taking into account socioeconomic status and cultural and religious issues, information on: 
what foods and drinks to avoid 
how to interpret food labels 
alternative sources of nutrition to ensure adequate nutritional intake 
the safety and limitations of an elimination diet 
the proposed duration of the elimination diet 
when, where and how an oral food challenge or food reintroduction procedure may be undertaken 
the safety and limitations of the oral food challenge or food reintroduction procedure. 
1.1.15 
For babies and young children with suspected allergy to cows' milk protein, offer: 
food avoidance advice to breastfeeding mothers 
information on the most appropriate hypoallergenic formula or milk substitute to mothers of formula-fed babies. 
Seek advice from a dietitian with appropriate competencies. 
1.1.16 
Offer the child or young person, or their parent or carer, information about the support available and details of how to contact support groups. (See the information for the public for examples of organisations that provide information and support .) 
Referral to secondary or specialist care 
1.1.17 
Based on the allergy-focused clinical history, consider referral to secondary or specialist care in any of the following circumstances. 
The child or young person has: 
faltering growth in combination with one or more of the gastrointestinal symptoms described in recommendation 1.1.1 
not responded to a single-allergen elimination diet 
had one or more acute systemic reactions 
had one or more severe delayed reactions 
confirmed IgE-mediated food allergy and concurrent asthma 
significant atopic eczema where multiple or cross-reactive food allergies are suspected by the parent or carer. 
There is: 
persisting parental suspicion of food allergy (especially in children or young people with difficult or perplexing symptoms) despite a lack of supporting history 
strong clinical suspicion of IgE-mediated food allergy but allergy test results are negative 
clinical suspicion of multiple food allergies. 
Alternative diagnostic tools 
1.1.18 
Do not use the following alternative diagnostic tests in the diagnosis of food allergy: 
vega test 
applied kinesiology 
hair analysis. 
1.1.19 
Do not use serum-specific IgG testing in the diagnosis of food allergy. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Introduction 
Back to top
