Fertility preservation for medical indications | Fertility problems: assessment and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Fertility
Fertility problems: assessment and treatment
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG257 
Published: 
31 March 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Principles of care 
Initial advice to people concerned about delays in conception 
Advice about factors that can affect fertility 
Defining infertility and initial assessment 
Investigation of fertility problems and management strategies 
Management of male factor fertility problems 
Management of female factor fertility problems 
Unstimulated intrauterine insemination (IUI) 
Unexplained fertility problems in people trying to conceive through unprotected vaginal sexual intercourse 
Access criteria for in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Procedures used during in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) 
Donor insemination 
Oocyte donation 
Fertility preservation for medical indications 
Long-term safety of assisted reproductive technologies 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Fertility preservation for medical indications 
1.53 Fertility preservation 
1.53.1 
Discuss fertility preservation as an option with people who are preparing for medical treatment, or who have a medical condition, that is likely to impair their fertility. For people who need urgent treatment, this discussion should take place at the earliest possible opportunity. [2026] 
1.53.2 
When deciding whether to offer fertility preservation, take into account the following factors: 
the person's diagnosis 
the planned treatment 
the likely outcome of subsequent fertility treatment 
the person's prognosis following the treatment of the condition 
the likely viability of stored or post-thawed material. [2013, amended 2026] 
1.53.3 
For NHS-funded fertility preservation, do not apply the eligibility criteria used for conventional fertility treatment, including the lower age limit. [2013, amended 2026] 
1.53.4 
Inform people who are considering fertility preservation that eligibility criteria for assisted conception in an NHS setting will apply when it comes to using stored material. [2013, amended 2026] 
1.53.5 
Offer sperm cryopreservation to men (and boys), and trans women and non-binary people with male reproductive organs who are of reproductive age, and who are preparing for medical treatment, or who have a medical condition, that is likely to make them infertile. [2026] 
1.53.6 
Offer oocyte or embryo cryopreservation (as appropriate) to women (and girls), and trans men and non-binary people with female reproductive organs who are of reproductive age, and who are preparing for medical treatment, or who have a medical condition, that is likely to make them infertile. Also see part D on fertility preservation and oocyte donation in the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) guideline on ovarian stimulation for IVF/ICSI (update 2025) . [2026] 
1.53.7 
Consider ovarian tissue cryopreservation when oocyte or embryo cryopreservation is not feasible, for example, in girls before puberty. See the NICE HealthTech guidance on removal, preservation and reimplantation of ovarian tissue for restoring fertility after gonadotoxic treatment . [2026] 
1.53.8 
Organise follow-ups at least every 5 years with people who have had their material preserved to determine whether or not there is a need to continue NHS-funded storage. Offer continued NHS-funded storage for people who remain at continued significant risk of infertility, in line with legislation on consent. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2026 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on fertility preservation for medical indications . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review R: fertility preservation . 
Next page 
Long-term safety of assisted reproductive technologies 
Previous page 
Oocyte donation 
Back to top
