Overview | Otitis media with effusion in under 12s | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Ear, nose and throat conditions
Otitis media with effusion in under 12s
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG233 
Published: 
30 August 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers identifying and managing otitis media with effusion (OME), also known as ‘glue ear’, in children younger than 12 years. It aims to improve hearing and quality of life in children with OME. 
For guidance on antimicrobial prescribing for acute otitis media (ear infection) in children and young people, see the NICE guideline on otitis media (acute): antimicrobial prescribing . 
Last reviewed: 30 August 2023 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG60 (published February 2008). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
information and advice 
recognition and assessment 
reassessment 
management of hearing loss 
non-surgical management of OME 
surgical management of OME 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Children under 12 years old with OME, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
