Overview | Psychosis and schizophrenia in children and young people: recognition and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Psychosis and schizophrenia
Psychosis and schizophrenia in children and young people: recognition and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG155 
Published: 
23 January 2013
Last updated: 
26 October 2016
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Supplementary information on baseline investigations and monitoring 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers recognising and managing psychosis and schizophrenia in children and young people. It aims to improve early recognition of psychosis and schizophrenia so that children and young people can be offered the treatment and care they need to live with the condition. 
Last reviewed: 19 September 2024 
We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the sections on first episode psychosis and subsequent acute episodes of psychosis or schizophrenia . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
In May 2024, we simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines (for example, the NICE guideline on service user experience in adult mental health ). This is a presentational change only, and no changes to practice are intended. 
Next review: We have reviewed our guidelines portfolio to identify topics that we think will add the most value to the health and care system and have agreed the update recommended in the 2023 exceptional surveillance report will not proceed as planned.  We will continue to monitor this topic for new evidence. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
working safely and effectively with children and young people 
referring, assessing and treating possible psychosis 
referring, assessing and treating first-episode psychosis 
treating acute exacerbations or recurrences of psychosis or schizophrenia 
referring children and young people who are in crisis and managing challenging behaviour 
promoting recovery in primary care  and secondary care 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals working with children and young people who have, or might have, psychosis and schizophrenia 
Children and young people who have, or might have, psychosis and schizophrenia, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Bipolar disorder, psychosis and schizophrenia in children and young people 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
