Overview | Stable angina: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Stable angina
Stable angina: management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG126 
Published: 
23 July 2011
Last updated: 
25 August 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers managing stable angina in people aged 18 and over. It outlines the importance of addressing the person’s concerns about stable angina and the roles of medical therapy and revascularisation. 
Diagnosing stable angina is covered in NICE’s guideline on chest pain of recent onset: assessment and diagnosis . 
Last reviewed: 25 August 2016 
Recommendations 1.4.11 and 1.4.12 were updated to note new advice from the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) about safety concerns related to ivabradine ( June 2014 and December 2014 ) and nicorandil ( January 2016 ). See the surveillance decision  for more information. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 1.5.2 and 1.5.12 of this guideline partially update recommendation 1.2 of myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and myocardial infarction (TA73). 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
information and support 
preventing and treating episodes of stable angina 
drugs for secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease 
anti-anginal drug treatment 
revascularisation 
pain interventions 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Adults who have been diagnosed with stable angina due to atherosclerotic disease 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called management of stable angina. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health 
Stable angina 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
