Overview | Drug allergy: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Allergies and anaphylaxis
Drug allergy: diagnosis and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG183 
Published: 
03 September 2014
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and resources 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing drug allergy in all age groups. It aims to make it easier for professionals to tell when someone is having an allergic reaction, by specifying the key signs and patterns to look out for. It also makes recommendations on improving people’s understanding of their drug allergies, and ensuring these are recorded properly in their medical records. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
assessment 
documenting and sharing information with other healthcare professionals 
providing information and support to patients 
non-specialist management and referral to specialist services 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with a suspected or diagnosed drug allergy and their families and carers 
Is this guideline up to date? 
November 2018: We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. For more information, see the surveillance decision .  
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called drug allergy: diagnosis and management of drug allergy in adults, children and young people. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Drug allergy 
Next page 
Key priorities for implementation 
Back to top
