Context | Diabetic retinopathy: management and monitoring | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diabetes
Diabetic retinopathy: management and monitoring
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG242 
Published: 
13 August 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Context 
This is a new guideline on diagnosing and managing diabetic retinopathy. It includes information on monitoring and treatment for people in hospital eye services with: 
non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy 
proliferative diabetic retinopathy and 
diabetic macular oedema. 
Diabetic retinopathy is one of the leading causes of visual impairment and blindness in the UK. Retinopathy is a direct consequence of raised glucose levels so, within 20 years of being diagnosed with diabetes, most people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes will have some degree of retinopathy. 
Diabetic retinopathy is an umbrella term that covers all complications of diabetes that affect the retina. This includes non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy, proliferative diabetic retinopathy and maculopathy. Maculopathy affects the centre part of the retina, called the macula. There are 2 forms of diabetic maculopathy: diabetic macular oedema and diabetic macular ischaemia. 
Non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy is an early stage of the disease with fewer symptoms. Some people with non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy progress to having proliferative diabetic retinopathy. Proliferative diabetic retinopathy refers to abnormal blood vessels that grow in the optic nerve, in the retina, or both, which can lead to vitreous haemorrhage. It can also cause scarring that can, in turn, lead to tractional retinal detachment and central and peripheral vision loss. 
At any stage of retinopathy, people may also develop diabetic macular oedema. It causes fluid to gather in the macula and can lead to loss of central vision. 
Without the correct monitoring and treatment, proliferative diabetic retinopathy and macular oedema can both lead to permanent vision loss. 
The eyes of people with diabetes are monitored as part of the NHS diabetic eye screening programme (DESP) . Once they show signs of sight-threatening diabetic retinopathy, they are referred to hospital eye services for further tests and treatment. This guideline covers people who have been referred to hospital eye services, or are already under their care. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
