Recommendations | Alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis and management of physical complications | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Liver conditions
Alcohol-use disorders
Alcohol-use disorders: diagnosis and management of physical complications
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG100 
Published: 
02 June 2010
Last updated: 
12 April 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Acute alcohol withdrawal
1.2 Wernicke's encephalopathy
1.3 Alcohol-related liver disease
1.4 Alcohol-related pancreatitis
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
patient experience in adult NHS services 
babies, children and young people's experience of healthcare 
shared decision making 
medicines adherence 
medicines optimisation 
medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms 
multimorbidity 
transition from children's to adults' services 
decision-making and mental capacity . 
1.1 Acute alcohol withdrawal 
1.1.1 Admission to hospital 
1.1.1.1 
For people in acute alcohol withdrawal with, or who are assessed to be at high risk of developing, alcohol withdrawal seizures or delirium tremens, offer admission to hospital for medically assisted alcohol withdrawal . [2010] 
1.1.1.2 
For young people under 16 years who are in acute alcohol withdrawal, offer admission to hospital for physical and psychosocial assessment, in addition to medically assisted alcohol withdrawal. [2010] 
1.1.1.3 
For certain vulnerable people who are in acute alcohol withdrawal (for example, those who are frail, have cognitive impairment or multiple comorbidities, lack social support, have learning difficulties or are 16 or 17 years), consider a lower threshold for admission to hospital for medically assisted alcohol withdrawal. [2010] 
1.1.1.4 
For people who are alcohol dependent but not admitted to hospital, offer advice to avoid a sudden reduction in alcohol intake and information about how to contact local alcohol support services. Note that a sudden reduction in alcohol intake can result in severe withdrawal in dependent drinkers. [2010] 
1.1.2 Assessment and monitoring 
1.1.2.1 
Healthcare professionals who care for people in acute alcohol withdrawal should be skilled in the assessment and monitoring of withdrawal symptoms and signs. [2010] 
1.1.2.2 
Follow locally specified protocols to assess and monitor patients in acute alcohol withdrawal. Consider using a tool (such as the Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment – Alcohol, revised [CIWA–Ar] scale ) as an adjunct to clinical judgement. [2010] 
1.1.2.3 
People in acute alcohol withdrawal should be assessed immediately on admission to hospital by a healthcare professional skilled in the management of alcohol withdrawal. [2010] 
1.1.3 Treatment for acute alcohol withdrawal 
1.1.3.1 
Offer pharmacotherapy to treat the symptoms of acute alcohol withdrawal as follows: 
Consider offering a benzodiazepine or carbamazepine. Follow the MHRA safety advice on antiepileptic drugs in pregnancy . 
Clomethiazole may be offered as an alternative to a benzodiazepine or carbamazepine. However, it should be used with caution, in inpatient settings only and according to the summary of product characteristics. 
In April 2017, this was an off-label use of some benzodiazepines (alprazolam, clobazam and lorazepam) and carbamazepine. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . Refer to the summary of product characteristics for cautions in specific populations for all medicines for acute alcohol withdrawal. [2010, amended 2021] 
1.1.3.2 
People with decompensated liver disease who are being treated for acute alcohol withdrawal should be offered advice from a healthcare professional experienced in the management of patients with liver disease. [2010] 
1.1.3.3 
Offer information about how to contact local alcohol support services to people who are being treated for acute alcohol withdrawal. [2010] 
1.1.3.4 
Follow a symptom-triggered regimen for drug treatment for people in acute alcohol withdrawal who are: 
in hospital or 
in other settings where 24‑hour assessment and monitoring are available. [2010] 
1.1.4 Management of delirium tremens 
1.1.4.1 
In people with delirium tremens, offer oral lorazepam as first-line treatment. If symptoms persist or oral medication is declined, offer parenteral lorazepam or haloperidol. 
In April 2017, this was an off-label use of lorazepam and haloperidol. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . Refer to the summary of product characteristics for cautions in specific populations. [2010, amended 2017] 
1.1.4.2 
If delirium tremens develops in a person during treatment for acute alcohol withdrawal, review their withdrawal drug regimen. [2010] 
1.1.5 Management of alcohol withdrawal seizures 
1.1.5.1 
In people with alcohol withdrawal seizures, consider offering a quick-acting benzodiazepine (such as lorazepam) to reduce the likelihood of further seizures. 
In April 2017, this was an off-label use of lorazepam. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . Refer to the summary of product characteristics for cautions in specific populations. [2010] 
1.1.5.2 
If alcohol withdrawal seizures develop in a person during treatment for acute alcohol withdrawal, review their withdrawal drug regimen. [2010] 
1.1.5.3 
Do not offer phenytoin to treat alcohol withdrawal seizures. [2010] 
1.2 Wernicke's encephalopathy 
1.2.1.1 
Offer thiamine to people at high risk of developing, or with suspected, Wernicke's encephalopathy. Thiamine should be given in doses toward the upper end of the 'British national formulary' range. It should be given orally or parenterally as described in recommendations 1.2.1.2 to 1.2.1.4. [2010] 
1.2.1.2 
Offer prophylactic oral thiamine to harmful or dependent drinkers: 
if they are malnourished or at risk of malnourishment or 
if they have decompensated liver disease or 
if they are in acute withdrawal or 
before and during a planned medically assisted alcohol withdrawal . [2010] 
1.2.1.3 
Offer prophylactic parenteral thiamine followed by oral thiamine to harmful or dependent drinkers: 
if they are malnourished or at risk of malnourishment or 
if they have decompensated liver disease 
and in addition 
they attend an emergency department or 
are admitted to hospital with an acute illness or injury. [2010] 
1.2.1.4 
Offer parenteral thiamine to people with suspected Wernicke's encephalopathy. Maintain a high level of suspicion for the possibility of Wernicke's encephalopathy, particularly if the person is intoxicated. Parenteral treatment should be given for a minimum of 5 days, unless Wernicke's encephalopathy is excluded. Oral thiamine treatment should follow parenteral therapy. [2010] 
1.3 Alcohol-related liver disease 
For information on diagnosing, monitoring and manging complications of cirrhosis, see NICE's guideline on cirrhosis in over 16s: assessment and management . 
1.3.1 Assessment and diagnosis of alcohol-related liver disease 
1.3.1.1 
Exclude alternative causes of liver disease in people with a history of harmful or hazardous drinking who have abnormal liver blood test results. [2010] 
1.3.1.2 
Refer people to a specialist experienced in the management of alcohol-related liver disease to confirm a clinical diagnosis of alcohol-related liver disease. [2010] 
1.3.1.3 
Consider liver biopsy for the investigation of alcohol-related liver disease. [2010] 
1.3.1.4 
When considering liver biopsy for the investigation of alcohol-related liver disease: 
take into account the small but definite risks of morbidity and mortality 
discuss the benefits and risks with the patient and 
ensure informed consent is obtained. [2010] 
1.3.1.5 
In people with suspected acute alcohol-related hepatitis , consider a liver biopsy to confirm the diagnosis if the hepatitis is severe enough to require corticosteroid treatment. [2010] 
1.3.2 Referral for consideration of liver transplantation 
1.3.2.1 
Refer patients with decompensated liver disease to be considered for assessment for liver transplantation if they: 
still have decompensated liver disease after best management and 3 months' abstinence from alcohol and 
are otherwise suitable candidates for liver transplantation. [2010, amended 2017] 
1.3.3 Corticosteroid treatment for alcohol-related hepatitis 
1.3.3.1 
Offer corticosteroid treatment to people with severe alcohol-related hepatitis and a discriminant function of 32 or more, only after: 
effectively treating any active infection or gastrointestinal bleeding that may be present 
controlling any renal impairment 
discussing the potential benefits and risks with the person and their family members or carers (as appropriate), explaining that corticosteroid treatment: 
has been shown to improve survival in the short term (1 month) 
has not been shown to improve survival over a longer term (3 months to 1 year) 
has been shown to increase the risk of serious infections within the first 3 months of starting treatment. 
In April 2017, this was an off-label use of prednisolone. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . [2017] 
1.3.4 Nutritional support for alcohol-related hepatitis 
1.3.4.1 
Assess the nutritional requirements of people with acute alcohol-related hepatitis. Offer nutritional support if needed and consider using nasogastric tube feeding (see the NICE guideline on nutrition support for adults: oral nutrition support, enteral tube feeding and parenteral nutrition ). [2010] 
1.4 Alcohol-related pancreatitis 
1.4.1 Diagnosis of chronic alcohol-related pancreatitis 
1.4.1.1 
To inform a diagnosis of chronic alcohol-related pancreatitis use a combination of: 
the person's symptoms 
an imaging modality to determine pancreatic structure and 
tests of pancreatic exocrine and endocrine function. [2010] 
1.4.1.2 
Use computed tomography as the first-line imaging modality for the diagnosis of chronic alcohol‑related pancreatitis in people with a history and symptoms suggestive of chronic alcohol‑related pancreatitis. [2010] 
1.4.2 Treatment options for painful chronic alcohol-related pancreatitis 
1.4.2.1 
Refer people with pain from chronic alcohol-related pancreatitis to a specialist centre for multidisciplinary assessment. [2010] 
1.4.2.2 
Consider surgery (open or minimally invasive) as first-line treatment in adults with painful chronic pancreatitis that is causing obstruction of the main pancreatic duct. [2018] 
1.4.2.3 
Offer coeliac axis block , splanchnicectomy or surgery to people with poorly controlled pain from small-duct (non-obstructive) chronic alcohol-related pancreatitis. [2010] 
1.4.3 Prophylactic antibiotics for acute alcohol-related pancreatitis 
1.4.3.1 
Do not offer prophylactic antimicrobials to people with acute pancreatitis. [2018] 
1.4.4 Nutritional support for acute alcohol-related pancreatitis 
1.4.4.1 
Ensure that people with acute pancreatitis are not made 'nil‑by‑mouth' and do not have food withheld unless there is a clear reason for this (for example, vomiting). [2018] 
1.4.4.2 
Offer enteral nutrition to anyone with severe or moderately severe acute pancreatitis. Start within 72 hours of presentation and aim to meet their nutritional requirements as soon as possible. [2018] 
1.4.4.3 
Offer anyone with severe or moderately severe acute pancreatitis parenteral nutrition only if enteral nutrition has failed or is contraindicated. [2018] 
1.4.5 Enzyme supplementation for chronic alcohol-related pancreatitis 
In September 2024, supplies of pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy were disrupted, so availability varies. Use the Specialist Pharmacy Service's prescribing and ordering available pancreatic enzyme replacement therapies resource and tool to help identify equivalent licensed products. 
1.4.5.1 
Offer pancreatic enzyme supplements to people with chronic alcohol-related pancreatitis who have symptoms of steatorrhoea or poor nutritional status due to exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. [2010] 
1.4.5.2 
Do not prescribe pancreatic enzyme supplements to people with chronic alcohol-related pancreatitis if pain is their only symptom. [2010] 
Terms used in this guideline 
Acute alcohol withdrawal 
The physical and psychological symptoms that people can experience when they suddenly reduce the amount of alcohol they drink if they have previously been drinking excessively for prolonged periods of time. 
Alcohol dependence 
A cluster of behavioural, cognitive and physiological factors that typically include a strong desire to drink alcohol and difficulties in controlling its use. Someone who is alcohol-dependent may persist in drinking, despite harmful consequences. They will also give alcohol a higher priority than other activities and obligations. For further information, please refer to: 'Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders' (DSM‑IV) (American Psychiatric Association 2000) and 'International statistical classification of diseases and related health problems – 10th revision' (ICD‑10) (World Health Organization 2007). 
Alcohol-related hepatitis 
Alcoholic hepatitis. 
Coeliac axis block 
Pain relief by nerve block of the coeliac plexus. 
CIWA–Ar scale 
The Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment – Alcohol, revised (CIWA–Ar) scale is a validated 10‑item assessment tool that can be used to quantify the severity of the alcohol withdrawal syndrome, and to monitor and medicate patients throughout withdrawal. See Sullivan et al. (1989) Assessment of alcohol withdrawal: the revised Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol scale (CIWA–Ar). British Journal of Addiction 84:1353-1357 . 
Decompensated liver disease 
Liver disease complicated by jaundice, ascites, variceal bleeding or hepatic encephalopathy. 
Discriminant function 
Maddrey's discriminant function (DF) was described to predict prognosis in alcohol-related hepatitis and identify patients suitable for treatment with steroids. It is 4.6 × [prothrombin time − control time (seconds)] + bilirubin in mg/dl. To calculate the DF using bilirubin in micromol/l divide the bilirubin value by 17. 
Harmful drinking (high-risk drinking) 
A pattern of alcohol consumption that is causing mental or physical damage (ICD‑10, DSM‑V). 
Consumption (units per week): Drinking 35 units a week or more for women. Drinking 50 units a week or more for men. 
Hazardous drinking (increasing risk drinking) 
A pattern of alcohol consumption that increases someone's risk of harm. Some would limit this definition to the physical or mental health consequences (as in harmful use). Others would include the social consequences. The term is currently used by the World Health Organization to describe this pattern of alcohol consumption. It is not a diagnostic term. 
Consumption (units per week): Drinking more than 14 units a week, but less than 35 units a week for women. Drinking more than 14 units a week, but less than 50 units for men. 
Malnourishment 
A state of nutrition in which a deficiency of energy, protein and/or other nutrients causes measurable adverse effects on tissue/body form, composition, function or clinical outcome. 
Medically assisted alcohol withdrawal 
The deliberate withdrawal from alcohol by a dependent drinker under the supervision of medical staff. Prescribed medication may be needed to relieve the symptoms. It can be carried out at home, in the community or in a hospital or other inpatient facility. 
Splanchnicectomy 
Surgical division of the splanchnic nerves and coeliac ganglion. 
Symptom-triggered regimen 
Treatment tailored to the person's individual needs, which are determined by the severity of withdrawal signs and symptoms. The patient is regularly assessed and monitored, either using clinical experience and questioning alone or with the help of a designated questionnaire such as the CIWA–Ar. Drug treatment is provided if the patient needs it and treatment is withheld if there are no symptoms of withdrawal. 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
