Overview | Bipolar disorder: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder: assessment and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG185 
Published: 
24 September 2014
Last updated: 
02 September 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers recognising, assessing and treating bipolar disorder (formerly known as manic depression) in children, young people and adults. The recommendations apply to bipolar I, bipolar II, mixed affective and rapid cycling disorders. It aims to improve access to treatment and quality of life in people with bipolar disorder. 
MHRA advice on valproate :  Recommendations on valproate have taken into account the MHRA safety advice on the use of valproate ,  valproate use in people younger than 55 years , valproate use in women and girls and valproate use in men . Valproate must not be started for the first time in people (male or female) younger than 55 years, unless 2 specialists independently consider and document that there is no other effective or tolerated treatment, or there are compelling reasons that the reproductive risks do not apply. Valproate must not be used in women and girls of childbearing potential (including young girls who are likely to need treatment into their childbearing years), unless other options are unsuitable and the Pregnancy Prevention Programme is in place. Boys and men should be advised to use effective contraception (condoms, plus contraception used by a female sexual partner) throughout the valproate treatment period and for 3 months after stopping valproate. Men taking valproate who are planning a family within the next year should discuss potential fertility risks and treatment options with a healthcare professional. 
Last reviewed: 2 September 2025 
We updated recommendations on using valproate in line with Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) safety advice on valproate use in men . For more details see  update information . 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG38 (July 2006). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
recognising and managing bipolar disorder in adults in primary care 
assessing suspected bipolar disorder in adults in secondary care 
managing mania, hypomania and bipolar depression in secondary care 
managing bipolar disorder in the longer term in secondary care 
promoting recovery and return to primary care 
recognising, diagnosing and managing bipolar disorder in children and young people 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
People working in occupational health, social services and the independent sector 
Children, young people and adults with bipolar disorder 
Families of and people who care for children, young people and adults with bipolar disorder 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called bipolar disorder: the assessment and management of bipolar disorder in adults, children and young people in primary and secondary care. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Bipolar disorder, psychosis and schizophrenia in children and young people 
Promoting health and preventing premature mortality in black, Asian and other minority ethnic groups 
Bipolar disorder in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
