Management of male factor fertility problems | Fertility problems: assessment and treatment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Fertility
Fertility problems: assessment and treatment
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG257 
Published: 
31 March 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Principles of care 
Initial advice to people concerned about delays in conception 
Advice about factors that can affect fertility 
Defining infertility and initial assessment 
Investigation of fertility problems and management strategies 
Management of male factor fertility problems 
Management of female factor fertility problems 
Unstimulated intrauterine insemination (IUI) 
Unexplained fertility problems in people trying to conceive through unprotected vaginal sexual intercourse 
Access criteria for in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Procedures used during in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) 
Donor insemination 
Oocyte donation 
Fertility preservation for medical indications 
Long-term safety of assisted reproductive technologies 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.24 Medical management
1.25 Azoospermia
1.26 Y chromosome microdeletions
1.27 Reduced sperm DNA integrity
1.28 Varicocele
1.29 Ejaculatory failure
Management of male factor fertility problems 
1.24 Medical management 
1.24.1 
Offer gonadotrophin therapy to treat men, and trans women and non-binary people with male reproductive organs who have hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. [2026] 
1.24.2 
Only consider gonadotrophin or anti-oestrogen therapy for men, and trans women and non-binary people with male reproductive organs who have impaired semen parameters and no hypogonadotropic hypogonadism as part of a clinical trial. [2026] 
1.24.3 
Do not offer androgens to treat semen abnormalities. [2026] 
1.24.4 
Explain that the significance of antisperm antibodies is unclear and the effectiveness of systemic corticosteroid treatment for antisperm antibodies is uncertain. [2004] 
1.24.5 
Do not offer antibiotic treatment to treat leukocytes in the semen unless there is an identified infection because there is no evidence that this improves pregnancy rates. [2004] 
1.24.6 
Do not offer supplements, antioxidants or medical treatments to improve sperm DNA integrity (fragmentation). [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2026 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on medical management of male factor fertility problems . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review U: hormone treatment for male factor fertility problems 
evidence review S: sperm DNA fragmentation . 
1.25 Azoospermia 
1.25.1 
Offer men, and trans women and non-binary people with male reproductive organs surgical correction or surgical sperm retrieval to treat obstructive azoospermia. When deciding which treatment to offer, take into account the following factors: 
female fertility factors (for example, age, ovarian reserve, tubal patency and ovulatory status) 
the obstructive interval if known 
the risks and benefits of the surgical intervention 
the person's preference. [2026] 
1.25.2 
Offer surgical sperm retrieval to manage non-obstructive azoospermia. [2026] 
1.25.3 
When carrying out surgical sperm retrieval for non-obstructive azoospermia (see recommendation 1.25.2), consider microscopic testicular sperm extraction (micro-TESE). [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on azoospermia . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in: 
evidence review W: surgical interventions for obstructive azoospermia 
evidence review Y: surgical sperm retrieval techniques . 
1.26 Y chromosome microdeletions 
1.26.1 
Do not offer surgical sperm retrieval in the presence of Y chromosome AZF a or b microdeletion. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on Y chromosome microdeletions . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review T: Y chromosome microdeletion . 
1.27 Reduced sperm DNA integrity 
1.27.1 
Do not offer surgical sperm retrieval as a way to improve outcomes for men, and trans women and non-binary people with male reproductive organs who have non-azoospermia and reduced sperm DNA integrity (elevated fragmentation levels). [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on reduced sperm DNA integrity . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review S: sperm DNA fragmentation . 
1.28 Varicocele 
1.28.1 
Consider radiological or surgical treatment (taking into account female fertility factors) for men, and trans women and non-binary people with male reproductive organs who have varicocele detected on clinical examination, and who: 
are trying to conceive spontaneously, and 
have reduced semen parameters. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on varicocele . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review X: treatments for varicocele . 
1.29 Ejaculatory failure 
1.29.1 
For men, and trans women and non-binary people with male reproductive organs who have ejaculatory failure, identify the cause to determine the most appropriate and least invasive method of managing the issue. [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on management of ejaculatory failure . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review V: treatments for ejaculatory failure . 
Next page 
Management of female factor fertility problems 
Previous page 
Investigation of fertility problems and management strategies 
Back to top
