Overview | Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and dyspepsia in adults: investigation and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Digestive tract conditions
Gastro-oesophageal reflux, including Barrett's oesophagus
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and dyspepsia in adults: investigation and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG184 
Published: 
03 September 2014
Last updated: 
18 October 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Appendix A: Dosage information on proton pump inhibitors 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers investigating and managing gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) and dyspepsia in people aged 18 and over. It aims to improve the treatment of GORD and dyspepsia by making detailed recommendations on Helicobacter pylori eradication, and specifying when to consider laparoscopic fundoplication and referral to specialist services. 
Last reviewed: 18 October 2019 
Changes have been made to recommendations in the sections on first-line and second-line treatments to reflect new restrictions and precautions for the use of fluoroquinolone antibiotics. These recommendations are labelled  [new 2014, amended 2019] . For more information, see update information . 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG17 (August 2004). 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
referral for endoscopy 
interventions for uninvestigated dyspepsia , GORD , peptic ulcer disease and functional dyspepsia 
Helicobacter pylori testing and eradication 
laparoscopic fundoplication 
referral to specialist services 
surveillance for people with Barrett’s oesophagus 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Adults with GORD or dyspepsia and their families 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called dyspepsia and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease: investigation and management of dyspepsia, symptoms suggestive of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, or both. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Dyspepsia and gastro‑oesophageal reflux disease in adults 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
