Context | Social, emotional and mental wellbeing in primary and secondary education | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Children's social care
Social, emotional and mental wellbeing in primary and secondary education 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG223 
Published: 
06 July 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Context 
Primary and secondary schools help children and young people learn social, emotional and mental skills through both the taught and the wider curriculum (such as activities outside the classroom). Schools can provide the supportive, caring and nurturing environment that supports positive social, emotional and mental wellbeing. They are also important settings in which to identify and provide early intervention for children and young people at increased risk of mental ill health. 
Schools have statutory duties to establish environments where children and young people are supported and can fully engage. These duties encourage schools to support personal development, mental health and wellbeing. Many schools follow a whole-school approach to social, emotional and mental wellbeing (see the Department for Education's research and analysis on supporting mental health in schools and colleges ). This approach goes beyond learning and teaching to include school culture, ethos and environment. It involves engaging with children and young people, their parents and carers, teacher and school leaders and outside agencies. 
Social, emotional and mental wellbeing may be promoted in curriculum subjects such as personal, social, health and economic education and be embedded more broadly through a school's commitment to the spiritual, moral, social and cultural development of their pupils. Key challenges for schools include: 
knowing what approaches improve student outcomes in a specific school setting 
accommodating effective teaching of social, emotional and mental wellbeing in a crowded curriculum. 
Schools use various methods to identify children and young people who may benefit from targeted interventions to support their approach to social, emotional and mental wellbeing. This may include information from other practitioners such as a speech and language therapist or special educational needs and disability coordinator. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
