Glossary | Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health protection
Environment
Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG70 
Published: 
30 June 2017
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Committee discussion 
Recommendations for research 
Glossary 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
Average speed technology
Daily Air Quality Index
Euro standards
PM2.5, PM10
Street ventilation
Telematics
Travel plans
Glossary 
Average speed technology 
Cameras with automatic number plate reading (ANPR) digital technology, placed in multiple locations (at least 2, at a minimum of 200 m apart) along a stretch of road to monitor a vehicle's average speed. 
Daily Air Quality Index 
A number used by government agencies to tell the public how polluted the air is or will be. The number is provided with recommended actions and health advice. The index is numbered 1 to 10 and divided into 4 bands: low (1 to 3), moderate (4 to 6), high (7 to 9) and very high (10). 
Euro standards 
Standards produced by EU Directives specifying maximum permitted emissions of various air pollutants. Light duty vehicle standards are referred to using Arabic numerals (Euro 1 to 6); standards for heavy duty vehicles use Roman numerals (Euro I to VI). 
PM 2.5 , PM 10 
Particulate matter is produced by, among other things, combustion of fossil fuels or abrasion of tyres and brakes. Particles are classified by size, described using the abbreviation PM with a suffix (commonly 2.5 or 10) that gives the maximum particle size in micrometres. The mass concentration of particles is usually expressed in micrograms per m 3 of air. 
Airborne PM 10 and PM 2.5 come from both primary emissions (including combustion of fossil fuels, tyre and brake wear) and secondary particles (for example, nitrates and sulphates) formed when pollutants react in the atmosphere. PM 2.5 particles are sometimes referred to as 'fine particles', and PM 2 . 5–10 as 'coarse particles'. Fine particles can penetrate deep into the lungs. 
Street ventilation 
Air in a street flows in a pattern determined by many factors, including the shape and design of buildings. It mixes with air from outside the street. If there are sources of pollution in the street (primarily motor vehicles) the air flow is restricted. 
Telematics 
Technologies that store and send information on the speed, position, acceleration and deceleration of road vehicles. This, together with global positioning system (GPS) data, can be used to compare driving styles and estimate the impact on fuel consumption, emissions or wear and tear. 
Travel plans 
Travel plans are a way of assessing and then mitigating the potential negative effects that new developments could have on air pollution by generating significant amounts of motor traffic. 
For other public health and social care terms see the Think Local, Act Personal Care and Support Jargon Buster . 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Recommendations for research 
Back to top
