Overview | Pneumonia: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Pneumonia: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG250 
Published: 
02 September 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing, assessing, and treating community-acquired and hospital-acquired pneumonia, including bacterial pneumonia secondary to COVID-19, in babies over 1 month (corrected gestational age), children, young people and adults. It aims to optimise antibiotic use and reduce antibiotic resistance. 
Important changes to practice in this update include: 
a change to the course length of antibiotics from 5 days to 3 days, for babies and children aged 3 months (corrected gestational age) to 11 years with non-severe community-acquired pneumonia without complications or underlying disease 
new recommendations on using corticosteroids for adults in hospital with high-severity community-acquired pneumonia. 
The guideline does not cover ventilator-associated pneumonia or COVID-19 pneumonia. For recommendations on managing suspected or confirmed COVID-19 pneumonia, see NICE's guideline on managing COVID-19 . 
For bacterial infection in healthy babies up to and including 28 days (corrected gestational age), see NICE’s guideline on neonatal infection: antibiotics for prevention and treatment . 
Last reviewed : 02 September 2025 
We have reviewed the evidence on diagnosing, assessing and treating community-acquired and hospital-acquired pneumonia. For more information, see the update information . 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG191 (published December 2014), and antimicrobial prescribing guidelines NG138 and NG139 (both published September 2019). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
assessing community-acquired pneumonia 
investigations in hospital 
antibiotic treatment for community-acquired pneumonia 
corticosteroid treatment in hospital 
non-invasive respiratory support 
information for parents or carers of children with community-acquired pneumonia 
use of biomarkers after starting treatment 
follow-up chest X-rays 
These supplement the existing recommendations on: 
starting and reviewing antibiotics 
antibiotic treatment for hospital-acquired pneumonia 
See also the visual summaries on: 
Community-acquired pneumonia (children and young people) 
Community-acquired pneumonia (adults presenting to primary care) 
Community-acquired pneumonia (adults presenting to hospital) 
Hospital-acquired pneumonia 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
People who have suspected or confirmed pneumonia (except ventilator-associated and COVID-19 pneumonia), their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Pneumonia: diagnosis and management 
Acute respiratory infection in over 16s: initial assessment and management including virtual wards (hospital at home) 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
