Recommendations | Peripheral arterial disease: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Peripheral circulatory conditions
Peripheral arterial disease: diagnosis and management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG147 
Published: 
08 August 2012
Last updated: 
11 December 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Information requirements
1.2 Secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease in people with peripheral arterial disease
1.3 Diagnosis
1.4 Imaging for revascularisation
1.5 Management of intermittent claudication
1.6 Management of critical limb ischaemia
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Information requirements 
1.1.1 
Offer all people with peripheral arterial disease oral and written information about their condition. Discuss it with them so they can share decision‑making, and understand the course of the disease and what they can do to help prevent disease progression. Information should include: 
the causes of their symptoms and the severity of their disease 
the risks of limb loss and/or cardiovascular events associated with peripheral arterial disease 
the key modifiable risk factors, such as smoking, control of diabetes, hyperlipidaemia, diet, body weight and exercise 
how to manage pain 
all relevant treatment options, including the risks and benefits of each 
how they can access support for dealing with depression and anxiety. 
Ensure that information, tailored to the individual needs of the person, is available at diagnosis and subsequently as required, to allow people to make decisions throughout the course of their treatment. [2012] 
1.1.2 
NICE has produced guidance on the components of good patient experience in adult NHS services. Follow the recommendations in NICE's guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . [2012] 
1.2 Secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease in people with peripheral arterial disease 
1.2.1 
Offer all people with peripheral arterial disease information, advice, support and treatment regarding the secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease, in line with published NICE guidance on: 
treating tobacco dependence 
diet, weight management and exercise 
lipid modification and statin therapy 
diabetes 
high blood pressure 
antiplatelet therapy . [2012] 
1.2.2 
Rivaroxaban plus aspirin is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for preventing atherothrombotic events in people with symptomatic peripheral arterial disease at high risk of ischaemic events. For full details, see the guidance on rivaroxaban (TA607, 2019) . 
1.2.3 
Clopidogrel is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for preventing occlusive vascular events in people with peripheral arterial disease. For full details, see the guidance on clopidogrel (TA210, 2010) . 
1.3 Diagnosis 
1.3.1 
Assess people for the presence of peripheral arterial disease if they: 
have symptoms suggestive of peripheral arterial disease  or 
have diabetes, non‑healing wounds on the legs or feet, or unexplained leg pain  or 
are being considered for interventions to the leg or foot  or 
need to use compression hosiery. [2012] 
1.3.2 
Assess people with suspected peripheral arterial disease by: 
asking about the presence and severity of possible symptoms of intermittent claudication and critical limb ischaemia 
examining the legs and feet for evidence of critical limb ischaemia, for example ulceration 
examining the femoral, popliteal and foot pulses 
measuring the ankle brachial pressure index (see recommendation 1.3.3). [2012] 
1.3.3 
Measure the ankle brachial pressure index in the following way: 
The person should be resting and supine if possible. 
Record systolic blood pressure with an appropriately sized cuff in both arms and in the posterior tibial, dorsalis pedis and, where possible, peroneal arteries. 
Take measurements manually using a doppler probe of suitable frequency in preference to an automated system. 
Document the nature of the doppler ultrasound signals in the foot arteries. 
Calculate the index in each leg by dividing the highest ankle pressure by the highest arm pressure. [2012] 
Diagnosing peripheral arterial disease in people with diabetes 
1.3.4 
Do not exclude a diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease in people with diabetes based on a normal or raised ankle brachial pressure index alone. [2018] 
1.3.5 
Do not use pulse oximetry for diagnosing peripheral arterial disease in people with diabetes. [2018] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these 2018 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on diagnosis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: determining diagnosis and severity of peripheral arterial disease in people with diabetes . 
1.4 Imaging for revascularisation 
1.4.1 
Offer duplex ultrasound as first‑line imaging to all people with peripheral arterial disease for whom revascularisation is being considered. [2012] 
1.4.2 
Offer contrast‑enhanced magnetic resonance angiography to people with peripheral arterial disease who need further imaging (after duplex ultrasound) before considering revascularisation. [2012] 
1.4.3 
Offer computed tomography angiography to people with peripheral arterial disease who need further imaging (after duplex ultrasound) if contrast‑enhanced magnetic resonance angiography is contraindicated or not tolerated. [2012] 
1.5 Management of intermittent claudication 
Supervised exercise programme 
1.5.1 
Offer a supervised exercise programme to all people with intermittent claudication. [2012] 
1.5.2 
Consider providing a supervised exercise programme for people with intermittent claudication which involves: 
2 hours of supervised exercise a week for a 3‑month period 
encouraging people to exercise to the point of maximal pain. [2012] 
Angioplasty and stenting 
1.5.3 
Offer angioplasty for treating people with intermittent claudication only when: 
advice on the benefits of modifying risk factors has been reinforced (see the section on secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease in people with peripheral arterial disease )  and 
a supervised exercise programme has not led to a satisfactory improvement in symptoms  and 
imaging has confirmed that angioplasty is suitable for the person. [2012] 
1.5.4 
Do not offer primary stent placement for treating people with intermittent claudication caused by aorto‑iliac disease (except complete occlusion) or femoro‑popliteal disease. [2012] 
1.5.5 
Consider primary stent placement for treating people with intermittent claudication caused by complete aorto‑iliac occlusion (rather than stenosis). [2012] 
1.5.6 
Use bare metal stents when stenting is used for treating people with intermittent claudication. [2012] 
Bypass surgery and graft types 
1.5.7 
Offer bypass surgery for treating people with severe lifestyle‑limiting intermittent claudication only when: 
angioplasty has been unsuccessful or is unsuitable  and 
imaging has confirmed that bypass surgery is appropriate for the person. [2012] 
1.5.8 
Use an autologous vein whenever possible for people with intermittent claudication having infra‑inguinal bypass surgery. [2012] 
Pharmacological treatment 
1.5.9 
Consider naftidrofuryl oxalate for treating people with intermittent claudication, starting with the least costly preparation, only when: 
supervised exercise has not led to satisfactory improvement  and 
the person prefers not to be referred for consideration of angioplasty or bypass surgery. 
Review progress after 3 to 6 months and discontinue naftidrofuryl oxalate if there has been no symptomatic benefit. [2012] 
Naftidrofuryl oxalate is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating intermittent claudication in people with peripheral arterial disease for whom vasodilator therapy is considered appropriate after taking into account other treatment options. For full details, see the guidance on naftidrofuryl oxalate (TA223, 2011) . 
1.5.10 
Cilostazol, pentoxifylline and inositol nicotinate are not recommended in NICE technology appraisal guidance for treating intermittent claudication in people with peripheral arterial disease. For full details, see the guidance on cilostazol, pentoxifylline and inositol nicotinate (TA223, 2011) . 
1.6 Management of critical limb ischaemia 
1.6.1 
Ensure that all people with critical limb ischaemia are assessed by a vascular multidisciplinary team before treatment decisions are made. [2012] 
Revascularisation 
1.6.2 
Offer angioplasty or bypass surgery for treating people with critical limb ischaemia who require revascularisation, taking into account factors including: 
comorbidities 
pattern of disease 
availability of a vein 
patient preference. [2012] 
1.6.3 
Do not offer primary stent placement for treating people with critical limb ischaemia caused by aorto‑iliac disease (except complete occlusion) or femoro‑popliteal disease. [2012] 
1.6.4 
Consider primary stent placement for treating people with critical limb ischaemia caused by complete aorto‑iliac occlusion (rather than stenosis). [2012] 
1.6.5 
Use bare metal stents when stenting is used for treating people with critical limb ischaemia. [2012] 
1.6.6 
Use an autologous vein whenever possible for people with critical limb ischaemia having infra‑inguinal bypass surgery. [2012] 
Management of critical limb ischaemic pain 
1.6.7 
Offer paracetamol, and either weak or strong opioids depending on the severity of pain, to people with critical limb ischaemic pain. 
To support discussions with patients about the benefits and harms of opioid treatment, and safe withdrawal management, see: 
NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms 
NICE's guideline on shared decision making 
the section on medication review in NICE's guideline on medicines optimisation . [2012, amended 2020] 
1.6.8 
Offer drugs such as laxatives and anti‑emetics to manage the adverse effects of strong opioids, in line with the person's needs and preferences. [2012] 
1.6.9 
Refer people with critical limb ischaemic pain to a specialist pain management service if any of the following apply: 
their pain is not adequately controlled and revascularisation is inappropriate or impossible 
ongoing high doses of opioids are required for pain control 
pain persists after revascularisation or amputation. [2012] 
1.6.10 
Do not offer chemical sympathectomy to people with critical limb ischaemic pain, except in the context of a clinical trial. [2012] 
Major amputation 
1.6.11 
Do not offer major amputation to people with critical limb ischaemia unless all options for revascularisation have been considered by a vascular multidisciplinary team. [2012] 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
