Overview | Preventing suicide in community and custodial settings | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Mental health services
Preventing suicide in community and custodial settings
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG105 
Published: 
10 September 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and resources 
Overview 
This guideline covers ways to reduce suicide and help people bereaved or affected by suicides. It aims to: 
help local services work more effectively together to prevent suicide 
identify and help people at risk 
prevent suicide in places where it is currently more likely. 
It does not cover national strategies, general mental wellbeing, or areas covered by other NICE guidance such as self-harm or mental health conditions. 
This guideline should be read in conjunction with Public Health England's Local suicide prevention planning: a practice resource . 
Last reviewed: 10 September 2018 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
suicide prevention partnerships ,  strategies  and  action plans 
gathering and analysing suicide-related information 
awareness raising by suicide prevention partnerships 
how suicide prevention partnerships can reduce access to methods of suicide 
training by suicide prevention partnerships 
how suicide prevention partnerships can support people bereaved or affected by a suspected suicide 
reducing the potential harmful effects of media reporting of a suspected suicide 
Who is it for? 
Health and wellbeing boards and local safeguarding boards 
Commissioners in the NHS and local authorities and others working in health and social care in particular, primary care and community services 
Organisations in the public, private, voluntary and community sectors 
People working in: prisons (public and contracted out), children and young people’s secure estate, immigration removal centres (IRCs), probation services and community rehabilitation services 
National crime agency, police and emergency services 
Education institutions 
Families, carers and others who have been bereaved or affected by suicide 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guidance. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Suicide prevention 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
