Overview | Atrial fibrillation: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Heart rhythm conditions
Atrial fibrillation: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG196 
Published: 
27 April 2021
Last updated: 
30 June 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Using this guideline 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing atrial fibrillation in adults. It includes guidance on providing the best care and treatment for people with atrial fibrillation, including assessing and managing risks of stroke and bleeding. 
See the  MHRA advice on warfarin and other anticoagulants – monitoring of patients during the COVID-19 pandemic , which includes reports of supratherapeutic anticoagulation with warfarin. 
Last reviewed:  30 June 2021 
We amended our recommendation on using the ORBIT score to assess bleeding risk to reinstate the previous link to an appropriate calculation tool, which was removed in error on 10 June 2021. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG180 (June 2014). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
detection and diagnosis 
assessment of stroke and bleeding risks 
stroke prevention 
rate control 
left atrial ablation 
preventing recurrence after ablation 
preventing and managing postoperative atrial fibrillation 
It also includes recommendations on: 
assessment of cardiac function 
personalised package of care and information 
referral 
rhythm control 
management of acute presentations 
initial management of stroke and atrial fibrillation 
stopping anticoagulation 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with atrial fibrillation, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was commissioned by NICE and developed in partnership with the Royal College of Physicians (RCP). 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Atrial fibrillation 
Next page 
Using this guideline 
Back to top
