Recommendations | Gambling-related harms: identification, assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Addiction
Gambling-related harms: identification, assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG248 
Published: 
28 January 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
1.1 Case identification, initial support, referral and assessment
1.2 Information and support
1.3 Models of care and service delivery
1.4 Improving access to treatment
1.5 Treatment of gambling-related harms
1.6 Relapse and ongoing support
1.7 Interventions and support for families and affected others
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
For information on how this guideline will be implemented, see the implementation statement . 
1.1 Case identification, initial support, referral and assessment 
Stigma 
1.1.1 
Recognise that stigma, shame and fear of disclosure can prevent people who are experiencing gambling-related harms from talking about gambling, and from seeking and accessing support and treatment. In addition, stigma may be a particular issue for certain groups such as people from marginalised, minority or under-represented groups. 
For recommendations on overcoming stigma, see the section on improving access to treatment . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on improving access to treatment . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: access . 
Asking about gambling 
These recommendations are for healthcare professionals and social care practitioners in all settings including the criminal justice system. 
1.1.2 
Consider asking people about gambling (even if they have no obvious risk factors for gambling-related harm) when asking them about smoking, alcohol consumption or use of other substances (for example, as part of a holistic assessment or health check, when registering for a service such as with a GP or in contacts with social services). 
1.1.3 
Ask people about gambling in the following situations because they may be at increased risk of gambling-related harm: 
when they present in any setting with a mental health problem or concern, in particular thoughts about self-harm or suicide, depression, anxiety, psychosis and bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), personality disorder, or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
when they are taking medicines that may affect impulse control, for example, dopamine agonists for Parkinson's disease, or aripiprazole for psychosis; see NICE's guideline on Parkinson's disease for advice on managing and monitoring impulse control disorders as an adverse effect of dopaminergic therapy 
at each key contact with the criminal justice system (for example, with the police, liaison and diversion services, probation services, courts and prisons) 
when they present in any setting with problems relating to alcohol or substance dependence, especially use of cocaine 
when they are at risk of or experiencing homelessness 
when they share that they have financial concerns 
when there are concerns about safeguarding issues or violence, including domestic abuse 
when they share that there is a family history of gambling that harms or alcohol or substance dependence. 
1.1.4 
Consider asking people about gambling if they may be at increased risk of harm: 
because they have a neurological condition or acquired brain injury that leads to disinhibition or increased impulsivity 
because they are a young person who has recently left home for the first time 
because of their current or past occupation, for example, armed forces personnel, veterans, people working in the gambling or financial industry, and sports professionals. 
1.1.5 
Take into account that having multiple risk factors may have a cumulative effect and further increase the person's chances of experiencing gambling-related harms. 
1.1.6 
Use direct questions to ask people about gambling, such as: 'Do you gamble?' or 'Are you worried about your own or another person's gambling?'. Be aware that some people may find it difficult to talk about gambling. 
1.1.7 
Encourage people who have concerns about gambling to assess the level of gambling-related harms by asking them to complete the questionnaire available on the NHS website . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect services, see the rationale and impact section on asking about gambling . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: factors suggesting harmful gambling and evidence review B: tools for identification and assessment of harmful gambling . 
Initial support for people experiencing gambling-related harms 
These recommendations are for healthcare professionals and social care practitioners in all settings including the criminal justice system. 
1.1.8 
Advise people experiencing gambling-related harms that support and treatment are available and recovery is possible. 
1.1.9 
If a person is experiencing gambling-related harms, offer initial help and support. Depending on the setting, the severity of the harms and the level of concern, this could include: 
providing information on gambling-related harms (see the recommendations on information and support ) 
encouraging and supporting them to seek help, for example, from their healthcare provider or social worker 
signposting them to resources and services for further help and advice (for example, the NHS website on help for problems with gambling , gambling support groups, local authority resources and the national gambling helpline), some of which can be accessed anonymously 
referring or signposting them to gambling support and gambling treatment services (see the recommendations on referral and triage ). 
1.1.10 
Consider brief motivational interviewing to encourage people to seek further help and support if they are reluctant to access services. 
1.1.11 
Recognise that gambling and gambling-related harms can be a dominant risk factor for suicidal ideation and suicide attempts, even in the absence of other risk factors. 
1.1.12 
If a person experiencing gambling-related harms presents considerable or immediate risk to themselves or others, refer them urgently to specialist mental health services or a crisis team, via the emergency services if necessary. See NICE's guideline on self-harm: assessment, management and preventing recurrence . 
1.1.13 
Ask people experiencing gambling-related harms directly about suicidal ideation and intent. If there is a risk of self-harm or suicide: 
tell them about the known link between gambling-related harms and suicide, and that the risk may be highest immediately after a gambling episode 
put in place a safety plan to help them manage the acute risk; see the section on interventions for self-harm in NICE's guideline on self-harm: assessment, management and preventing recurrence 
assess whether they have social support (for example, from their family or friends) to help protect them and are aware of other sources of help (for example, voluntary sector organisations or social care services) 
consider mobilising social support to help protect the person (for example, by contacting their family or friends, balancing the possible benefits and risks of involving family members or carers with the rights of the person) 
advise them to seek further help if the situation deteriorates. 
1.1.14 
Discuss with people the possibility of practical self-exclusion techniques that could be used to prevent gambling, including: 
blocking software or tools to prevent online gambling 
blocking marketing messages 
self-exclusion systems for land-based gambling such as casinos, arcades and betting shops 
systems that block gambling payments through the person's bank account 
methods to limit access to money, for example, agreeing that a family member will take control of finances. 
1.1.15 
Consider providing advice on how and where to seek help and support with: 
finances, including debt management 
social issues such as housing 
employment or employer issues 
legal issues 
domestic violence or other harms to family relationships, including economic abuse and coercive behaviour. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect services, see the rationale and impact section on initial support for people experiencing gambling-related harms . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: factors suggesting harmful gambling . 
Referral and triage 
These recommendations are for healthcare professionals and social care practitioners in all settings including the criminal justice system. They may also be relevant to commissioners and providers of gambling treatment and gambling support services. 
1.1.16 
Consider referring people experiencing gambling that harms via an NHS triage service, for triage and allocation to an appropriate level of service. 
1.1.17 
When discussing support or treatment with the person, tell them that self-referral, via an NHS triage service or the national gambling helpline, is an option. 
1.1.18 
Recognise that gambling severity can vary over time and recent onset or short periods of less intense gambling, even after a period of abstinence, can lead to severe harms in some people, and may require referral to a gambling treatment service. 
1.1.19 
Consider referring affected others to gambling treatment or support services, depending on their level of need. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect services, see the rationale and impact section on referral and triage . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: tools for identification and assessment of harmful gambling . 
Assessment of gambling that harms 
These recommendations are for providers of gambling treatment services. 
1.1.20 
Consider using an up-to-date validated tool to assess gambling that harms (examples include the Problem Gambling Severity Index and the South Oaks Gambling Screen). 
1.1.21 
Discuss the person's gambling with them and assess the following: 
gambling history (when the gambling started and how it has progressed, including when the frequency or intensity increased) 
type(s) and location of gambling activities 
current frequency of gambling (for example, days per week or hours per day) 
medical history, including physical and mental health, neurodevelopmental history, acquired brain injury, comorbidities, and alcohol or substance dependence 
childhood development and family history 
current mental health and the relationship with gambling-related harms (see recommendation 1.5.7 ) 
the impact of gambling on their mental health (for example, depression, anxiety and insomnia) and their physical health 
risk of suicide, including any past attempts 
financial impact of gambling (for example, money spent on gambling as a proportion of income, borrowing or stealing money for gambling) 
how gambling affects other aspects of their life (for example, social functioning, interpersonal relationships, employment, education and whether it has led to any involvement in crime) 
psychological functions of gambling for them, or the motivation for gambling 
factors that may contribute to continued gambling (for example, triggers and cravings, and how thoughts and emotions may have been influenced) 
role of advertising and marketing in contributing to gambling 
alignment to ICD-11 or DSM-5 criteria for gambling disorder 
reasons for seeking support, motivation to change and expectations and goals of treatment 
safeguarding issues or concerns 
immediate needs (for example, help with housing, food and debts). 
1.1.22 
Assess whether current pharmacological therapy may be contributing to gambling that harms (for example, aripiprazole and medicines for Parkinson's disease). Think about reducing or optimising these medicines in consultation with the relevant specialist services. 
1.1.23 
Develop a case formulation , care plan and safety plan (if needed) with the person based on the results of the assessment, including any immediate actions that can be taken (see recommendation 1.1.14 ). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect services, see the rationale and impact section on assessment of gambling that harms . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: tools for identification and assessment of harmful gambling . 
1.2 Information and support 
These recommendations are for providers of gambling treatment and gambling support services. 
For more guidance on communication and giving information, including providing accessible information, see NICE's guidelines on patient experience in adult NHS services and service user experience in adult mental health . For advice on discussing risks and benefits, see NICE's guideline on shared decision making . 
1.2.1 
Provide unbiased information to people who are experiencing gambling-related harms (including affected others) to support their treatment and recovery. This could include information on: 
why people gamble and what induces them to continue gambling or return to gambling, despite the harm; include information on the addictive nature of gambling, effects on the reward system in the brain and how the gambling industry and advertising may incentivise, encourage and promote gambling behaviour 
the different types of gambling activities, how different products are targeted to different groups of people (for example, in-game sports betting is promoted mainly to young men and some online games are promoted mainly to women) and how the addictive characteristics and harm of different gambling products and environments may vary 
that it is common to feel shame or fear and to experience stigma when disclosing gambling harms 
the harms that can be caused by gambling, for example, distress; impact on self-esteem, self-control, decision making and mental health; the potential for increased risk of suicide, debt and possible involvement in crime 
how to recognise the potential harms associated with gambling, including the link with mental health conditions, and alcohol or substance dependence 
what services are available for gambling-related harms (including crisis services for people at risk of suicide; voluntary sector organisations or social care services; and national, regional or local treatment services) and how to access them (see the recommendations on referral and triage ) 
how to access other sources of support for gambling-related harms (for example, informal support from family and friends, peer support groups and online forums) 
how to access practical support (for example, debt services, financial help and advice on how to avoid gambling sites, inducements and marketing). 
1.2.2 
Discuss with people experiencing gambling-related harms: 
their reasons for seeking support and treatment and how these can help to motivate them to change 
that recovery is achievable (for example, sharing positive testimonies, stories and films and providing access to people who have recovered from gambling-related harms). 
1.2.3 
Provide unbiased information to affected others, including: 
how they can support the person who is experiencing gambling that harms 
how they can be supported by gambling treatment services, healthcare providers, voluntary sector organisations or social care services, either with the person experiencing gambling that harms or by themselves 
how they can access help for themselves, including support for their own mental health and practical issues such as financial support. 
1.2.4 
Provide information and support in ways that the person prefers, for example, at face-to-face consultations or online, such as through websites, apps or social media. 
1.2.5 
Service providers should ensure that information: 
is well promoted and signposted in local and national health and social care services, as well as in the wider community, including in the criminal justice system 
can be accessed anonymously. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect services, see the rationale and impact section on information and support . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: information and support . 
1.3 Models of care and service delivery 
These recommendations are for commissioners and providers of gambling treatment and gambling support services. 
Gambling treatment services 
Gambling treatment services will be commissioned by the NHS but may be provided by a range of providers, including the NHS or voluntary sector organisations. At the time of publication (January 2025), only the specialist gambling clinics are commissioned by the NHS. However, there is a planned reconfiguration of gambling treatment services. There will therefore be a period over which this change will be fully implemented (see the implementation statement ). 
1.3.1 
Gambling treatment services should include: 
specialist gambling clinics, which will usually provide assessment, information, treatment and support, including case management, for people with a greater severity of gambling-related harms or a greater severity of co-occurring needs (such as mental health conditions, suicidality, previous trauma, neurodiversity, learning disabilities, and alcohol or substance dependence) 
community-based gambling treatment services, which will usually provide treatment and support for people experiencing gambling-related harms, including affected others, but with lower levels of gambling-related harms or complexity than specialist gambling clinics. 
Gambling support services 
Gambling support services may be commissioned by the NHS or may operate independently and be provided by a range of providers, including the NHS or voluntary sector organisations. 
1.3.2 
Gambling support services should provide information and support to people experiencing gambling-related harms, including affected others. This support may include brief interventions, peer support, advice and signposting and referring to other services, including gambling treatment services. 
All services 
1.3.3 
Gambling treatment and support services should be provided to meet the needs of people with different levels of gambling-related harm. 
1.3.4 
People should be offered the appropriate level of care to meet their needs, based on the severity of their gambling (including the Problem Gambling Severity Index score if available), presence of comorbidities, other co-occurring needs, and according to their preferences. 
1.3.5 
Gambling treatment and support services should be commissioned and provided without influence or involvement from the gambling industry, ensuring there are no conflicts of interest between the commissioners and providers of services and the gambling industry. 
1.3.6 
Commissioners and service providers should ensure that all services: 
allow for the prompt and ongoing assessment of the risk and severity of gambling-related harms, including the risk of suicide and self-harm 
take into account the needs of the individual to ensure that people are offered the relevant support and treatment, referring people to other services such as specialist gambling clinics if necessary 
deliver timely support so that treatment can start as soon as possible after assessment 
provide easy access to treatment, including for people who may otherwise find it difficult to access services (for example, people experiencing homelessness, people in the criminal justice system and in military service); see the recommendations on improving access to treatment 
are multidisciplinary and provide coordinated support for people experiencing gambling-related harms across mental and physical health services and local authorities, including social care and the criminal justice system, with agreed protocols for sharing information between providers 
work with services for people with learning disabilities, mental health conditions (such as PTSD or severe ADHD), alcohol or substance dependence, or acquired cognitive impairments (see recommendation 1.5.8 ) 
provide support and treatment for as long as needed, including follow-up and aftercare support 
support the integrated delivery of services across providers, to ensure that people do not fall into gaps in service provision. 
1.3.7 
Commissioners and providers should ensure that the workforce delivering support and treatment services for people experiencing gambling-related harms is trained and competent to do so (for example, cognitive behavioural therapy [CBT] should be delivered by psychologists or accredited CBT therapists; see recommendation 1.5.9 ). 
1.3.8 
Service providers should routinely collect and publish nationally agreed standardised sets of data on people entering services for gambling-related harms, including waiting times, demographics, baseline data on type of gambling and severity of gambling-related harms, and treatment outcomes. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect services, see the rationale and impact section on models of care and service delivery . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: models of care and service delivery . 
1.4 Improving access to treatment 
These recommendations are for commissioners and providers of gambling treatment and gambling support services. 
Overcoming stigma 
1.4.1 
To lessen the impact of stigma and to support access to treatment: 
use a person-centred, empathic, non-judgemental approach and 
discuss with people any fears or concerns that are preventing them from seeking help, and having or continuing with treatment. 
1.4.2 
To help people feel more comfortable and reduce stigma when accessing treatment, consider modifying treatments or their delivery for different groups, including making reasonable adjustments. Depending on local needs, this may include providing: 
sex or gender-specific services such as women-only groups 
vocation-specific services such as veterans' groups 
groups for affected others 
culturally sensitive services that are tailored to the needs of local communities and take into account factors such as ethnic background and religion 
treatments for gambling-related harms in separate locations from services for alcohol or substance dependence. 
Supporting access for people with mental health problems 
1.4.3 
Recognise that people with mental health problems (for example, PTSD, depression or anxiety) may find it more difficult to access support and treatment for gambling-related harms. 
1.4.4 
Ensure that treatment for gambling-related harms is coordinated with treatment for any coexisting alcohol or substance dependence or mental health problems (see recommendation 1.5.8 ). 
Supporting and encouraging access and engagement 
1.4.5 
Ensure that referral and treatment pathways are simple and easy to access. To enable this, the pathways should: 
be accessible through self-referral or referral by practitioners in a variety of settings (see the recommendations on referral and triage ) 
take into account the needs of particular groups, for example, by providing access for people in the criminal justice system 
be designed to minimise drop-out and maximise engagement, for example, by avoiding a requirement to complete multiple steps to gain access to treatment. 
1.4.6 
Explain to people accessing treatment that: 
gambling treatment and support services are usually free, although some charges may apply (for example, for prescriptions) 
all conversations are private and confidential, although it may be necessary to share confidential information without their consent in certain circumstances (for example, if they or others may be in danger). 
1.4.7 
Encourage access to and engagement with treatment by starting evidence-based interventions as soon as possible after identifying gambling-related harms. 
1.4.8 
Encourage engagement with interventions by providing treatment in a location and using a delivery method that reflects the person's needs and preferences (for example, individual sessions if group therapy is not available or suitable, in person or via phone or video conferencing). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on improving access to treatment . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: access . 
1.5 Treatment of gambling-related harms 
These recommendations are for commissioners and providers of gambling treatment and gambling support services. 
General principles of treatment 
For more guidance on tailoring healthcare services for individuals, see NICE's guidelines on patient experience in adult NHS services and service user experience in adult mental health . For advice on making decisions about treatment and care, see NICE's guideline on shared decision making . 
1.5.1 
Recognise that the holistic care of people experiencing gambling-related harms should include multidisciplinary teams where necessary, for example, healthcare professionals, social care practitioners, and people working in the criminal justice system and voluntary sector organisations. 
1.5.2 
Involve a partner, family member or other person close to the person experiencing gambling that harms in their treatment and in communication with the care team, if that is what they both agree to. Discuss that it may be useful to meet individually and jointly. 
1.5.3 
Discuss and agree the aim of treatment for gambling that harms (typically abstinence) with the person. 
1.5.4 
Discuss with the person, and those close to them if present, if they have any other goals that are important to them, for example: 
reducing financial difficulties 
improving relationships 
improving their mental health, such as reducing anxiety and distress. 
1.5.5 
Offer gambling-specific interventions for the treatment of gambling that harms. 
1.5.6 
Ensure that a variety of methods (including in-person or remote, for example, via phone or videoconferencing) are available for delivering interventions. Discuss the different methods with the person, including that: 
remote delivery (via phone or videoconferencing) may be more convenient and less time-consuming than in-person treatment 
in-person treatment is more likely to lead to the development of a supportive therapeutic relationship than remote treatment, and this may help ongoing engagement. 
1.5.7 
Recognise that some mental health conditions, alcohol or substance dependence or acquired cognitive impairments may be: 
a consequence of gambling that harms and may resolve or improve with successful treatment for gambling or 
underlying conditions that occur before or alongside gambling that harms and need concurrent treatment or 
so severe (for example, severe PTSD, or alcohol or substance dependence) that they need treatment first, to improve engagement with treatment for gambling that harms. 
1.5.8 
Ensure that there are established links with services to treat comorbidities (for example, alcohol or substance dependence; or cognitive, mental and physical health problems including Parkinson's disease) or in-house expertise, to provide a timely, comprehensive, coordinated service for people with comorbidities and avoid the need for multiple appointments with different services. 
1.5.9 
Interventions should be delivered by trained, competent practitioners who practice using an agreed competency framework. This includes those who provide peer support or facilitate group therapies. 
1.5.10 
Practitioners should deliver interventions in a way that: 
is understanding, empathic, supportive and helpful 
encourages ownership and engagement by the person experiencing gambling-related harms 
avoids minimising concerns 
avoids stigmatising language 
develops and builds a therapeutic relationship with the person 
encourages a 2-way dialogue and ongoing communication 
provides continuity of care wherever possible. 
Peer support 
1.5.11 
Offer peer support as an integral part of the support and treatment for gambling-related harms for people who wish to engage with it. Explain that peer support can provide: 
an opportunity to discuss aspects of recovery (social and personal) with others who have been through similar experiences 
an opportunity to hear what has worked for other people 
an opportunity to discuss topics that might feel stigmatising (for example, relapse) 
encouragement to continue with treatment. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on treatment of gambling-related harms: general principles and peer support . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: improving gambling treatment services . 
Psychological interventions for gambling that harms 
These recommendations are for commissioners and providers of gambling treatment services. 
1.5.12 
Consider motivational interviewing to strengthen people's confidence and commitment to change, or to encourage people who are unsure or have reservations about starting treatment. 
1.5.13 
Offer group CBT to reduce gambling severity and frequency. Start this intervention as soon as possible after diagnosis. 
1.5.14 
Offer individual CBT if the person does not wish to join a group, if group therapy is not possible (for example, there are no other people available to form a suitable group), or it is assessed as not suitable for the person. 
1.5.15 
CBT should: 
be delivered as a group intervention ideally by 2 practitioners (see recommendation 1.3.7 ), at least 1 of whom has gambling-specific CBT training and competence, or as an individual intervention by 1 practitioner with gambling-specific CBT training and competence 
be delivered in line with evidence-based treatment protocols 
be provided as a course, usually with 8 to 10 sessions for group therapy or 6 to 8 sessions for individual therapy (in some cases, more sessions may be needed or fewer sessions may be sufficient) 
include a relapse prevention component (covering, for example, how to deal with triggers and how to respond to a relapse). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on psychological interventions for gambling that harms . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: psychological and psychosocial treatment of harmful gambling . 
Pharmacological treatment for gambling that harms 
These recommendations are for commissioners and providers of gambling treatment services. 
1.5.16 
Consider naltrexone to reduce gambling severity if: 
psychological therapy has not achieved the desired outcomes after an appropriate course has been completed or 
the person has repeated relapses despite having received an appropriate course of psychological therapy. 
In January 2025, this was an off-label use of naltrexone. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.5.17 
Naltrexone should be started by, or under the supervision of, an appropriately qualified and experienced specialist. See the National prescribing guideline for naltrexone in gambling disorder . 
1.5.18 
Consider continuing psychological therapy in combination with naltrexone. 
1.5.19 
When starting naltrexone: 
check that kidney and liver function are within normal ranges 
check that people are not taking opioids before starting naltrexone (and advise people to avoid taking opioids while taking naltrexone) 
consider an initial dose of 25 mg once a day for 3 days, then increase the dose to 50 mg once a day for 4 to 6 months 
agree a follow-up plan with the person to regularly monitor for effectiveness, safety and side effects (for example, regular liver function tests, and the onset of chest pain or palpitations); see the National prescribing guideline for naltrexone in gambling disorder . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on pharmacological treatment of gambling that harms . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: pharmacological treatment of harmful gambling . 
1.6 Relapse and ongoing support 
These recommendations are for commissioners and providers of gambling treatment and gambling support services. 
1.6.1 
Recognise that relapse in people whose gambling has decreased after treatment can be distressing for the person and may lead to suicide or self-harm. 
1.6.2 
Discuss the risk of relapse with people experiencing gambling that harms. Include that: 
relapse is not shameful and it may be part of a recovery journey or learning event 
relapse does not indicate individual failure, and having a plan in place to recover quickly increases confidence and reduces shame 
relapse can occur because of individual or environmental factors 
understanding the causes and triggers which may lead to relapse, including exposure to advertising and marketing, may be helpful 
skills and techniques can be taught during treatment to reduce the chance of relapse (for example, using blocking tools, stimulus control and strategies for coping with high-risk situations). 
1.6.3 
Continue to provide support, follow-up, and rapid re-entry to therapy after a course of psychological or pharmacological treatment according to the person's needs and preferences. 
1.6.4 
Consider additional treatment or support for people: 
where the agreed outcomes have not been achieved through the original intervention 
who may be at higher risk of relapse 
who have lapsed or relapsed. 
1.6.5 
Discuss with the person what additional treatment or support they may need. This could include: 
additional sessions of an intervention (for example, CBT) 
other support such as peer support or support groups 
support with ongoing harms (for example, relating to employment, finance, health, housing, relationships or legal issues), which may be provided by voluntary sector organisations. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on relapse and ongoing support . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: relapse prevention . 
1.7 Interventions and support for families and affected others 
These recommendations are for commissioners and providers of gambling treatment and gambling support services. 
1.7.1 
Recognise that: 
the recommendations in this guideline on case identification, initial support and referral , information and support , improving access to treatment , overcoming stigma and general principles of treatment also apply to family members and affected others 
gambling-related harms, including stigma, may also have a severe impact on family members and affected others. 
1.7.2 
Offer support to affected others, including: 
the opportunity to receive help and advice both by themselves and with the person experiencing gambling that harms (if that is what they both agree to) 
techniques to manage their own distress and prioritise their needs 
support to help them engage in non-judgemental communication with the person experiencing gambling that harms. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on interventions for families and affected others . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: interventions for families and affected others . 
Next page 
Terms used in this guideline 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
