Recommendations for research | Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Attention deficit disorder
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG87 
Published: 
14 March 2018
Last updated: 
13 September 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1 Children and young people aged 5 to 18 years – brief, group-based, ADHD-focused, parent-training intervention
2 Medication choice in people with coexisting conditions
3 Medication choice in people with no previous medication for ADHD
4 Prescribing beyond monotherapy
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
1 Children and young people aged 5 to 18 years – brief, group-based, ADHD-focused, parent-training intervention 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness, and optimum length, of a brief parent-training intervention for parents and carers of children and young people with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) aged 5 to 18 years? 
Why this is important 
There was no clear evidence identified about the benefit of formal parent-training programmes for ADHD symptoms in children and young people aged 5 to 18 years. The cost effectiveness of these programmes was unclear, partly because of uncertainty over the number of sessions and the length of programme needed to achieve clinical benefit. This research recommendation would help address these uncertainties. 
2 Medication choice in people with coexisting conditions 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of ADHD medications in people with ADHD and tic disorders, a history of psychosis or mania, or personality disorder? 
Why is this important 
No evidence was identified to justify different medication choices in people with ADHD and tic disorders, a history of psychosis or mania, or emotional dysregulation. These groups are often excluded from trials. There are reasons (for example, mechanism of action of medication options, previous reports of adverse effects) to suspect that these groups may respond differently to different drugs, but a lack of trials to confirm this. Primarily there are some concerns that stimulant medication may worsen the symptoms of any of these coexisting conditions and therefore non-stimulant medication should be preferred. 
3 Medication choice in people with no previous medication for ADHD 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of ADHD medications in people with ADHD with no previous medication for the condition? 
Why is this important 
Most of the evidence to support the recommendations for medication choices for people with ADHD comes from studies in people who have previously received medication. Therefore, these studies often include a population not representative of the people with newly diagnosed ADHD. There may be differing levels of efficacy of the various treatment options in people who have received no previous medication for ADHD. 
4 Prescribing beyond monotherapy 
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of various ADHD prescribing strategies when monotherapy has failed? 
Why is this important 
This guideline makes recommendations for the medication choices for people with ADHD up to the point at which common monotherapies are exhausted. There is very little evidence to guide healthcare professionals beyond this point, particularly with regard to whether there is a benefit of prescribing stimulant and non-stimulant medication together. 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
