Key priorities for implementation | Spasticity in under 19s: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Spasticity
Spasticity in under 19s: management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG145 
Published: 
25 July 2012
Last updated: 
29 November 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Key priorities for implementation 
The following recommendations have been identified as priorities for implementation. 
Principles of care 
Children and young people with spasticity should have access to a network of care that uses agreed care pathways supported by effective communication and integrated team working. 
If a child or young person receives treatment for spasticity from healthcare professionals outside the network team , this should be planned and undertaken in discussion with the network team to ensure integrated care and effective subsequent management. 
Offer a management programme that is: 
developed and implemented in partnership with the child or young person and their parents or carers 
individualised 
goal focused. 
Help children and young people and their parents or carers to be partners in developing and implementing the management programme by offering: 
relevant, and age and developmentally appropriate, information and educational materials 
regular opportunities for discussion and 
advice on their developmental potential and how different treatment options may affect this. 
Monitor the child or young person's condition for: 
the response to treatments 
worsening of spasticity 
developing secondary consequences of spasticity , for example pain or contractures 
the need to change their individualised goals. 
Physical therapy (physiotherapy and/or occupational therapy) 
All children and young people with spasticity referred to the network team should be promptly assessed by a physiotherapist and, where necessary, an occupational therapist. 
Following treatment with botulinum toxin type A , continuous pump-administered intrathecal baclofen , orthopaedic surgery or selective dorsal rhizotomy , provide an adapted physical therapy programme as an essential component of management. 
Intrathecal baclofen 
Consider treatment with continuous pump-administered intrathecal baclofen in children and young people with spasticity if, despite the use of non-invasive treatments, spasticity or dystonia are causing difficulties with any of the following: 
pain or muscle spasms 
posture or function 
self-care (or ease of care by parents or carers). 
At the time of publication (July 2012), intrathecal baclofen did not have UK marketing authorisation for children younger than 4 years, nor did it have UK marketing authorisation for use in the treatment of dystonia associated with spasticity. Where appropriate, informed consent should be obtained and documented. 
Orthopaedic surgery 
An assessment should be performed by an orthopaedic surgeon within the network team if: 
based on clinical findings (see recommendation 1.1.16) or radiological monitoring, there is concern that the hip may be displaced 
based on clinical or radiological findings there is concern about spinal deformity. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Previous page 
Introduction 
Back to top
