Overview | Physical activity and the environment | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health protection
Environment
Physical activity and the environment
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG90 
Published: 
22 March 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
The committee's discussion 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
Glossary 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers how to improve the physical environment to encourage and support physical activity. The aim is to increase the general population’s physical activity levels. 
The recommendations in this guideline should be read alongside NICE's guideline on physical activity: walking and cycling . 
Last reviewed: 22 March 2018 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline PH8 (January 2008). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
strategies, policies and plans to increase physical activity in the local environment 
active travel 
public open spaces 
buildings 
schools 
Who is it for? 
Local authorities and metro mayors, including agencies contracted to deliver environmental changes for local authorities 
Others responsible for open spaces used by the public such as in workplaces, community-owned gardens and playing fields 
Housing, local enterprise partnerships and others responsible for the built environment 
Public transport planners and providers 
Organisations working to ensure people with limited mobility can be physically active 
It may also be relevant for members of the public. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
NICE worked with Public Health England to develop this guidance. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health 
Physical activity: encouraging activity in the community 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
