Overview | Coeliac disease: recognition, assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Coeliac disease
Coeliac disease: recognition, assessment and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG20 
Published: 
02 September 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Implementation: getting started 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the recognition, assessment and management of coeliac disease in children, young people and adults.  
Last reviewed: 18 December 2019 
We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. For more information, see the surveillance decision .  
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG86 (May 2009). 
Next review: This guideline/guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
recognising coeliac disease 
serological testing for coeliac disease 
referral of people with suspected coeliac disease 
information and support 
advice on dietary management 
non-responsive and refractory coeliac disease 
monitoring and review in people with coeliac disease 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare staff who care for people with suspected or diagnosed coeliac disease 
Laboratories carrying out testing for coeliac disease 
Commissioners and providers of coeliac services 
People with coeliac disease or suspected coeliac disease, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Coeliac disease 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
