Managing chronic asthma | Asthma pathway (BTS, NICE, SIGN) | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Respiratory conditions
Asthma
Asthma pathway (BTS, NICE, SIGN)
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG244 
Published: 
27 November 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Diagnosis 
Monitoring asthma control 
Managing chronic asthma 
Managing acute asthma 
Managing difficult and severe asthma 
Managing asthma in pregnancy, during labour and when breastfeeding 
Asthma in adolescents 
Occupational asthma 
Self-management 
Risk-stratified care 
Organisation and delivery of care 
On this page 
Pharmacological management
Non-pharmacological management
Managing chronic asthma 
Pharmacological management 
Treatment principles 
See recommendations on principles of pharmacological treatment in the BTS, NICE and SIGN guideline on asthma. 
Inhalers 
See recommendations on inhalers in the BTS, NICE and SIGN guideline on asthma. 
Environmental impact of inhaler devices 
See recommendations on the environmental impact of inhaler devices in the BTS/SIGN British guideline on the management of asthma (SIGN 158). 
People 12 years and over 
See recommendations on pharmacological management in people aged 12 and over and the summary of pharmacological management in people aged 12 years and over in the BTS, NICE and SIGN guideline on asthma. 
See also the Accelerated Access Collaborative consensus pathway on the management of uncontrolled asthma in adults . 
Children aged 5 to 11 
See recommendations on pharmacological management in children aged 5 to 11 and the summary of pharmacological management in children aged 5 to 11 in the BTS, NICE and SIGN guideline on asthma. 
Children under 5 
See recommendations on pharmaceutical management in children under 5 and the summary of pharmacological management in children under 5 in the BTS, NICE and SIGN guideline on asthma. 
Decreasing maintenance therapy 
See recommendations on decreasing maintenance therapy in the BTS, NICE and SIGN guideline on asthma. 
Adherence 
See recommendations on adherence in the BTS, NICE and SIGN guideline on asthma. 
Non-pharmacological management 
See recommendations on non-pharmacological management in the BTS/SIGN British guideline on the management of asthma (SIGN 158). 
Next page 
Managing acute asthma 
Previous page 
Monitoring asthma control 
Back to top
