Overview | Stroke and transient ischaemic attack in over 16s: diagnosis and initial management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Stroke and transient ischaemic attack
Stroke and transient ischaemic attack in over 16s: diagnosis and initial management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG128 
Published: 
01 May 2019
Last updated: 
13 April 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Additional information 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and resources 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers interventions in the acute stage of a stroke or transient ischaemic attack (TIA). It offers the best clinical advice on the diagnosis and acute management of stroke and TIA in the 48 hours after onset of symptoms. 
Last reviewed:  27 March 2026 
We reviewed this guideline and will not be developing recommendations on the use of genetic testing for clopidogrel in populations that are not already covered in relevant NICE HealthTech guidance. See the surveillance decision for further details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG68 (July 2008). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
rapid recognition of symptoms and diagnosis , including  initial management of suspected and confirmed TIA 
imaging for people with suspected TIA 
specialist care ,  pharmacological treatments and  surgery for people with acute stroke 
thrombectomy for people with acute ischaemic stroke 
maintenance or restoration of homeostasis , including blood pressure control for people with acute intracerebral haemorrhage 
nutrition and hydration 
optimal positioning and early mobilisation for people with acute stroke 
decompressive hemicraniectomy for people with acute stroke 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals in primary and secondary NHS healthcare settings 
Commissioners and providers of services 
People aged over 16 who have had a stroke or TIA, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Stroke in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
