Other considerations | Human and animal bites: antimicrobial prescribing | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Human and animal bites: antimicrobial prescribing
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG184 
Published: 
04 November 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Rationale and impact 
Summary of the evidence 
Other considerations 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
Medicines safety
Medicines adherence
Resource implications
Other considerations 
Medicines safety 
Antibiotic-associated diarrhoea is estimated to occur in 2% to 25% of people taking antibiotics, depending on the antibiotic used ( NICE clinical knowledge summary on diarrhoea – antibiotic associated ). 
About 10% of the general population claim to have a penicillin allergy; this is often because of a skin rash that occurred while taking a course of penicillin as a child. Fewer than 10% of people who think they are allergic to penicillin are truly allergic. See the NICE guideline on drug allergy: diagnosis and management for more information. People with a history of immediate hypersensitivity to penicillins may also react to cephalosporins and other beta lactam antibiotics ( BNF information on phenoxymethylpenicillin ). 
Cholestatic jaundice can occur with co‑amoxiclav, and is more common in people over 65 years and in men; treatment should not usually exceed 14 days ( BNF information on co-amoxiclav ). 
Tetracyclines (for example, doxycycline) can deposit in growing bone and teeth (by binding to calcium) causing staining and occasionally dental hypoplasia. They should not be given to pregnant or breastfeeding women, and use in children under 12 years is either contraindicated or there is a caution for use only in severe or life-threatening infections when there are no alternatives ( BNF information on doxycycline ). 
Co‑trimoxazole is associated with rare but serious side effects, including blood disorders and Stevens–Johnson syndrome. There is caution for use in older people because there is an increased risk of serious side effects. There is also caution for use in people with a predisposition to hyperkalaemia. Monitoring of blood counts is recommended with prolonged treatment ( BNF information on co-trimoxazole ). 
See the summaries of product characteristics for information on contraindications, cautions and adverse effects of individual medicines. 
Medicines adherence 
Medicines adherence may be a problem for some people taking antibiotics that need frequent dosing or longer treatment duration (see the NICE guideline on medicines adherence ). 
Resource implications 
Recommended antibiotics are available as generic formulations. See the NHS Drug Tariff for costs. 
See the evidence review for more information. 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Summary of the evidence 
Back to top
