Overview | Spondyloarthritis in over 16s: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Musculoskeletal conditions
Arthritis
Spondyloarthritis in over 16s: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG65 
Published: 
28 February 2017
Last updated: 
02 June 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing spondyloarthritis that is suspected or confirmed in adults who are 16 years or older. It aims to raise awareness of the features of spondyloarthritis and provide clear advice on what action to take when people with signs and symptoms first present in healthcare settings. It also provides advice on the range of treatments available. 
NICE has also produced guidelines on psoriasis and low back pain and sciatica in over 16s . 
Last reviewed: 4 March 2025 
We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the section on pharmacological management of spondyloarthritis . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
recognition and referral 
diagnosing spondyloarthritis in specialist care 
managing spondyloarthritis 
information and support 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with spondyloarthritis and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Spondyloarthritis 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
