What is this guideline about and who is it for? | Antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Infections
Antimicrobial stewardship
Antimicrobial stewardship: systems and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG15 
Published: 
18 August 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
What is this guideline about and who is it for? 
Person-centred care 
Recommendations 
Implementation: getting started 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Purpose of this guideline
Audience for this guideline
Scope of this guideline
What is this guideline about and who is it for? 
Purpose of this guideline 
The purpose of this guideline is to provide good practice recommendations on systems and processes for the effective use of antimicrobials. 
Audience for this guideline 
Health and social care practitioners (a term used to define the wider care team of hospital staff [including microbiologists and infection control staff], community matrons and case managers, GPs, dentists, podiatrists, pharmacists and community nurses [including those staff working in out‑of‑hours services], domiciliary care workers and care home staff [registered nurses and social care practitioners working in care homes], social workers and case managers). 
Organisations commissioning (for example, clinical commissioning groups or local authorities), providing or supporting the provision of care (for example, national or professional bodies, directors of public health, health and wellbeing boards, healthcare trusts and locum agencies). 
Adults, young people and children (including neonates) using antimicrobials or those caring for these groups. This includes people and organisations involved with the prescribing and management of antimicrobials in health and social care settings. 
The guideline may also be relevant to individual people and organisations delivering non‑NHS healthcare services, and to other devolved administrations. 
It is anticipated that health and social care providers and commissioners of services will need to work together to ensure that patients benefit from the good practice recommendations in this guideline. 
Scope of this guideline 
The guideline covers the effective use of antimicrobials as part of all publicly funded health and social care commissioned or provided by NHS organisations, local authorities (in England), independent organisations or independent contractors. 
The guideline may also be relevant to care delivered by non‑NHS healthcare services, and to other devolved administrations. 
The guideline does not cover: 
specific clinical conditions (although some evidence identified included patients with a specific infection such as community acquired pneumonia) 
named medicines 
public health awareness of antimicrobial resistance 
research into new antimicrobials 
immunisation and vaccination 
antimicrobial household cleaning products 
antimicrobial use in animals 
hand hygiene, decolonisation and infection prevention and control measures 
medicines adherence, except where there are specific issues for health and social care practitioners to address relating to antimicrobials 
access to medicines, including local decision‑making for medicines not included on local formularies 
medicines shortages, including supply issues and discontinued medicines 
prescription charges 
waste medicines. 
All NICE guidelines are developed in accordance with the NICE equality scheme. 
Next page 
Person-centred care 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
