Recommendations | Autism spectrum disorder in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Autism
Autism spectrum disorder in adults: diagnosis and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG142 
Published: 
27 June 2012
Last updated: 
14 June 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 General principles of care
1.2 Identification and assessment
1.3 Identifying the correct interventions and monitoring their use
1.4 Interventions for autism
1.5 Interventions for behaviour that challenges
1.6 Interventions for coexisting mental disorders
1.7 Assessment and interventions for families, partners and carers
1.8 Organisation and delivery of care
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
The following guidance is based on the best available evidence. The full guideline gives details of the methods and the evidence used to develop the guidance. 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 General principles of care 
Principles for working with autistic adults and their families, partners and carers 
1.1.1 
All staff working with autistic adults should: 
work in partnership with autistic adults and, where appropriate, with their families, partners and carers 
offer support and care respectfully 
take time to build a trusting, supportive, empathic and non-judgemental relationship as an essential part of care. 
1.1.2 
All staff working with autistic adults should have an understanding of the: 
nature, development and course of autism 
impact on personal, social, educational and occupational functioning 
impact of the social and physical environment. 
1.1.3 
All health and social care professionals providing care and support for autistic adults should have a broad understanding of the: 
nature, development and course of autism 
impact on personal, social, educational and occupational functioning 
impact of and interaction with the social and physical environment 
impact on and interaction with other coexisting mental and physical disorders and their management 
potential discrepancy between intellectual functioning as measured by IQ and adaptive functioning as reflected, for example, by difficulties in planning and performing activities of daily living including education or employment. 
1.1.4 
All health and social care professionals providing care and support for autistic adults should: 
aim to foster the person's autonomy, promote active participation in decisions about care and support self-management 
maintain continuity of individual relationships wherever possible 
ensure that comprehensive information about the nature of, and interventions and services for, their difficulties is available in an appropriate language or format (including various visual, verbal and aural, easy read , and different colour and font formats) 
consider whether the person may benefit from access to a trained advocate. 
1.1.5 
All health and social care professionals providing care and support for autistic adults and their families, partners and carers should: 
ensure that they are easily identifiable (for example, by producing or wearing appropriate identification) and approachable 
clearly communicate their role and function 
address the person using the name and title they prefer 
clearly explain any clinical language and check that the autistic person understands what is being said 
take into account communication needs, including those arising from a learning disability , sight or hearing problems or language difficulties, and provide communication aids or independent interpreters (someone who does not have a personal relationship with the autistic person) if required. 
1.1.6 
All health and social care professionals providing care and support for autistic adults and their families, partners and carers should ensure that they are: 
familiar with recognised local and national sources (organisations and websites) of information and/or support for autistic people 
able to discuss and advise on how to access and engage with these resources. 
1.1.7 
Encourage autistic adults to participate in self-help or support groups or access one-to-one support, and provide support so that they can attend meetings and engage in the activities. 
1.1.8 
In all settings, take into account the physical environment in which autistic adults are assessed, supported and cared for, including any factors that may trigger behaviour that challenges. If necessary make adjustments or adaptations to the: 
amount of personal space given (at least an arm's length) 
setting using visual supports (for example, use labels with words or symbols to provide visual cues about expected behaviour) 
colour of walls and furnishings (avoid patterns and use low-arousal colours such as cream) 
lighting (reduce fluorescent lighting, use blackout curtains or advise use of dark glasses or increase natural light) 
noise levels (reduce external sounds or advise use of earplugs or ear defenders). 
Where it is not possible to adjust or adapt the environment, consider varying the duration or nature of any assessment or intervention (including taking regular breaks) to limit the negative impact of the environment. 
1.1.9 
All health and social care professionals providing care and support for autistic adults should: 
be aware of under-reporting and under-recognition of physical disorders in autistic people 
be vigilant for unusual likes and dislikes about food and/or lack of physical activity 
offer advice about the beneficial effects of a healthy diet and exercise, taking into account any hyper- and/or hypo-sensory sensitivities ; if necessary, support referral to a GP or dietician. 
1.1.10 
All staff working with autistic adults should be sensitive to issues of sexuality, including asexuality and the need to develop personal and sexual relationships. In particular, be aware that problems in social interaction and communication may lead to the autistic person misunderstanding another person's behaviour or to their possible exploitation by others. 
1.1.11 
Ensure that autistic adults who have caring responsibilities receive support to access the full range of mental and physical health and social care services, including: 
specific information, advice and support to parents about their parenting role, including parent training if needed, by professionals experienced in the care of autistic adults and children 
social support, such as childcare, to enable them to attend appointments, groups and therapy sessions, and to access education and employment. 
Structures for the organisation and delivery of care and interventions 
1.1.12 
In order to effectively provide care and support for autistic adults, the local autism multi-agency strategy group should include representation from managers, commissioners and clinicians from adult services, including mental health, learning disability, primary healthcare, social care, housing, educational and employment services, the criminal justice system and the third sector. There should be meaningful representation from autistic people and their families, partners and carers. 
1.1.13 
In each area a specialist community-based multidisciplinary team for autistic adults (the specialist autism team) should be established. The membership should include: 
psychologists with training and experience in working with autistic adults 
nurses 
occupational therapists 
psychiatrists 
social workers 
speech and language therapists 
support staff (for example, staff supporting access to housing, educational and employment services, financial advice, and personal and community safety skills). 
1.1.14 
The specialist autism team should have a key role in the delivery and coordination of: 
specialist diagnostic and assessment services 
specialist care and interventions 
advice and training to other health and social care professionals on the diagnosis, assessment, care and interventions for autistic adults (as not all may be in the care of a specialist team) 
support in accessing, and maintaining contact with, housing, educational and employment services 
support to families, partners and carers where appropriate 
care and interventions for autistic adults living in specialist residential accommodation 
training, support and consultation for staff who care for autistic adults in residential and community settings. 
Involving families, partners and carers 
1.1.15 
Discuss with autistic adults if and how they want their families, partners or carers to be involved in their care. During discussions, take into account any implications of the Mental Capacity Act (2005) and any communication needs the person may have (see recommendation 1.1.5). 
1.1.16 
If the autistic person wants their family, partner or carer(s) to be involved, encourage this involvement and: 
negotiate between the autistic person and their family, partner or carer(s) about confidentiality and sharing of information on an ongoing basis 
explain how families, partners and carers can help support the autistic person and help with care plans 
make sure that no services are withdrawn because of involvement of the family, partner or carer(s), unless this has been clearly agreed with both the autistic person and their family, partner or carer(s). 
1.1.17 
Give all families, partners and carer(s) (whether or not the person wants them to be involved in their care) verbal and written information about: 
autism and its management 
local support groups and services specifically for families, partners and carers 
their right to a carer's assessment of their own physical and mental health needs, and how to access this (see the NICE guideline on supporting adult carers ). 
1.1.18 
If an autistic person does not want their family, partners or carer(s) to be involved in their care: 
give the family, partner or carer(s) verbal and written information about who they can contact if they are concerned about the person's care 
bear in mind that autistic people may be ambivalent or negative towards their family or partner. This may be for many different reasons, including a coexisting mental disorder or prior experience of violence or abuse. 
1.2 Identification and assessment 
Principles for the effective assessment of autism 
1.2.1 
Staff who have responsibility for the identification or assessment of autistic adults should adapt these procedures, if necessary, to ensure their effective delivery, including modifications to the setting in which assessment is delivered (see recommendation 1.1.8 ) and the duration and pacing of the assessment. 
Identification and initial assessment of possible autism 
1.2.2 
Consider assessment for possible autism when a person has: 
one or more of the following: 
persistent difficulties in social interaction 
persistent difficulties in social communication 
stereotypic (rigid and repetitive) behaviours, resistance to change or restricted interests, and 
one or more of the following: 
problems in obtaining or sustaining employment or education 
difficulties in initiating or sustaining social relationships 
previous or current contact with mental health or learning disability services 
a history of a neurodevelopmental condition (including learning disabilities and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) or mental disorder. 
1.2.3 
For adults with possible autism who do not have a moderate or severe learning disability, consider using the Autism-Spectrum Quotient – 10 items (AQ-10). (If a person has reading difficulties, read out the AQ-10.) If a person scores 6 or above on the AQ-10, or autism is suspected based on clinical judgement (taking into account any past history provided by an informant ), offer a comprehensive assessment for autism. [amended 2021] 
1.2.4 
For adults with possible autism who have a moderate or severe learning disability, consider a brief assessment to ascertain whether the following behaviours are present (if necessary using information from a family member, partner or carer): 
difficulties in reciprocal social interaction including: 
limited interaction with others (for example, being aloof, indifferent or unusual) 
interaction to fulfil needs only 
interaction that is naive or one-sided 
lack of responsiveness to others 
little or no change in behaviour in response to different social situations 
limited social demonstration of empathy 
rigid routines and resistance to change 
marked repetitive activities (for example, rocking and hand or finger flapping), especially when under stress or expressing emotion. 
If two or more of the above categories of behaviour are present, offer a comprehensive assessment for autism. 
Comprehensive (diagnostic, needs and risks) assessment of suspected autism 
1.2.5 
A comprehensive assessment should: 
be undertaken by professionals who are trained and competent 
be team-based and draw on a range of professions and skills 
where possible involve a family member, partner, carer or other informant or use documentary evidence (such as school reports) of current and past behaviour and early development. 
1.2.6 
At the beginning of a comprehensive assessment, discuss with the person the purpose of the assessment and how the outcome of the assessment will be fed back to them. Feedback should be individualised, and consider involving a family member, partner, carer or advocate, where appropriate, to support the person and help explain the feedback. 
1.2.7 
During a comprehensive assessment, enquire about and assess the following: 
core autism features (difficulties in social interaction and communication and the presence of stereotypic behaviour, resistance to change or restricted interests) that have been present in childhood and continuing into adulthood 
early developmental history, where possible 
behavioural problems 
functioning at home, in education or in employment 
past and current physical and mental disorders 
other neurodevelopmental conditions 
hyper- and/or hypo-sensory sensitivities and attention to detail. 
Carry out direct observation of core autism features especially in social situations. 
1.2.8 
To aid more complex diagnosis and assessment for adults, consider using a formal assessment tool, such as: 
the following tools for people who do not have a learning disability: 
the Adult Asperger Assessment (AAA; includes the Autism-Spectrum Quotient [AQ] and the Empathy Quotient [EQ]) 
the Autism Diagnostic Interview – Revised (ADI-R) 
the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule – Generic (ADOS-G) 
the Asperger Syndrome (and high-functioning autism) Diagnostic Interview (ASDI) 
the Ritvo Autism Asperger Diagnostic Scale – Revised (RAADS-R) 
the following tools in particular for people with a learning disability: 
the ADOS-G 
the ADI-R. 
1.2.9 
To organise and structure the process of a more complex assessment, consider using a formal assessment tool, such as the Diagnostic Interview for Social and Communication Disorders (DISCO), the ADOS-G or the ADI-R. 
1.2.10 
During a comprehensive assessment, take into account and assess for possible differential diagnoses and coexisting disorders or conditions, such as: 
other neurodevelopmental conditions (use formal assessment tools for learning disabilities) 
mental disorders (for example, schizophrenia, depression or other mood disorders, and anxiety disorders, in particular, social anxiety disorder and obsessive–compulsive disorder) 
neurological disorders (for example, epilepsy) 
physical disorders 
communication difficulties (for example, speech and language problems, and selective mutism) 
hyper- and/or hypo-sensory sensitivities. 
1.2.11 
Do not use biological tests, genetic tests or neuroimaging for diagnostic purposes routinely as part of a comprehensive assessment. 
1.2.12 
During a comprehensive assessment, assess the following risks: 
self-harm (in particular in people with depression or a moderate or severe learning disability) 
rapid escalation of problems 
harm to others 
self-neglect 
breakdown of family or residential support 
exploitation or abuse by others. 
Develop a risk management plan if needed. 
1.2.13 
Develop a care plan based on the comprehensive assessment, incorporating the risk management plan and including any particular needs (such as adaptations to the social or physical environment), and also taking into account the needs of the family, partner or carer(s). 
1.2.14 
Provide a 'health passport' (for example, a laminated card) for autistic adults, which includes information for all staff about the person's care and support needs. Advise the person to carry the health passport at all times. 
1.2.15 
As part of a comprehensive assessment consider developing a 24-hour crisis management plan, where necessary in conjunction with specialist mental health services, which should detail: 
the likely trigger(s) for a crisis 
the nature and speed of the reaction to any trigger(s), including details about the way in which autism may impact on a person's behaviour leading up to and during a crisis 
the role of the specialist team and other services (including outreach and out-of-hours services) in responding to a crisis 
advice to primary care professionals and other services on their responsibilities and appropriate management in a crisis 
advice for families, partners and carers about their role in a crisis 
the nature of any changes or adaptations to the social or physical environment (see recommendation 1.1.8 ) needed to manage a crisis. 
1.2.16 
Consider obtaining a second opinion (including referral to another specialist autism team if necessary), if there is uncertainty about the diagnosis or if any of the following apply after diagnostic assessment: 
disagreement about the diagnosis within the autism team 
disagreement with the person, their family, partner, carer(s) or advocate about the diagnosis 
a lack of local expertise in the skills and competencies needed to reach diagnosis in autistic adults 
the person has a complex coexisting condition, such as a severe learning disability, a severe behavioural, visual, hearing or motor problem, or a severe mental disorder. 
1.2.17 
On an individual basis, and using information from the comprehensive assessment and physical examination, and clinical judgement, consider further investigations, including: 
genetic tests, as recommended by the regional genetics centre, if there are specific dysmorphic features, congenital anomalies and/or evidence of a learning disability 
electroencephalography if there is suspicion of epilepsy 
hearing or sight tests, if there is suspicion of hearing or visual impairment 
other medical tests depending on individual signs and symptoms (for example, sudden onset of behaviour that challenges, change in usual patterns of behaviour, sudden change in weight, or suspicion that the person might be in pain and is unable to communicate this). 
1.2.18 
Offer all adults who have received a diagnosis of autism (irrespective of whether they need or have refused further care and support) a follow-up appointment to discuss the implications of the diagnosis, any concerns they have about the diagnosis, and any future care and support they may require. 
Assessment of behaviour that challenges 
1.2.19 
Assessment of behaviour that challenges should be integrated into a comprehensive assessment for autistic adults. 
1.2.20 
When assessing behaviour that challenges carry out a functional analysis (see recommendation 1.5.3 ) including identifying and evaluating any factors that may trigger or maintain the behaviour, such as: 
physical disorders 
the social environment (including relationships with family members, partners, carers and friends) 
the physical environment, including sensory factors 
coexisting mental disorders (including depression, anxiety disorders and psychosis) 
communication problems 
changes to routines or personal circumstances. 
1.3 Identifying the correct interventions and monitoring their use 
1.3.1 
When discussing and deciding on interventions with autistic adults, consider: 
their experience of, and response to, previous interventions 
the nature and severity of their autism 
the extent of any associated functional impairment arising from the autism, a learning disability or a mental or physical disorder 
the presence of any social or personal factors that may have a role in the development or maintenance of any identified problem(s) 
the presence, nature, severity and duration of any coexisting disorders 
the identification of predisposing and possible precipitating factors that could lead to crises if not addressed. 
1.3.2 
When discussing and deciding on care and interventions with autistic adults, take into account the: 
increased propensity for elevated anxiety about decision-making in autistic people 
greater risk of altered sensitivity and unpredictable responses to medication 
environment, for example whether it is suitably adapted for autistic people, in particular those with hyper- and/or hypo-sensory sensitivities (see recommendation 1.1.8 ) 
presence and nature of hyper- and/or hypo-sensory sensitivities and how these might impact on the delivery of the intervention 
importance of predictability, clarity, structure and routine for autistic people 
nature of support needed to access interventions. 
1.3.3 
When discussing and deciding on interventions with autistic adults, provide information about: 
the nature, content and duration of any proposed intervention 
the acceptability and tolerability of any proposed intervention 
possible interactions with any current interventions and possible side effects 
the implications for the continuing provision of any current interventions. 
1.3.4 
When deciding on options for pharmacological interventions for behaviour that challenges or coexisting mental disorders in autistic adults: 
be aware of the potential for greater sensitivity to side effects and idiosyncratic responses in autistic people and 
consider starting with a low dose. 
1.3.5 
For any intervention used in autistic adults, there should be a regular review of: 
the benefits of the intervention, where feasible using a formal rating of the target behaviour(s) 
any adverse events 
specific monitoring requirements of pharmacological interventions as highlighted by the summary of product characteristics 
adherence to the intervention. 
1.4 Interventions for autism 
Psychosocial interventions for the core features of autism 
1.4.1 
For autistic adults without a learning disability or with a mild to moderate learning disability, who have identified problems with social interaction, consider: 
a group-based social learning programme focused on improving social interaction 
an individually delivered social learning programme for people who find group-based activities difficult. 
1.4.2 
Social learning programmes to improve social interaction should typically include: 
modelling 
peer feedback (for group-based programmes) or individual feedback (for individually delivered programmes) 
discussion and decision-making 
explicit rules 
suggested strategies for dealing with socially difficult situations. 
1.4.3 
Do not provide facilitated communication for autistic adults. 
Psychosocial interventions focused on life skills 
1.4.4 
For autistic adults of all ranges of intellectual ability, who need help with activities of daily living, consider a structured and predictable training programme based on behavioural principles. 
1.4.5 
For autistic adults without a learning disability or with a mild to moderate learning disability, who are socially isolated or have restricted social contact, consider: 
a group-based structured leisure activity programme 
an individually delivered structured leisure activity programme for people who find group-based activities difficult. 
1.4.6 
A structured leisure activity programme should typically include: 
a focus on the interests and abilities of the participant(s) 
regular meetings for a valued leisure activity 
for group-based programmes, a facilitator with a broad understanding of autism to help integrate the participants 
the provision of structure and support. 
1.4.7 
For autistic adults without a learning disability or with a mild to moderate learning disability, who have problems with anger and aggression, offer an anger management intervention, adjusted to the needs of autistic adults. 
1.4.8 
Anger management interventions should typically include: 
functional analysis of anger and anger-provoking situations 
coping-skills training and behaviour rehearsal 
relaxation training 
development of problem-solving skills. 
1.4.9 
For autistic adults without a learning disability or with a mild learning disability, who are at risk of victimisation, consider anti-victimisation interventions based on teaching decision-making and problem-solving skills. 
1.4.10 
Anti-victimisation interventions should typically include: 
identifying and, where possible, modifying and developing decision-making skills in situations associated with abuse 
developing personal safety skills. 
1.4.11 
For autistic adults without a learning disability or with a mild learning disability, who are having difficulty obtaining or maintaining employment, consider an individual supported employment programme. 
1.4.12 
An individual supported employment programme should typically include: 
help with writing CVs and job applications and preparing for interviews 
training for the identified work role and work-related behaviours 
carefully matching the autistic person with the job 
advice to employers about making reasonable adjustments to the workplace 
continuing support for the person after they start work 
support for the employer before and after the person starts work, including autism awareness training. 
Biomedical (pharmacological, physical and dietary) interventions and the core features of autism 
1.4.13 
Do not use anticonvulsants for the management of core features of autism in adults. 
1.4.14 
Do not use chelation for the management of core features of autism in adults. 
1.4.15 
Do not use the following interventions for the management of core features of autism in adults: 
exclusion diets (such as gluten- or casein-free and ketogenic diets) 
vitamins, minerals and dietary supplements (such as vitamin B6 or iron supplementation). 
1.4.16 
Do not use drugs specifically designed to improve cognitive functioning (for example, cholinesterase inhibitors) for the management of core features of autism or routinely for associated cognitive or behavioural problems in adults. 
1.4.17 
Do not use oxytocin for the management of core features of autism in adults. 
1.4.18 
Do not use secretin for the management of core features of autism in adults. 
1.4.19 
Do not use testosterone regulation for the management of core features of autism in adults. 
1.4.20 
Do not use hyperbaric oxygen therapy for the management of core features of autism in adults. 
1.4.21 
Do not use antipsychotic medication for the management of core features of autism in adults. 
1.4.22 
Do not use antidepressant medication for the routine management of core features of autism in adults. 
1.5 Interventions for behaviour that challenges 
1.5.1 
Before initiating other interventions for behaviour that challenges , address any identified factors that may trigger or maintain the behaviour (see recommendation 1.2.20 ) by offering: 
the appropriate care for physical disorders (for example, gastrointestinal problems or chronic pain) 
treatment for any coexisting mental disorders, including psychological and pharmacological interventions (for example, anxiolytic, antidepressant or antipsychotic medication), informed by existing NICE guidance 
interventions aimed at changing the physical or social environment (for example, who the person lives with) when problems are identified, such as: 
advice to the family, partner or carer(s) 
changes or accommodations to the physical environment (see recommendation 1.1.8 ). 
1.5.2 
First offer a psychosocial intervention for the behaviour that challenges if no coexisting mental or physical disorder, or problem related to the physical or social environment, has been identified as triggering or maintaining behaviour that challenges. 
1.5.3 
When deciding on the nature and content of a psychosocial intervention to address behaviour that challenges, use a functional analysis. The functional analysis should facilitate the targeting of interventions that address the function(s) of problem behaviour(s) by: 
providing information, from a range of environments, on: 
factors that appear to trigger the behaviour 
the consequences of the behaviour (that is, the reinforcement received as a result of their behaviour) 
identifying trends in behaviour occurrence, factors that may be evoking that behaviour, and the needs that the person is attempting to meet by performing the behaviour. 
1.5.4 
In addition to the functional analysis, base the choice of intervention(s) on: 
the nature and severity of the behaviour 
the person's physical needs and capabilities 
the physical and social environment 
the capacity of staff and families, partners or carers to provide support 
the preferences of the autistic person and, where appropriate, their family, partner or carer(s) 
past history of care and support. 
Psychosocial interventions for behaviour that challenges 
1.5.5 
Psychosocial interventions for behaviour that challenges should be based on behavioural principles and informed by a functional analysis of behaviour (see recommendation 1.5.3 ). 
1.5.6 
Psychosocial interventions for behaviour that challenges should include: 
clearly identified target behaviour(s) 
a focus on outcomes that are linked to quality of life 
assessment and modification of environmental factors that may contribute to initiating or maintaining the behaviour 
a clearly defined intervention strategy 
a clear schedule of reinforcement, and capacity to offer reinforcement promptly and contingently on demonstration of the desired behaviour 
a specified timescale to meet intervention goals (to promote modification of intervention strategies that do not lead to change within a specified time) 
a systematic measure of the target behaviour(s) taken before and after the intervention to ascertain whether the agreed outcomes are being met. 
Combined interventions for behaviour that challenges 
1.5.7 
Consider antipsychotic medication in conjunction with a psychosocial intervention for behaviour that challenges when there has been no or limited response to psychosocial or other interventions (such as environmental adaptations). Antipsychotic medication should be prescribed by a specialist and quality of life outcomes monitored carefully. Review the effects of the medication after 3–4 weeks and discontinue it if there is no indication of a clinically important response at 6 weeks. 
In June 2012 this was an off-label use of antipsychotic medication. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Pharmacological interventions for behaviour that challenges 
1.5.8 
Consider antipsychotic medication alone for behaviour that challenges when psychosocial or other interventions could not be delivered because of the severity of the behaviour that challenges. Antipsychotic medication should be prescribed by a specialist and quality of life outcomes monitored carefully. Review the effects of the medication after 3–4 weeks and discontinue it if there is no indication of a clinically important response at 6 weeks. 
In June 2012 this was an off-label use of antipsychotic medication. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.5.9 
Do not routinely use anticonvulsants for the management of behaviour that challenges in autistic adults. 
1.6 Interventions for coexisting mental disorders 
1.6.1 
Staff delivering interventions for coexisting mental disorders to autistic adults should: 
have an understanding of the core features of autism and their possible impact on the treatment of coexisting mental disorders 
consider seeking advice from a specialist autism team regarding delivering and adapting these interventions for autistic people. 
Psychosocial interventions for coexisting mental disorders 
1.6.2 
For autistic adults and coexisting mental disorders, offer psychosocial interventions informed by existing NICE guidance for the specific disorder. 
1.6.3 
Adaptations to the method of delivery of cognitive and behavioural interventions for autistic adults and coexisting common mental disorders should include: 
a more concrete and structured approach with a greater use of written and visual information (which may include worksheets, thought bubbles, images and 'tool boxes') 
placing greater emphasis on changing behaviour, rather than cognitions, and using the behaviour as the starting point for intervention 
making rules explicit and explaining their context 
using plain English and avoiding excessive use of metaphor, ambiguity and hypothetical situations 
involving a family member, partner, carer or professional (if the autistic person agrees) to support the implementation of an intervention 
maintaining the person's attention by offering regular breaks and incorporating their special interests into therapy if possible (such as using computers to present information). 
Pharmacological interventions for coexisting mental disorders 
1.6.4 
For autistic adults and coexisting mental disorders, offer pharmacological interventions informed by existing NICE guidance for the specific disorder. 
1.7 Assessment and interventions for families, partners and carers 
1.7.1 
Offer families, partners and carers of autistic adults an assessment of their own needs (see the NICE guideline on supporting adult carers for recommendations on identifying, assessing and meeting the caring, physical and mental health needs of families, partners and carers). 
1.7.2 
When the needs of families, partners and carers have been identified, provide information about, and facilitate contact with, a range of support groups including those specifically designed to address the needs of families, partners and carers of autistic people. See the NICE guideline on supporting adult carers. 
1.7.3 
Offer information, advice, training and support to families, partners and carers if they: 
need help with the personal, social or emotional care of the family member, partner or friend or 
are involved in supporting the delivery of an intervention for their family member, partner or friend (in collaboration with professionals). 
1.8 Organisation and delivery of care 
Developing local care pathways 
1.8.1 
Local care pathways should be developed to promote implementation of key principles of good care. Pathways should be: 
negotiable, workable and understandable for autistic adults, their families, partners and carers, and professionals 
accessible and acceptable to all people in need of the services served by the pathway 
responsive to the needs of autistic adults and their families, partners and carers 
integrated so that there are no barriers to movement between different levels of the pathway 
outcome focused (including measures of quality, service user experience and harm). 
1.8.2 
Autism strategy groups should be responsible for developing, managing and evaluating local care pathways. The group should appoint a lead professional responsible for the local autism care pathway. The aims of the strategy group should include: 
developing clear policy and protocols for the operation of the pathway 
ensuring the provision of multi-agency training about features of autism, and training and support on the operation of the pathway 
making sure the relevant professionals (health, social care, housing, educational and employment services and the third sector) are aware of the local autism pathway and how to access services 
supporting the integrated delivery of services across all care settings 
supporting the smooth transition to adult services for young people going through the pathway 
auditing and reviewing the performance of the pathway. 
1.8.3 
The autism strategy group should develop local care pathways that promote access to services for all autistic adults, including: 
people with coexisting physical and mental disorders (including substance misuse) 
women 
people with learning disabilities 
older people 
people from black and minority ethnic groups 
transgender people 
homeless people 
people from the traveller community 
people in the criminal justice system 
autistic parents. 
1.8.4 
When providing information about local care pathways to autistic adults and their families, partners and carers, all professionals should: 
take into account the person's knowledge and understanding of autism and its care and management 
ensure that such information is appropriate to the communities using the pathway. 
1.8.5 
The autism strategy group should design local care pathways that promote a range of evidence-based interventions at each step in the pathway and support autistic adults in their choice of interventions. 
1.8.6 
The autism strategy group should design local care pathways that respond promptly and effectively to the changing needs of all populations served by the pathways. Pathways should have in place: 
clear and agreed goals for the services offered to autistic adults 
robust and effective means for measuring and evaluating the outcomes associated with the agreed goals 
clear and agreed mechanisms for responding promptly to identified changes to people's needs. 
1.8.7 
The autism strategy group should design local care pathways that provide an integrated programme of care across all care settings. Pathways should: 
minimise the need for transition between different services or providers 
allow services to be built around the pathway and not the pathway around the services 
establish clear links (including access and entry points) to other care pathways (including those for physical healthcare needs) 
have designated staff who are responsible for the coordination of people's engagement with the pathway. 
Improving access to care 
1.8.8 
There should be a single point of referral (including self-referral) to specialist services for autistic adults. 
1.8.9 
Support access to services and increase the uptake of interventions by: 
delivering assessment and interventions in a physical environment that is appropriate for people with hyper- and/or hypo-sensory sensitivities (see recommendation 1.1.8 ) 
changing the professional responsible for the person's care if a supportive and caring relationship cannot be established. 
1.8.10 
Support access to services and increase the uptake of interventions by: 
ensuring systems (for example, care coordination or case management) are in place to provide for the overall coordination and continuity of care for autistic adults 
designating a professional to oversee the whole period of care (usually a member of the primary healthcare team for those not in the care of a specialist autism team or mental health or learning disability service). 
Residential care 
1.8.11 
If residential care is needed for autistic adults it should usually be provided in small, local community-based units (of no more than six people and with well-supported single person accommodation). The environment should be structured to support and maintain a collaborative approach between the autistic person and their family, partner or carer(s) for the development and maintenance of interpersonal and community living skills. 
1.8.12 
Residential care environments should include activities that are: 
structured and purposeful 
designed to promote integration with the local community and use of local amenities 
clearly timetabled with daily, weekly and sequential programmes that promote choice and autonomy. 
1.8.13 
Residential care environments should have: 
designated areas for different activities that provide visual cues about expected behaviour 
adaptations to the physical environment for people with hyper- and/or hypo-sensory sensitivities (see recommendation 1.1.8 ) 
inside and outside spaces where the autistic person can be alone (for example, if they are over-stimulated). 
1.8.14 
Residential care staff should: 
understand the principles and attitudes underpinning the effective delivery of residential care for autistic adults 
work in collaboration with health and community care staff from a range of specialist services to support the delivery of a comprehensive care plan 
be trained in assessing and supporting the needs of autistic adults 
be consistent and predictable, but with some flexibility to allow change and choice 
be committed to involving families, partners and carers. 
Terms used in this guideline 
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline. 
Augmentative communication 
An alternative way of helping people with communication difficulties by using assistive technology such as computers or other devices, such as a speech output device. 
Behavioural principles 
Ideas, such as reinforcement and function of behaviour, that underlie behavioural therapies and underpin many interventions teaching adaptive skills for community living for autistic people, including those with behaviour that challenges. 
Behaviour that challenges 
A term used to describe behaviour that is a result of the interaction between individual and environmental factors, and includes stereotypic behaviour (such as rocking or hand flapping), anger, aggression, self-injury, and disruptive or destructive behaviour. Such behaviour is seen as challenging when it affects the person's or other people's quality of life and or jeopardises their safety. 
Care pathway 
A system designed to improve the overall quality of healthcare by standardising the care process and promoting organised efficient service user care based on best evidence to optimise service user outcomes. 
Chelation 
A procedure that involves using one or more substances (chelating agents) to remove materials that are toxic, including heavy metals such as mercury, from the body. 
Easy read 
An accessible format for written communication designed for people with a learning disability. It uses simple jargon-free language, short sentences and illustrations. 
Facilitated communication 
A therapeutic intervention whereby a facilitator supports the hand or arm of an autistic person while using a keyboard or other devices with the aim of helping the person to develop pointing skills and to communicate. 
Functional analysis 
A method for understanding the causes and consequences of behaviour and its relationship to particular stimuli, and the function of the behaviour. The function of a particular behaviour can be analysed by typically identifying (1) the precursor or trigger of the behaviour, (2) the behaviour itself, and (3) the consequence of the behaviour. 
Hyper- and hypo-sensory sensitivities 
Being over-sensitive (hyper-sensitive) or under-sensitive (hypo-sensitive) to sound, light, colour, smell or taste, which can cause anxiety or even pain in an autistic person. 
Informant 
A family member, partner, carer or other third party known to the autistic person who is able to provide information about the person's features and behaviour so that professionals can have a fuller picture of the person's developmental history. Some assessment tools for autism require information from informants. 
Learning disability 
Lower intellectual ability (usually defined as an IQ of less than 70) that leads to problems in learning, developing new skills, communication and carrying out daily activities. Learning disability severities are defined by the following IQ scores: mild=50–69, moderate=35–49 and severe=20–34. A person with a mild to moderate learning disability may only need support in certain areas. However, a person with a moderate to severe learning disability may have no speech or limited communication, a significantly reduced ability to learn new skills and require support with daily activities such as dressing and eating. Learning disabilities are different from 'learning difficulties', like dyslexia, which do not affect intellect. Learning disability is sometimes also called 'intellectual disability'. 
Modelling 
A technique used in behavioural therapy that utilises video and other media. The service user observes target behaviour on the video or computer screen, and repeats it. 
Reinforcement 
A technique used in behavioural therapy to teach 'rules' of social engagement through providing prompts for behaviour. Reinforcement may be by the autistic person or those working with or caring for them. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Key priorities for implementation 
Back to top
