Recommendations | Intrapartum care for women with existing medical conditions or obstetric complications and their babies | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Intrapartum care
Intrapartum care for women with existing medical conditions or obstetric complications and their babies
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG121 
Published: 
06 March 2019
Last updated: 
25 April 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Information for women with existing medical conditions
1.2 Planning for intrapartum care with women with existing medical conditions – involving a multidisciplinary team
1.3 Heart disease
1.4 Asthma
1.5 Long-term systemic steroids
1.6 Bleeding disorders
1.7 Subarachnoid haemorrhage or arteriovenous malformation of the brain
1.8 Acute kidney injury or chronic kidney disease
1.9 Obesity
1.10 Information for women with obstetric complications or no antenatal care
1.11 Risk assessment for women with obstetric complications or no antenatal care
1.12 Pyrexia
1.13 Sepsis
1.14 Intrapartum haemorrhage
1.15 Breech presenting in labour
1.16 Small-for-gestational-age baby
1.17 Large-for-gestational-age baby
1.18 No antenatal care
1.19 Previous caesarean section
1.20 Labour after 42 weeks of pregnancy
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Supporting women to make decisions about their care is particularly important during the intrapartum period. Healthcare professionals should ensure that women have the information they need to make decisions and to give consent in line with General Medical Council (GMC) guidance and the 2015 Montgomery ruling . 
1.1 Information for women with existing medical conditions 
1.1.1 
Clarify with women with existing medical conditions whether and how they would like their birth companion(s) involved in discussions about care during labour and birth. Review this regularly. 
1.1.2 
Offer pregnant women with medical conditions and their birth companion(s) information about intrapartum care. This should include: 
general information as outlined in the NICE guideline on intrapartum care 
how their medical condition may affect their care 
how labour and birth may affect their medical condition 
how their medical condition and its management may affect the baby. 
Information should be presented as recommended in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . 
1.1.3 
Offer information about intrapartum care in consultations before conception, if possible, and as early as possible during pregnancy. Allow extra time to discuss with the woman how her medical condition may affect her care. 
1.1.4 
Information about intrapartum care should be offered to women with medical conditions by a member of the multidisciplinary team (see the recommendation on team members in the section on planning for intrapartum care with women with existing medical conditions - involving a multidisciplinary team ). 
1.1.5 
If a pregnant woman with a medical condition has not had any antenatal care (see the section on no antenatal care ), give her information about intrapartum care at her first contact with healthcare services during pregnancy. 
NICE has published a guideline on diabetes in pregnancy . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information for women with existing medical conditions . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: information for women with existing medical conditions . 
1.2 Planning for intrapartum care with women with existing medical conditions – involving a multidisciplinary team 
1.2.1 
A multidisciplinary team led by a named healthcare professional should involve a pregnant woman with a medical condition in preparing an individualised plan for intrapartum care. The plan should be: 
formulated by following the principles of shared decision making outlined in the NICE guideline on shared decision making 
reviewed with the woman and her birth companion(s) as early as possible throughout pregnancy and on admission for birth 
updated with the woman if her medical condition changes during pregnancy 
shared with the woman's GP and teams providing her antenatal and intrapartum care. 
1.2.2 
For pregnant women with a medical condition, the multidisciplinary team may include, as appropriate: 
a midwife 
an obstetrician 
an obstetric anaesthetist 
an obstetric physician or clinician with expertise in caring for pregnant women with the medical condition 
a clinician with expertise in the medical condition 
a specialty surgeon 
a critical care specialist 
a neonatologist 
the woman's GP 
allied health professionals. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on planning for intrapartum care with women with existing medical conditions – involving a multidisciplinary team . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: antenatal care planning involving a multidisciplinary team for women with existing medical conditions . 
1.3 Heart disease 
Risk assessment for women with heart disease 
1.3.1 
Risk assessment for women with heart disease should follow the principles of multidisciplinary team working (outlined in the recommendation in the section on planning for intrapartum care with women with existing medical conditions - involving a multidisciplinary team ). Include a cardiologist with expertise in managing heart disease in pregnant women in the multidisciplinary team discussions. 
1.3.2 
For women with heart disease diagnosed in the intrapartum period, urgent multidisciplinary discussions are needed to ensure that the woman is offered the same level of care as a woman with an existing diagnosis of heart disease and, where possible, that her preferences are taken into account. 
1.3.3 
Be aware that some women with heart disease are at low risk of complications and their care should be in line with the NICE guideline on intrapartum care , whereas others need individualised specialist care. 
Risk is defined according to the modified World Health Organization (WHO) classification of maternal cardiovascular risk in the 2018 European Society of Cardiology guidelines published in the European Heart Journal . 
1.3.4 
For women with heart disease, reassess intrapartum risk regularly during pregnancy and the intrapartum period using all of the following: 
comprehensive clinical assessment, including history and physical examination 
the modified WHO classification of risk 
New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class (see American Heart Association's information about classes of heart failure ). 
1.3.5 
Offer the same investigations to pregnant women with heart disease as to women who are not pregnant. Review the results and act on them without delay. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on risk assessment for women with heart disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: heart disease . 
Management of anticoagulation for women with mechanical heart valves 
1.3.6 
When pregnancy is confirmed: 
involve women with mechanical heart valves in multidisciplinary discussion of plans for anticoagulation during the intrapartum period (see the recommendations in the section on planning for intrapartum care with women with existing medical conditions - involving a multidisciplinary team ) 
consider including a haematologist in the multidisciplinary discussion 
explain to women that they will need individualised anticoagulation depending on their current treatment. 
1.3.7 
For women with mechanical heart valves who are taking warfarin in the third trimester, switch anticoagulation to low-molecular-weight heparin by 36 +0  weeks of pregnancy or 2 weeks before planned birth (if this is earlier than 36 +0  weeks). In hospital, consider doing this by: 
stopping warfarin, and 24 hours later, starting low-molecular-weight heparin using a twice-daily regimen at a dose based on the most recent weight available 
increasing the dose of low-molecular-weight heparin according to anti‑Xa levels; this should be done by: 
checking anti‑Xa levels each day 3 to 4 hours after a dose of low-molecular-weight heparin, aiming for a peak anti‑Xa level between 1.0 and 1.2 IU/ml 
checking that the anti‑Xa level before a dose of low-molecular-weight heparin (trough level) is above 0.6 IU/ml 
rechecking anti‑Xa level weekly once the target anti‑Xa level is achieved. 
1.3.8 
For women with mechanical heart valves, stop therapeutic low-molecular-weight heparin 24 hours before a planned caesarean section and consider: 
aiming to perform the caesarean section as near to 24 hours after stopping low-molecular-weight heparin as possible and no later than 30 hours after stopping or 
switching to intravenous unfractionated heparin (aiming for an activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT] of at least twice control), then 4 to 6 hours before caesarean section, stopping intravenous unfractionated heparin. 
1.3.9 
For women with mechanical heart valves who are having an induction of labour, a senior obstetrician should be involved in: 
deciding when to stop low-molecular-weight heparin or intravenous unfractionated heparin in order to: 
minimise the risk of maternal haemorrhage or valve thrombosis 
enable the option of regional analgesia 
reviewing the progress of labour and : 
the need for low-molecular-weight heparin every 12 hours, aiming for birth as close to 12 hours from the last injection as possible or 
the need for unfractionated heparin, aiming for birth as close to 4 to 6 hours after stopping the infusion. 
1.3.10 
For women with mechanical heart valves who are taking warfarin and who present in established labour: 
check the international normalised ratio (INR) immediately and consult a haematologist 
do not give anticoagulation until the woman has had an assessment by an obstetrician, which should happen within 2 hours 
carry out a senior review (including at least a senior obstetrician, haematologist and a consultant obstetric anaesthetist) to discuss the mode of birth most likely to give the lowest risk of bleeding for the woman and the baby 
consider reversal of anticoagulation. 
1.3.11 
For women with mechanical heart valves, carry out a postpartum review, involving at least a senior obstetrician and anaesthetist, of the risk of haemorrhage and valve thrombosis within 3 to 4 hours of birth. Aim to restart therapeutic low-molecular-weight heparin or unfractionated heparin 4 to 6 hours after birth. 
1.3.12 
For women with mechanical heart valves at high risk of peripartum haemorrhage, consider the following options until hourly review indicates that therapeutic anticoagulation can be re-established: 
prophylactic low-molecular-weight heparin or 
no low-molecular-weight heparin. 
1.3.13 
For women with mechanical heart valves, consider delaying restarting warfarin until at least 7 days after birth and arrange specialist follow‑up as outlined in the multidisciplinary care plan (see recommendation 1.3.6). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on management of anticoagulation for women with mechanical heart valves . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: heart disease . 
Mode of birth for women with heart disease 
1.3.14 
Develop an individualised birth plan with the woman with heart disease covering all 3 stages of labour following multidisciplinary discussion (outlined in the recommendation on the plan in the section on planning for intrapartum care with women with existing medical conditions - involving a multidisciplinary team ). Consider including a cardiologist with expertise in managing heart disease in pregnant women in the multidisciplinary team discussions. 
1.3.15 
Throughout pregnancy, manage pulmonary arterial hypertension in consultation with a specialist pulmonary hypertension centre. 
1.3.16 
Offer planned birth (induction of labour or caesarean section) for women with mechanical heart valves. 
1.3.17 
Consider planned caesarean section for women with: 
any disease of the aorta assessed as high risk 
pulmonary arterial hypertension 
NYHA class III or IV heart disease. 
Explain the benefits and risks of caesarean section. If the woman chooses not to have a caesarean section, explain the benefits and risks of an assisted second stage of labour compared with active pushing alone. 
1.3.18 
For women with heart disease who have a planned caesarean section, develop an individualised emergency care plan with the woman in case she presents in early labour, with new symptoms or with obstetric complications. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on mode of birth for women with heart disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: heart disease . 
Fluid management for women with heart disease 
1.3.19 
During pregnancy, plan the management of fluid balance during the intrapartum period for women with heart disease with the multidisciplinary team (outlined in the recommendation on team members in the section on planning for intrapartum care with women with existing medical conditions - involving a multidisciplinary team ). Include a cardiologist with expertise in managing heart disease in pregnant women. Multidisciplinary discussion should include: 
how the condition affects fluid balance 
optimum fluid balance and how this might be achieved 
plans for risk assessment and monitoring. 
1.3.20 
Identify women with heart disease for whom fluid balance is critical to cardiac function. These include women with: 
severe left-sided stenotic lesions (for example, aortic stenosis and mitral stenosis) 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
cardiomyopathy with systolic ventricular dysfunction 
pulmonary arterial hypertension 
Fontan circulation and other univentricular circulations 
NYHA class IV heart disease. 
1.3.21 
For women with heart disease in whom fluid balance is critical for optimal cardiac function, offer tailored monitoring and clinical review during the intrapartum period, and consider escalation as follows: 
hourly monitoring of fluid input and output (with at least 4‑hourly assessment by a senior clinician), blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate and oxygen saturation 
continuous electrocardiogram (ECG) and pulse oximetry with interpretation by trained staff 
continuous intra-arterial blood pressure monitoring 
cardiac output monitoring with non-invasive techniques, or serial echocardiography by trained staff. 
Advise women who need intensive monitoring that this may have to be carried out in an intensive care unit where the necessary equipment and expertise is available. 
Be aware that some pulse oximeters can underestimate or overestimate oxygen saturation levels, especially if the saturation level is borderline. Overestimation has been reported in people with dark skin. See also the NHS England Patient Safety Alert on the risk of harm from inappropriate placement of pulse oximeter probes . 
1.3.22 
Offer standard fluid management during the intrapartum period for women with modified WHO 1 and NYHA class I heart disease. 
1.3.23 
Consider standard fluid management during the intrapartum period for women with modified WHO 2 to 3, or NYHA class II to III heart disease after a multidisciplinary discussion (outlined in the recommendation on the plan in the section on planning for intrapartum care with women with existing medical conditions - involving a multidisciplinary team ). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on fluid management for women with heart disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: heart disease . 
Diagnosis and management of heart failure for all women in the intrapartum period 
These recommendations cover the diagnosis and management of heart failure for all women in the intrapartum period. This includes women with existing heart disease, and women with no existing heart disease who develop symptoms and signs of heart failure. 
1.3.24 
Take a cardiac-specific history and suspect heart failure if there is not another likely cause of any of the following symptoms: 
breathlessness when lying down (ruling out aortocaval compression) or at rest 
unexplained cough, particularly when lying down or which produces frothy pink sputum 
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea – being woken from sleep by severe breathlessness and coughing, which may produce pink frothy sputum and is improved by moving to an upright position 
palpitation (awareness of persistent fast heart rate at rest). 
1.3.25 
Consider heart failure in the intrapartum period if there are any of the following signs: 
pale, sweaty, agitated with cool peripheries 
heart rate persistently greater than 110 beats per minute at rest 
respiratory rate persistently greater than 20 breaths per minute at rest 
hypotension (systolic blood pressure less than 100 mmHg) 
oxygen saturation less than 95% on air 
elevated jugular venous pressure 
added murmur or heart sound 
reduced air entry, basal crackles or wheeze, on listening to the chest. 
Be aware that some pulse oximeters can underestimate or overestimate oxygen saturation levels, especially if the saturation level is borderline. Overestimation has been reported in people with dark skin. See also the NHS England Patient Safety Alert on the risk of harm from inappropriate placement of pulse oximeter probes . 
1.3.26 
If any of the symptoms or signs in recommendations 1.3.24 and 1.3.25 suggest heart failure, a senior clinician should review the woman's condition without delay. 
1.3.27 
When there is a clinical suspicion of heart failure in any woman in the intrapartum period: 
establish peripheral venous access 
measure urea and electrolytes, and perform a full blood count 
measure arterial blood gases 
perform an ECG 
perform a chest X‑ray. 
1.3.28 
If clinical suspicion of heart failure in the intrapartum period cannot be ruled out by the investigations in recommendation 1.3.27, arrange: 
review by a cardiologist (with interim review by a healthcare professional with expertise in this area if a cardiologist is not immediately available) 
a transthoracic echocardiogram by a trained technician or cardiologist 
measurement of N‑terminal pro‑brain natriuretic peptide (NT‑proBNP) levels. 
1.3.29 
Consider early birth for women with heart failure due to cardiomyopathy, depending on the severity of the condition and how well the condition has responded to treatment. 
1.3.30 
Optimise treatment for heart failure as soon as possible after birth even if the woman is breastfeeding. 
1.3.31 
If clinical suspicion of heart failure persists after birth, consider the continued involvement of a cardiologist. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on diagnosis and management of heart failure for all women in the intrapartum period . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: heart disease . 
Anaesthesia and analgesia for women with heart disease 
1.3.32 
During pregnancy, prepare a plan for managing anaesthesia and analgesia for women with heart disease involving a multidisciplinary team and the woman (outlined in the recommendation on the plan in the section on planning for intrapartum care with women with existing medical conditions - involving a multidisciplinary team ). Consider including a haematologist for women on an anticoagulation regimen. 
1.3.33 
Consider offering the same information about anaesthesia and analgesia in labour to women with modified WHO 1 or modified WHO 2 heart disease as described in the NICE guideline on intrapartum care . 
1.3.34 
Consider regional anaesthesia for women with modified WHO 3 and modified WHO 4 heart disease, unless this is contraindicated. 
1.3.35 
Consider collaborative working in the intrapartum period between an obstetric anaesthetist and a cardiac anaesthetist for women with modified WHO 3 and modified WHO 4 heart disease. 
1.3.36 
When using regional anaesthesia for women with heart disease, aim to preserve cardiovascular stability by, for example, using a sequential combined spinal–epidural technique. 
1.3.37 
Offer intrapartum monitoring of the heart and circulation to all women with modified WHO 3 and modified WHO 4 heart disease; this will usually include continuous invasive intra-arterial pressure monitoring and may include central venous pressure monitoring and advanced cardiac output monitoring. 
1.3.38 
Offer low-dose regional analgesia to women with modified WHO 3 or modified WHO 4 heart disease because this is less likely to cause cardiac instability during labour and birth. 
1.3.39 
Consider regional analgesia for women who have been on low-molecular-weight heparin and who have not had a prophylactic dose for at least 12 hours, or a therapeutic dose for at least 24 hours. 
1.3.40 
For women taking low-molecular-weight heparin: 
wait 12 hours after a prophylactic dose before siting an epidural, or removing an epidural catheter 
wait 24 hours after a therapeutic dose before siting an epidural or spinal, or removing an epidural catheter 
after siting an epidural or a spinal, or removing an epidural catheter, wait 4 hours before administering a further dose of low-molecular-weight heparin 
do not administer therapeutic dose low-molecular-weight heparin while an epidural catheter is in place. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on anaesthesia and analgesia for women with heart disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: heart disease . 
Management of the third stage of labour for women with heart disease 
1.3.41 
During pregnancy, prepare an individualised plan for managing the third stage of labour for women with heart disease, involving a multidisciplinary team and the woman (outlined in the recommendation on the plan in the section on planning for intrapartum care with women with existing medical conditions - involving a multidisciplinary team ). Consider including a cardiologist with expertise in managing heart disease in pregnant women. 
1.3.42 
Treat women with modified WHO 1 heart disease as low risk and consider the full range of care options for healthy women in the third stage of labour described in the NICE guideline on intrapartum care . 
1.3.43 
Advise active management of the third stage of labour for women with modified WHO 2 heart disease, in line with the NICE guideline on intrapartum care . 
1.3.44 
Consider management of the third stage of labour for women with modified WHO 3 or modified WHO 4 heart disease according to table 1. 
Table 1 Management of the third stage of labour for women with modified WHO 3 or modified WHO 4 heart disease 
Condition 
First-line uterotonic 
Second-line uterotonics 
Drugs to avoid because of potential harm 
Significant aortopathy 
Marfan syndrome and Loeys–Dietz with aortic dilatation >40 mm 
Bicuspid aortopathy and aortic dilatation >45 mm 
Previous aortic dissection 
Turner syndrome and aortic size index >25 cm/m 2 
Oxytocin 
Misoprostol 
Carboprost 
Ergometrine (because of risk of hypertension-induced aortic dissection or rupture) 
Limited or fixed low cardiac output, or preload-dependent circulation 
Severe systemic ventricular dysfunction (ejection fraction <30%) 
Severe valvular stenosis 
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with diastolic dysfunction or significant outflow tract obstruction 
Fontan circulation 
Cyanotic heart disease 
Slow infusion of oxytocin to avoid sudden haemodynamic change 
Misoprostol 
Carboprost 
Long-acting oxytocin analogues and ergometrine (because of risk of hypertension-induced heart failure) 
Pulmonary arterial hypertension 
Oxytocin 
Misoprostol 
Ergometrine, carboprost and long-acting oxytocin analogues (because of risk of worsening pulmonary hypertension) 
Coronary artery disease 
Oxytocin 
Misoprostol 
Ergometrine (because of risk of coronary ischaemia) 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on management of the third stage of labour for women with heart disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: heart disease . 
1.4 Asthma 
Analgesia for women with asthma 
1.4.1 
Offer women with asthma the same options for pain relief during labour as women without asthma, including: 
Entonox (50% nitrous oxide plus 50% oxygen) 
intravenous and intramuscular opioids 
epidural 
combined spinal–epidural analgesia. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on pain relief during labour for women with asthma . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: asthma . 
Prostaglandins for women with asthma 
1.4.2 
Do not offer prostaglandin F2 alpha (carboprost) to women with asthma because of the risk of bronchospasm. 
1.4.3 
Consider prostaglandin E1 or prostaglandin E2 as options for inducing labour in women with asthma because there is no evidence that they worsen asthma. 
1.4.4 
Consider prostaglandin E1 as an option for treating postpartum haemorrhage in women with asthma because there is no evidence it worsens asthma. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on prostaglandins for women with asthma . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: asthma . 
1.5 Long-term systemic steroids 
Steroid replacement regimens 
1.5.1 
Be aware that maternal corticosteroids given antenatally for fetal lung maturation should not affect the advice given in recommendations 1.5.2 to 1.5.4. 
1.5.2 
For women planning a vaginal birth who have adrenal insufficiency or who are taking long-term oral steroids (equivalent to 5 mg or more prednisolone daily for more than 3 weeks): 
continue their regular oral steroids and 
when they are in established first stage of labour, add intravenous or intramuscular hydrocortisone and consider a minimum dose of 50 mg every 6 hours until 6 hours after the baby is born. 
1.5.3 
For women having a planned or emergency caesarean section who have adrenal insufficiency or who are taking long-term oral steroids (equivalent to 5 mg or more prednisolone daily for more than 3 weeks): 
continue their regular oral steroids and 
give intravenous hydrocortisone when starting anaesthesia; the dose will depend on whether the woman has received hydrocortisone in labour, for example: 
consider giving 50 mg if she has had hydrocortisone in labour 
consider giving 100 mg if she has not had hydrocortisone in labour 
give a further dose of hydrocortisone 6 hours after the baby is born (for example, 50 mg intravenously or intramuscularly). 
1.5.4 
Do not offer supplemental hydrocortisone in the intrapartum period to women taking inhaled or topical steroids. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on steroid replacement for women on long-term steroids . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: long-term systemic steroids . 
1.6 Bleeding disorders 
Regional anaesthesia and analgesia for women with bleeding disorders 
1.6.1 
Discuss the balance of benefits and risks of regional analgesia and anaesthesia with women with bleeding disorders. 
1.6.2 
When considering regional analgesia and anaesthesia for women with bleeding disorders, take into account: 
the overall risk of bleeding and opportunity for corrective treatment 
therapeutic and prophylactic anticoagulation 
the risk of bleeding associated with the technique to be used 
the difficulty of needle siting or insertion 
the comparative risks associated with no analgesia or non-regional analgesia 
the comparative risks of general anaesthesia. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on regional anaesthesia and analgesia for women with bleeding disorders . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: bleeding disorders . 
Modifying the birth plan according to platelet count or function 
1.6.3 
For woman with known immune thrombocytopenic purpura, before admission for birth: 
plan birth in an obstetric-led unit with a neonatal unit that routinely provides high-dependency care 
plan as if the baby will be at risk of bleeding irrespective of the woman's platelet count 
consider monitoring maternal platelet count weekly from 36 weeks, and if the platelet count is below 50: 
discuss and agree a plan for intrapartum care with the multidisciplinary team, including a haematologist 
consider giving steroids or intravenous immunoglobulin to raise the maternal platelet count. 
1.6.4 
For women with known immune thrombocytopenic purpura, on admission for birth: 
measure maternal platelet count 
manage intrapartum care according to table 2. 
1.6.5 
For women with known or suspected immune thrombocytopenic purpura, take the following precautions to reduce the risk of bleeding for the baby: 
inform the neonatal team of the imminent birth of a baby at risk 
do not carry out fetal blood sampling 
use fetal scalp electrodes with caution 
do not use ventouse 
use mid-cavity or rotational forceps with caution 
bear in mind that a caesarean section may not protect the baby from bleeding 
measure the platelet count in the umbilical cord blood at birth. 
1.6.6 
Modify the birth plan based on maternal platelet count, using table 2 as a guide, for women with: 
gestational thrombocytopenia (without pre-eclampsia and HELLP syndrome, and otherwise well) 
an uncertain diagnosis of immune thrombocytopenic purpura. 
Table 2 Modifying the birth plan according to maternal platelet count in women with immune thrombocytopenic purpura or gestational thrombocytopenia 
Maternal platelet count 
Maternal care 
Platelet count above 80×10 9 /l 
Treat the woman as healthy for the purpose of considering regional analgesia and anaesthesia 
Platelet count 50 to 80×10 9 /l 
Before considering regional analgesia and anaesthesia, take into account: 
clinical history 
the woman's preferences 
anaesthetic expertise 
Platelet count below 50×10 9 /l 
Avoid regional analgesia and anaesthesia under most circumstances 
If the woman has known or suspected immune thrombocytopenic purpura, assume the baby is at risk of bleeding and take the precautions outlined in recommendation 1.6.5. If the woman has gestational thrombocytopenia, assume the baby has a normal risk of bleeding. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on modifying the birth plan according to platelet count or function . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: bleeding disorders . 
Management of the third stage of labour for women with bleeding disorders 
1.6.7 
Be aware that women with bleeding disorders are at increased risk of primary and secondary postpartum haemorrhage. 
1.6.8 
Offer active management rather than physiological management of the third stage of labour for women with bleeding disorders, in line with the NICE guideline on intrapartum care . 
1.6.9 
For women with bleeding disorders, avoid giving uterotonics by intramuscular injection. 
1.6.10 
Offer individualised postpartum care, as discussed with a senior haematologist, for women with bleeding disorders, to include: 
measurement of blood loss 
monitoring obstetric complications 
monitoring haematological parameters. 
1.6.11 
Be aware that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can add to the risk of bleeding. 
1.6.12 
Before discharge from hospital, inform women with bleeding disorders of the risk of secondary bleeding postpartum and how to access care. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on managing the third stage of labour for women with bleeding disorders . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: bleeding disorders . 
1.7 Subarachnoid haemorrhage or arteriovenous malformation of the brain 
Mode of birth and management of the second stage of labour for women with subarachnoid haemorrhage or arteriovenous malformation of the brain 
1.7.1 
Involve the multidisciplinary team in risk assessment for women with a cerebrovascular malformation or a history of intracranial bleeding. Include the woman in care planning and a clinician with expertise in managing neurovascular conditions in pregnant women. 
Care for women with cerebrovascular malformation at low risk of intracranial bleeding 
1.7.2 
Classify the risk of intrapartum intracranial bleeding as low if a woman has: 
a fully treated cerebrovascular malformation or 
intracranial bleeding of unknown cause following investigation, which occurred more than 2 years ago. 
1.7.3 
For women with a cerebrovascular malformation at low risk of intracranial bleeding, base decisions on the mode of birth on the woman's preference and obstetric indications. 
1.7.4 
For women with a cerebrovascular malformation at low risk of intracranial bleeding, manage the second stage of labour based on the woman's preference and obstetric indications. 
Care for women with cerebrovascular malformation at high risk of intracranial bleeding 
1.7.5 
Classify the risk of intrapartum intracranial bleeding as high if a woman has: 
an untreated or partially treated cerebrovascular malformation that has bled previously 
a large aneurysm (7 mm or more) or an aneurysm with other high-risk features as defined by a neuroradiologist 
a complex arteriovenous malformation 
cavernoma with high-risk features 
intracranial bleeding within the past 2 years. 
1.7.6 
Consider caesarean section for women who are at high risk of cerebral haemorrhage, after a full discussion with the woman of the benefits and risks of all the options. 
1.7.7 
For women at high risk of cerebral haemorrhage who prefer to aim for a vaginal birth or are in the second stage of labour: 
offer regional analgesia and 
explain the benefits and risks of an assisted second stage of labour compared with active pushing alone. 
1.7.8 
For women who present for the first time in labour with a history of cerebrovascular malformation or intracranial bleeding and unknown risk of intracranial bleeding, manage as high risk and follow recommendations 1.7.6 and 1.7.7. 
1.7.9 
Do not withhold regional analgesia or anaesthesia from women with an isolated cerebrovascular malformation unless they have a genetic predisposition to multiple vascular malformations or unknown genetic history. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on care of women at risk of intracranial bleeding . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: subarachnoid haemorrhage or arterio-venous malformation of the brain . 
1.8 Acute kidney injury or chronic kidney disease 
Fluid management for women with kidney disease 
1.8.1 
During pregnancy, involve the multidisciplinary team in risk assessment for women with kidney disease. Include a clinician with expertise in managing renal conditions in pregnant women. 
1.8.2 
Ensure that women with chronic kidney disease stage 4 or 5 before pregnancy or women with progressive or active kidney disease are cared for in the intrapartum period by a midwife, obstetrician and obstetric anaesthetist with input from a clinician with expertise in managing renal conditions in pregnant women. 
1.8.3 
Ensure that a clinician with expertise in managing renal conditions in pregnant women is available for consultation during the intrapartum period for women with chronic kidney disease stage 4 or 5 before pregnancy or women with progressive or active kidney disease. 
1.8.4 
Manage acute kidney injury secondary to pre-eclampsia in line with the NICE guideline on hypertension in pregnancy . 
1.8.5 
For women with chronic kidney disease with or without pre-eclampsia, monitor fluid balance in the intrapartum period. Measure heart rate hourly and the following at least every 4 hours: 
blood pressure 
respiratory rate with chest auscultation 
fluid output and fluid intake 
oxygen saturation. 
After each assessment, develop an individualised plan for managing fluid balance, which may involve additional monitoring techniques, with the aim of maintaining normal fluid volume to reduce the risks of acute kidney injury and pulmonary oedema. 
1.8.6 
Assess renal function at least every 24 hours during the intrapartum period in all women with chronic kidney disease because prolonged labour may lead to dehydration and acute kidney injury. 
1.8.7 
For women with acute kidney injury: 
identify and correct the cause of the acute kidney injury 
measure heart rate hourly and monitor fluid balance in the intrapartum period by assessing the following at least every 4 hours: 
blood pressure 
respiratory rate and chest auscultation 
fluid output and fluid intake 
oxygen saturation 
develop an individualised plan for managing fluid balance, which may involve additional monitoring techniques, with the aim of maintaining normal fluid volume and avoiding both dehydration and pulmonary oedema 
consider giving a single small bolus of fluid (for example, 250 ml) as crystalloid if the woman is dehydrated and review the fluid status and urine output within an hour of giving the first fluid bolus and before considering giving a second 
continue to monitor fluid balance and renal function until the acute kidney injury has recovered. 
1.8.8 
Do not offer nephrotoxic drugs (for example, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) in the intrapartum period to women with kidney disease. 
1.8.9 
For all women with kidney disease during pregnancy: 
monitor the following at least every 4 hours for at least 24 hours after the birth: 
heart rate and blood pressure 
respiratory rate and chest auscultation 
fluid output and fluid intake 
oxygen saturation 
ensure postpartum assessment of renal function and follow‑up for women with persistent kidney disease. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on fluid management for women with kidney disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: acute kidney injury or chronic kidney disease . 
Timing and mode of birth for women with kidney disease 
1.8.10 
As early as possible during pregnancy, plan intrapartum care for women with kidney disease due to lupus nephritis, vasculitis or glomerulonephritis with the woman and a clinician with expertise in managing renal conditions in pregnant women. 
1.8.11 
As early as possible during pregnancy, plan intrapartum care for women with a kidney transplant with the woman, a clinician with expertise in managing renal conditions in pregnant women and a kidney transplant surgeon. 
1.8.12 
For women with chronic kidney disease stage 1, stable renal function and non-nephrotic-range proteinuria (urine protein:creatinine ratio less than 300 mg/mmol), base decisions on timing and mode of birth on the woman's preference and obstetric indications. 
1.8.13 
Consider planned birth by 40 +0  weeks of pregnancy for women with: 
chronic kidney disease stage 1 and nephrotic-range proteinuria (urine protein:creatinine ratio greater than 300 mg/mmol) or 
chronic kidney disease stage 2 to 4 with stable renal function. 
1.8.14 
For women with chronic kidney disease stage 5 or deteriorating stage 3b and stage 4, before 34 +0  weeks of pregnancy, discuss the option of dialysis with the woman and the multidisciplinary team in an effort to prolong the pregnancy to at least 34 +0  weeks. 
1.8.15 
For women with chronic kidney disease stage 5 or deteriorating stage 3b and stage 4, after 34 +0  weeks of pregnancy, discuss the option of planned birth with the woman and the multidisciplinary team and consider birth no later than 38 +0  weeks. 
1.8.16 
For all women with kidney disease, including those with a kidney transplant, base decisions on mode of birth on the woman's preference and obstetric indications. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on timing and mode of birth for women with kidney disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: acute kidney injury or chronic kidney disease . 
1.9 Obesity 
Assessing fetal presentation early in labour for women with a BMI over 30 
1.9.1 
Consider ultrasound scanning at the start of established labour if the baby's presentation is uncertain for women with a BMI over 30 kg/m 2 at the booking appointment, particularly those with a BMI over 35 kg/m 2 . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on assessing fetal presentation early in labour for women with a BMI over 30 kg/m 2 . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: obesity . 
Fetal monitoring for women with a BMI over 30 
1.9.2 
Base intrapartum fetal monitoring on the woman's preference and obstetric indications (including no antenatal care), in line with the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour , for women with a BMI over 30 kg/m 2 at the booking appointment and no medical complications. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on fetal monitoring for women with a BMI over 30 kg/m 2 . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: obesity . 
Position in labour for women with a BMI over 30 
1.9.3 
For women with a BMI over 30 kg/m 2 at the booking appointment, carry out a risk assessment in the third trimester. When developing the birth plan with the woman, take into account: 
the woman's preference 
the woman's mobility 
comorbidities 
the woman's current or most recent weight. 
1.9.4 
For women with a BMI over 30 kg/m 2 at the booking appointment and reduced mobility in the third trimester, consider advising the lateral position in the second stage of labour. 
1.9.5 
For women with a BMI over 30 kg/m 2 at the booking appointment and adequate mobility, provide care in the second stage of labour in line with the NICE guideline on intrapartum care . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on position during the second stage of labour for women with a BMI over 30 kg/m 2 . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: obesity . 
Equipment needs for women in labour with a BMI over 30 
1.9.6 
All obstetric units should have 'birthing beds' able to take a safe working load of 250 kg. 
1.9.7 
Carry out a risk assessment to ensure that essential equipment, in a size-appropriate form, is available for the intrapartum care of women with a BMI over 30 kg/m 2 at the booking appointment, including: 
surgical, obstetric and anaesthetic equipment 
blood pressure cuffs 
operating theatre tables 
lifting and lateral transfer equipment 
anti-embolism stockings 
wheelchairs 
monitoring and measuring equipment. 
1.9.8 
For women with a BMI over 50 kg/m 2 at the booking appointment, offer referral to an obstetric unit with suitable equipment and expertise as early as possible in pregnancy, if this is not available in their current unit. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on equipment needs for women in labour with a BMI over 30 kg/m 2 . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: obesity . 
1.10 Information for women with obstetric complications or no antenatal care 
1.10.1 
Follow the recommendations on communication in the NICE guideline on intrapartum care for women in labour with obstetric complications or no antenatal care. 
1.10.2 
Recognise that women in labour with obstetric complications or no antenatal care: 
may be more anxious than other women in labour and 
are likely to have a better experience of labour and birth if they receive information about the benefits and risks of options for their care and are fully involved in decision making. 
1.10.3 
Provide information about care in labour and mode of birth, which: 
is personalised to the woman's circumstances and needs 
uses local and national figures where possible 
expresses benefits and risks in a way that the woman can understand 
is presented as recommended in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services . 
1.10.4 
Recognise that individual views about risk vary, and support a woman's decision making and choices. 
1.10.5 
Clarify with women with obstetric complications or no antenatal care whether and how they would like their birth companion(s) involved in discussions about care during labour and birth. Review this regularly. 
1.10.6 
Involve the woman in planning her care by asking about her preferences and expectations for labour and birth. Take account of previous discussions, planning, decisions and choices, and keep the woman and her birth companion(s) fully informed. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information for women with obstetric complications or no antenatal care . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: information for women with obstetric complications or no antenatal care . 
1.11 Risk assessment for women with obstetric complications or no antenatal care 
1.11.1 
Take account of symptoms reported and concerns expressed by women in labour with any of the following: 
pyrexia 
sepsis 
intrapartum haemorrhage 
breech presentation 
suspected small-for-gestational-age baby 
suspected large-for-gestational-age baby 
previous caesarean section 
labour after 42 weeks of pregnancy 
no antenatal care. 
1.11.2 
Ensure that a healthcare professional with skills and experience in managing obstetric complications reviews and assesses the condition of a woman with any of the complications in recommendation 1.11.1, including any observations recorded, and escalates care as needed. 
1.11.3 
Take account of the whole clinical picture when discussing options for care with the woman during the intrapartum period. 
1.11.4 
Carry out and record maternal observations (pulse, blood pressure, temperature and urine output), as recommended in the NICE guideline on intrapartum care and shown in table 3, for women in labour with any of the following and no other reasons for concern: 
breech presentation 
suspected small-for-gestational-age baby 
suspected large-for-gestational-age baby 
previous caesarean section 
labour after 42 weeks of pregnancy 
no antenatal care. 
Table 3 Routine maternal observations for women in labour with breech presentation, suspected small- or large-for-gestational-age baby, previous caesarean section, onset of labour after 42 weeks or no antenatal care, and no other reasons for concern 
Pulse 
Blood pressure 
Respiratory rate 
Temperature 
Level of consciousness (AVPU) 
Oxygen saturation 
Urine 
Hourly 
4‑hourly, and hourly in the second stage 
Not required routinely 
4‑hourly 
Not required routinely 
Not required routinely 
Record output 
Abbreviations: AVPU, alert, voice, pain, unresponsive. 
The frequency of observations should be adjusted if necessary based on the level of clinical concern. 
1.11.5 
For women in labour with fever, a temperature of 38°C or above on a single reading or 37.5°C or above on 2 consecutive readings (1 hour apart), carry out maternal observations as shown in table 4. 
1.11.6 
For women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis, carry out maternal observations as shown in table 4. 
1.11.7 
For women with intrapartum haemorrhage, continuously monitor vaginal blood loss and carry out maternal observations as shown in table 4. 
Table 4 Routine maternal observations for women in labour with fever, suspected sepsis, sepsis or intrapartum haemorrhage 
Maternal observation 
Fever 
Suspected sepsis – concern insufficient for antibiotic treatment 
Sepsis or suspected sepsis – on antibiotic treatment 
Intrapartum haemorrhage 
Pulse 
Hourly 
Hourly 
Continuous, or at least every 30 minutes 
At least hourly 
Blood pressure 
4-hourly, and hourly in the second stage 
4-hourly, and hourly in the second stage 
Continuous, or at least every 30 minutes 
At least 4-hourly, and at least hourly in the second stage 
Respiratory rate 
4-hourly 
4-hourly 
Continuous, or at least every 30 minutes 
At least 4-hourly 
Temperature 
Hourly 
Hourly 
Hourly 
At least 4-hourly 
Level of consciousness (AVPU) 
Hourly 
Hourly 
Every 30 minutes 
Hourly 
Oxygen saturation 
4-hourly 
4-hourly 
Continuous, or at least every 30 minutes 
At least 4-hourly 
Urine 
Record output 
Record output 
Record output, hourly if catheterised 
Record output, hourly if catheterised 
Abbreviations: AVPU, alert, voice, pain, unresponsive. 
The frequency of observations should be adjusted if necessary based on the level of clinical concern. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on risk assessment for women with obstetric complications or no antenatal care . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: risk assessment for women with obstetric complications or no antenatal care . 
1.12 Pyrexia 
Use of antipyretics for women in labour with a fever 
1.12.1 
Consider paracetamol for women in labour with a fever, a temperature of 38°C or above on a single reading, or 37.5°C or above on 2 consecutive readings (1 hour apart). 
1.12.2 
Be aware that paracetamol is not a treatment for sepsis and should not delay investigation if sepsis is suspected. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on the use of antipyretics for women in labour with a fever . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: pyrexia . 
Fetal blood sampling for women in labour with a fever 
1.12.3 
For women in labour with a fever, a temperature of 38°C or above on a single reading, or 37.5°C or above on 2 consecutive readings (1 hour apart), follow the recommendations in the section on fetal monitoring for women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis on fetal blood sampling for women with suspected sepsis. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on fetal blood sampling for women in labour with a fever . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: pyrexia . 
1.13 Sepsis 
Mode of birth for women with sepsis or suspected sepsis 
Recognising sepsis 
1.13.1 
Follow the NICE guideline on suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people for the recognition of sepsis in pregnant women. 
1.13.2 
Take into account the normal physiological changes in labour when thinking about the possibility of sepsis, for example, increased maternal pulse rate. 
1.13.3 
Recognise that women in labour with sepsis (see the NICE guideline on suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people ) are at higher risk of severe illness or death. 
Multidisciplinary review for women in labour with suspected sepsis 
1.13.4 
For women in labour with suspected sepsis, ensure ongoing multidisciplinary review from a team with a named lead, including: 
a senior obstetrician 
a senior obstetric anaesthetist 
a senior midwife 
a labour ward coordinator. 
Multidisciplinary review for women in labour with sepsis 
1.13.5 
For women in labour with sepsis, ensure ongoing multidisciplinary review from a team with a named lead, including: 
a senior obstetrician 
a senior obstetric anaesthetist 
a senior neonatologist 
a senior microbiologist 
a senior midwife 
a labour ward coordinator. 
1.13.6 
Include a senior intensivist (critical care specialist), if a woman in labour with sepsis has any of the following signs of organ dysfunction: 
altered consciousness 
hypotension (systolic blood pressure less than 90 mmHg) 
reduced urine output (less than 0.5 ml/kg per hour) 
need for 40% oxygen to maintain oxygen saturation above 92% 
tympanic temperature of less than 36°C. 
Be aware that some pulse oximeters can underestimate or overestimate oxygen saturation levels, especially if the saturation level is borderline. Overestimation has been reported in people with dark skin. See also the NHS England Patient Safety Alert on the risk of harm from inappropriate placement of pulse oximeter probes . 
Planning intrapartum care for women with sepsis or suspected sepsis 
1.13.7 
For women with sepsis or suspected sepsis in the intrapartum period: 
agree a clear multidisciplinary care plan with the woman 
document the agreed plan 
review the plan regularly, taking account of the whole clinical picture, including response to treatment. 
1.13.8 
Involve the woman with sepsis or suspected sepsis and her birth companion(s) in shared decision making about her care, including the following options: 
induction of labour 
continuing labour 
augmenting labour 
instrumental birth 
caesarean section. 
1.13.9 
When discussing timing and mode of birth with a woman with sepsis or suspected sepsis, take into account the woman's preferences, concerns and expectations, and the whole clinical picture, including: 
the source and severity of sepsis, if known 
weeks of pregnancy 
fetal wellbeing 
stage and progress of labour 
parity 
response to treatment. 
1.13.10 
If the source of sepsis is thought to be the genital tract, expedite the birth. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on mode of birth for women with sepsis or suspected sepsis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: sepsis . 
Anaesthesia and analgesia for women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis 
Anaesthesia for women in labour with sepsis and signs of organ dysfunction 
1.13.11 
For women in labour with sepsis and any signs of organ dysfunction (see recommendation 1.13.6), regional anaesthesia should only be used with caution and advice from a consultant obstetric anaesthetist, and with a senior anaesthetist present. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on anaesthesia for women in labour with sepsis and signs of organ dysfunction . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: sepsis . 
Analgesia for women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis 
1.13.12 
For women in labour with sepsis and any signs of organ dysfunction (see recommendation 1.13.6), regional analgesia should only be used with caution and advice from a consultant obstetric anaesthetist. 
1.13.13 
For women in labour with suspected sepsis where concern is insufficient for antibiotic treatment, consider the birthing pool as a form of analgesia only after discussion with a senior midwife and a senior obstetrician. 
1.13.14 
For women in labour who need antibiotics for suspected sepsis (see the NICE guideline on suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people ), start the antibiotics before inserting the needle for regional analgesia. 
1.13.15 
For women in labour with suspected sepsis, carry out a multidisciplinary review of options for pain relief at least every 4 hours. 
1.13.16 
If there are concerns about providing a woman's choice of regional analgesia, this should be discussed with the consultant obstetric anaesthetist. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on analgesia for women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: sepsis . 
Fetal monitoring for women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis 
1.13.17 
Advise continuous cardiotocography during labour for: 
women with suspected sepsis and 
women with confirmed sepsis 
in line with the section on the use of cardiotocography for monitoring during labour in the NICE guideline on fetal monitoring in labour . 
1.13.18 
Explain to the woman and her birth companion(s) what fetal blood sampling involves and the uncertainty of the significance of the results, and support her decision to accept or decline testing. 
1.13.19 
Be aware that for women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis, fetal blood sample results may be falsely reassuring, and always discuss with a consultant obstetrician: 
whether fetal blood sampling is needed 
the results of any fetal blood sampling carried out. 
1.13.20 
For women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis and an abnormal cardiotocograph trace, think about the whole clinical picture and take account of the following before performing any fetal blood sampling and when interpreting the results: 
the woman's preferences 
stage and progress of labour 
parity 
likelihood of chorioamnionitis. 
1.13.21 
If sepsis continues to be suspected, only repeat fetal blood sampling with caution and in discussion with a consultant obstetrician. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on fetal monitoring for women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: sepsis . 
Antimicrobial treatment for women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis 
1.13.22 
For women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis: 
Take into account the whole clinical picture when thinking about antimicrobial treatment. 
Document the rationale for any decision to start antimicrobial treatment and the choice of antimicrobial. 
Take specimens for microbiological culture, including blood cultures, before starting antimicrobials in line with the NICE guideline on suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people . 
1.13.23 
For women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis and a clear source of infection, use existing local antimicrobial guidance when offering an antimicrobial. [This recommendation is adapted from the NICE guideline on suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people .] 
1.13.24 
For women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis and an unclear source of infection, offer a broad-spectrum intravenous antimicrobial from the agreed local formulary and in line with local (where available) or national guidelines. [This recommendation is adapted from the NICE guideline on suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people .] 
1.13.25 
Explain to the woman in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis and her birth companion(s): 
there is no evidence to support the use of one broad-spectrum antimicrobial over another 
the choice of antimicrobial will be guided by local antimicrobial guidelines. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on antimicrobial treatment for women in labour with sepsis or suspected sepsis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: sepsis . 
Care for women with sepsis or suspected sepsis immediately after the birth 
1.13.26 
For women with sepsis or suspected sepsis, ensure that there is ongoing multidisciplinary review (see the recommendations in the sections on multidisciplinary review for women in labour with suspected sepsis and with sepsis ) in the first 24 hours after the birth. This should include a discussion about the need for: 
microbiological specimens for culture 
antimicrobial treatment 
increased frequency of monitoring 
an enhanced level of care and monitoring 
further investigations such as imaging 
support to enable the woman to feed her baby as she chooses (including keeping the woman and baby together wherever possible and maintaining skin-to-skin contact) 
additional support for the woman and her family. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on care for women with sepsis or suspected sepsis immediately after the birth . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: sepsis . 
1.14 Intrapartum haemorrhage 
Management of intrapartum haemorrhage 
1.14.1 
If there are signs of shock in a woman with intrapartum haemorrhage, proceed with immediate resuscitation. 
1.14.2 
The maternity service and ambulance service should have strategies in place to respond quickly and appropriately if a woman has an intrapartum haemorrhage in any setting. [This recommendation is adapted from the NICE guideline on intrapartum care .] 
1.14.3 
If a woman in labour has any vaginal blood loss other than a 'show', transfer her to obstetric-led care, in line with the NICE guideline on intrapartum care . 
1.14.4 
If a woman in labour has any vaginal blood loss other than a 'show', explain to her and her birth companion(s) what is happening. 
1.14.5 
If a woman in labour has any vaginal blood loss other than a 'show': 
Take a history of the bleeding, asking about: 
any associated symptoms, including pain 
any specific concerns the woman may have 
any previous uterine surgery. 
Check previous scans for placental position. 
Assess the volume of blood loss and characteristics of the blood, such as colour, and presence of clots or amniotic fluid. 
Carry out a physical examination, including: 
vital signs 
abdominal palpation 
speculum examination 
vaginal examination if placenta praevia has been excluded 
fetal heart auscultation. 
Start continuous cardiotocography. 
Take a blood sample to determine full blood count and blood group. 
1.14.6 
Think about the possible causes of bleeding, for example: 
placental abruption 
placenta praevia 
uterine rupture 
vasa praevia. 
Recognise that in many cases, no cause will be identifiable. 
1.14.7 
If a woman in labour has any vaginal blood loss other than a 'show', agree a multidisciplinary care plan with the woman and document the plan. Include the following in plans for multidisciplinary care: 
a senior obstetrician 
a senior obstetric anaesthetist 
a senior midwife 
a labour ward coordinator. 
1.14.8 
If a woman has intrapartum bleeding and her condition is stable, management should include: 
establishing venous access 
maternal monitoring (see the recommendation on continuously monitoring vaginal blood loss in the section on risk assessment for women with obstetric complications or no antenatal care and table 4 ) 
monitoring the fetal heart rate with continuous cardiotocography. 
1.14.9 
If a woman with intrapartum bleeding has a large blood loss or her condition causes concern, management should be in line with recommendation 1.14.8 and also include: 
giving intravenous fluids urgently 
taking blood for full blood count and cross-matching 
seeking medical advice from a more experienced healthcare professional. 
Management may also include: 
triggering the local major haemorrhage protocol 
taking blood for clotting studies and blood gases 
use of amniotomy or oxytocin 
expediting the birth. 
1.14.10 
If a woman in labour has vaginal blood loss typical of a 'show', follow the NICE guideline on intrapartum care . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on management of intrapartum haemorrhage . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review N: intrapartum haemorrhage . 
1.15 Breech presenting in labour 
Mode of birth for women presenting with a breech position in labour 
1.15.1 
Discuss with women in labour with breech presentation the possible benefits and risks of vaginal birth and caesarean section, including: 
an increase in the chance of serious medical problems for the woman with caesarean section 
an increase in the chance of serious medical problems for the baby with vaginal birth 
what it might mean for them and the baby if such problems did occur. 
1.15.2 
Explain to women in labour with breech presentation that any benefit of caesarean section in reducing the chance of serious medical problems for the baby may be greater in early labour. 
1.15.3 
Offer women in labour with breech presentation a choice between continuing labour and caesarean section. 
1.15.4 
Assess progress of labour in line with the NICE guideline on intrapartum care . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on mode of birth for women presenting with a breech position in labour . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review O: breech presenting in labour . 
1.16 Small-for-gestational-age baby 
Fetal monitoring in labour for babies suspected to be small for gestational age 
1.16.1 
Discuss with a woman whose baby is suspected to be small for gestational age: 
the chance of serious medical problems for her baby 
what it might mean for her and her baby if such problems did occur. 
1.16.2 
When discussing risk, explain that when a baby is suspected to be small for gestational age: 
it is sometimes difficult to be certain the suspicion is correct until the baby is born 
the chance of serious medical problems for the baby is greater with: 
growth restriction 
additional risk factors, such as preterm birth 
complications during labour or birth. 
1.16.3 
Offer continuous cardiotocography to women whose babies are suspected to be small for gestational age after a full discussion of the benefits and risks (see recommendations 1.16.1 and 1.16.2). Respect the woman's decision if she declines continuous cardiotocography. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on fetal monitoring in labour for babies suspected to be small for gestational age . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review P: small-for-gestational-age baby . 
1.17 Large-for-gestational-age baby 
Mode of birth for babies suspected to be large for gestational age 
1.17.1 
Explain to women in labour whose babies are suspected to be large for gestational age that: 
it is sometimes difficult to be certain the suspicion is correct until the baby is born 
when making decisions about mode of birth (for example, vaginal birth or caesarean section), this uncertainty needs to be taken into account. 
1.17.2 
Discuss with women in labour whose babies are suspected to be large for gestational age the possible benefits and risks of vaginal birth and caesarean section, including: 
a higher chance of maternal medical problems such as infection with emergency caesarean section 
a higher chance of shoulder dystocia and brachial plexus injury with vaginal birth 
a higher chance of instrumental birth and perineal trauma with vaginal birth. 
Explain to the woman and her birth companion(s) what it might mean for her and her baby if such problems did occur. 
1.17.3 
Offer women in labour whose babies are suspected to be large for gestational age a choice between continuing labour, including augmented labour, and caesarean section. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on mode of birth for babies suspected to be large for gestational age . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q: large-for-gestational-age baby . 
1.18 No antenatal care 
Risk assessment and management of labour for women with no antenatal care 
1.18.1 
For women who have had no antenatal care, be aware of the particular importance of following the recommendations on establishing rapport and treating with respect in the NICE guideline on intrapartum care . 
1.18.2 
Provide obstetric-led intrapartum care for women who have had no antenatal care, and alert the neonatal team and, if relevant, the anaesthetic team. If the woman presents to a midwifery unit, arrange urgent transfer to an obstetric-led unit if appropriate. 
1.18.3 
For a woman with no antenatal care who has difficulty understanding, speaking and reading English, provide an interpreter (who may be a link worker or advocate and should not be a member of her family, her legal guardian or her partner), who can communicate with her in her preferred language. [This recommendation is adapted from the NICE guideline on pregnancy and complex social factors .] 
1.18.4 
If possible, take a full medical, psychological and social history from women who have had no antenatal care. 
Try to find out why there has been no care during pregnancy. 
Ask the woman who, if anyone, she would like to support her as her birth companion(s) during labour. 
Explore sensitively any possible vulnerability or safeguarding concerns, including: 
young maternal age 
maternal mental health 
maternal learning disability 
maternal substance misuse 
domestic or sexual abuse 
homelessness 
human trafficking 
undocumented migrant status 
female genital mutilation 
the woman or family members being known to children's services or social services. 
1.18.5 
Carry out an obstetric and general medical examination of a woman with no antenatal care as soon as possible. This should include the initial assessment described in the NICE guideline on intrapartum care . 
1.18.6 
Carry out an assessment of the unborn baby, including ultrasound if possible, to determine: 
viability 
the presentation 
an estimate of gestational age 
the possibility of multiple pregnancy 
the placental site. 
1.18.7 
Offer women who have had no antenatal care, tests for: 
anaemia (full blood count) 
haemoglobinopathies 
blood group and rhesus D status 
atypical red cell alloantibodies 
random blood glucose 
asymptomatic bacteriuria 
HIV, hepatitis B and syphilis. 
1.18.8 
Offer rapid HIV testing to women thought to be at high risk of infection, which might include: 
recent migrants from countries with high rates of HIV infection 
women who misuse substances intravenously 
suspected sexual abuse. 
1.18.9 
Explain to a woman who has had no antenatal care why and when information about her pregnancy may need to be shared with other agencies. [This recommendation is adapted from the NICE guideline on pregnancy and complex social factors .] 
1.18.10 
Contact the woman's GP and, if appropriate, other health or social care professionals for more information about the woman's history and to plan ongoing care. 
1.18.11 
If there are safeguarding concerns, refer the woman to safeguarding services, document the referral and inform healthcare professionals such as the GP, health visitor and paediatric teams, and social care professionals (see the NICE guidelines on pregnancy and complex social factors , child maltreatment and child abuse and neglect ). 
1.18.12 
Follow the recommendations in the NICE guideline on intrapartum care when no medical conditions or obstetric complications are identified in women who present in labour with no antenatal care. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on risk assessment and management of labour for women with no antenatal care . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review R: no antenatal care . 
1.19 Previous caesarean section 
Management of the first and second stages of labour for women with a previous caesarean section 
1.19.1 
Do not routinely insert an intravenous cannula for women in labour who have had a previous caesarean section. 
1.19.2 
Explain to women in labour who have had a previous caesarean section that: 
a vaginal birth is associated with a small chance of uterine rupture 
an emergency caesarean section may mean a higher chance of: 
heavy bleeding needing a blood transfusion 
infection, for example, intrauterine infection 
a longer hospital stay 
complications in a future pregnancy, for example, placenta praevia and placenta accreta (see the NICE guideline on caesarean birth ). 
1.19.3 
Explain to women in labour who have had a previous caesarean section that there is little evidence of a difference in outcomes for the baby between a vaginal birth or another caesarean section. 
1.19.4 
Explain to women who have had a previous caesarean section that they are likely to have a lower chance of complications in labour if they have also had a previous vaginal birth. 
1.19.5 
When discussing oxytocin for delay in the first or second stage of labour, explain to women who have had a previous caesarean section that this: 
increases the chance of uterine rupture 
reduces the chance of another caesarean section 
increases the chance of an instrumental birth. 
1.19.6 
For guidance on continuous cardiotocography in labour for women with a previous caesarean section, see NICE's guideline on caesarean birth . 
1.19.7 
Support informed choice of a full range of options for pain relief for women who have had a previous caesarean section, including labour and birth in water. 
1.19.8 
Explain to women in labour who have had a previous caesarean section that regional analgesia is associated with: 
a reduced chance of another caesarean section 
an increased chance of an instrumental birth. 
1.19.9 
Do not routinely offer amniotomy to women in labour who have had a previous caesarean section. 
1.19.10 
This recommendation on continuous cardiotocography has been withdrawn (see recommendation 1.19.6). 
1.19.11 
For women who have had a previous caesarean section, be aware of the particular importance of following the recommendations from the NICE guideline on intrapartum care on: 
food and drink in labour 
controlling gastric acidity 
position in labour, including the latent first stage, and birth. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on management of the first and second stages of labour for women with a previous caesarean section . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review S: previous caesarean section . 
1.20 Labour after 42 weeks of pregnancy 
Fetal and maternal monitoring for women in labour after 42 weeks of pregnancy 
1.20.1 
Offer continuous cardiotocography to women in labour after 42 weeks of pregnancy after a full discussion of the benefits and risks to the woman and her baby. Respect the woman's decision if she declines continuous cardiotocography. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on fetal and maternal monitoring for women in labour after 42 weeks of pregnancy . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review T: labour after 42 weeks of pregnancy . 
Terms used in this guideline 
Chronic kidney disease stages 
Classified according to estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) measured before pregnancy. See glomerular filtration rate (GFR) categories in table 1 in the NICE guideline on chronic kidney disease in adults . 
Intrapartum period 
The intrapartum period is from the onset of labour (spontaneous or induced) to 24 hours after birth. 
Mechanical heart valves 
A mechanical heart valve refers to a prosthetic heart valve that requires long-term anticoagulation to prevent heart valve thrombosis. This is different from a bioprosthetic heart valve, which does not need long-term anticoagulation. 
Regional anaesthesia 
Regional anaesthesia includes spinal, epidural and combined spinal–epidural techniques. 
Regional analgesia 
Regional analgesia includes spinal, epidural and combined spinal–epidural techniques. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
