Overview | Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Respiratory conditions
Pulmonary fibrosis
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in adults: diagnosis and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG163 
Published: 
12 June 2013
Last updated: 
23 May 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in people aged 18 and over. It aims to improve the quality of life for people with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis by helping healthcare professionals to diagnose the condition and provide effective symptom management. 
Last reviewed:  19 September 2024 
We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the section on disease-modifying pharmacological interventions . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
Next review:  This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
diagnosis 
information and support 
prognosis 
management 
review and follow-up 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Adults with suspected or diagnosed idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: the diagnosis and management of suspected idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
