Overview | Challenging behaviour and learning disabilities: prevention and interventions for people with learning disabilities whose behaviour challenges | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Children's social care
Challenging behaviour and learning disabilities: prevention and interventions for people with learning disabilities whose behaviour challenges
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG11 
Published: 
29 May 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Context 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers interventions and support for children, young people and adults with a learning disability and behaviour that challenges. It highlights the importance of understanding the cause of behaviour that challenges, and performing thorough assessments so that steps can be taken to help people change their behaviour and improve their quality of life. The guideline also covers support and intervention for family members or carers. 
NICE has produced an  easy read version  for people with a learning disability. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
general principles of care 
support and interventions for family members or carers 
early identification of the emergence of behaviour that challenges 
assessment 
psychological and environmental interventions 
medication 
interventions for coexisting health problems and sleep problems 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals, commissioners and providers in health and social care 
Parents, family members or carers of children, young people and adults with a learning disability and behaviour that challenges 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Learning disability: behaviour that challenges 
Learning disability: identifying and managing mental health problems 
Next page 
Context 
Back to top
