Context | Rheumatoid arthritis in adults: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Musculoskeletal conditions
Arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis in adults: management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG100 
Published: 
11 July 2018
Last updated: 
12 October 2020
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Context 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory disease largely affecting synovial joints. It typically affects the small joints of the hands and the feet, and usually both sides equally and symmetrically, although any synovial joint can be affected. It is a systemic disease and so can affect the whole body, including the heart, lungs and eyes. 
The incidence of the condition is low, with around 1.5 men and 3.6 women developing RA per 10,000 people per year. The overall occurrence of RA is 2 to 4 times greater in women than men. The peak age of incidence in the UK for both men and women is the 70s, but people of all ages can develop the disease. 
Drug management aims to relieve symptoms, as pain relief is the priority for people with RA, and to modify the disease process. Disease modification slows or stops radiological progression, which is closely correlated with progressive functional impairment. 
RA can result in a wide range of complications for people with the disease, their carers, the NHS and society in general. The economic impact of this disease includes: 
direct costs to the NHS and associated healthcare support services 
indirect costs to the economy, including the effects of early mortality and lost productivity 
the personal impact of RA and subsequent complications for people with RA and their families. 
Approximately one-third of people stop work because of the disease within 2 years of onset, and this increases thereafter. Clearly this disease is costly to the UK economy and to individuals. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
