Overview | Familial hypercholesterolaemia: identification and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Lipid disorders
Familial hypercholesterolaemia: identification and management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG71 
Published: 
27 August 2008
Last updated: 
04 October 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers identifying and managing familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH), a specific type of high cholesterol that runs in the family, in children, young people and adults. It aims to help identify people at increased risk of coronary heart disease as a result of having FH. 
Last reviewed: 11 July 2024 
We have checked the evidence and plan to update the recommendations on case finding and diagnosis . For more information see the surveillance decision . 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
diagnosis 
identifying people with FH using cascade testing 
drug treatment, lifestyle interventions and specialist treatment 
information and support on contraception for women with FH and for pregnant women with FH 
review and referral for evaluation of coronary heart disease 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Children, young people and adults, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called identification and management of familial hypercholesterolaemia. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Familial hypercholesterolaemia 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
