Overview | Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Hypertension
Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG136 
Published: 
28 August 2019
Last updated: 
26 February 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers identifying and treating primary hypertension (high blood pressure) in people aged 18 and over, including people with type 2 diabetes. It aims to reduce the risk of cardiovascular problems such as heart attacks and strokes by helping healthcare professionals to diagnose hypertension accurately and treat it effectively. 
NICE has also produced a guideline on hypertension in pregnancy . 
Last reviewed: 26 February 2026 
We added a new recommendation to offer advice on healthy living to people who have raised blood pressure but have not been diagnosed with hypertension. See update information for more details. 
We are monitoring the ongoing research on the response to antihypertensive drugs in different ethnic groups that may impact recommendations in this guideline. We will check the evidence when published and make a decision whether to update this guideline at this time. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG127. It also updates and replaces the section on blood pressure management in the NICE guideline on type 2 diabetes in adults  (NG28). 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
diagnosing hypertension 
starting antihypertensive drug treatment 
monitoring treatment and blood pressure targets 
choosing antihypertensive drug treatment  (treatment steps 1 to 4) 
measuring blood pressure 
assessing cardiovascular risk and target organ damage 
lifestyle interventions 
See a 2-page visual summary on the recommendations for diagnosing and treating hypertension 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People who have or may have high blood pressure, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health 
Type 2 diabetes in adults 
Hypertension in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
