Recommendations for research | Suspected cancer: recognition and referral | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood and bone marrow cancers
Suspected cancer: recognition and referral
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG12 
Published: 
23 June 2015
Last updated: 
15 April 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Recommendations organised by site of cancer 
Recommendations on patient support, safety netting and the diagnostic process 
Recommended actions organised by symptom and findings of primary care investigations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Dual compared with sequential CA125 and ultrasound testing for ovarian cancer 
What is the diagnostic test accuracy and cost effectiveness of dual compared with sequential CA125 and ultrasound testing for ovarian cancer in people presenting with symptoms of suspected cancer in primary care? [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on age and serum CA125 thresholds for detecting ovarian cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: dual testing with serum CA125 and ultrasound scan compared to serum CA125 alone, and age and serum CA125 thresholds for detection of suspected ovarian cancer in adults . 
2 Unscheduled bleeding on hormone replacement therapy (HRT) 
What is the risk of endometrial cancer in adults presenting in primary care with unexplained vaginal bleeding that cannot be attributed to HRT? [2026] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on unscheduled bleeding on HRT . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: endometrial cancer: unscheduled bleeding, HRT and cancer referral . 
3 Age thresholds in cancer 
Longitudinal studies should be carried out to identify and quantify factors in adults that are associated with development of specific cancers at a younger age than the norm. They should be designed to inform age thresholds in clinical guidance. The primary outcome should be likelihood ratios and positive predictive values for cancer occurring in younger age groups. [2015] 
4 Primary care testing 
Diagnostic accuracy studies of tests accessible to primary care should be carried out for a given cancer in symptomatic people. Priority areas for research should include tests for people with cough, non-visible haematuria, suspected prostate cancer, suspected pancreatic cancer, suspected cancer in childhood and young people and other suspected rare cancers. Outcomes of interest are the performance characteristics of the test, particularly sensitivity, specificity and positive and negative predictive values. [2015] 
5 Cancers insufficiently researched in primary care 
Observational studies of symptomatic primary care patients should be used to estimate the positive predictive value of different symptoms for specific cancers. Priority areas for research are those where the evidence base is currently insufficient and should include prostate cancer, pancreatic cancer, cancer in childhood and young people and other rare cancers. Outcomes of interest are positive predictive values and likelihood ratios for cancer. [2015] 
Other recommendations for research 
6 Patient experience 
Qualitative studies are needed to assess the key issues in patient experience and patient information needs in the cancer diagnostic pathway, particularly in the interval between first presentation to primary care and first appointment in secondary care. Outcomes of interest are patient satisfaction, quality of life and patient perception of the quality of care and information. [2015] 
7 Prostate-specific antigen testing 
What is the diagnostic accuracy of using age-adjusted and fixed prostate-specific antigen thresholds for people with symptoms of prostate cancer, including those at high risk of developing prostate cancer (such as those with an African family background or a family history of prostate cancer)? [2015] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research see the rationale section on prostate-specific antigen testing for prostate cancer . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: PSA testing for prostate cancer . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Terms used in this guideline 
Back to top
