Recommendations for research | Gambling-related harms: identification, assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Addiction
Gambling-related harms: identification, assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG248 
Published: 
28 January 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
On this page 
Key recommendations for research
Other recommendations for research
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
Key recommendations for research 
1 Asking about gambling 
What is the accuracy of individual brief screening tools in identifying gambling-related harms? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on asking about gambling . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: tools for identification and assessment of harmful gambling . 
2 Tools to assess gambling-related harms 
What is the accuracy of tools to assess gambling-related harms? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on assessment of gambling that harms . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: tools for identification and assessment of harmful gambling . 
3 Models of care and service delivery 
What is the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of care pathways and models of care for people who experience gambling-related harms (including those with comorbid conditions such as depression, anxiety and substance-use disorders, those at high-risk and those under-represented in services)? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on models of care and service delivery . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: models of care and service delivery . 
4 Combination of pharmacological and psychological interventions 
What is the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of pharmacological treatment with and without psychological therapy for the treatment of gambling that harms? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on pharmacological treatment of gambling that harms . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: pharmacological treatment of harmful gambling . 
5 Long-term effectiveness of treatments for gambling-related harms 
What is the long-term effectiveness and cost-effectiveness, including prevention of suicide and self-harm, of psychological treatments for gambling that harms? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on psychological interventions for gambling that harms . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: psychological and psychosocial treatment of harmful gambling . 
6 Preventing relapse 
What is the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of interventions and approaches (for example, building recovery capital, mutual aid, peer support and mentoring programmes) for preventing relapse in people who have previously experienced gambling that harms? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on relapse and ongoing support . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: relapse prevention . 
Other recommendations for research 
7 Interventions to improve access 
What is the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of interventions or approaches designed to improve access to gambling treatment services for people from under-represented groups who are experiencing gambling-related harms? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on improving access to treatment . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: interventions to improve access . 
8 Treatment of gambling-related harms for diverse groups 
How should gambling treatment services be adapted to meet the needs of diverse populations (for example, different ages, different races or cultural backgrounds, or people with varying neurodiversity)? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on treatment of gambling-related harms: general principles and peer support . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: improving gambling treatment services . 
9 Psychological or psychosocial interventions 
What is the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of psychological or psychosocial interventions to reduce gambling symptoms and increase recovery capital? 
10 Combination psychological or psychosocial interventions 
What sequential or combination psychological or psychosocial interventions are most effective and cost effective for the treatment of gambling that harms? 
11 Psychological or psychosocial interventions with comorbidities 
What is the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of psychological or psychosocial interventions for gambling that harms with comorbid conditions (for example, depression, anxiety or alcohol or substance dependence)? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations for research, see the rationale section on psychological interventions for gambling that harms . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F: psychological and psychosocial treatment of harmful gambling . 
12 Combination pharmacological treatment 
What is the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of combination pharmacological treatment for gambling that harms? 
13 Pharmacological treatment for different groups of people 
What is the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of pharmacological treatment for gambling that harms in people with comorbidities (for example, depression, anxiety or alcohol or substance dependence)? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations for research, see the rationale section on pharmacological treatment of gambling that harms . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E: pharmacological treatment of harmful gambling . 
14 Reducing gambling-related harms for families and affected others 
What is the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of interventions and approaches (including structured approaches validated for gambling and psychoeducation) for reducing gambling-related harms for affected others? 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on interventions for families and affected others . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: interventions for families and affected others . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Terms used in this guideline 
Back to top
