Recommendations | Ovarian cancer: recognition and initial management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Ovarian cancer
Ovarian cancer: recognition and initial management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG122 
Published: 
27 April 2011
Last updated: 
15 April 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix: Risk of malignancy index (RMI I) 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Detection in primary care
1.2 Establishing the diagnosis in secondary care
1.3 Information and support for women with newly diagnosed ovarian cancer
1.4 Managing suspected early (stage 1) ovarian cancer
1.5 Managing advanced (stage 2 to 4) ovarian cancer
1.6 Systemic anticancer therapy for recurrent or relapsed ovarian cancer
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Healthcare professionals should follow our general guidelines for people delivering care: 
Patient experience in adult NHS services 
Shared decision making . 
1.1 Detection in primary care 
For recommendations on detecting ovarian cancer in primary care, see the section on ovarian cancer in NICE's guideline on suspected cancer: recognition and referral . 
1.2 Establishing the diagnosis in secondary care 
1.2.1 Tumour markers: which to use? 
1.2.1.1 
Measure serum CA125 in secondary care in all women with suspected ovarian cancer, if this has not already been done in primary care. 
1.2.1.2 
In women under 40 with suspected ovarian cancer, measure levels of alpha fetoprotein (AFP) and beta human chorionic gonadotrophin (beta-hCG) as well as serum CA125, to identify women who may not have epithelial ovarian cancer. 
1.2.2 Malignancy indices 
1.2.2.1 
Calculate a risk of malignancy index I (RMI I) score (after carrying out an ultrasound; see recommendation 1.2.3.1 in the section on imaging in the diagnostic pathway: which procedures?) and refer all women with an RMI I score of 250 or greater to a specialist multidisciplinary team. 
See the appendix for details of how to calculate an RMI I score . 
1.2.3 Imaging in the diagnostic pathway: which procedures? 
1.2.3.1 
Carry out an ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis as the first imaging test in secondary care for women with suspected ovarian cancer, if this has not already been done in primary care. 
1.2.3.2 
If the ultrasound, serum CA125 and clinical status suggest ovarian cancer, carry out a CT scan of the pelvis and abdomen to establish the extent of the cancer. Include the thorax if clinically indicated. 
1.2.3.3 
Do not use MRI routinely for assessing women with suspected ovarian cancer. 
1.2.4 Tissue diagnosis 
Need for tissue diagnosis 
1.2.4.1 
If offering cytotoxic chemotherapy to women with suspected advanced ovarian cancer, first obtain a confirmed tissue diagnosis by histology (or by cytology if histology is not appropriate) in all but exceptional cases. 
1.2.4.2 
Offer cytotoxic chemotherapy for suspected advanced ovarian cancer without a tissue diagnosis (histology or cytology) only: 
in exceptional cases, after discussion with the multidisciplinary team, and 
after discussing with the woman the possible benefits and risks of starting chemotherapy without a tissue diagnosis. 
Methods of tissue diagnosis other than laparotomy 
1.2.4.3 
If surgery has not been carried out, use histology rather than cytology to obtain a tissue diagnosis. To obtain tissue for histology: 
use percutaneous image-guided biopsy if this is feasible 
consider laparoscopic biopsy if percutaneous image-guided biopsy is not feasible or has not produced an adequate sample. 
Use cytology if histology is not appropriate. 
1.3 Information and support for women with newly diagnosed ovarian cancer 
1.3.1.1 
Offer women with newly diagnosed ovarian cancer information about their condition, including psychosocial and psychosexual issues, that: 
is available at the time they want it 
includes the amount of detail that they want and are able to deal with 
is in a suitable format, including written information. 
1.3.1.2 
Ensure that information is available about: 
the stage, treatment options and prognosis 
how to manage the side effects of both the condition and its treatments to maximise wellbeing 
sexuality and sexual activity 
fertility and hormone treatment 
symptoms and signs of cancer recurrence 
genetics, including the chances of family members developing ovarian cancer (see NICE's guideline on ovarian cancer: identifying and managing familial and genetic risk ) 
self-help strategies to optimise independence and coping 
where to go for support, including support groups 
how to deal with emotions such as sadness, depression, anxiety and a feeling of a lack of control over the outcome of the cancer and treatment. 
1.4 Managing suspected early (stage 1) ovarian cancer 
1.4.1 The role of systematic retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy 
1.4.1.1 
Carry out retroperitoneal lymph node assessment as part of optimal surgical staging in women with suspected ovarian cancer whose cancer appears to be confined to the ovaries (that is, who appear to have stage 1 ovarian cancer). 
Lymph node assessment involves sampling of retroperitoneal lymphatic tissue from the para-aortic area and pelvic side walls if there is a palpable abnormality, or random sampling if there is no palpable abnormality. 
Optimal surgical staging constitutes: 
midline laparotomy to allow thorough assessment of the abdomen and pelvis 
a total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and infracolic omentectomy 
biopsies of any peritoneal deposits 
random biopsies of the pelvic and abdominal peritoneum 
retroperitoneal lymph node assessment. 
1.4.1.2 
Do not include systematic retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy (block dissection of lymph nodes from the pelvic side walls to the level of the renal veins) as part of standard surgical treatment in women with suspected ovarian cancer whose cancer appears to be confined to the ovaries (that is, who appear to have stage 1 ovarian cancer). 
1.4.2 Adjuvant systemic chemotherapy for stage 1 ovarian cancer 
1.4.2.1 
Do not offer adjuvant chemotherapy to women who have had optimal surgical staging and have low-risk stage 1 ovarian cancer (grade 1 or 2, stage 1a or 1b). 
1.4.2.2 
Offer women with high-risk stage 1 ovarian cancer (grade 3 or stage 1c) adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of 6 cycles of carboplatin. 
1.4.2.3 
Discuss the possible benefits and side effects of adjuvant chemotherapy with women who have had suboptimal surgical staging and appear to have stage 1 ovarian cancer (see recommendation 1.4.1.1 ). 
1.5 Managing advanced (stage 2 to 4) ovarian cancer 
1.5.1 Primary surgery 
1.5.1.1 
If carrying out surgery for ovarian cancer, whether before chemotherapy or after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, the objective should be complete resection of all macroscopic disease. 
1.5.2 Intraperitoneal chemotherapy 
1.5.2.1 
Do not offer intraperitoneal chemotherapy for ovarian cancer, except as part of a clinical trial. See also NICE's HealthTech guidance on cytoreduction surgery with hyperthermic intraoperative peritoneal chemotherapy for peritoneal carcinomatosis , which recommends that this procedure should only be used with special arrangements for clinical governance, consent, and audit or research. 
1.5.3 First-line systemic anticancer therapy 
1.5.3.1 
Paclitaxel with a platinum-based compound or with platinum-based therapy alone (cisplatin or carboplatin) are recommended as options for first-line chemotherapy for treating ovarian cancer. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on paclitaxel (TA55, 2005) . 
1.5.3.2 
Bevacizumab with paclitaxel and carboplatin is not recommended for the first-line treatment of advanced ovarian cancer. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on bevacizumab (TA284, 2013) . However, NHS England recommends bevacizumab with paclitaxel and carboplatin as an option for first-line induction treatment for advanced (stage 3 and 4) ovarian cancer at a dose of 7.5 mg/kg or 15 mg/kg. For more information, see the NHS England Cancer Drugs Fund list . 
In April 2025, a dose of 7.5 mg/kg was an off-label use of bevacizumab. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.5.4 Systemic anticancer therapy for maintenance treatment 
1.5.4.1 
Niraparib for maintenance treatment is recommended as an option for advanced (stage 3 and 4) high-grade epithelial ovarian cancer in adults after response to first-line platinum-based chemotherapy only if they did not have or could not tolerate bevacizumab as part of first-line induction chemotherapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on niraparib (TA1129, 2026) . 
1.5.4.2 
Rucaparib for maintenance treatment is recommended as an option for BRCA mutation-negative, homologous recombination deficiency positive, advanced (stage 3 and 4), high-grade epithelial ovarian cancer after complete or partial response to first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on rucaparib (TA1055, 2025) . 
1.5.4.3 
Rucaparib for maintenance treatment is recommended as an option for BRCA mutation-negative, advanced (stage 3 and 4), high-grade epithelial ovarian cancer, when homologous recombination deficiency status is negative or unknown and bevacizumab is not a treatment option, after complete or partial response to first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on rucaparib (TA1055, 2025) . 
1.5.4.4 
Olaparib for maintenance treatment is recommended as an option for BRCA mutation-positive advanced (stage 3 and 4) high-grade epithelial ovarian cancer after response to first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on olaparib (TA962, 2024) . 
1.5.4.5 
Olaparib with bevacizumab for maintenance treatment is recommended as an option for homologous recombination deficiency positive, advanced (stage 3 and 4), high-grade epithelial ovarian cancer after complete or partial response to first-line platinum-based chemotherapy with bevacizumab. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on olaparib with bevacizumab (TA946, 2024) . 
1.5.4.6 
Bevacizumab for maintenance treatment is recommended as an option by NHS England for advanced (stage 3 and 4) ovarian cancer previously treated with a 7.5 mg/kg dose of bevacizumab in combination with carboplatin and paclitaxel. See the NHS England Cancer Drugs Fund list . 
In April 2025, this was an off-label use of bevacizumab. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.6 Systemic anticancer therapy for recurrent or relapsed ovarian cancer 
1.6.1 Systemic anticancer therapy options 
1.6.1.1 
For medicines recommended as options for treating recurrent ovarian cancer, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
paclitaxel in combination with platinum or as monotherapy (TA389, 2016) 
pegylated liposomal doxorubicin hydrochloride (PLDH) as monotherapy (TA389, 2016) 
PLDH in combination with platinum (TA389, 2016) . 
1.6.1.2 
For medicines not recommended for treating the first recurrence of platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on: 
gemcitabine in combination with carboplatin (TA389, 2016) 
trabectedin in combination with PLDH (TA389, 2016) 
topotecan (TA389, 2016) 
bevacizumab in combination with gemcitabine and carboplatin (TA285, 2013) . 
1.6.1.3 
Topotecan is not recommended for treating recurrent platinum-resistant or platinum-refractory ovarian cancer. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on topotecan (TA389, 2016) . 
1.6.1.4 
Trametinib is recommended as an option by NHS England for treating serous low-grade ovarian or peritoneal cancer that has recurred or progressed following at least 1 platinum-based chemotherapy. See the NHS England Cancer Drugs Fund list . 
In April 2025, this was an off-label use of trametinib. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.6.2 Systemic anticancer therapy for maintenance treatment 
1.6.2.1 
Rucaparib for maintenance treatment is recommended as an option for relapsed platinum-sensitive high-grade epithelial ovarian cancer that has completely or partially responded to platinum-based chemotherapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on rucaparib (TA1007, 2024) . 
1.6.2.2 
Olaparib for maintenance treatment is recommended as an option for BRCA mutation-positive relapsed, platinum-sensitive, high-grade epithelial ovarian cancer after 2 or more courses of platinum-based chemotherapy. For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on olaparib (TA908, 2023) . 
1.6.2.3 
Niraparib for maintenance treatment is recommended as an option for treating relapsed, platinum-sensitive, high-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer in adults that has responded to the most recent course of platinum-based chemotherapy if: 
they have a BRCA mutation and have had 2 courses of platinum-based chemotherapy, or 
they do not have a BRCA mutation and have had 2 or more courses of platinum-based chemotherapy. 
For full details, see NICE's technology appraisal guidance on niraparib (TA784, 2022) . 
1.6.3 Neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase (NTRK) fusion-positive solid tumours 
1.6.3.1 
Larotrectinib is recommended as an option through the Cancer Drugs Fund for treating locally advanced or metastatic NTRK fusion-positive solid tumours when there are no other satisfactory treatment options. For full details, see  NICE's technology appraisal guidance on larotrectinib (TA630, May 2020) . 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
