Overview | Managing medicines for adults receiving social care in the community | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Managing medicines for adults receiving social care in the community
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG67 
Published: 
30 March 2017
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Overview 
This guideline covers medicines support for adults (aged 18 and over) who are receiving social care in the community. It aims to ensure that people who receive social care are supported to take and look after their medicines effectively and safely at home. It gives advice on assessing if people need help with managing their medicines, who should provide medicines support and how health and social care staff should work together. 
NICE has also produced guidelines on managing medicines in care homes and home care for older people . 
Last reviewed: 30 March 2017 
Next review:  This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
governance arrangements  and  joint working between health and social care 
assessing medicines support needs 
supporting people to take their medicines , including covert administration  and  managing concerns 
staff training and competency 
sharing medicines information  and  record keeping 
safely ordering and supplying medicines  and  transporting, storing and disposing of medicines 
Who is it for? 
Social care practitioners (including care workers and social workers) providing care for people in the community 
Health professionals providing care for people receiving social care in the community, and their support staff 
Commissioners and providers of services for people receiving social care in the community 
People receiving social care in the community, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Medicines management for people receiving social care in the community 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
