Overview | Twin and triplet pregnancy | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Pregnancy
Twin and triplet pregnancy
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG137 
Published: 
04 September 2019
Last updated: 
09 April 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers care for pregnant women and pregnant people with a twin or triplet pregnancy in addition to routine care during pregnancy and labour. It aims to reduce the risk of complications and improve outcomes. 
It should be read in conjunction with NICE’s guidelines on antenatal care , intrapartum care and fetal monitoring . For information on other related topics, see our women's and reproductive health summary page . 
Last reviewed: 9 April 2024 
We reviewed the evidence and made new and updated recommendations on screening for and preventing preterm birth. 
This guideline updates and replaces multiple pregnancy: antenatal care for twin and triplet pregnancies (NICE guideline CG129, September 2011). It also updates recommendations on multiple pregnancy in section 1.2.2 of NICE’s guideline on caesarean section (CG132). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
screening and preventing preterm birth 
It also includes recommendations on: 
fetal complications 
timing of birth 
mode of birth 
fetal monitoring during labour 
analgesia 
managing the third stage of labour 
determining gestational age and chorionicity (the number of outer membranes that surround the babies) 
delivery of care , including specialist antenatal appointments 
general care 
maternal complications 
indications for referral to a tertiary level fetal medicine centre 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Pregnant women and pregnant people with a twin or triplet pregnancy and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Multiple pregnancy: twin and triplet pregnancies 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
