Context | Diabetes (type 1 and type 2) in children and young people: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diabetes
Diabetes (type 1 and type 2) in children and young people: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG18 
Published: 
01 August 2015
Last updated: 
11 May 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Context 
Diabetes is a long‑term condition that can have a major impact on the life of a child or young person, as well as their family or carers. In addition to glucose-lowering agents for managing blood glucose levels, diabetes management should include education, support and access to psychological services, as detailed in this guideline. Preparations should also be made for the transition from paediatric to adult services, which have a somewhat different model of care and evidence base. 
Type 1 diabetes is becoming more common in the UK, and since 2004 type 2 diabetes is also being diagnosed with increasing frequency. The 2020/21 National Paediatric Diabetes Audit identified 29,000 children and young people with type 1 diabetes and 973 with type 2 being managed within a paediatric diabetes unit. 
Much of the general care for type 2 diabetes is the same as for type 1 diabetes, although the initial management is different. In addition, overweight and obesity associated with type 2 diabetes bring an increased risk of renal complications and problems such as hypertension and dyslipidaemia. These differences in management and complications need guidance specific to type 2 diabetes. A variety of genetic conditions (such as maturity‑onset diabetes in the young) and other conditions (such as cystic fibrosis‑related diabetes) may also lead to diabetes in children and young people, but the care of these diverse conditions is beyond the scope of this guideline. 
This guideline recommends attempting to reach a glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) level near the normal range and near normoglycaemia. This is to further reduce the long-term risks associated with diabetes. Newer technology such as continuous subcutaneous glucose monitoring may also help children and young people to have better blood glucose management, although this is not currently recommended for all children and young people with type 2 diabetes. 
By implementing the strict blood glucose management recommended in this guideline, improvements can be made to diabetes care that reduce the impact of the condition on the future health of children and young people. 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Rationale and impact 
Back to top
