Recommendations | Multimorbidity: clinical assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Multiple long-term conditions
Multimorbidity: clinical assessment and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG56 
Published: 
21 September 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 General principles
1.2 Taking account of multimorbidity in tailoring the approach to care
1.3 How to identify people who may benefit from an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity
1.4 How to assess frailty
1.5 Principles of an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity
1.6 Delivering an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity
1.7 Comprehensive assessment in hospital
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in  NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines  explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 General principles 
1.1.1 
Be aware that multimorbidity refers to the presence of 2 or more long-term health conditions, which can include: 
defined physical and mental health conditions such as diabetes or schizophrenia 
ongoing conditions such as learning disability 
symptom complexes such as frailty or chronic pain 
sensory impairment such as sight or hearing loss 
alcohol and substance misuse. 
1.1.2 
Be aware that the management of risk factors for future disease can be a major treatment burden for people with multimorbidity and should be carefully considered when optimising care. 
1.1.3 
Be aware that the evidence for recommendations in NICE guidance on single health conditions is regularly drawn from people without multimorbidity and taking fewer prescribed regular medicines . 
1.1.4 
Think carefully about the risks and benefits, for people with multimorbidity, of individual treatments recommended in guidance for single health conditions. Discuss this with the patient alongside their preferences for care and treatment. 
1.2 Taking account of multimorbidity in tailoring the approach to care 
1.2.1 
Consider an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity if the person requests it or if any of the following apply: 
they find it difficult to manage their treatments or day-to-day activities 
they receive care and support from multiple services and need additional services 
they have both long-term physical and mental health conditions 
they have frailty (see section 1.4 ) or falls 
they frequently seek unplanned or emergency care (see also recommendation 1.3.2) 
they are prescribed multiple regular medicines (see section 1.3 ). 
1.3 How to identify people who may benefit from an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity 
1.3.1 
Identify adults who may benefit from an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity (as outlined in section 1.5 ): 
opportunistically during routine care 
proactively using electronic health records. 
Use the criteria in recommendation 1.2.1 to guide this. 
1.3.2 
Consider using a validated tool such as eFI, PEONY or QAdmissions, if available in primary care electronic health records, to identify adults with multimorbidity who are at risk of adverse events such as unplanned hospital admission or admission to care homes. 
1.3.3 
Consider using primary care electronic health records to identify markers of increased treatment burden such as number of regular medicines a person is prescribed. 
1.3.4 
Use an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity for adults of any age who are prescribed 15 or more regular medicines, because they are likely to be at higher risk of adverse events and drug interactions. 
1.3.5 
Consider an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity for adults of any age who: 
are prescribed 10 to 14 regular medicines 
are prescribed fewer than 10 regular medicines but are at particular risk of adverse events. 
1.4 How to assess frailty 
1.4.1 
Consider assessing frailty in people with multimorbidity. 
1.4.2 
Be cautious about assessing frailty in a person who is acutely unwell. 
1.4.3 
Do not use a physical performance tool to assess frailty in a person who is acutely unwell. 
Primary care and community care settings 
1.4.4 
When assessing frailty in primary and community care settings, consider using 1 of the following: 
an informal assessment of gait speed (for example, time taken to answer the door, time taken to walk from the waiting room) 
self-reported health status (that is, 'how would you rate your health status on a scale from 0 to 10?', with scores of 6 or less indicating frailty) 
a formal assessment of gait speed, with more than 5 seconds to walk 4 metres indicating frailty 
the PRISMA-7 questionnaire, with scores of 3 and above indicating frailty. 
Hospital outpatient settings 
1.4.5 
When assessing frailty in hospital outpatient settings, consider using 1 of the following: 
self-reported health status (that is, 'how would you rate your health status on a scale from 0 to 10?', with scores of 6 or less indicating frailty) 
the 'Timed Up and Go' test, with times of more than 12 seconds indicating frailty 
a formal assessment of gait speed, with more than 5 seconds to walk 4 metres indicating frailty 
the PRISMA‑7 questionnaire, with scores of 3 and above indicating frailty 
self-reported physical activity, with frailty indicated by scores of 56 or less for men and 59 or less for women using the Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly. 
1.5 Principles of an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity 
1.5.1 
When offering an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity, focus on: 
how the person's health conditions and their treatments interact and how this affects quality of life 
the person's individual needs, preferences for treatments, health priorities, lifestyle and goals 
the benefits and risks of following recommendations from guidance on single health conditions 
improving quality of life by reducing treatment burden, adverse events, and unplanned care 
improving coordination of care across services. 
1.5.2 
Follow these steps when delivering an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity: 
Discuss the purpose of an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity (see recommendation 1.6.2 ). 
Establish disease and treatment burden (see recommendations 1.6.3 to 1.6.5 ). 
Establish patient goals, values and priorities (see recommendations 1.6.6 to 1.6.8 ). 
Review medicines and other treatments taking into account evidence of likely benefits and harms for the individual patient and outcomes important to the person (see recommendations 1.6.9 to 1.6.16 ). 
Agree an individualised management plan with the person (see recommendation 1.6.17 ), including: 
goals and plans for future care (including advance care planning) 
who is responsible for coordination of care 
how the individualised management plan and the responsibility for coordination of care is communicated to all professionals and services involved 
timing of follow-up and how to access urgent care. 
1.6 Delivering an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity 
1.6.1 
Follow the recommendations in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services , which provides guidance on knowing the patient as an individual, tailoring healthcare services for each patient, continuity of care and relationships, and enabling patients to actively participate in their care. 
Discussing the purpose of an approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity 
1.6.2 
Discuss with the person the purpose of the approach to care, that is, to improve quality of life. This might include reducing treatment burden and optimising care and support by identifying: 
ways of maximising benefit from existing treatments 
treatments that could be stopped because of limited benefit 
treatments and follow-up arrangements with a high burden 
medicines with a higher risk of adverse events (for example, falls, gastrointestinal bleeding, acute kidney injury) 
non-pharmacological treatments as possible alternatives to some medicines 
alternative arrangements for follow-up to coordinate or optimise the number of appointments. 
Establishing disease and treatment burden 
1.6.3 
Establish disease burden by talking to people about how their health problems affect their day-to-day life. Include a discussion of: 
mental health 
how disease burden affects their wellbeing 
how their health problems interact and how this affects quality of life. 
1.6.4 
Establish treatment burden by talking to people about how treatments for their health problems affect their day-to-day life. Include in the discussion: 
the number and type of healthcare appointments a person has and where these take place 
the number and type of medicines a person is taking and how often 
any harms from medicines 
non-pharmacological treatments such as diets, exercise programmes and psychological treatments 
any effects of treatment on their mental health or wellbeing. 
1.6.5 
Be alert to the possibility of: 
depression and anxiety (consider identifying, assessing and managing these conditions in line with the NICE guideline on common mental health problems ) 
chronic pain and the need to assess this and the adequacy of pain management. 
Establishing patient goals, values and priorities 
1.6.6 
Clarify with the patient whether and how they would like their partner, family members and/or carers to be involved in key decisions about the management of their conditions. Review this regularly. If the patient agrees, share information with their partner, family members and/or carers. [This recommendation is adapted from the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services .] 
1.6.7 
Encourage people with multimorbidity to clarify what is important to them, including their personal goals, values and priorities. These may include: 
maintaining their independence 
undertaking paid or voluntary work, taking part in social activities and playing an active part in family life 
preventing specific adverse outcomes (for example, stroke) 
reducing harms from medicines 
reducing treatment burden 
lengthening life. 
1.6.8 
Explore the person's attitudes to their treatments and the potential benefits and harms of those treatments. Follow the recommendations on patient involvement in decisions about medicines and understanding the patient's knowledge, beliefs and concerns about medicines in the NICE guideline on medicines adherence . 
Reviewing medicines and other treatments 
1.6.9 
When reviewing medicines and other treatments, use the database of treatment effects to find information on: 
the effectiveness of treatments 
the duration of treatment trials 
the populations included in treatment trials. 
1.6.10 
Consider using a screening tool (for example, the STOPP/START tool in older people) to identify medicine-related safety concerns and medicines the person might benefit from but is not currently taking. [This recommendation is adapted from the NICE guideline on medicines optimisation .] 
1.6.11 
When optimising treatment, think about any medicines or non-pharmacological treatments that might be started as well as those that might be stopped. 
1.6.12 
Ask the person if treatments intended to relieve symptoms are providing benefits or causing harms. If the person is unsure of benefit or is experiencing harms from a treatment: 
discuss reducing or stopping the treatment 
plan a review to monitor effects of any changes made and decide whether any further changes to treatments are needed (including restarting a treatment). 
1.6.13 
Take into account the possibility of lower overall benefit of continuing treatments that aim to offer prognostic benefit, particularly in people with limited life expectancy or frailty. 
1.6.14 
Discuss with people who have multimorbidity and limited life expectancy or frailty whether they wish to continue treatments recommended in guidance on single health conditions which may offer them limited overall benefit. 
1.6.15 
Discuss any changes to treatments that aim to offer prognostic benefit with the person, taking into account: 
their views on the likely benefits and harms from individual treatments 
what is important to them in terms of personal goals, values and priorities (see recommendation 1.6.7 ). 
1.6.16 
Tell a person who has been taking bisphosphonate for osteoporosis for at least 3 years that there is no consistent evidence of: 
further benefit from continuing bisphosphonate for another 3 years 
harms from stopping bisphosphonate after 3 years of treatment. 
Discuss stopping bisphosphonate after 3 years and include patient choice, fracture risk and life expectancy in the discussion. 
Agreeing the individualised management plan 
1.6.17 
After a discussion of disease and treatment burden and the person's, personal goals, values and priorities, develop and agree an individualised management plan with the person. Agree what will be recorded and what actions will be taken. These could include: 
starting, stopping or changing medicines and non-pharmacological treatments 
prioritising healthcare appointments 
anticipating possible changes to health and wellbeing 
assigning responsibility for coordination of care and ensuring this is communicated to other healthcare professionals and services 
other areas the person considers important to them 
arranging a follow-up and review of decisions made. 
Share copies of the management plan in an accessible format with the person and (with the person's permission) other people involved in care (including healthcare professionals, a partner, family members and/or carers). 
1.7 Comprehensive assessment in hospital 
1.7.1 
Start a comprehensive assessment of older people with complex needs at the point of admission and preferably in a specialist unit for older people. [This recommendation is from the NICE guideline on transition between inpatient hospital settings and community or care home settings for adults with social care needs .] 
Terms used in this guideline 
Multimorbidity 
Multimorbidity refers to the presence of 2 or more long-term health conditions, which can include: 
defined physical and mental health conditions such as diabetes or schizophrenia 
ongoing conditions such as learning disability 
symptom complexes such as frailty or chronic pain 
sensory impairment such as sight or hearing loss 
alcohol and substance misuse. 
The management of risk factors for future disease can be a major treatment burden for people with multimorbidity and should be carefully considered when optimising care. 
This guideline covers the optimisation of care for: 
adults with 2 or more long-term physical health conditions 
adults with 1 or more mental health condition and at least 1 physical health condition. 
An approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity 
An approach to care that takes account of multimorbidity involves personalised assessment and the development of an individualised management plan. The aim is to improve quality of life by reducing treatment burden, adverse events, and unplanned or uncoordinated care. The approach takes account of a person's individual needs, preferences for treatments, health priorities and lifestyle. It aims to improve coordination of care across services, particularly if this has become fragmented. 
Individualised management plan 
An individualised management plan is a management plan covering clinical aspects of a person's care, such as the medicines they are taking and the services they are attending. It includes information about which areas of care are most important to the person and whether treatments have been stopped to reduce treatment burden. 
Medicines 
Medicines includes topical treatments such as ointments, inhalers, creams and drops, as well as medicines taken by mouth or injection. 
Comprehensive assessment of older people with complex needs 
A comprehensive geriatric assessment is an interdisciplinary diagnostic process to determine the medical, psychological and functional capability of someone who is frail and old. The aim is to develop a coordinated, integrated plan for treatment and long-term support. 
Next page 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
