7 Treating status epilepticus, repeated or cluster seizures, and prolonged seizures | Epilepsies in children, young people and adults | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Epilepsy
Epilepsies in children, young people and adults
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG217 
Published: 
27 April 2022
Last updated: 
30 January 2025
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
1 Diagnosis and assessment of epilepsy 
2 Information and support 
3 Referral to tertiary specialist services 
4 Principles of treatment, safety, monitoring and withdrawal 
5 Treating epileptic seizures in children, young people and adults 
6 Treating childhood-onset epilepsies 
7 Treating status epilepticus, repeated or cluster seizures, and prolonged seizures 
8 Non-pharmacological treatments 
9 Psychological, neurobehavioural, cognitive and developmental comorbidities in epilepsy 
10 Reducing the risk of epilepsy-related death including sudden unexpected death in epilepsy 
11 Service provision and transition 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
7.1 Status epilepticus
7.2 Repeated seizures or cluster seizures
7.3 Prolonged seizures
7 Treating status epilepticus, repeated or cluster seizures, and prolonged seizures 
7.1 Status epilepticus 
Initial treatment for generalised convulsive status epilepticus 
7.1.1 
Provide resuscitation and immediate emergency treatment for children, young people and adults who have convulsive status epilepticus (seizures lasting 5 minutes or more). 
7.1.2 
If the person with convulsive status epilepticus has an individualised emergency management plan that is immediately available, administer medication as detailed in the plan. 
7.1.3 
If the person with convulsive status epilepticus does not have an individualised emergency management plan immediately available: 
give a benzodiazepine (buccal midazolam or rectal diazepam) immediately as first-line treatment in the community or 
use intravenous lorazepam if intravenous access and resuscitation facilities are immediately available. 
7.1.4 
Be aware of the possible underlying causes of status epilepticus, including hypoglycaemia, eclampsia and alcohol withdrawal, which may need to be treated with additional medication. 
7.1.5 
Be alert to non-adherence to antiseizure medication, which can also be a cause of status epilepticus. 
7.1.6 
Be aware that non-epileptic seizures (dissociative seizures) can be similar in presentation to convulsive status epilepticus. 
Management if initial treatment is unsuccessful 
7.1.7 
If convulsive status epilepticus does not respond to the first dose of benzodiazepine: 
call emergency services in the community or 
seek expert guidance in hospital. 
7.1.8 
Continue to follow the person's individualised emergency management plan, if this is immediately available, or give a second dose of benzodiazepine if the seizure does not stop within 5 to 10 minutes of the first dose. 
7.1.9 
If convulsive status epilepticus does not respond to 2 doses of a benzodiazepine, give any of the following medicines intravenously as a second-line treatment: 
levetiracetam 
phenytoin 
sodium valproate (follow the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency safety measures and precautionary advice for sodium valproate in box 2 ). 
Take into account that levetiracetam may be quicker to administer and have fewer adverse effects than the alternative options. 
In April 2022, this was an off-label use of levetiracetam. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
7.1.10 
If convulsive status epilepticus does not respond to a second-line treatment, consider trying an alternative second-line treatment option under expert guidance. 
7.1.11 
If convulsive status epilepticus does not respond to the second-line treatment options tried, consider the following third-line options under expert guidance: 
phenobarbital or 
general anaesthesia. 
7.1.12 
After an episode of convulsive status epilepticus, agree an emergency management plan with the person if they do not already have one and there is concern that status epilepticus may recur. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on status epilepticus . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review 9: antiseizure medication for status epilepticus . 
7.2 Repeated seizures or cluster seizures 
7.2.1 
Manage repeated or cluster seizures (typically 3 or more self-terminating seizures in 24 hours) as a medical emergency. 
7.2.2 
If a person has repeated or cluster seizures: 
follow their individualised emergency management plan, if this is immediately available or 
consider giving a benzodiazepine, such as clobazam or midazolam, immediately if they do not have an individualised emergency management plan immediately available. 
7.2.3 
Seek expert guidance if the person has further episodes of repeated or cluster seizures. 
7.2.4 
Agree an individualised emergency management plan with the person after repeated or cluster seizures if they do not have one already and there is concern that repeated or cluster seizures may recur. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on repeated or cluster seizures . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review 10: antiseizure medications for repetitive/cluster seizures: monotherapy and add-on therapies . 
7.3 Prolonged seizures 
For convulsive seizures that continue for 5 minutes or more, follow the recommendations in the section on status epilepticus . 
7.3.1 
Manage prolonged convulsive seizures (any convulsive seizure that continues for more than 2 minutes longer than a person's usual seizure) as a medical emergency. 
7.3.2 
If a person has a prolonged convulsive seizure: 
follow their individualised emergency management plan if this is immediately available or 
consider giving a benzodiazepine, such as midazolam or clobazam, immediately if they do not have an individualised emergency management plan immediately available. 
7.3.3 
After a prolonged convulsive seizure, agree an emergency management plan with the person if they do not already have one and there is concern that prolonged convulsive seizures may recur. 
7.3.4 
After a prolonged non-convulsive seizure (a non-convulsive seizure that continues for more than 2 minutes longer than a person's usual seizure), agree an emergency management plan with the person if they do not already have one and there is concern that prolonged non-convulsive seizures may recur. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on prolonged seizures . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review 11: antiseizure medication for prolonged seizures: monotherapy . 
Next page 
8 Non-pharmacological treatments 
Previous page 
6 Treating childhood-onset epilepsies 
Back to top
