Overview | Mental health problems in people with learning disabilities: prevention, assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Mental health services
Mental health problems in people with learning disabilities: prevention, assessment and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG54 
Published: 
14 September 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers preventing, assessing and managing mental health problems in people with learning disabilities in all settings (including health, social care, education, and forensic and criminal justice). It aims to improve assessment and support for mental health conditions, and help people with learning disabilities and their families and carers to be involved in their care. 
Last reviewed: 30 July 2024 
We simplified the guideline by removing recommendations on general principles of care that are covered in other NICE guidelines (for example, the  NICE guideline on service user experience in adult mental health ). This is a presentational change only, and no changes to practice are intended. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
organising and delivering care 
prevention, including social, physical environment  and  occupational interventions 
annual GP health checks 
assessment 
psychological interventions, and how to adapt these for people with learning disabilities 
prescribing, monitoring and reviewing pharmacological interventions 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Social care practitioners 
Care workers 
Education staff 
Commissioners and service providers 
People with learning disabilities and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Learning disability: identifying and managing mental health problems 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
