Appendix: Assessing generalised anxiety disorder | Generalised anxiety disorder and panic disorder in adults: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Mental health, behavioural and neurodevelopmental conditions
Anxiety
Generalised anxiety disorder and panic disorder in adults: management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG113 
Published: 
26 January 2011
Last updated: 
15 June 2020
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Appendix: Assessing generalised anxiety disorder 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Appendix: Assessing generalised anxiety disorder 
The assessment of generalised anxiety disorder (GAD) is based on the criteria in DSM‑IV. Assessment should include the number and severity of symptoms, duration of the current episode and course of the disorder. 
Key symptoms of GAD 
The key symptoms of GAD are: 
excessive anxiety and worry about a number of events or activities 
difficulty controlling the worry. 
The worry should occur on a majority of days for at least 6 months. The focus of the worry should not be confined to features of another anxiety disorder (for example, not just about having a panic attack, social embarrassment, a traumatic event, being contaminated or having a serious illness). 
If the 2 key symptoms are present, ask about the following associated symptoms: 
restlessness 
being easily fatigued 
difficulty concentrating 
irritability 
muscle tension 
disturbed sleep. 
Then ask about duration, distress, impairment of functioning and past history of anxiety and mood disorders. 
Factors that favour initial education about GAD and active monitoring 
only (step 1) are: 
few symptoms of GAD or symptoms that are intermittent or of less than 6 months' duration (hence subclinical) 
only mild distress and no or limited functional impairment 
no comorbid anxiety or mood disorder 
no past history of anxiety or mood disorders 
individual not interested in any active treatment option. 
Factors that favour initial active treatment with low-intensity psychological interventions, including GP-prescribed non-facilitated self-help (step 2) are: 
diagnostic criteria for GAD met 
clinically significant distress and/or impairment in social, occupational or other important areas of functioning 
comorbid anxiety or mood disorder 
individual wishes to pursue active treatment for GAD. 
Factors that favour treatment with a high-intensity psychological intervention or a pharmacological intervention (step 3) are: 
marked functional impairment 
less marked but clinically significant functional impairment or distress and inadequate response to a step 2 intervention 
past history of anxiety or mood disorders. 
Factors that favour referral for specialist treatment (step 4) are: 
GAD that is refractory to both cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and drug treatment 
very severe functional impairment (such as self-neglect) 
persistent suicidal thoughts 
multiple psychiatric comorbidities. 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Recommendations for research 
Back to top
