Overview | Headaches in over 12s: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Headaches
Headaches in over 12s: diagnosis and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG150 
Published: 
19 September 2012
Last updated: 
03 June 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the diagnosis and management of tension-type headache, migraine (including migraine with aura and menstrual-related migraine), cluster headache and medication overuse headache in young people (aged 12 years and older) and adults. It aims to improve the recognition and management of headaches, with more targeted treatment to improve the quality of life for people with headaches, and to reduce unnecessary investigations. 
MHRA advice on topiramate: Recommendations on topiramate have taken into account the MHRA advice on the use of topiramate . Topiramate should not be used for migraine prophylaxis in pregnancy, or in women of childbearing potential unless the conditions of the Pregnancy Prevention Programme are fulfilled. 
Last reviewed: 1 December 2025 
We reviewed this guideline and will update recommendations in the section on management. See the surveillance decision for further details. See the guideline in development page for progress on the update. 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
assessment 
diagnosis 
management 
See the  1-page visual summary on prophylaxis of migraine with or without aura . 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals who provide care for young people and adults with headaches 
Young people (12 years and older) and adults with headaches, and their families and carers. Particular consideration is given to the needs of people of reproductive age  
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called headaches: diagnosis and management of headaches in young people and adults. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Headaches in over 12s 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
