Overview | Cerebral palsy in adults | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Cerebral palsy
Cerebral palsy in adults
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG119 
Published: 
15 January 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers care and support for adults with cerebral palsy. It aims to improve health and wellbeing, promote access to services and support participation and independent living. 
NICE has also produced guidelines on cerebral palsy in under 25s: assessment and management and spasticity in under 19s: management . 
Last reviewed:  19 September 2024 
We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the section on saliva control . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
Next review:  This guidance will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
access to services and ongoing review 
support with communication , vocational skills and independent living ,  electronic assistive technology and  physical activity 
managing spasticity and dystonia 
assessing and monitoring bone and joint disorders , mental health problems , difficulties with eating and nutrition ,  respiratory disorders and  pain 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals in primary and secondary care 
Social care practitioners and professionals from other sectors, such as non-governmental, education and voluntary organisations 
People responsible for planning services, commissioners and providers 
Adults with cerebral palsy, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Cerebral palsy in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
