Overview | Spasticity in under 19s: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Spasticity
Spasticity in under 19s: management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG145 
Published: 
25 July 2012
Last updated: 
29 November 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers managing spasticity and co-existing motor disorders and their early musculoskeletal complications in children and young people (from birth up to their 19 th birthday) with non-progressive brain disorders. It aims to reduce variation in practice and help healthcare professionals to select and use appropriate treatments. 
In November 2016, recommendation 1.1.8 was amended to update information on the World Health Organization’s International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) and the domains it covers. 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
principles of care 
physiotherapy and occupational therapy 
orthoses 
oral drugs 
botulinum toxin type A 
intrathecal baclofen 
orthopaedic surgery and selective dorsal rhizotomy 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Children and young people with spasticity, and their families and carers 
Is this guideline up to date? 
We reviewed the evidence in November 2016 . We found no new evidence that affects the recommendations in this guideline. 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called spasticity in children and young people with non-progressive brain disorders: management of spasticity and co-existing motor disorders and their early musculoskeletal complications. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Introduction 
Back to top
