Overview | Hypertension in pregnancy: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cardiovascular conditions
Hypertension
Hypertension in pregnancy: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG133 
Published: 
25 June 2019
Last updated: 
17 April 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing hypertension (high blood pressure), including pre-eclampsia, during pregnancy, labour and birth. It also includes advice for women with hypertension who wish to conceive and women who have had a pregnancy complicated by hypertension. It aims to improve care during pregnancy, labour and birth for women and their babies. 
For information on related topics, see our women's and reproductive health summary page . 
Last reviewed: 27 April 2023 
We updated our recommendations on when to offer placental growth factor (PLGF)-based testing for pre-eclampsia, in line with our diagnostics guidance on PLGF-based testing for pre-eclampsia . See the update information for more details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG107 (August 2010). 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
We’ve created a series of visual summaries to explain assessment, treatment and other aspects of care for various conditions relating to hypertension in pregnancy. These are available to download from tools and resources .  
Recommendations 
This guideline includes new and updated recommendations on: 
assessing proteinuria 
managing chronic hypertension in pregnancy and  gestational hypertension 
managing pre-eclampsia, including severe pre-eclampsia in critical care settings 
treatment during the postnatal period (including breastfeeding) 
advice and follow-up in community care 
It also includes recommendations on: 
reducing the risk of hypertension in pregnancy 
fetal monitoring and care of women during labour and birth 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Women who develop hypertension during pregnancy, who have hypertension and wish to conceive, and who have had a pregnancy complicated by hypertension, and their relatives and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Hypertension in pregnancy 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
