Recommendations for research | Pancreatic cancer in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Pancreatic cancer in adults: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG85 
Published: 
07 February 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1 Neoadjuvant therapy
2 Cachexia interventions
3 Minimally invasive pancreatectomy
4 Pain management
5 Psychological support needs
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. The committee's full set of recommendations for research are detailed in the full guideline . 
1 Neoadjuvant therapy 
Prospective randomised trials should be undertaken to compare preoperative (neoadjuvant) therapy with standard postoperative therapy in people with resectable pancreatic cancer. 
Why this is important 
The pancreatic cancer survival rate after surgical resection is very low, which suggests that most people have metastatic disease at the time of surgery. In addition, surgical complications may stop people from having adjuvant therapy. This makes neoadjuvant therapy an attractive option. However, the evidence for neoadjuvant therapy is limited and low quality. Using neoadjuvant therapy means delaying surgery, and it is possible that during this delay pancreatic cancer will progress and become unresectable in some people, negating any benefit of neoadjuvant therapy. 
Research is needed to compare neoadjuvant treatments (which might be chemotherapy, radiotherapy or both) with surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy. The outcomes of interest are: 
feasibility of delivering neoadjuvant treatment 
feasibility of randomising patients 
objective response rate of neoadjuvant therapy 
R0 resection rate 
surgical complications, length of hospital stay, mortality of surgery 
delivery of planned treatment 
disease-free survival and overall survival after surgery 
quality of life, patient experience and patient-reported outcome measures. 
2 Cachexia interventions 
A cohort study followed by phase 2 and 3 studies should be undertaken in people with pancreatic cancer and cachexia or pre-cachexia, to compare cachexia assessment methods and anti-cachexia interventions with standard care. 
Why this is important 
Most people with advanced and metastatic pancreatic cancer also have cachexia. This causes severe reductions in their quality of life and is associated with reduced overall survival. Cachexia has 3 phases: pre‑cachexia, cachexia and refractory cachexia. The condition cannot be stopped by conventional nutritional support and leads to progressive functional impairment. Complete or partial reversal of cachexia would cause major improvements in quality of life, and potentially improve survival if people recover enough to have more effective cancer treatments. The outcomes of interest are: 
prevention or reversal of cachexia 
overall survival 
quality of life 
pain relief 
lean tissue mass 
tolerance to treatment. 
3 Minimally invasive pancreatectomy 
Prospective randomised trials should be undertaken to compare the effectiveness of minimally invasive pancreatectomy or pancreatoduodenectomy (laparoscopic or robotic) with open pancreatectomy or pancreatoduodenectomy in people with pancreatic cancer. 
Why this is important 
Minimally invasive surgery is generally considered to be more acceptable to people than open surgery. It has been introduced successfully for several other types of cancer and has been shown to improve quality of life. However, there is not enough evidence to determine whether minimally invasive surgery improves morbidity and mortality for people with pancreatic cancer, compared with open surgery. Prospective randomised trials are therefore needed in this area. The outcomes of interest are: 
conversion rate to open surgery 
R0 resection rate 
lymph node yield 
blood loss 
duration of surgery 
complications 
need for critical care 
length of hospital stay 
time to return to normal activity 
mortality of surgery 
long-term survival after surgery 
quality of life, patient experience and patient-reported outcome measures. 
4 Pain management 
A randomised trial should be undertaken comparing early endoscopic ultrasound-guided neurolytic coeliac plexus (EUS‑guided NCP) interventions with on‑demand EUS‑guided NCP interventions in people with unresectable pancreatic cancer. 
Why this is important 
There are few randomised trials in this area, and the methods used to perform NCP intervention vary. It is not clear if early NCP intervention is better than on‑demand NCP intervention in terms of the outcomes that are important to the person and duration of effect of the procedure. On‑demand NCP intervention may benefit people with uncontrolled pain, people receiving escalating doses of analgesia, people experiencing unacceptable analgesic side effects, and others. However, people who receive early NCP intervention may not need on‑demand NCP intervention later on. Further research should clarify if the timing of the intervention gives any advantage. The outcomes of interest are: 
reduction in pain 
patient experience (including nutritional status) 
health-related quality of life 
adverse events 
analgesic use 
survival. 
5 Psychological support needs 
A qualitative study should be undertaken to evaluate information and support interventions to address psychological needs at different points in the care pathway for people with pancreatic cancer. 
Why this is important 
People with pancreatic cancer often have unmet psychological support needs that impact on their quality of life. These can be related to anxiety and depression, and to the psychological impact of fatigue, pain, gastrointestinal symptoms (particularly changes to appetite) and nutritional status. There has been very little research into the information and support interventions that would meet these needs. Research would help identify effective information and support interventions that would improve quality of life for people with pancreatic cancer and their family members or carers. Outcomes of interest are: 
quality of life 
psychological wellbeing 
ability to carry out normal activities 
patient experience and patient-reported outcome measures. 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Terms used in this guideline 
Back to top
