Gaps in the evidence | Excess winter deaths and illness and the health risks associated with cold homes | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Excess winter deaths and illness and the health risks associated with cold homes
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG6 
Published: 
05 March 2015
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
What is this guideline about? 
Recommendations 
Who should take action? 
Context 
Considerations 
Recommendations for research 
Gaps in the evidence 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Gaps in the evidence 
The Public Health Advisory Committee (PHAC) identified a number of gaps in the evidence related to the programmes under examination based on an assessment of the evidence, stakeholder and expert comment. These gaps are set out below. 
1. It is not clear to what extent cold‑related deaths are primarily a seasonal or a temperature‑related phenomenon. For some conditions, there is a clear medical reason why cold causes or exacerbates them (for example, cardiovascular‑related conditions). This is not true in other cases (for example, Alzheimer's disease). 
(Source: Evidence review 1) 
2. There are no accurate estimates of the degree to which various diseases can be attributed to cold temperatures in the UK. This includes how long a period of cold weather is needed before these diseases emerge. 
(Source: Evidence review 1) 
3. It is uncertain to what extent vulnerability to the cold relates to outdoor or indoor temperatures in the UK. Similarly, the degree to which outdoor temperature may affect indoor temperature and ill‑health is unknown. 
(Source: Evidence review 1) 
4. There is a lack of rigorous, UK‑based epidemiological evidence on the degree to which different housing energy efficiency interventions modify the risk of cold temperature‑related deaths and illnesses. 
(Source: Evidence review 2) 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Recommendations for research 
Back to top
