Recommendations | Pressure ulcers: prevention and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Skin conditions
Pressure ulcers
Pressure ulcers: prevention and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG179 
Published: 
23 April 2014
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Introduction 
Key priorities for implementation 
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
Terms used in this guideline
1.1 Prevention: adults
1.2 Prevention: neonates, infants, children and young people
1.3 Prevention: all ages
1.4 Management: adults
1.5 Management: neonates, infants, children and young people
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off‑label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
Terms used in this guideline 
Adults, neonates, infants, children and young people 
This guideline covers people of all ages at risk of, or who have, a pressure ulcer. These terms are defined as follows: 
adults: 18 years or older 
neonates: under 4 weeks 
infants: between 4 weeks and 1 year 
children: 1 year to under 13 years 
young people: 13 to 17 years. 
Risk assessment 
This guideline uses the terms 'at risk' and 'at high risk' to identify people who may develop a pressure ulcer. For the purposes of this guideline: 
Adults considered to be at risk of developing a pressure ulcer are those who, after assessment using clinical judgement and/or a validated risk assessment tool, are considered to be at risk of developing a pressure ulcer. 
Adults considered to be at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer will usually have multiple risk factors (for example, significantly limited mobility, nutritional deficiency, inability to reposition themselves, significant cognitive impairment) identified during risk assessment with or without a validated risk assessment tool. Adults with a history of pressure ulcers or a current pressure ulcer are also considered to be at high risk. 
Neonates, infants, children and young people considered to be at risk are those who, after assessment using clinical judgement and/or a validated risk assessment tool, are considered to be at risk of developing a pressure ulcer. 
Neonates, infants, children and young people considered to be at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer will usually have multiple risk factors (for example, significantly limited mobility, nutritional deficiency, inability to reposition themselves, significant cognitive impairment) identified during risk assessment with or without a validated risk assessment tool. Those with a history of pressure ulcers or a current pressure ulcer are also considered to be at high risk. 
Please note that the examples given are not exhaustive. 
1.1 Prevention: adults 
Risk assessment 
1.1.1 
Be aware that all patients are potentially at risk of developing a pressure ulcer. 
1.1.2 
Carry out and document an assessment of pressure ulcer risk for adults: 
being admitted to secondary care or care homes in which NHS care is provided or 
receiving NHS care in other settings (such as primary and community care and emergency departments) if they have a risk factor, for example: 
significantly limited mobility (for example, people with a spinal cord injury) 
significant loss of sensation 
a previous or current pressure ulcer 
nutritional deficiency 
the inability to reposition themselves 
significant cognitive impairment. 
1.1.3 
Consider using a validated scale to support clinical judgement (for example, the Braden scale, the Waterlow score or the Norton risk-assessment scale) when assessing pressure ulcer risk. 
1.1.4 
Reassess pressure ulcer risk if there is a change in clinical status (for example, after surgery, on worsening of an underlying condition or with a change in mobility). 
Skin assessment 
1.1.5 
Offer adults who have been assessed as being at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer a skin assessment by a trained healthcare professional (see recommendation 1.3.4 ). The assessment should take into account any pain or discomfort reported by the patient and the skin should be checked for: 
skin integrity in areas of pressure 
colour changes or discoloration 
Healthcare professionals should be aware that non-blanchable erythema may present as colour changes or discolouration, particularly in darker skin tones or types. 
variations in heat, firmness and moisture (for example, because of incontinence, oedema, dry or inflamed skin). 
1.1.6 
Use finger palpation or diascopy to determine whether erythema or discolouration (identified by skin assessment) is blanchable. 
1.1.7 
Start appropriate preventative action (see recommendations 1.1.1–1.1.17) in adults who have non-blanching erythema and consider repeating the skin assessment at least every 2 hours until resolved. 
Repositioning 
1.1.8 
Encourage adults who have been assessed as being at risk of developing a pressure ulcer to change their position frequently and at least every 6 hours. If they are unable to reposition themselves, offer help to do so, using appropriate equipment if needed. Document the frequency of repositioning required. 
1.1.9 
Encourage adults who have been assessed as being at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer to change their position frequently and at least every 4 hours. If they are unable to reposition themselves, offer help to do so, using appropriate equipment if needed. Document the frequency of repositioning required. 
Skin massage 
1.1.10 
Do not offer skin massage or rubbing to adults to prevent a pressure ulcer. 
Nutritional supplements and hydration 
1.1.11 
Do not offer nutritional supplements specifically to prevent a pressure ulcer in adults whose nutritional intake is adequate. 
1.1.12 
Do not offer subcutaneous or intravenous fluids specifically to prevent a pressure ulcer in adults whose hydration status is adequate. 
Pressure redistributing devices 
1.1.13 
Use a high-specification foam mattress for adults who are: 
admitted to secondary care 
assessed as being at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer in primary and community care settings. 
1.1.14 
Consider a high-specification foam theatre mattress or an equivalent pressure redistributing surface for all adults who are undergoing surgery. 
1.1.15 
Discuss with adults at high risk of developing a heel pressure ulcer and, where appropriate, their family or carers, a strategy to offload heel pressure, as part of their individualised care plan. 
1.1.16 
Consider the seating needs of people at risk of developing a pressure ulcer who are sitting for prolonged periods. 
1.1.17 
Consider a high-specification foam or equivalent pressure redistributing cushion for adults who use a wheelchair or who sit for prolonged periods. 
Barrier creams 
1.1.18 
Consider using a barrier preparation to prevent skin damage in adults who are at high risk of developing a moisture lesion or incontinence-associated dermatitis, as identified by skin assessment (such as those with incontinence, oedema, dry or inflamed skin). 
1.2 Prevention: neonates, infants, children and young people 
Risk assessment 
1.2.1 
Carry out and document an assessment of pressure ulcer risk for neonates, infants, children and young people: 
being admitted to secondary or tertiary care or 
receiving NHS care in other settings (such as primary and community care and emergency departments) if they have a risk factor, for example: 
significantly limited mobility 
significant loss of sensation 
a previous or current pressure ulcer 
nutritional deficiency 
the inability to reposition themselves 
significant cognitive impairment. 
1.2.2 
Use a scale validated for this population (for example, the Braden Q scale for children), to support clinical judgement. 
Skin assessment 
1.2.3 
Offer neonates, infants, children and young people who are assessed as being at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer a skin assessment by a trained healthcare professional. Take into account: 
skin changes in the occipital area 
skin temperature 
the presence of blanching erythema or discoloured areas of skin. 
1.2.4 
Be aware of specific sites (for example, the occipital area) where neonates, infants, children and young people are at risk of developing a pressure ulcer. 
Repositioning 
1.2.5 
Ensure that neonates and infants who are at risk of developing a pressure ulcer are repositioned at least every 4 hours. 
1.2.6 
Encourage children and young people who are at risk of developing a pressure ulcer to change their position at least every 4 hours. If they are unable to reposition themselves, offer help to do so, using appropriate equipment if needed. 
1.2.7 
Consider more frequent repositioning than every 4 hours for neonates and infants who have been assessed as being at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer. Document the frequency of repositioning required. 
1.2.8 
Encourage children and young people who have been assessed as being at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer to change their position more frequently than every 4 hours. If they are unable to reposition themselves, offer help to do so, using equipment if needed. Document the frequency of repositioning required. 
1.2.9 
Ensure that repositioning equipment is available to aid the repositioning of children and young people, if needed. 
1.2.10 
Ensure that healthcare professionals are trained in the use of repositioning equipment. 
1.2.11 
Ensure that patients, parents and carers understand the reasons for repositioning. If children and young people decline repositioning, document and discuss their reasons for declining. 
1.2.12 
Consider involving a play expert to encourage children who have difficulty with, or who have declined repositioning. 
1.2.13 
Relieve pressure on the scalp and head when repositioning neonates, infants, children and young people at risk of developing a pressure ulcer. 
Skin massage 
1.2.14 
Do not offer skin massage or rubbing to neonates, infants, children and young people to prevent a pressure ulcer. 
Nutritional supplements and hydration 
1.2.15 
Do not offer nutritional supplements specifically to prevent a pressure ulcer in neonates, infants, children and young people with adequate nutritional status for their developmental stage and clinical condition. 
1.2.16 
Do not offer subcutaneous or intravenous fluids specifically to prevent a pressure ulcer in neonates, infants, children and young people with adequate hydration status for their development stage and clinical condition. 
Pressure redistributing devices 
1.2.17 
Use a high-specification foam cot mattress or overlay for all neonates and infants who have been assessed as being at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer as part of their individualised care plan. 
1.2.18 
Use a high-specification foam mattress or overlay for all children and young people who have been assessed as being at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer as part of their individualised care plan. 
1.2.19 
Discuss with children and young people at high risk of developing a heel pressure ulcer and their parents and carers, where appropriate, a strategy to offload heel pressure as part of their individualised care plan. 
1.2.20 
Offer infants, children and young people who are long-term wheelchair users, regular wheelchair assessments and provide pressure relief or redistribution. 
1.2.21 
Offer neonates, infants, children and young people at risk of developing an occipital pressure ulcer an appropriate pressure redistributing surface (for example, a suitable pillow or pressure redistributing pad). 
Barrier creams 
1.2.22 
Use barrier preparations to help prevent skin damage, such as moisture lesions, for neonates, infants, children and young people who are incontinent. 
1.3 Prevention: all ages 
Care planning 
1.3.1 
Develop and document an individualised care plan for neonates, infants, children, young people and adults who have been assessed as being at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer, taking into account: 
the outcome of risk and skin assessment 
the need for additional pressure relief at specific at-risk sites 
their mobility and ability to reposition themselves 
other comorbidities 
patient preference. 
Patient and carer information 
1.3.2 
Offer timely, tailored information to people who have been assessed as being at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer, and their family or carers. The information should be delivered by a trained or experienced healthcare professional and include: 
the causes of a pressure ulcer 
the early signs of a pressure ulcer 
ways to prevent a pressure ulcer 
the implications of having a pressure ulcer (for example, for general health, treatment options and the risk of developing pressure ulcers in the future). 
Demonstrate techniques and equipment used to prevent a pressure ulcer. 
1.3.3 
Take into account individual needs when supplying information to people with: 
degenerative conditions 
impaired mobility 
neurological impairment 
cognitive impairment 
impaired tissue perfusion (for example, caused by peripheral arterial disease). 
Healthcare professional training and education 
1.3.4 
Provide training to healthcare professionals on preventing a pressure ulcer, including: 
who is most likely to be at risk of developing a pressure ulcer 
how to identify pressure damage 
what steps to take to prevent new or further pressure damage 
who to contact for further information and for further action. 
1.3.5 
Provide further training to healthcare professionals who have contact with anyone who has been assessed as being at high risk of developing a pressure ulcer. Training should include: 
how to carry out a risk and skin assessment 
how to reposition 
information on pressure redistributing devices 
discussion of pressure ulcer prevention with patients and their carers 
details of sources of advice and support. 
1.4 Management: adults 
Ulcer measurement 
1.4.1 
Document the surface area of all pressure ulcers in adults. If possible, use a validated measurement technique (for example, transparency tracing or a photograph). 
1.4.2 
Document an estimate of the depth of all pressure ulcers and the presence of undermining, but do not routinely measure the volume of a pressure ulcer. 
Categorisation 
1.4.3 
Categorise each pressure ulcer in adults using a validated classification tool (such as the International NPUAP‑EPUAP Pressure Ulcer Classification System). Use this to guide ongoing preventative strategies and management. Repeat and document each time the ulcer is assessed. 
Nutritional supplements and hydration 
See also the NICE guideline on nutrition support for details of nutrition support other than supplements, and advice on energy and protein intake levels. 
1.4.4 
Offer adults with a pressure ulcer a nutritional assessment by a dietitian or other healthcare professional with the necessary skills and competencies. 
1.4.5 
Offer nutritional supplements to adults with a pressure ulcer who have a nutritional deficiency. 
1.4.6 
Provide information and advice to adults with a pressure ulcer and, where appropriate, their family or carers, on how to follow a balanced diet to maintain an adequate nutritional status, taking into account energy, protein and micronutrient requirements. 
1.4.7 
Do not offer nutritional supplements to treat a pressure ulcer in adults whose nutritional intake is adequate. 
1.4.8 
Do not offer subcutaneous or intravenous fluids to treat a pressure ulcer in adults whose hydration status is adequate. 
Pressure redistributing devices 
1.4.9 
Use high-specification foam mattresses for adults with a pressure ulcer. If this is not sufficient to redistribute pressure, consider the use of a dynamic support surface. 
1.4.10 
Do not use standard-specification foam mattresses for adults with a pressure ulcer. 
1.4.11 
Consider the seating needs of adults who have a pressure ulcer who are sitting for prolonged periods. 
1.4.12 
Consider a high-specification foam or equivalent pressure redistributing cushion for adults who use a wheelchair or sit for prolonged periods and who have a pressure ulcer. 
Negative pressure wound therapy 
1.4.13 
Do not routinely offer adults negative pressure wound therapy to treat a pressure ulcer, unless it is necessary to reduce the number of dressing changes (for example, in a wound with a large amount of exudate). 
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy and electrotherapy 
1.4.14 
Do not offer the following to adults to treat a pressure ulcer: 
electrotherapy 
hyperbaric oxygen therapy. 
Debridement 
1.4.15 
Assess the need to debride a pressure ulcer in adults, taking into consideration: 
the amount of necrotic tissue 
the category, size and extent of the pressure ulcer 
patient tolerance 
any comorbidities. 
1.4.16 
Offer debridement to adults if identified as needed in the assessment: 
use autolytic debridement, using an appropriate dressing to support it 
consider using sharp debridement if autolytic debridement is likely to take longer and prolong healing time. 
1.4.17 
Do not routinely offer adults with a pressure ulcer: 
larval (maggot) therapy 
enzymatic debridement. 
Consider larval therapy if debridement is needed but sharp debridement is contraindicated or if there is associated vascular insufficiency. 
Systemic antibiotics and antiseptics 
See also the NICE guideline on antimicrobial stewardship . 
1.4.18 
After a skin assessment, offer systemic antibiotics to adults with a pressure ulcer if there are any of the following: 
clinical evidence of systemic sepsis (see also NICE's guidelines on suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over and suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people ) 
spreading cellulitis 
underlying osteomyelitis 
1.4.19 
Discuss with a local hospital microbiology department which antibiotic to offer adults with infection to ensure that the chosen systemic antibiotic is effective against local strains of infection. 
1.4.20 
Do not offer systemic antibiotics specifically to heal a pressure ulcer in adults. 
1.4.21 
Do not offer systemic antibiotics to adults based only on positive wound cultures without clinical evidence of infection. 
Topical antimicrobials and antiseptics 
See also the NICE guideline on antimicrobial stewardship . 
1.4.22 
Do not routinely use topical antiseptics or antimicrobials to treat a pressure ulcer in adults. 
Dressings 
1.4.23 
Discuss with adults with a pressure ulcer and, if appropriate, their family or carers, what type of dressing should be used, taking into account: 
pain and tolerance 
position of the ulcer 
amount of exudate 
frequency of dressing change. 
1.4.24 
Consider using a dressing for adults that promotes a warm, moist wound healing environment to treat category 2, 3 and 4 pressure ulcers. 
1.4.25 
Do not offer gauze dressings to treat a pressure ulcer in adults. 
Heel pressure ulcers 
1.4.26 
Discuss with adults with a heel pressure ulcer and, if appropriate, their family or carers, a strategy to offload heel pressure as part of their individualised care plan. (See also the NICE guideline on diabetic foot problems for advice on heel pressure offloading.) 
1.5 Management: neonates, infants, children and young people 
Ulcer measurement 
1.5.1 
Document the surface area of all pressure ulcers in neonates, infants, children and young people, preferably using a validated measurement technique (for example, transparency tracing or a photograph). 
1.5.2 
Document an estimate of the depth of a pressure ulcer and the presence of undermining, but do not routinely measure the volume of a pressure ulcer in neonates, infants, children and young people. 
Categorisation 
1.5.3 
Categorise each pressure ulcer in neonates, infants, children and young people at onset using a validated classification tool (such as the International NPUAP‑EPUAP) Pressure Ulcer Classification System) to guide ongoing preventative and management options. Repeat and document each time the ulcer is assessed. 
Nutritional supplements and hydration 
1.5.4 
Offer an age-related nutritional assessment to neonates, infants, children and young people with a pressure ulcer. This should be performed by a paediatric dietitian or other healthcare professional with the necessary skills and competencies. 
1.5.5 
Discuss with a paediatric dietitian (or other healthcare professional with the necessary skills and competencies) whether to offer nutritional supplements specifically to treat a pressure ulcer in neonates, infants, children and young people whose nutritional intake is adequate. 
1.5.6 
Offer advice on a diet that provides adequate nutrition for growth and healing in neonates, infants, children and young people with a pressure ulcer. 
1.5.7 
Discuss with a paediatric dietitian whether to offer nutritional supplements to correct nutritional deficiency in neonates, infants, children and young people with a pressure ulcer. 
1.5.8 
Assess fluid balance in neonates, infants, children and young people with a pressure ulcer. 
1.5.9 
Ensure there is adequate hydration for age, growth and healing in neonates, infants, children and young people. If there is any doubt, seek further medical advice. 
Pressure redistributing devices 
1.5.10 
Consider using specialist support surfaces (including dynamic support surfaces where appropriate) for neonates, infants, children and young people with a pressure ulcer, taking into account their current pressure ulcer risk and mobility. 
1.5.11 
Use a high-specification cot or bed mattress or overlay for all neonates, infants, children and young people with a pressure ulcer. 
1.5.12 
If pressure on the affected area cannot be adequately relieved by other means (such as repositioning), consider a dynamic support surface, appropriate to the size and weight of the child or young person with a pressure ulcer, if this can be tolerated. 
1.5.13 
Tailor the support surface to the location and cause of the pressure ulcer for neonates, infants, children and young people. 
Negative pressure wound therapy 
1.5.14 
Do not routinely use negative pressure wound therapy to treat a pressure ulcer in neonates, infants, children and young people. 
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy and electrotherapy 
1.5.15 
Do not use the following to treat a pressure ulcer in neonates, infants, children and young people: 
electrotherapy 
hyperbaric oxygen therapy. 
Debridement 
1.5.16 
Consider autolytic debridement with appropriate dressings for dead tissue in neonates, infants, children and young people. Consider sharp and surgical debridement by trained staff if autolytic debridement is unsuccessful. 
Systemic antibiotics and antiseptics 
See also the NICE guideline on antimicrobial stewardship . 
1.5.17 
Consider systemic antibiotics for neonates, infants, children and young people with a pressure ulcer with clinical evidence of local or systemic infection. 
1.5.18 
Discuss with a local hospital microbiology department which antibiotic to offer neonates, infants, children and young people with infection to ensure that the chosen systemic antibiotic is effective against local strains of bacteria. 
Topical antimicrobials and antiseptics 
See also the NICE guideline on antimicrobial stewardship . 
1.5.19 
Do not routinely use topical antiseptics or antimicrobials to treat a pressure ulcer in neonates, infants, children and young people. 
Dressings 
1.5.20 
Consider using a dressing that promotes a warm, moist healing environment to treat category 2, 3 and 4 pressure ulcers in neonates, infants, children and young people. 
1.5.21 
Consider using topical antimicrobial dressings to treat a pressure ulcer where clinically indicated in neonates, infants, children and young people, for example, where there is spreading cellulitis. 
1.5.22 
Do not use iodine dressings to treat a pressure ulcer in neonates. 
1.5.23 
Do not offer gauze dressings to treat a pressure ulcer in neonates, infants, children and young people. 
Heel pressure ulcers 
1.5.24 
Discuss with the parents or carers of neonates and infants and with children and young people (and their parents or carers if appropriate), a strategy to offload heel pressure as part of their individualised care plan to manage their heel pressure ulcer, taking into account differences in size, mobility, pain and tolerance. (See also the NICE guideline on diabetic foot problems for advice on heel pressure offloading.) 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Key priorities for implementation 
Back to top
