Overview | Vitamin B12 deficiency in over 16s: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Vitamin B12 deficiency in over 16s: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG239 
Published: 
06 March 2024
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers recognising, diagnosing and managing vitamin B12 deficiency in people aged 16 and over, including deficiency caused by autoimmune gastritis. It also covers monitoring for gastric cancer in people with autoimmune gastritis. 
In this guideline, we do not use the term pernicious anaemia to describe autoimmune gastritis. See the definition of autoimmune gastritis in the terms used in this guideline for more details. 
Last reviewed: 6 March 2024 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
recognising vitamin B12 deficiency , including when to test for the condition 
diagnosing vitamin B12 deficiency 
identifying the cause of vitamin B12 deficiency , including autoimmune gastritis 
managing vitamin B12 deficiency 
ongoing care and follow up 
monitoring for gastric cancer in people with autoimmune gastritis 
information and support for people with suspected or confirmed vitamin B12 deficiency. 
See the 2-page visual summary on ongoing care and follow-up options for oral and intramuscular vitamin B12 replacement . 
Who is it for? 
Health and social care professionals providing NHS-commissioned services 
Commissioners of services 
Laboratories 
People with confirmed or suspected vitamin B12 deficiency, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
