Recommendations | Urinary tract infection in under 16s: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Urological conditions
Urinary tract infection
Urinary tract infection in under 16s: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG224 
Published: 
27 July 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Diagnosis
1.2 Acute management
1.3 Imaging tests
1.4 Surgical intervention
1.5 Follow up
1.6 Information and advice
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Diagnosis 
Symptoms and signs 
1.1.1 
Test the urine of babies, children and young people who have symptoms and signs that increase the likelihood that a urinary tract infection (UTI) is present (see table 1 and the explanation of how to use the table beneath it). [2022] 
1.1.2 
Consider testing the urine of babies, children and young people if they are unwell and there is a suspicion of a UTI but none of the signs or symptoms listed in table 1 are present. [2022] 
1.1.3 
Refer babies under 3 months with a suspected UTI (see table 1 and recommendation 1.1.2) to paediatric specialist care, and: 
send a urine sample for urgent microscopy and culture 
manage in line with the sections on management by the non-paediatric practitioner and management by the paediatric specialist in the NICE guideline on fever in under 5s: assessment and initial management . [2017, amended 2022] 
1.1.4 
Do not routinely test the urine of babies, children and young people 3 months and over who have symptoms and signs that suggest an infection other than a UTI. If they remain unwell and there is diagnostic uncertainty, consider urine testing. [2022] 
Table 1 Symptoms and signs that increase or decrease the likelihood that a UTI is present 
Symptoms and signs that increase the likelihood that a urinary tract infection (UTI) is present 
Symptoms and signs that decrease the likelihood that a UTI is present 
Painful urination (dysuria) 
More frequent urination 
New bedwetting 
Foul smelling (malodorous) urine 
Darker urine 
Cloudy urine 
Frank haematuria (visible blood in urine) 
Reduced fluid intake 
Fever 
Shivering 
Abdominal pain 
Loin tenderness or suprapubic tenderness 
Capillary refill longer than 3 seconds 
Previous history of confirmed urinary tract infection 
Absence of painful urination (dysuria) 
Nappy rash 
Breathing difficulties 
Abnormal chest sounds 
Abnormal ear examination 
Fever with known alternative cause 
When using the table, be aware that: 
The symptoms and signs in this table should be used to inform a decision about whether urine collection and testing is necessary. 
It is not an exhaustive list of symptoms or signs and should be used as a guide alongside clinical judgement. 
The presence or absence of a single symptom or sign in isolation in either column should not necessarily be used to decide whether or not to test for UTI. 
Multiple symptoms and signs will probably increase the likelihood that there is a UTI. 
It may be useful to consider alternative diagnoses where the symptoms and signs decrease the likelihood that a UTI is present. 
1.1.5 
For babies or children under 5 with fever with no obvious cause where a UTI is no longer suspected, see the NICE guideline on fever in under 5s: assessment and initial management . [2022] 
1.1.6 
Paediatric specialists should consult the section on management by the paediatric specialist in the NICE guideline on fever in under 5s: assessment and initial management , which covers when to test urine for a UTI in babies and children under 5 with fever who are in their care. [2022] 
1.1.7 
Avoid delay when collecting and testing the urine sample. If the sample cannot be collected at the consultation, advise the parents or carers (as appropriate) to collect and return the urine sample as soon as possible, ideally within 24 hours. [2022] 
See the sections on urine collection , preservation and testing . 
1.1.8 
If a baby, child or young person has suspected sepsis, assess and manage their condition in line with the NICE guideline on suspected sepsis in under 16s . [2022] 
1.1.9 
If a baby of up to and including 28 days corrected gestational age has suspected or confirmed bacterial infection, assess and manage their condition in line with the NICE guideline on neonatal infection: antibiotics for prevention and treatment . For early-onset neonatal infection, see the section on assessing and managing the risk of early-onset neonatal infection after birth , and for late-onset neonatal infection, see the section on risk factors for and clinical indicators of possible late-onset neonatal infection in the NICE guideline on neonatal infection: antibiotics for prevention and treatment . [2022] 
For guidance on when to consider sexual abuse, see recommendation 1.1.21 in the NICE guideline on child maltreatment . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on symptoms and signs of urinary tract infection . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion for the 2017 recommendation are in evidence review A: urinary tract infection diagnosis in infants and children under 3 months and 3 months to 3 years . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion for the 2022 recommendations are in evidence review B: symptoms and signs . 
Assessment of risk of serious illness 
1.1.10 
Assess the level of illness in babies and children in accordance with the section on clinical assessment of children with fever in the NICE guideline on fever in under 5s: assessment and initial management . [2007] 
Urine collection 
1.1.11 
Take urine samples from children and young people before they are given antibiotics. This is in line with the NICE antimicrobial prescribing guidelines on pyelonephritis (acute) and urinary tract infection (lower) . [2022] 
1.1.12 
Babies and children with a high risk of serious illness should have a urine sample taken, but treatment should not be delayed if a urine sample cannot be obtained. [2007] 
1.1.13 
Use a clean catch method for urine collection wherever possible. [2007] 
1.1.14 
If a clean catch urine sample is not possible, use other non-invasive methods such as urine collection pads. It is important to follow the manufacturer's instructions when using urine collection pads. [2007] 
1.1.15 
Do not use cotton wool balls, gauze or sanitary towels to collect urine from babies and children. [2007] 
1.1.16 
Use catheter samples or suprapubic aspiration (SPA) when it is not possible or practical to collect urine by non-invasive methods. Use ultrasound guidance to confirm that there is urine in the bladder before SPA. [2007] 
Urine preservation 
1.1.17 
Immediately refrigerate or use boric acid to preserve urine samples that are to be cultured but cannot be cultured within 4 hours of collection. [2007] 
1.1.18 
Follow the manufacturer's instructions when using boric acid to ensure the correct specimen volume and avoid potential toxicity against bacteria in the specimen. [2007] 
Urine testing 
1.1.19 
Use dipstick testing for babies and children between 3 months and 3 years with suspected UTI, and: 
if both leukocyte esterase and nitrite are negative: 
do not give antibiotics 
do not send a urine sample for microscopy and culture unless at least 1 of the criteria in recommendation 1.1.21 apply. 
if leukocyte esterase or nitrite, or both are positive: 
send the urine sample for culture 
give antibiotics. [2017] 
1.1.20 
Use the urine-testing strategy for children aged 3 years or older shown in table 2. Assess the risk of serious illness in line with the section on clinical assessment of children with fever in the NICE guideline on fever in under 5s to ensure appropriate urine tests and interpretation, both of which depend on the child's age and risk of serious illness. [2007] 
Table 2 Urine dipstick testing strategies for children 3 years or older 
Urine dipstick test result 
Strategy 
Leukocyte esterase and nitrite are both positive 
Assume the child has a urinary tract infection (UTI) and give them antibiotics. If the child has a high or intermediate risk of serious illness or a history of previous UTI, send a urine sample for culture. 
Leukocyte esterase is negative and nitrite is positive 
Give the child antibiotics if the urine test was carried out on a fresh urine sample. Send a urine sample for culture. Subsequent management will depend on the result of urine culture. 
Leukocyte esterase is positive and nitrite is negative 
Send a urine sample for microscopy and culture. Do not give the child antibiotics unless there is good clinical evidence of a UTI (for example, obvious urinary symptoms). A positive leukocyte esterase result may indicate an infection outside the urinary tract that may need to be managed differently. 
Leukocyte esterase and nitrite are both negative 
Assume the child does not have a UTI. Do not give the child antibiotics for a UTI or send a urine sample for culture. Explore other possible causes of the child's illness. 
Dipstick testing for leukocyte esterase and nitrite is diagnostically as useful as microscopy and culture, and can safely be used. 
1.1.21 
Send urine samples for culture if a baby or child: 
is thought to have acute upper UTI (pyelonephritis; see the section on clinical differentiation between acute upper UTI and lower UTI ) 
has a high to intermediate risk of serious illness (see the section on assessment of risk of serious illness ) 
is under 3 months old 
has a positive result for leukocyte esterase or nitrite 
has recurrent UTI 
has an infection that does not respond to treatment within 24 to 48 hours, if no sample has already been sent 
has clinical symptoms and signs but dipstick tests do not correlate. [2017] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2017 recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on urine testing . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in the evidence review A: urinary tract infection diagnosis in infants and children under 3 months and 3 months to 3 years . 
1.1.22 
Interpret microscopy results as shown in table 3. [2007] 
1.1.23 
Use clinical criteria for decision making if a urine test does not support findings, because in a small number of cases, this may be the result of a false negative. [2007] 
Table 3 Interpreting microscopy results 
Microscopy results 
Interpretation 
Pyuria and bacteriuria are both positive 
Assume the baby or child has a urinary tract infection (UTI) 
Pyuria is positive and bacteriuria is negative 
Start antibiotic treatment if the baby or child has symptoms or signs of a UTI 
Pyuria is negative and bacteriuria is positive 
Assume the baby or child has a UTI 
Pyuria and bacteriuria are both negative 
Assume the baby or child does not have a UTI 
History and examination of confirmed UTI 
1.1.24 
Record the following risk factors for UTI and serious underlying pathology: 
poor urine flow 
history suggesting previous UTI or confirmed previous UTI 
recurrent fever of uncertain origin 
antenatally diagnosed renal abnormality 
family history of vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) or renal disease 
constipation 
dysfunctional voiding 
enlarged bladder 
abdominal mass 
evidence of spinal lesion 
poor growth 
high blood pressure. [2007] 
Clinical differentiation between acute upper UTI and lower UTI 
1.1.25 
Assume a diagnosis of acute upper UTI in babies or children who have either: 
bacteriuria and fever of 38°C or higher or 
bacteriuria, fever lower than 38°C and loin pain or tenderness. [2007] 
1.1.26 
Assume that babies and children who have bacteriuria but no systemic symptoms or signs have lower UTI (cystitis). [2007] 
Laboratory tests for localising UTI 
1.1.27 
Do not use C-reactive protein alone to differentiate acute upper UTI from lower UTI in babies and children. [2007] 
1.2 Acute management 
Note that the antibiotic requirements for babies and children with conditions that are outside the scope of this guideline (for example, babies and children already known to have significant pre-existing uropathies) have not been addressed and may be different from those given here. 
1.2.1 
Immediately refer babies and children with a high risk of serious illness (see the section on assessment of risk of serious illness ) to a paediatric specialist. [2007] 
1.2.2 
Immediately refer babies under 3 months with a suspected UTI to a paediatric specialist. [2007] 
1.2.3 
Paediatric specialists should give babies under 3 months with a suspected UTI parenteral antibiotics in line with the section on management by the paediatric specialist in the NICE guideline on fever in under 5s . [2007, amended 2022] 
1.2.4 
Consider referring babies and children over 3 months with upper UTI to a paediatric specialist. [2007] 
1.2.5 
Give babies and children over 3 months with an acute upper UTI antibiotics in line with the NICE guideline on pyelonephritis (acute): antimicrobial prescribing . [2007, amended 2018] 
1.2.6 
Give babies and children over 3 months with lower UTI antibiotics in line with the NICE guideline on urinary tract infection (lower): antimicrobial prescribing . [2007, amended 2018] 
1.2.7 
For information about treating babies and children who were already on prophylactic antibiotics who then developed a UTI see the NICE guidelines on pyelonephritis (acute): antimicrobial prescribing , urinary tract infection (lower): antimicrobial prescribing and urinary tract infection (recurrent): antimicrobial prescribing . [2018] 
1.2.8 
Do not use antibiotics to treat asymptomatic bacteriuria in babies and children. [2007] 
1.2.9 
Laboratories should monitor patterns of urinary pathogen resistance and make this information routinely available to prescribers. [2007] 
Preventing recurrence 
1.2.10 
Manage dysfunctional elimination syndromes and constipation in babies and children who have had a UTI. [2007] 
1.2.11 
Encourage children who have had a UTI to drink enough water to avoid dehydration. [2007] 
1.2.12 
Ensure that children who have had a UTI have access to clean toilets when needed and do not have to delay voiding unnecessarily. [2007] 
Prophylactic antibiotics 
1.2.13 
Do not routinely give prophylactic antibiotics to babies and children following first-time UTI. [2007] 
1.2.14 
See the NICE guideline on urinary tract infection (recurrent): antimicrobial prescribing for prophylactic antibiotic treatment for recurrent UTI in babies and children. [2018] 
1.2.15 
Do not give prophylactic antibiotics to babies and children with asymptomatic bacteriuria. [2007] 
Imaging tests for localising UTI 
1.2.16 
Do not routinely use imaging to localise UTI. [2007] 
1.2.17 
In rare instances when it is clinically important to confirm or exclude acute upper UTI, use either: 
power doppler ultrasound or 
a dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) scintigraphy scan if power doppler ultrasound is not available or the diagnosis has not been confirmed. [2007] 
1.3 Imaging tests 
1.3.1 
Send babies and children with atypical UTI (see box 1 ) for a urinary tract ultrasound during the acute infection, to identify structural abnormalities such as obstruction and to ensure prompt management, as outlined in tables 4, 5 and 6. [2007] 
1.3.2 
Send babies younger than 6 months with first-time UTI that responds to treatment for ultrasound within 6 weeks of the UTI, as outlined in table 4. [2007] 
Box 1 Definitions of atypical and recurrent urinary tract infection (UTI) 
Atypical UTI includes: 
Seriously ill (for more information, refer to the NICE guideline on fever in under 5s: assessment and initial management ) 
Poor urine flow 
Abdominal or bladder mass 
Raised creatinine 
Septicaemia 
Failure to respond to treatment with suitable antibiotics within 48 hours 
Infection with non- E. coli organisms 
Recurrent UTI: 
Two or more episodes of UTI with acute upper UTI (acute pyelonephritis), or 
One episode of UTI with acute upper UTI plus 1 or more episodes of UTI with lower UTI (cystitis), or 
Three or more episodes of UTI with lower UTI 
1.3.3 
Do not routinely send babies and children over 6 months with first-time UTI who respond to treatment for an ultrasound, unless they have atypical UTI as outlined in tables 5 and 6. [2007] 
1.3.4 
Babies and children who have had a lower UTI should be sent for ultrasound (within 6 weeks) only if they: 
are younger than 6 months or 
have had recurrent infections. [2007] 
1.3.5 
Use a DMSA scan 4 to 6 months after the acute infection to detect renal parenchymal defects in babies and children, as outlined in tables 4, 5 and 6. [2007] 
1.3.6 
If the baby or child has a subsequent UTI while waiting for a DMSA scan, review the timing of the scan and consider doing it sooner. [2007] 
1.3.7 
Do not routinely use imaging to identify VUR in babies and children who have had a UTI, except in specific circumstances as outlined in tables 4, 5 and 6. [2007] 
1.3.8 
When a micturating cystourethrogram (MCUG) is done, give prophylactic antibiotics orally for 3 days with the MCUG on the second day. [2007] 
1.3.9 
Send babies and children who have had a UTI for imaging, as outlined in tables 4, 5 and 6. [2007] 
Table 4 Recommended imaging schedule for babies younger than 6 months 
Test 
Responds well to treatment within 48 hours 
Atypical urinary tract infection 
Recurrent urinary tract infection 
Ultrasound during the acute infection 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Ultrasound within 6 weeks 
Yes 
If abnormal consider micturating cystourethrogram (MCUG) 
No 
No 
Dimercaptosuccinic acid scintigraphy scan 4 to 6 months after the acute infection 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Micturating cystourethrogram 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
See box 1 for definitions of atypical and recurrent urinary tract infection. 
In a baby with a non- E. coli urinary tract infection that is responding well to antibiotics and has no other features of atypical infection, a non-urgent ultrasound can be requested, to happen within 6 weeks. 
Table 5 Recommended imaging schedule for babies and children between 6 months to under 3 years 
Test 
Responds well to treatment within 48 hours 
Atypical urinary tract infection 
Recurrent urinary tract infection 
Ultrasound during the acute infection 
No 
Yes 
No 
Ultrasound within 6 weeks 
No 
No 
Yes 
Dimercaptosuccinic acid scintigraphy scan 4 to 6 months after the acute infection 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Micturating cystourethrogram 
No 
No 
No 
See box 1 for definitions of atypical and recurrent urinary tract infection. 
While MCUG should not be performed routinely it should be considered if the following features are present: 
dilatation on ultrasound 
poor urine flow 
non- E. coli -infection 
family history of VUR. 
In babies and children with a non- E. coli urinary tract infection that is responding well to antibiotics and has no other features of atypical infection, a non-urgent ultrasound can be requested, to happen within 6 weeks. 
Table 6 Recommended imaging schedule for children 3 years or older 
Test 
Responds well to treatment within 48 hours 
Atypical urinary tract infection 
Recurrent urinary tract infection 
Ultrasound during the acute infection 
No 
Yes 
No 
Ultrasound within 6 weeks 
No 
No 
Yes 
Dimercaptosuccinic acid scintigraphy scan 4 to 6 months after the acute infection 
No 
No 
Yes 
Micturating cystourethrogram 
No 
No 
No 
See box 1 for definitions of atypical and recurrent urinary tract infection. 
Ultrasound in toilet-trained children should be performed with a full bladder with an estimate of bladder volume before and after urination. 
In a child with a non- E. coli urinary tract infection that is responding well to antibiotics and has no other features of atypical infection, a non-urgent ultrasound can be requested, to happen within 6 weeks. 
1.4 Surgical intervention 
1.4.1 
Do not routinely use surgery for management of VUR. [2007] 
1.5 Follow up 
1.5.1 
Do not routinely follow up babies and children who have not had imaging investigations. [2007] 
1.5.2 
Discuss and agree with parents, carers or the young person (as appropriate) how the results of imaging will be communicated. [2007] 
1.5.3 
Do not routinely offer follow-up outpatient appointments when the results of investigations are normal. [2007] 
1.5.4 
Give parents or carers the results of all investigations in writing. [2007] 
1.5.5 
Refer babies and children who have recurrent UTI or abnormal imaging results for assessment by a paediatric specialist. [2007] 
1.5.6 
When assessing babies and children with renal parenchymal defects, include height, weight, blood pressure and routine testing for proteinuria. [2007] 
1.5.7 
Do not offer long-term follow up to babies and children with minor, unilateral renal parenchymal defects, unless they have recurrent UTI, family history or lifestyle risk factors for hypertension. [2007] 
1.5.8 
Babies and children who have bilateral renal abnormalities, impaired kidney function, raised blood pressure or proteinuria should have monitoring and appropriate management by a paediatric nephrologist to slow the progression of chronic kidney disease. [2007] 
1.5.9 
Do not routinely retest babies' and children's urine for infection if they are asymptomatic after an episode of UTI. [2007] 
1.5.10 
Do not follow up babies and children based only on the presence of asymptomatic bacteriuria. [2007] 
1.6 Information and advice 
1.6.1 
Healthcare professionals should ensure that when a child or young person has a suspected UTI, they and their parents or carers (as appropriate) are told about the need for treatment, the importance of completing any course of treatment and given advice about prevention and long-term management. [2007] 
1.6.2 
Ensure that children and young people, and their parents or carers (as appropriate), know that UTIs can recur and that it is important to remain vigilant and to seek prompt treatment for any suspected reinfection. [2007] 
1.6.3 
Offer children and young people, and their parents or carers (as appropriate) advice and information on: 
prompt recognition of symptoms 
urine collection, storage and testing 
treatment options 
prevention 
the nature of and reason for any urinary tract investigation 
prognosis 
reasons and arrangements for long-term management if required. [2007] 
Terms used in this guideline 
Bacteriuria 
Bacteria in the urine with or without UTI. 
Fever 
Elevation of body temperature above the normal daily variation unless otherwise specified in a particular recommendation. 
Pyuria 
White cells in the urine. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
