Recommendations | Diverticular disease: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Digestive tract conditions
Diverticular disease
Diverticular disease: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG147 
Published: 
27 November 2019
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Diverticulosis
1.2 Diverticular disease
1.3 Acute diverticulitis
1.4 Information
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off‑label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Diverticulosis 
Management and advice 
1.1.1 
Tell people with diverticulosis that the condition is asymptomatic and no specific treatments are needed. 
1.1.2 
Advise people to eat a healthy, balanced diet including whole grains, fruit and vegetables. Tell them that: 
there is no need to avoid seeds, nuts, popcorn or fruit skins 
if they have constipation and a low-fibre diet, increasing their fibre intake gradually may minimise flatulence and bloating. 
1.1.3 
Advise people to drink adequate fluid if they are increasing their fibre intake, especially if there is a risk of dehydration. 
1.1.4 
Consider bulk-forming laxatives for people with constipation. 
1.1.5 
Tell people about the benefits of exercise, and weight loss if they are overweight or obese, and stopping smoking, in reducing the risk of developing acute diverticulitis and symptomatic disease. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on diverticulosis management and advice . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: prevention of diverticular disease in patients with diverticulosis . 
1.2 Diverticular disease 
Symptoms and signs 
1.2.1 
Suspect diverticular disease if a person presents with one or both of the following: 
intermittent abdominal pain in the left lower quadrant with constipation, diarrhoea or occasional large rectal bleeds (the pain may be triggered by eating and relieved by the passage of stool or flatus) 
tenderness in the left lower quadrant on abdominal examination. 
Be aware that: 
in a minority of people and in people of Asian origin, pain and tenderness may be localised in the right lower quadrant 
symptoms may overlap with conditions such as irritable bowel syndrome, colitis and malignancy. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on symptoms and signs of diverticular disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: symptoms and signs of diverticular disease . 
Investigations and referral 
1.2.2 
Do not routinely refer people with suspected diverticular disease unless: 
routine endoscopic and/or radiological investigations cannot be organised from primary care or 
colitis is suspected or 
the person meets the criteria for a suspected cancer pathway. 
1.2.3 
If the person meets the criteria for a suspected cancer pathway, refer by this route (see NICE's guideline on suspected cancer: recognition and referral ). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on investigations and referral . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: diagnosis of diverticular disease . 
Management and advice 
1.2.4 
Do not offer antibiotics to people with diverticular disease . 
1.2.5 
Advise people to avoid non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and opioid analgesia if possible, because they may increase the risk of diverticular perforation. 
1.2.6 
For advice on diet, fluid intake, stopping smoking, weight loss and exercise, follow the recommendations in section 1.1 on diverticulosis . 
1.2.7 
Advise people that: 
the benefits of increasing dietary fibre may take several weeks to achieve 
if tolerated, a high-fibre diet should be maintained for life. 
1.2.8 
Consider bulk-forming laxatives if: 
a high-fibre diet is unacceptable to the person or it is not tolerated or 
the person has persistent constipation or diarrhoea. 
1.2.9 
Consider simple analgesia, for example paracetamol, as needed if the person has ongoing abdominal pain. 
1.2.10 
Consider an antispasmodic if the person has abdominal cramping. 
1.2.11 
If the person has persistent symptoms or symptoms that do not respond to treatment, think about alternative causes and investigate and manage appropriately. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on diverticulosis management and advice . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: management of diverticular disease . 
Recurrent diverticular disease 
The committee were unable to make recommendations for practice in this area. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on recurrent diverticular disease . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review evidence review E: management of recurrent diverticular disease . 
1.3 Acute diverticulitis 
Symptoms and signs of acute diverticulitis 
1.3.1 
Suspect acute diverticulitis if a person presents with constant abdominal pain, usually severe and localising in the left lower quadrant, with any of the following: 
fever or 
sudden change in bowel habit and significant rectal bleeding or passage of mucus from the rectum or 
tenderness in the left lower quadrant, a palpable abdominal mass or distention on abdominal examination, with a previous history of diverticulosis or diverticulitis. 
Be aware that in a minority of people and in people of Asian origin, pain and tenderness may be localised in the right lower quadrant. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on symptoms and signs of acute diverticulitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review evidence review F: referral criteria for acute diverticulitis . 
Symptoms and signs of complicated acute diverticulitis 
1.3.2 
Suspect complicated acute diverticulitis and refer for same-day hospital assessment if the person has uncontrolled abdominal pain and any of the features in table 1. 
Table 1 Symptoms and signs that suggest complicated acute diverticulitis 
Symptom or sign 
Possible complication 
Abdominal mass on examination or peri-rectal fullness on digital rectal examination 
Intra-abdominal abscess 
Abdominal rigidity and guarding on examination 
Bowel perforation and peritonitis 
Altered mental state, raised respiratory rate, low systolic blood pressure, raised heart rate, low tympanic temperature, no urine output or skin discolouration 
Sepsis (see the NICE guideline on suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over ) 
Faecaluria, pneumaturia, pyuria or the passage of faeces through the vagina 
Fistula into the bladder or vagina 
Colicky abdominal pain, absolute constipation (passage of no flatus or stool), vomiting or abdominal distention 
Intestinal obstruction 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on symptoms and signs of complicated acute diverticulitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I: indications for surgery . 
Investigation of suspected acute diverticulitis 
Primary care 
1.3.3 
For people with suspected uncomplicated acute diverticulitis who are not referred for same-day hospital assessment: 
reassess in primary care if their symptoms persist or worsen and 
consider referral to secondary care for further assessment. 
Secondary care 
1.3.4 
For people with suspected complicated acute diverticulitis who have been referred for same-day hospital assessment, offer a full blood count, urea and electrolytes test and C‑reactive protein test. 
1.3.5 
If the person with suspected complicated acute diverticulitis has raised inflammatory markers, offer a contrast CT scan within 24 hours of hospital admission to confirm diagnosis and help plan management. If contrast CT is contraindicated, perform one of the following: 
a non-contrast CT or 
an MRI or 
an ultrasound scan, depending on local expertise. 
1.3.6 
If inflammatory markers are not raised, think about the possibility of alternative diagnoses. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on investigation of suspected acute diverticulitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G: diagnostic tests for acute diverticulitis . 
Non-surgical management of acute diverticulitis 
1.3.7 
For people with acute diverticulitis who are systemically well: 
consider a no antibiotic prescribing strategy 
offer simple analgesia, for example paracetamol 
advise the person to re‑present if symptoms persist or worsen. 
1.3.8 
Offer an antibiotic prescribing strategy if the person with acute diverticulitis is systemically unwell, is immunosuppressed or has significant comorbidity. 
1.3.9 
Offer oral antibiotics if the person with acute diverticulitis is systemically unwell but does not meet the criteria for referral for suspected complicated acute diverticulitis. 
1.3.10 
Offer intravenous antibiotics to people admitted to secondary care with suspected complicated acute diverticulitis . 
For guidance on the management of suspected sepsis see NICE's guideline on suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over . 
1.3.11 
Review intravenous antibiotics within 48 hours or after scanning if sooner (see recommendation 1.3.5) and consider stepping down to oral antibiotics where possible. 
1.3.12 
If the person has CT-confirmed uncomplicated acute diverticulitis, review the need for antibiotics and discharge them depending on any co-existing medical conditions. 
1.3.13 
When prescribing an antibiotic for suspected or confirmed acute diverticulitis, follow the advice in table 2. 
Table 2 Antibiotics for adults aged 18 years and over with suspected or confirmed acute diverticulitis 
Treatment 
Antibiotic, dosage and course length 
First-choice oral antibiotic for suspected or confirmed uncomplicated acute diverticulitis 
Co-amoxiclav : 
500/125 mg three times a day for 5 days 
Alternative first-choice oral antibiotics if penicillin allergy or co‑amoxiclav unsuitable 
Cefalexin (caution in penicillin allergy) with metronidazole : 
Cefalexin:500 mg twice or three times a day (up to 1 to 1.5 g three or four times a day for severe infection) for 5 days 
Metronidazole: 400 mg three times a day for 5 days 
Trimethoprim with metronidazole : 
Trimethoprim: 200 mg twice a day for 5 days 
Metronidazole: 400 mg three times a day for 5 days 
Ciprofloxacin ( only if switching from IV ciprofloxacin with specialist advice) with metronidazole : 
Ciprofloxacin: 500 mg twice a day for 5 days 
Metronidazole: 400 mg three times a day for 5 days 
See the MHRA January 2024 advice for restrictions and precautions on using fluoroquinolone antibiotics because of the risk of disabling and potentially long-lasting or irreversible side effects. Fluoroquinolones must now only be prescribed when other commonly recommended antibiotics are inappropriate 
First-choice intravenous antibiotics for suspected or confirmed complicated acute diverticulitis 
Co-amoxiclav : 
1.2 g three times a day 
Cefuroxime with metronidazole : 
Cefuroxime:750 mg three or four times a day (increased to 1.5 g three or four times a day if severe infection) 
Metronidazole: 500 mg three times a day 
Amoxicillin with gentamicin and metronidazole : 
Amoxicillin: 500 mg three times a day (increased to 1 g four times a day if severe infection) 
Gentamicin: Initially 5 to 7 mg/kg once a day, subsequent doses adjusted according to serum gentamicin concentration. Therapeutic drug monitoring and assessment of renal function is required (see the BNF information on gentamicin ) 
Metronidazole: 500 mg three times a day 
Ciprofloxacin ( only in people with allergy to penicillins and cephalosporins) with metronidazole : 
Ciprofloxacin: 400 mg twice or three times a day 
Metronidazole: 500 mg three times a day 
See the MHRA January 2024 advice for restrictions and precautions on using fluoroquinolone antibiotics because of the risk of disabling and potentially long-lasting or irreversible side effects. Fluoroquinolones must now only be prescribed when other commonly recommended antibiotics are inappropriate 
Alternative intravenous antibiotics 
Consult local microbiologist 
See BNF for appropriate use and dosing in specific populations, for example, hepatic impairment, renal impairment, pregnancy and breastfeeding, and administering intravenous (or, where appropriate, intramuscular) antibiotics. 
Longer courses may be needed based on clinical assessment. Continue antibiotics for up to 14 days in people with CT-confirmed diverticular abscess. 
Review intravenous antibiotics within 48 hours or after scanning if sooner and consider stepping down to oral antibiotics where possible. 
Emergency management of complicated acute diverticulitis 
1.3.14 
When prescribing an antibiotic for suspected or confirmed complicated acute diverticulitis , follow the advice in table 2. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on the non-surgical management of acute diverticulitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H: non-surgical management of acute diverticulitis . 
Management of abscesses 
1.3.15 
For people presenting in secondary care with complicated acute diverticulitis and suspected diverticular abscess, assess and manage in line with NICE's guideline on suspected sepsis in people aged 16 or over . 
1.3.16 
Offer intravenous antibiotics to people with acute diverticulitis and suspected diverticular abscess. 
1.3.17 
When prescribing an antibiotic for diverticular abscess, follow the advice in table 2. 
1.3.18 
Offer a contrast CT scan to people with acute diverticulitis and suspected diverticular abscess. If contrast CT is contraindicated, perform one of the following: 
a non-contrast CT or 
an MRI or 
an ultrasound scan, depending on local expertise. 
1.3.19 
Review intravenous antibiotics within 48 hours or after scanning if sooner and consider stepping down to oral antibiotics where possible. 
1.3.20 
Use the scan results to guide treatment based on the size and location of the abscess. 
1.3.21 
If a person does not have confirmed diverticular abscess, review their need for antibiotics. 
1.3.22 
Consider either percutaneous drainage (if anatomically feasible) or surgery (see recommendation 1.3.27) for abscesses greater than 3 cm. 
1.3.23 
Send samples of pus from the abscess (if it has been drained) to the microbiology laboratory to enable antibiotic treatment to be tailored to sensitivities. 
1.3.24 
For abscesses less than 3 cm switch to oral antibiotics where possible. 
1.3.25 
In people with a CT-confirmed diverticular abscess, if the condition does not improve clinically or there is deterioration, consider re-imaging to inform the management strategy. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on the management of abscesses in complicated acute diverticulitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review N: percutaneous drainage versus resectional surgery for the management of abscesses . 
Management of bowel perforations 
1.3.26 
Offer either laparoscopic lavage or resectional surgery (see recommendation 1.3.27) to people with diverticular perforation with generalised peritonitis after discussing the risks and benefits of the 2 options with them (see table 3). If faecal peritonitis is identified intraoperatively, proceed to resectional surgery. 
Table 3 Factors to take into account when deciding whether to have lavage or resection for diverticular perforation with generalised peritonitis 
Factor 
Laparoscopic lavage 
Resectional surgery 
What the procedure involves 
In diverticulitis this involves washing the abdominal cavity and colon using keyhole surgery 
The surgical removal of the diseased colon followed by either reattaching the remaining segments of the colon or forming an end stoma 
Effect on quality of life 
There was no significant difference in quality of life scores reported for lavage and surgery 
There was no significant difference in quality of life scores reported for lavage and surgery 
Mortality 
Although there was some benefit seen in mortality for lavage, this evidence was very uncertain 
Although there was some benefit seen in mortality for lavage, this evidence was very uncertain 
Needing a stoma (where the bowel is connected surgically to an opening in the abdomen and stools are collected in a bag or pouch) 
A stoma is not needed 
A stoma may be needed 
Pain 
Less likely to relieve pain than resectional surgery 
More likely to relieve pain than lavage because the damaged bowel has been removed 
Recurrent diverticulitis 
Fewer people had recurrent diverticulitis after surgery than after lavage because the diseased bowel is removed. However, the evidence was very uncertain 
Fewer people had recurrent diverticulitis after surgery than after lavage because the diseased bowel is removed. However, the evidence was very uncertain 
Needing more operations 
Evidence comparing unplanned surgery with lavage showed that fewer people needed reoperations after surgery than after lavage 
Evidence that included unplanned surgery and planned surgery (scheduled stoma reversal after resectional surgery) showed that fewer people needed reoperations after lavage 
However, in both cases the evidence was very uncertain 
Evidence comparing unplanned surgery with lavage showed that fewer people needed reoperations after surgery than after lavage 
Evidence that included unplanned surgery and planned surgery (scheduled stoma reversal after resectional surgery) showed that fewer people needed reoperations after lavage 
However, in both cases the evidence was very uncertain 
Postoperative complications 
There was no meaningful difference in the number of infections or in the need for further intervention between lavage and surgery. People who had surgery had a greater reduction in post-surgical abscesses than those who had lavage, but this evidence was of low quality 
There was no meaningful difference in the number of infections or in the need for further intervention between lavage and surgery. People who had surgery had a greater reduction in post-surgical abscesses than those who had lavage, but this evidence was of low quality 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on the management of bowel perforations in complicated acute diverticulitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review O: laparoscopic lavage for the management of bowel perforations . 
Anastomosis and bowel resection for people with complicated acute diverticulitis (elective and emergency surgery) 
1.3.27 
Offer people with complicated acute diverticulitis who are having surgery (either elective or emergency): 
primary anastomosis (join in the bowel) with or without diverting stoma or 
Hartmann's procedure (resection of the bowel with an end stoma). 
Take into account the person's age, any other conditions they have and how well they can carry out everyday activities (WHO performance status). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on anastomosis for people with complicated acute diverticulitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review M: primary versus secondary anastomosis (timing of anastomosis) in complicated acute diverticulitis . 
1.3.28 
In people undergoing bowel resection, consider resecting back to the compliant bowel (that is, bowel that is soft, unthickened and unaffected by inflammation). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on bowel resection for people with complicated acute diverticulitis. 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L: management of complicated acute diverticulitis – extent of colectomy . 
Elective surgical management after resolution of complicated acute diverticulitis 
1.3.29 
Consider open or laparoscopic resection for elective surgery for people who have recovered from complicated acute diverticulitis but have continuing symptoms, for example in people with stricture or fistula. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on elective surgical management after resolution of complicated acute diverticulitis. 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K: laparoscopic versus open sigmoid resection for acute diverticulitis . 
Timing of surgery for complicated acute diverticulitis 
The committee were unable to make recommendations for practice in this area. They made a recommendation for research on timing of surgery for complicated acute diverticulosis. 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on timing of surgery for complicated acute diverticulitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J: timing of surgery for complicated acute diverticulitis . 
Management of recurrent acute diverticulitis 
1.3.30 
Do not offer an aminosalicylate or antibiotics to prevent recurrent acute diverticulitis . 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on the management of recurrent acute diverticultitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review P: management of recurrent acute diverticulitis . 
1.4 Information 
Diverticulosis 
1.4.1 
Give people with diverticulosis , and their families and carers where appropriate, verbal and written information on: 
diet and lifestyle 
the course of diverticulosis and the likelihood of progression 
symptoms that indicate complications or progression to diverticular disease. 
Diverticular disease 
1.4.2 
Give people with diverticular disease , and their families and carers where appropriate, verbal and written information on: 
diet and lifestyle 
the course of diverticular disease and the likelihood of progression 
symptoms and symptom management 
when to seek medical advice. 
Acute diverticulitis 
1.4.3 
Give people with acute diverticulitis , and their families and carers where appropriate, verbal and written information on: 
diet and lifestyle 
the course of acute diverticulitis and likelihood of complicated disease or recurrent episodes 
symptoms 
when and how to seek further medical advice 
possible investigations and treatments 
risks of interventions and treatments, including antibiotic resistance, and how invasive these are 
role of surgery and outcomes (postoperative bowel function and symptoms). 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information for people with diverticulosis, diverticular disease and acute diverticulitis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q: information and support . 
Terms used in this guideline 
Acute diverticulitis 
Sudden inflammation or infection associated with diverticula. Symptoms include constant abdominal pain, usually severe and localising in the left lower quadrant. Other features, including fever, may also be present. 
Colitis 
Inflammation of the bowel related to Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, ischaemia or microscopic colitis. Symptoms may include abdominal pain and change in bowel habits with passage of blood. 
Complicated acute diverticulitis 
The presence of complications associated with inflamed or infected diverticula. These complications may include abscess, fistula, stricture perforation and sepsis. 
Diverticular disease 
The presence of diverticula with mild abdominal pain or tenderness and no systemic symptoms. 
Diverticulosis 
The presence of diverticula without symptoms. 
Next page 
Recommendations for research 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
