Recommendations for research | Diabetes (type 1 and type 2) in children and young people: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diabetes
Diabetes (type 1 and type 2) in children and young people: diagnosis and management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG18 
Published: 
01 August 2015
Last updated: 
11 May 2023
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1 Use of routinely collected real-world data to examine the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of continuous glucose monitoring
2 Effectiveness of glucose-lowering agents used to manage blood glucose levels in children and young people with type 2 diabetes
3 Weekly treatment with glucose-lowering agents for managing blood glucose levels
4 Continuous glucose monitor sensor adhesive to prevent sensitivities
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
1 Use of routinely collected real-world data to examine the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of continuous glucose monitoring 
Based on routinely collected real-world data, what is the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of continuous glucose monitoring devices to improve glycaemic control in children and young people? [2022] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on continuous glucose monitoring . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: continuous glucose monitoring in children and young people with type 1 diabetes . 
2 Effectiveness of glucose-lowering agents used to manage blood glucose levels in children and young people with type 2 diabetes 
In children and young people with type 2 diabetes, what is the effectiveness of glucose-lowering agents used to manage blood glucose levels in adults with type 2 diabetes? [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale section on glucose-lowering agents for managing blood glucose levels in children and young people with type 2 diabetes . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: glucose-lowering agents for managing blood glucose levels in children and young people with type 2 diabetes . 
3 Weekly treatment with glucose-lowering agents for managing blood glucose levels 
In children and young people with type 2 diabetes, what is the effectiveness of weekly treatment with glucose-lowering agents for managing blood glucose levels compared to daily treatment? [2023] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it might affect practice, see the rationale section on glucose-lowering agents for managing blood glucose levels in children and young people with type 2 diabetes . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D: glucose-lowering agents for managing blood glucose levels in children and young people with type 2 diabetes . 
4 Continuous glucose monitor sensor adhesive to prevent sensitivities 
What is the best continuous glucose monitor sensor adhesive to prevent sensitivities to the device, for example local skin reactions? [2022] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for research, see the rationale section on continuous glucose monitoring . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B: continuous glucose monitoring in children and young people with type 1 diabetes . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
