Overview | Chronic kidney disease: assessment and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Kidney conditions
Chronic kidney disease
Chronic kidney disease: assessment and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG203 
Published: 
25 August 2021
Last updated: 
24 November 2021
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers care and treatment for people with, or at risk of, chronic kidney disease (CKD). It aims to prevent or delay the progression, and reduce the risk of complications and cardiovascular disease. It also covers managing anaemia and hyperphosphataemia associated with CKD. 
Last reviewed: 19 August 2025 
We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the sections on pharmacotherapy and managing anaemia . This is to provide easy access to relevant guidance at the right point in the guideline only and is not a change in practice. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guidelines CG182 (published July 2014), NG8 (published June 2015), CG157 (published March 2013) and NICE evidence summary ESNM51. 
Future updates: 
August 2021: We have checked this guideline and plan to update the recommendation on oral antiplatelet therapy for reducing cardiovascular disease in people with chronic kidney disease. For more information, see the surveillance decision . 
September 2021: We also checked this guideline to assess if chronic kidney disease should be highlighted as an HIV indicator condition. We did not have clinical consensus, so will not amend this area but will note the issue for consideration in the future. For more information, see the surveillance decision . 
Recommendations 
This guideline was updated in August 2021. There are new and updated recommendations on: 
investigations for CKD 
classification of CKD 
frequency of monitoring 
risk assessment, referral criteria and shared care 
blood pressure control 
medicines for CKD 
phosphate binders to manage mineral and bone disorders 
glomerular filtration rate for diagnosing anaemia associated with CKD 
intravenous iron for treating anaemia associated with CKD 
These supplement the existing recommendations on: 
information and education for people with CKD 
diagnosing and assessing anaemia associated with CKD 
managing anaemia associated with CKD 
assessing and optimising erythropoiesis in people with anaemia 
monitoring anaemia treatment 
See visual summaries on the recommendations for identifying CKD in adults , phosphate binders and managing proteinuria . 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
People with chronic kidney disease, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Type 2 diabetes in adults 
Chronic kidney disease in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
