Overview | Blood transfusion | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Injuries, accidents and wounds
Blood transfusion
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG24 
Published: 
18 November 2015
Last updated: 
26 February 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Reducing requirement for blood transfusion for people having surgery 
Red blood cell transfusion 
Platelet transfusion 
Fresh frozen plasma transfusion 
Cryoprecipitate transfusion 
Prothrombin complex concentrate transfusion 
Patient safety 
Patient information 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Inclusions and exclusions 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers assessing for, and managing, blood transfusions in adults, young people and children aged 1 year and over. It covers the general principles of blood transfusion, but does not make recommendations relating to specific conditions. 
This guideline does not cover blood transfusions, or use of tranexamic acid for surgery, during pregnancy and labour. For more information on what the guideline does and does not cover, see the  section on inclusions and exclusions . 
Some people have religious beliefs that do not allow the transfusion of blood. Specific issues relating to these people have been addressed when reviewing the evidence and writing the recommendations. 
For guidance on blood transfusions and anticoagulant reversal for people with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding, see the section on resuscitation and initial management in NICE’s guideline on acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding in over 16s .  
Last reviewed: 26 February 2026 
We reviewed the evidence and made new recommendations on using tranexamic acid during surgery. 
Next review: This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
reducing requirements for blood transfusion for people having surgery 
red blood cell transfusion 
platelet transfusion 
fresh frozen plasma transfusion 
cryoprecipitate transfusion 
prothrombin complex concentrate transfusion 
patient safety and information 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals who assess for and manage blood transfusions and their alternatives 
Commissioners and providers of transfusion services 
People aged 1 year and over who may need a blood transfusion, their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Blood transfusion 
Next page 
Reducing requirement for blood transfusion for people having surgery 
Back to top
