Overview | Care and support of people growing older with learning disabilities | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Health and social care delivery
Adult's social care
Care and support of people growing older with learning disabilities 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG96 
Published: 
11 April 2018
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Putting this guideline into practice 
Recommendations for research 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers care and support for adults with learning disabilities as they grow older. It covers identifying changing needs, planning for the future, and delivering services including health, social care and housing. It aims to support people to access the services they need as they get older. 
We have produced an EasyRead version and video to explain this guideline, which are available from information for the public . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
overarching principles 
organising and delivering services 
identifying and assessing care and support needs 
planning and reviewing care and support 
identifying and managing health needs 
end of life care 
staff skills and expertise 
Who is it for? 
Providers of social care, health and housing support for people growing older with learning disabilities 
Practitioners in social care, health and housing who work with people growing older with learning disabilities and their families and carers 
Commissioners and people with a strategic role in assessing and planning local services 
Practitioners in other related services, including older people's services, adult learning disability services, employment, education and criminal justice services 
People with learning disabilities, their families, carers and advocates 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Learning disability: care and support of people growing older 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
