Recommendations | Headaches in over 12s: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Neurological conditions
Headaches
Headaches in over 12s: diagnosis and management
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG150 
Published: 
19 September 2012
Last updated: 
03 June 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Recommendations for research 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1.1 Assessment
1.2 Diagnosis
1.3 Management
Terms used in this guideline
Recommendations 
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care . 
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding. 
1.1 Assessment 
1.1.1 
Evaluate people who present with headache and any of the following features, and consider the need for further investigations and/or referral: 
worsening headache with fever 
sudden‑onset headache reaching maximum intensity within 5 minutes 
new‑onset neurological deficit 
new‑onset cognitive dysfunction 
change in personality 
impaired level of consciousness 
recent (typically within the past 3 months) head trauma 
headache triggered by cough, valsalva (trying to breathe out with nose and mouth blocked) or sneeze 
headache triggered by exercise 
orthostatic headache (headache that changes with posture) 
symptoms suggestive of giant cell arteritis 
symptoms and signs of acute narrow angle glaucoma 
a substantial change in the characteristics of their headache. [2012] 
For information on referral for suspected tumours of the brain or central nervous system, see the NICE guideline on suspected cancer . 
1.1.2 
Consider further investigations and/or referral for people who present with new‑onset headache and any of the following: 
compromised immunity, caused, for example, by HIV or immunosuppressive drugs 
age under 20 years and a history of malignancy 
a history of malignancy known to metastasise to the brain 
vomiting without other obvious cause. [2012] 
1.1.3 
Consider using a headache diary to aid the diagnosis of primary headaches. [2012] 
1.1.4 
If a headache diary is used, ask the person to record the following for a minimum of 8 weeks: 
frequency, duration and severity of headaches 
any associated symptoms 
all prescribed and over the counter medications taken to relieve headaches 
possible precipitants 
relationship of headaches to menstruation. [2012] 
1.2 Diagnosis 
Tension‑type headache, migraine (with or without aura) and cluster headache 
1.2.1 
Diagnose tension‑type headache, migraine or cluster headache according to the headache features in table 1. Chronic migraine and chronic tension‑type headache commonly overlap. If there are any features of migraine, diagnose chronic migraine. 
See recommendations 1.2.2, 1.2.3 and 1.2.4 for more information on diagnosis of migraine with aura. [2012] 
Table 1 Headache features according to headache type 
Headache feature 
Tension‑type headache 
Migraine (with or without aura) 
Cluster headache 
Pain location (can be in the head, face or neck) 
Bilateral 
Unilateral or bilateral 
Unilateral (around the eye, above the eye and along the side of the head/face) 
Pain quality 
Pressing/tightening (non‑pulsating) 
Pulsating (throbbing or banging in young people aged 12 to 17 years) 
Variable (can be sharp, boring, burning, throbbing or tightening) 
Pain intensity 
Mild or moderate 
Moderate or severe 
Severe or very severe 
Effect on activities 
Not aggravated by routine activities of daily living 
Aggravated by, or causes avoidance of, routine activities of daily living 
Restlessness or agitation 
Other symptoms 
None 
Unusual sensitivity to light and/or sound or nausea and/or vomiting 
Symptoms of aura can occur with or without headache and: 
are fully reversible 
develop over at least 5 minutes 
last 5 to 60 minutes 
Typical aura symptoms include visual symptoms such as flickering lights, spots or lines and/or partial loss of vision; sensory symptoms such as numbness and/or pins and needles; and/or speech disturbance 
On the same side as the headache: 
red and/or watery eye 
nasal congestion and/or runny nose 
swollen eyelid 
forehead and facial sweating 
constricted pupil and/or drooping eyelid 
Duration of headache 
30 minutes to continuous 
4 to 72 hours in adults 
1 to 72 hours in young people aged 12 to 17 years 
15 to 180 minutes 
Frequency 
Episodic tension-type headache 
On fewer than 15 days per month 
Chronic tension-type headache 
On 15 or more days per month for more than 3 months 
Episodic migraine (with or without aura) 
On fewer than 15 days per month 
Chronic migraine (with or without aura) 
On 15 or more days per month, with at least 8 days having features of migraine, for more than 3 months 
Episodic cluster headache 
From once every other day to 8 times a day with a pain-free period of more than 1 month 
Chronic cluster headache 
From once every other day to 8 times a day with a continuous pain-free period of less than 1 month in a 12-month period 
Migraine with aura 
1.2.2 
Suspect aura in people who present with or without headache and with neurological symptoms that: 
are fully reversible and 
develop gradually, either alone or in succession, over at least 5 minutes and 
last for 5 to 60 minutes. [2012] 
1.2.3 
Diagnose migraine with aura in people who present with or without headache and with 1 or more of the following typical aura symptoms that meet the criteria in recommendation 1.2.2: 
visual symptoms that may be positive (for example, flickering lights, spots or lines) and/or negative (for example, partial loss of vision) 
sensory symptoms that may be positive (for example, pins and needles) and/or negative (for example, numbness) 
speech disturbance. [2012] 
1.2.4 
Consider further investigations and/or referral for people who present with or without migraine headache and with any of the following atypical aura symptoms that meet the criteria in recommendation 1.2.2: 
motor weakness or 
double vision or 
visual symptoms affecting only 1 eye or 
poor balance or 
decreased level of consciousness. [2012] 
Menstrual‑related migraine 
1.2.5 
Suspect menstrual‑related migraine if migraine occurs predominantly between 2 days before and 3 days after the start of menstruation in at least 2 out of 3 consecutive menstrual cycles. [2012] 
1.2.6 
Diagnose menstrual‑related migraine using a headache diary (see recommendation 1.1.4) for at least 2 menstrual cycles. [2012] 
Medication overuse headache 
1.2.7 
Be alert to the possibility of medication overuse headache in people whose headache developed or worsened while they were taking the following drugs for 3 months or more: 
triptans, opioids, ergots or combination analgesic medications on 10 days per month or more or 
paracetamol, aspirin or an NSAID , either alone or in any combination, on 15 days per month or more. [2012] 
For guidance on safe prescribing of opioids and managing withdrawal, see NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms . 
1.3 Management 
All headache disorders 
1.3.1 
Consider using a headache diary: 
to record the frequency, duration and severity of headaches 
to monitor the effectiveness of headache interventions 
as a basis for discussion with the person about their headache disorder and its impact. [2012] 
1.3.2 
Consider further investigations and/or referral if a person diagnosed with a headache disorder develops any of the features listed in recommendation 1.1.1. [2012] 
1.3.3 
Do not refer people diagnosed with tension‑type headache, migraine, cluster headache or medication overuse headache for neuroimaging solely for reassurance. [2012] 
Information and support for people with headache disorders 
1.3.4 
Include the following in discussions with the person with a headache disorder: 
a positive diagnosis , including an explanation of the diagnosis and reassurance that other pathology has been excluded and 
the options for management and 
recognition that headache is a valid medical disorder that can have a significant impact on the person and their family or carers. [2012] 
1.3.5 
Give the person written and oral information about headache disorders, including information about support organisations. [2012] 
1.3.6 
Explain the risk of medication overuse headache to people who are using acute treatments for their headache disorder. [2012] 
Tension‑type headache 
Acute treatment 
1.3.7 
Consider aspirin, paracetamol or an NSAID for the acute treatment of tension‑type headache, taking into account the person's preference, comorbidities and risk of adverse events. 
Because of the association with Reye's syndrome, preparations containing aspirin should not be offered to under 16s. [2012] 
1.3.8 
Do not offer opioids for the acute treatment of tension‑type headache. [2012] 
Prophylactic treatment 
1.3.9 
Consider a course of up to 10 sessions of acupuncture over 5 to 8 weeks for the prophylactic treatment of chronic tension-type headache . [2012] 
Migraine with or without aura 
Acute treatment 
1.3.10 
Offer combination therapy with an oral triptan and an NSAID, or an oral triptan and paracetamol, for the acute treatment of migraine, taking into account the person's preference, comorbidities and risk of adverse events. For young people aged 12 to 17 years consider a nasal triptan in preference to an oral triptan. [2012] 
In June 2025, this was an off-label use of triptans (except nasal sumatriptan) in under 18s. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.11 
For people who prefer to take only 1 drug, consider monotherapy with an oral triptan, NSAID, aspirin (900 mg) or paracetamol for the acute treatment of migraine, taking into account the person's preference, comorbidities and risk of adverse events. For young people aged 12 to 17 years consider a nasal triptan in preference to an oral triptan. [2012, amended 2025] 
In June 2025, this was an off-label use of triptans (except nasal sumatriptan) in under 18s. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . Because of the association with Reye's syndrome, preparations containing aspirin should not be offered to under 16s. 
1.3.12 
When prescribing a triptan start with the one that has the lowest acquisition cost; if this is consistently ineffective, try one or more alternative triptans. [2012] 
In June 2025, this was an off-label use of triptans (except nasal sumatriptan) in under 18s. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.13 
Consider an anti‑emetic in addition to other acute treatment for migraine even in the absence of nausea and vomiting. [2012] 
1.3.14 
For people in whom oral preparations (or nasal preparations in young people aged 12 to 17 years) for the acute treatment of migraine are ineffective or not tolerated: 
consider a non‑oral preparation of metoclopramide or prochlorperazine and 
if non-oral metoclopramide or prochlorperazine is used, consider adding a non‑oral NSAID or triptan if they have not been tried. [2012, amended 2021] 
Note the special warnings and precautions for use in the summaries of product characteristics for metoclopramide and prochlorperazine, and discuss the benefits and risks with the person (or their parents or carers, as appropriate). 
In June 2025, only a buccal preparation of prochlorperazine was licensed for this indication (other preparations of prochlorperazine and metoclopramide were licensed for the relief of nausea and vomiting); nasal sumatriptan was the only triptan licensed for this indication in under 18s. This was an off‑label use of metoclopramide in children and young people. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.15 
Rimegepant (an oral calcitonin gene-related peptide [CGRP] inhibitor placed on or under the tongue) is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for the acute treatment of migraine with or without aura in adults, only if for previous migraines: 
at least 2 triptans were tried and they did not work well enough or 
triptans were contraindicated or not tolerated, and NSAIDs and paracetamol were tried but did not work well enough. 
For full details, see the guidance on rimegepant (TA919, 2023) . 
1.3.16 
Do not offer ergots or opioids for the acute treatment of migraine. [2012] 
Prophylactic treatment 
Follow the MHRA advice on the use of topiramate . Topiramate should not be used for migraine prophylaxis in pregnancy, or in women of childbearing potential unless the conditions of the Pregnancy Prevention Programme are fulfilled, including using highly effective contraception. 
1.3.17 
Discuss the benefits and risks of prophylactic treatment for migraine with the person, taking into account the person's preference, comorbidities, risk of adverse events and the impact of the headache on their quality of life. [2012] 
1.3.18 
Consider propranolol, topiramate or amitriptyline for migraine prevention after a full discussion of the benefits, risks and suitability of each option, including the potential benefit in reducing migraine recurrence and severity. Take into account the following factors and include them in the discussion if relevant: 
People with depression and migraine could be at an increased risk of using propranolol for self-harm. Use caution when prescribing propranolol, to minimise the risk of harm from toxicity and rapid deterioration in overdose, in line with the Healthcare Safety Investigation Branch's report on the under-recognised risk of harm from propranolol . 
Topiramate should not be used for migraine prophylaxis in pregnancy, or in women able to have children unless the conditions of the Pregnancy Prevention Programme are fulfilled. See the MHRA advice on the use of topiramate . 
For amitriptyline, take into account the advice on safe prescribing of antidepressants and managing withdrawal in NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms . 
In June 2025, this was an off-label use of topiramate and amitriptyline in children and young people. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . [2015, amended 2025] 
1.3.19 
If the first treatment tried does not work or is not tolerated, discuss trying a second option and then the remaining option, unless unsuitable because of safety concerns. [2025] 
1.3.20 
Do not offer gabapentin for the prophylactic treatment of migraine. [2015] 
1.3.21 
If propranolol, topiramate and amitriptyline have not worked or are not tolerated or are unsuitable because of safety concerns, consider a course of up to 10 sessions of acupuncture over 5 to 8 weeks according to the person's preference, comorbidities and risk of adverse events. [2012, amended 2025] 
1.3.22 
For people who are already having treatment with another form of prophylaxis and whose migraine is well controlled, continue the current treatment as required. See also recommendation 1.3.27 . [2012, amended 2015] 
1.3.23 
Advise people with migraine that the food supplement riboflavin (400 mg once a day) may be effective in reducing migraine frequency and intensity for some people. [2012] 
1.3.24 
For CGRP inhibitors recommended as options in NICE technology appraisal guidance for preventing episodic or chronic migraine in adults who have at least 4 migraine days a month, only if at least 3 preventive medicines have not worked or are not tolerated or are unsuitable because of safety concerns, see the guidance on: 
atogepant (TA973, 2024) oral tablet 
eptinezumab (TA871, 2023) intravenous infusion 
fremanezumab (TA764, 2022) subcutaneous injection 
erenumab (TA682, 2021) subcutaneous injection (140 mg dose only) 
galcanezumab (TA659, 2020) subcutaneous injection. 
1.3.25 
Rimegepant (an oral CGRP inhibitor placed on or under the tongue) is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for preventing episodic migraine in adults who have at least 4 and fewer than 15 migraine attacks per month, only if at least 3 preventive medicines have not worked or are not tolerated or are unsuitable because of safety concerns. For full details, see the guidance on rimegepant (TA906, 2023) . 
1.3.26 
Intramuscular injection of botulinum toxin type A is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for preventing chronic migraine in adults, only if at least 3 preventive medicines have not worked or are not tolerated or are unsuitable because of safety concerns, and when the condition is appropriately managed for medication overuse. For full details, see the guidance on botulinum toxin type A (TA260, 2012) . 
Prophylactic treatment review 
1.3.27 
Review the need for continuing migraine prophylaxis 3 to 6 months after starting prophylactic treatment. [2012, amended 2025] 
1.3.28 
Stop CGRP inhibitors after 12 weeks of treatment if the frequency of migraines does not reduce by: 
at least 50% in episodic migraine 
at least 30% in chronic migraine . [2025] 
1.3.29 
Stop botulinum toxin type A if the frequency of headache days per month does not reduce by at least 30% after 2 treatment cycles, or if their condition has changed to episodic migraine for 3 consecutive months. [2025] 
Combined hormonal contraceptive use by women and girls with migraine 
1.3.30 
Do not routinely offer combined hormonal contraceptives for contraception to women and girls who have migraine with aura. [2012] 
Menstrual-related migraine 
1.3.31 
For predictable menstrual‑related migraine that does not respond adequately to standard acute treatment, consider treatment with frovatriptan (2.5 mg twice a day) or zolmitriptan (2.5 mg, twice or three times a day) on the days migraine is expected. [2012] 
In June 2025, this was an off-label use of frovatriptan and zolmitriptan. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
Treatment of migraine during pregnancy 
1.3.32 
Offer paracetamol for the acute treatment of migraine during pregnancy. Consider the use of a triptan or an NSAID after discussing the need for treatment and the risks associated with the use of each medication during pregnancy. [2012] 
In June 2025, this was an off-label use of triptans (except nasal sumatriptan) in under 18s. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . See also the MHRA advice on NSAIDs: potential risks following prolonged use after 20 weeks of pregnancy . 
1.3.33 
Seek specialist advice if prophylactic treatment for migraine is needed during pregnancy. [2012] 
Cluster headache 
Acute treatment 
1.3.34 
Discuss the need for neuroimaging for people with a first bout of cluster headache with a GP with a special interest in headache or a neurologist. [2012] 
1.3.35 
Offer oxygen and/or a subcutaneous or nasal triptan for the acute treatment of cluster headache. [2012] 
In June 2025, nasal triptans did not have a UK marketing authorisation for this indication. This was also an off-label use of subcutaneous triptans in under 18s. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.36 
When using oxygen for the acute treatment of cluster headache: 
use 100% oxygen at a flow rate of at least 12 litres per minute with a non‑rebreathing mask and a reservoir bag and 
arrange provision of home and ambulatory oxygen. [2012] 
1.3.37 
When using a subcutaneous or nasal triptan, ensure the person is offered an adequate supply of triptans calculated according to their history of cluster bouts, based on the manufacturer's maximum daily dose. [2012] 
In June 2025, nasal triptans did not have a UK marketing authorisation for this indication. This was also an off-label use of subcutaneous triptans in under 18s. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.38 
Do not offer paracetamol, NSAIDS, opioids, ergots or oral triptans for the acute treatment of cluster headache. [2012] 
Prophylactic treatment 
1.3.39 
Consider verapamil for prophylactic treatment during a bout of cluster headache. If unfamiliar with its use for cluster headache, seek specialist advice before starting verapamil, including advice on electrocardiogram monitoring. [2012] 
In June 2025, this was an off-label use of verapamil. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.40 
Seek specialist advice for cluster headache that does not respond to verapamil. [2012] 
In June 2025, this was an off-label use of verapamil. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines . 
1.3.41 
Seek specialist advice if treatment for cluster headache is needed during pregnancy. [2012] 
Medication overuse headache 
For guidance on managing withdrawal of opioids, see NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal symptoms . 
1.3.42 
Explain to people with medication overuse headache that it is treated by withdrawing overused medication. [2012] 
1.3.43 
Advise people to stop taking all overused acute headache medications for at least 1 month and to stop abruptly rather than gradually. [2012] 
1.3.44 
Advise people that headache symptoms are likely to get worse in the short term before they improve and that there may be associated withdrawal symptoms, and provide them with close follow‑up and support according to their needs. [2012] 
1.3.45 
Consider prophylactic treatment for the underlying primary headache disorder in addition to withdrawal of overused medication for people with medication overuse headache. [2012] 
1.3.46 
Do not routinely offer inpatient withdrawal for medication overuse headache. [2012] 
1.3.47 
Consider specialist referral and/or inpatient withdrawal of overused medication for people who are using strong opioids, or have relevant comorbidities, or in whom previous repeated attempts at withdrawal of overused medication have been unsuccessful. [2012] 
1.3.48 
Review the diagnosis of medication overuse headache and further management 4 to 8 weeks after the start of withdrawal of overused medication. [2012] 
Terms used in this guideline 
Acute narrow‑angle glaucoma 
An uncommon eye condition that results from blockage of the drainage of fluid from the eye. Symptoms of acute glaucoma may include headache with a painful red eye and misty vision or haloes, and in some cases nausea. Acute glaucoma may be differentiated from cluster headache by the presence of a semi‑dilated pupil compared with the presence of a constricted pupil in cluster headache. 
Cluster headache bout 
The duration over which recurrent cluster headaches occur, usually lasting weeks or months. Headaches occur from 1 every other day to 8 times per day. 
Cluster headache, chronic 
Chronic cluster headaches occur from once every other day to 8 times a day with a continuous pain-free period of less than 1 month in a 12-month period. 
Cluster headache, episodic 
Episodic cluster headaches occur from once every other day to 8 times a day with a pain-free period of more than 1 month. 
Giant cell arteritis 
Also known as temporal arteritis, giant cell arteritis is characterised by the inflammation of the walls of medium and large arteries. Branches of the carotid artery and the ophthalmic artery are preferentially involved, giving rise to symptoms of headache, visual disturbances and jaw claudication. 
Migraine, chronic 
The headaches of chronic migraines (with or without aura) occur on 15 or more days per month, with at least 8 days having features of migraine, for more than 3 months. 
Migraine, episodic 
The headaches of episodic migraines (with or without aura) occur on fewer than 15 days per month. 
NSAID 
Non‑steroidal anti‑inflammatory drug. 
Positive diagnosis 
A diagnosis based on the typical clinical picture that does not require any further investigations to exclude alternative explanations for a person's symptoms. 
Tension-type headache, chronic 
Chronic tension-type headaches occur on 15 or more days per month for more than 3 months. 
Tension-type headache, episodic 
Episodic tension-type headaches occur on fewer than 15 days per month. 
Next page 
Context 
Previous page 
Overview 
Back to top
