Overview | Acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding in over 16s: management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Digestive tract conditions
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding
Acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding in over 16s: management 
Clinical guideline 
Reference number: CG141 
Published: 
13 June 2012
Last updated: 
25 August 2016
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers how upper gastrointestinal bleeding can be effectively managed in adults and young people aged 16 years and older. It aims to identify which diagnostic and therapeutic steps are useful so hospitals can develop a structure in which clinical teams can deliver an optimum service for people who develop this condition. 
Last reviewed: 29 November 2018 
We have found no new evidence that affects the recommendations. For more information, see the surveillance decision . 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
assessing risk 
resuscitation and initial management 
timing of endoscopy 
managing non variceal  and  variceal bleeding 
controlling bleeding and preventing re-bleeding in people taking NSAIDs, aspirin or clopidogrel 
primary prophylaxis for acutely ill people in critical care 
information and support 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
People over 16 with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding, and their families and carers 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
This guideline was previously called acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding: management. 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding in adults 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
