Recommendations for research | Type 1 diabetes in adults: diagnosis and management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Diabetes and other endocrinal, nutritional and metabolic conditions
Diabetes
Type 1 diabetes in adults: diagnosis and management 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG17 
Published: 
26 August 2015
Last updated: 
17 August 2022
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
1 Clinical features for distinguishing between type 1 diabetes and other types of diabetes
2 The use of C-peptide in diagnosing diabetes
3 Use of routinely collected real-world data to examine the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of continuous glucose monitoring
Recommendations for research 
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research. 
1 Clinical features for distinguishing between type 1 diabetes and other types of diabetes 
What are the best clinical features or combination of features for distinguishing between type 1 diabetes and other types of diabetes? [2022] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on diagnosis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: diagnosis of diabetes . 
2 The use of C-peptide in diagnosing diabetes 
What is the effectiveness of C‑peptide at correcting misclassification of diabetes diagnosis and what is the optimal timing for the test in distinguishing subtypes of diabetes? [2022] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on diagnosis . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C: diagnosis of diabetes . 
3 Use of routinely collected real-world data to examine the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of continuous glucose monitoring 
Based on routinely collected real-world data, what is the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) devices to improve glycaemic control? [2022] 
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research, see the rationale section on CGM . 
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A: continuous glucose monitoring in adults with type 1 diabetes . 
Next page 
Rationale and impact 
Previous page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
