Rationale and impact | Suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people: recognition, diagnosis and early management | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Blood and immune system conditions
Blood conditions
Suspected sepsis in pregnant or recently pregnant people: recognition, diagnosis and early management
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG255 
Published: 
19 November 2025
Register as a stakeholder 
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Could this be sepsis? 
Face to face assessment 
Evaluating risk level 
Managing suspected sepsis 
Antibiotic therapy, intravenous fluid and oxygen 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Information and support for all people with suspected sepsis 
Training and education 
Terms used in this guideline 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
On this page 
People with neutropenia or immunosuppression
Initial assessment and examination
Discharge
Finding and controlling the source of infection
Rationale and impact 
These sections briefly explain why the committee made the updated recommendations and how they might affect practice. 
People with neutropenia or immunosuppression 
Recommendations 1.1.9 and 1.1.11 
Why the committee made the recommendations 
The committee carefully thought about care for people with neutropenia or immunosuppression, such as those on anticancer treatment and immunosuppressant therapies, because sepsis shares many of the same signs and symptoms as neutropenic sepsis. The committee agreed that people with suspected neutropenic sepsis are at very high risk and should be treated in line with NICE's guideline on neutropenic sepsis in people with cancer . 
Return to recommendations 
Initial assessment and examination 
Recommendation 1.3.6 
Why the committee made the recommendation 
The committee agreed that the initial assessment is an important opportunity to identify people who are most at risk of sepsis. They noted that sepsis is hard to recognise (particularly in the initial stages), because the signs and symptoms are not specific. So when people who are unwell present multiple times to a GP or hospital with non-specific signs and symptoms, they may not initially be identified as at risk of sepsis. However, the committee agreed that this group is more likely to have sepsis, and they highlighted the need to ask people if they have presented before. 
How the recommendation might affect practice 
Asking people about multiple presentations can be done as part of the existing initial assessment, so should not require additional resources to implement. This information could allow sepsis to be diagnosed and treatment started earlier. This could reduce costs, because fewer critical care interventions would be needed at a later point. 
Return to recommendation 
Discharge 
Recommendation 1.7.16 
Why the committee made the recommendation 
By consensus, the committee removed recommendations on discharge for people at moderate and low risk of severe illness or death from sepsis. The committee did not think that the initial management period was the right time to consider discharge for people at these risk levels. The section of the 2016 recommendations on providing information and safety netting was retained, as this is applicable to everyone with suspected sepsis when they are eventually ready for discharge. 
How the recommendation might affect practice 
This change to the recommendations is not expected to have a significant impact on practice, because safety netting information should already be provided to people who have had suspected sepsis. 
Return to recommendation 
Finding and controlling the source of infection 
Recommendation 1.11.4 
Why the committee made the recommendations 
The 2016 recommendation on involving surgical teams only covered intra-abdominal and pelvic infections. Infections at other sites can be treated surgically or radiologically, and the committee expanded the recommendation by consensus to address this. 
The committee discussed the timing of interventions and agreed that this would vary depending on: 
the patient 
where the source of infection was 
if the intervention would be surgical or radiological 
if an interventional radiologist was available. 
Because of this, the committee could not recommend a specific timeframe for interventions. However, they agreed that interventions should be carried out as soon as possible. 
How the recommendations might affect practice 
Prompt source control could mean fewer critical care interventions are needed at a later point, which would reduce costs. 
Return to recommendation 
Next page 
Finding more information and committee details 
Previous page 
Recommendations for research 
Back to top
