Overview | Intrapartum care | Guidance | NICE 
You are here:
Home
NICE Guidance
Conditions and diseases
Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth
Intrapartum care
Intrapartum care 
NICE guideline 
Reference number: NG235 
Published: 
29 September 2023
Last updated: 
09 June 2026
Guidance 
Tools and resources 
Information for the public 
Evidence 
History 
Download guidance (PDF)
Overview
Recommendations 
Recommendations for research 
Rationale and impact 
Context 
Appendix A: Adverse outcomes for different places of birth 
Appendix B: Outcomes for different places of birth – by BMI at booking 
Appendix C: Outcomes for intravenous remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) compared with intramuscular pethidine 
Appendix D: Benefits and risks of birth out of water and water birth 
Finding more information and committee details 
Update information 
Overview 
This guideline covers the care of pregnant women and pregnant trans and non-binary people and their babies during labour and immediately after birth. It focuses on women and pregnant people who give birth between 37 and 42 weeks of pregnancy (‘term’). The guideline helps women and pregnant people to make informed choices about where to have their baby and about their care in labour. It also aims to reduce variation in aspects of care. 
NICE has also produced  guidelines on intrapartum care for women with existing medical conditions or obstetric complications and their babies ,  fetal monitoring in labour  and  caesarean birth . For information on other related topics, see our  women's and reproductive health summary page . 
Last reviewed: 9 June 2026 
We have reintroduced recommendations on prevention of vitamin K deficiency bleeding. See update information for more details. 
This guideline updates and replaces NICE guideline CG190 (2014). 
Next review:  This guideline will be reviewed if there is new evidence that is likely to change the recommendations. 
How we prioritise updating our guidance 
Decisions about updating our guidance are made by NICE’s prioritisation board. For more information on the principles and process, see  NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual . 
For information about individual topics, including any decisions affecting this guideline, see the  summary table of prioritisation board decisions . 
Recommendations 
This guideline includes recommendations on: 
antenatal education about labour 
planning place of birth 
care throughout labour in all birth settings 
transfer of care and changing place of birth 
pain relief during labour 
prelabour rupture of membranes at term 
first ,  second  and  third stages of labour 
care of the newborn baby  and  care of the woman after birth 
service organisation 
Who is it for? 
Healthcare professionals 
Commissioners and providers 
Healthy women who have had a straightforward pregnancy and give birth between 37 and 42 weeks of pregnancy 
Guideline development process 
How we develop NICE guidelines 
Your responsibility 
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service. It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian. 
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme . 
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with complying with those duties. 
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible. 
Related quality standards 
Intrapartum care 
Next page 
Recommendations 
Back to top
