--- page 1 ---
Revised 2017 
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 1 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
American College of Radiology 
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 
Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
Variant 1:  Traumatic visual defect. Suspect orbital injury. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category RRL 
CT orbits without IV contrast Usually Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT head without IV contrast Usually Appropriate ☢☢☢  
MRI head without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRI orbits without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
CT orbits with IV contrast May Be Appropriate (Disagreement) ☢☢☢ 
CTA head and neck with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
MRI head without and with IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRI orbits without and with IV contrast May Be Appropriate (Disagreement) O 
MRA head and neck without and with IV 
contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRA head and neck without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
Arteriography cervicocerebral Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT head with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT head without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
X-ray orbit Usually Not Appropriate ☢


--- page 2 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 2 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
Variant 2: Nontraumatic orbital asymmetry, exophthalmos, or enophthalmos. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category RRL 
MRI orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
CT orbits with IV contrast Usually Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT orbits without IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CTA head and neck with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
MRA head and neck without and with IV 
contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRI head without and with IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRI orbits without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRA head and neck without IV contrast May Be Appropriate (Disagreement) O 
MRI head without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
Arteriography cervicocerebral May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT head with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT head without IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT head without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
X-ray orbit Usually Not Appropriate ☢


--- page 3 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 3 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
Variant 3: Suspected orbital cellulitis, uv eitis, or scleritis. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category RRL 
CT orbits with IV contrast Usually Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
MRI orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
CT orbits without IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
MRI head without and with IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRI orbits without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
CTA head and neck with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
MRA head and neck without and with IV 
contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRI head without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
CT head with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
MRA head and neck without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
Arteriography cervicocerebral Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT head without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT head without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢  
X-ray orbit Usually Not Appropriate ☢


--- page 4 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 4 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
Variant 4: Suspected optic neuritis. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category RRL 
MRI orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
MRI head without and with IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
MRI orbits without IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
MRI head without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
CT orbits with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT head with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT head without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT head without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT orbits without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CTA head and neck with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢  
MRA head and neck without and with IV 
contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA head and neck without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
Arteriography cervicocerebral Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
X-ray orbit Usually Not Appropriate ☢


--- page 5 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 5 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
Variant 5: Visual loss. Etiology identified on ophthalmologic examination or laboratory tests. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category RRL 
MRI orbits without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
CT head without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢
CT orbits without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢
MRI head without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
Arteriography cervicocerebral Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢
CT head with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢
CT head without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢
CT orbits with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢
CT orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢
CTA head and neck with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢
MRA head and neck without and with IV 
contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA head and neck without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI head without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
X-ray orbit Usually Not Appropriate ☢


--- page 6 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 6 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
Variant 6: Visual loss. Intraocular mass, optic nerve, or pre-chiasm symptoms. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category RRL 
MRI orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
CT orbits with IV contrast Usually Appropriate ☢☢☢
MRI orbits without IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
CT orbits without IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢
MRI head without and with IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
CT head with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢
MRI head without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
CT head without IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢
CTA head and neck with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢
MRA head and neck without and with IV 
contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRA head and neck without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
Arteriography cervicocerebral Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢
CT head without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢
CT orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢
X-ray orbit Usually Not Appropriate ☢


--- page 7 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 7 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
Variant 7: Nonischemic visual loss. Chiasm or post-chiasm symptoms. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category RRL 
MRI head without and with IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
MRI head without IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
CT head with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT head without and with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT head without IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CTA head and neck with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
MRA head and neck without and with IV 
contrast May Be Appropriate O 
CT venography head with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
MR venography head without and with IV 
contrast May Be Appropriate O  
MR venography head without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O  
MRA head and neck without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
CT orbits with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT orbits without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
MRI orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI orbits without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
Arteriography cervicocerebral Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
X-ray orbit Usually Not Appropriate ☢


--- page 8 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 8 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
Variant 8: Ophthalmoplegia or diplopia. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category RRL 
MRI head without and with IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
MRI orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
CT orbits with IV contrast Usually Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
MRI orbits without IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
CT orbits without IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CTA head and neck with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
MRA head and neck without and with IV 
contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRA head and neck without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRI head without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
CT head with IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT head without IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢☢☢  
Arteriography cervicocerebral Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT head without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢  
CT orbits without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
X-ray orbit Usually Not Appropriate ☢


--- page 9 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 9 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
ORBITS, VISION AND VISUAL LOSS
Expert Panel on Neurologic Imag ing: Tabassum A. Kennedy, MD a; Amanda S. Corey, MD b;  
Bruno Policeni, MD c; Vikas Agarwal, MD d; Judah Burns, MD e; H. Benjamin Harvey, MD, JD f;  
Jenny Hoang, MBBS g; Christopher H. Hunt, MD h; Amy F. Juliano, MD i; William Mack, MD j;  
Gul Moonis, MD k; Gregory J. A. Murad, MD l; Jeffrey S. Pannell, MD m; Matthew S. Parsons, MD n;  
William J. Powers, MD o; Jason W. Schroeder, MD p*; Gavin Setzen, MD q; Matthew T. Whitehead, MD r;  
Julie Bykowski, MD.s 
Summary of Literature Review 
Introduction/Background 
A thorough neurologic and ophthalmologic examination can  often accurately localize a defect along the visual 
pathway. Combined with factors such as the age of the patient, the time-course for onset, degree of visual loss at 
presentation, the presence of eye pain, and visible exophthalm os or enophthalmos determine if imaging is needed, 
the choice of imaging modality, coverage to include the orbit,  anterior skull base and/ or brain, and contrast phase 
[1]. 
Disease along the visual pathway may be intrinsically relate d to the globe, optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic tracts, 
optic radiations, or primary visual cortex or related to  extrinsic mass effect from ad jacent pathology upon these 
structures. Primary diseases of the orbit may present with pr optosis, visual disturbance,  and/or ophthalmoplegia. 
These signs and symptoms may occur alone or in combination and may be accompanied by pain or other features 
including vascular congestion or erythema. The differen tial diagnosis in adults and subsequent appropriate 
imaging tests are dependent on the pattern and whether visual loss is monocular or binocular [2]. 
It is important to note the overlap of visual loss and other conditions a ddressed by independent ACR 
Appropriateness Criteria. Acute ischemic or hemorrhagic st roke should be emergently excluded in the setting of 
sudden onset, painless visual loss, and is extensiv ely reviewed in the ACR Appropriateness Criteria
® 
“Cerebrovascular Disease ” [3]. The ACR Appropriateness Criteria ® “ Headache” [4] addresses the need for 
immediate evaluation in the setting of papilledema [1], as  well as imaging of suspected giant-cell arteritis and 
posterior reversible encephalopathy, which may have associated visual symptoms. 
Imaging analysis of orbital diseases is facilitated by a compartmental approach that  establishes a differential 
diagnosis on the basis of lesion location along the visu al pathway [5]. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) are often comp lementary when assessing visual loss [6,7].  The inherent contrast 
provided by orbital fat allows for excellent anatomic  definition with either t echnique. Ultrasound (US) and 
fluorescein angiography are also important diagnostic t ools; however, these unique procedures are most often 
performed by the ophthalmologist and are beyond the scope of this article. 
Discussion of Procedures by Variant 
Variant 1: Traumatic visual defect. Suspect orbital injury. Initial imaging. 
Patients with traumatic orbital injury may have injuries that are isolated to the orbit or have intracranial 
manifestations, depending on the mechanism and severity of injury. In the United States, orbital trauma accounts 
for approximately 3% of visits to the emergency department [8].  Orbital injury should be suspected if periorbital 
soft-tissue swelling, hyphema, vision loss, or extraocular restriction is present. 
                                                           
aPrincipal Author, University of Wisconsin  Hospital and Clinic, Madison, Wisconsin. bPanel Chair, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia. cPanel Vice-Chair, 
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, Iowa. dUniversity of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. eMontefiore Medical Center, 
Bronx, New York. fMassachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. gDuke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina. hMayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota. iMassachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvar d Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. jUniversity 
of Southern California, Los Angeles, California; neurosurgical consultant. kColumbia University Medical Center, New York, New York. lUniversity of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida; neurosurgical consultant. mUniversity of California San Diego Me dical Center, San Diego, California. nMallinckrodt Institute 
of Radiology, Saint Louis, Missouri. oUniversity of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Caro lina; American Academy of Neurology. 
pWalter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland. qAlbany ENT & Allergy Services, PC, Al bany, New York; American Academy of 
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery. rChildren’s National Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia. sSpecialty Chair, UC San Diego Health, 
San Diego, California. 
 The American College of Radiology seeks and encourages collabor ation with other organizations on the development of the ACR Ap propriateness 
Criteria through society representation on expert panels. Participation by representatives from collaborating societies on the expert panel does not necessarily 
imply individual or society endorsement of the final document. 
 *The views expressed in this manuscript are those of the author  and do not reflect the official policy of the Department of Ar my/Navy/Air Force, 
Department of Defense, or United States Government. 
 Reprint requests to: publications@acr.org


--- page 10 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 10 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
CT 
Traumatic optic neuropathy and post-traumatic visual lo ss are typically evaluated with noncontrast thin-section 
orbital CT imaging with multiplanar reconstructions [7,9-1 3]. Contrast is typically not needed in the trauma 
setting. Orbital CT is superior at identifying the integrity  of the osseous orbit and skull base and is useful in 
identifying fractures, displaced fracture fragments, as well as narrowing of the optic canal. Associated soft-tissue 
findings include intraorbital foreign bo dies, hematomas, and extraocular muscle injury and are readily seen with 
noncontrast CT imaging of the orbits [14]. If orbital fract ures are identified, orbital CT  imaging can be useful at 
identifying the position of the extraocular muscles relative to the fracture defect as well as the overall size of the 
fracture as a predictor for the development of enophthalmos , which may be useful in surgical planning [15]. In 
patients with more severe mechanisms of injury, a CT of the head without contrast may also be indicated to assess 
for intracranial injury. Please refer to the ACR Appropriateness Criteria ® “Head Trauma” [16]. Precontrast and 
postcontrast head CT or orbit CT imaging is usually not appropriate. 
MRI 
MRI of the orbits without contrast may be complement ary in assessing traumatic optic neuropathy. MRI has been 
shown to be more sensitive for detecting optic nerve edema or avulsion than CT [17]. In patients with optic nerve 
injury initially suspected on CT, or in patients with une xplained visual loss following facial trauma, MR of the 
orbits without contrast may be helpful in assessing the in tegrity of the optic nerve. MRI of the brain without 
contrast may also provide additional findings related to  intracranial hemorrhage in the setting of traumatic brain 
injury and in assessment of traumatic cranial nerve injury. Please refer to the ACR Appropriateness Criteria ® 
“Head Trauma” [16] for additional recommendations. However, if th ere is a suspicion for a metallic foreign body 
in the orbit, an MRI is contraindicated. Contrast is typically not needed in the setting of trauma. 
CTA, MRA, Arteriography 
There is a role for angiography in assessing vascular injury in the setting of  trauma; however, this should be 
assessed in the larger context related to the overall extent of traumatic facial and intracranial injury and is not 
typically indicated as the initial imaging test for orbita l trauma. Please refer to the ACR Appropriateness Criteria ® 
“Head Trauma ” [16]. CT angiography (CTA), MR angiography (MRA ), or catheter-based digital subtraction 
angiography (DSA) may all be performed to evaluate fo r traumatic vascular injury; however, CTA in the trauma 
setting is often the preferred study for assessment of vascular injury. 
Radiography 
Orbital or skull radiographs are insufficient to detect  pathology in patients presenting with trauma and have 
primarily been supplanted by CT. 
Variant 2: Nontraumatic orbital asymmetry, exophthalmos, or enophthalmos. Initial imaging. 
Orbital asymmetry is a broad term that refers to the ex ternal appearance of the orbit. This asymmetry may be 
related to globe position, with one eye perceived or measur ed as more proptotic compared to the other, or one eye 
perceived as sunken or retracted compared to the other.  Normal range measurements vary and are dependent on 
the race of the individual [18,19]. 
Bilateral exophthalmos may indicate an underlying syst emic or diffuse condition, such as thyroid eye disease. 
Unilateral or asymmetric proptosis is concerning for an underlying mass or pathologic process intrinsic to the 
globe, optic nerve, extraocular muscles, lacrimal glands, or  adjacent soft-tissue structur es, posterior to the orbit, 
within the adjacent skull base or cavernous sinus. Vascula r malformations may result in proptosis in adults, and 
occur anywhere within the orbit. Carotid-cavernous fistula (CCF) may present with proptosis with orbital 
congestion and chemosis in the setting of an anterior-drain ing CCF or diplopia and pain in the posterior-draining 
CCFs [20]. 
Enophthalmos, or posterior displacement of the globe, may be caused by a development condition resulting in an 
absent globe (anophthalmia) or small globe  (microphthalmia) by traumatic injury to the bony orbit, silent sinus 
syndrome, processes that result in atrophy of the extraocular muscles, or by a desmoplastic 
neoplastic/inflammatory process [9,21-24]. 
If the asymmetry is associated with a white pupillary reflex  (leukocoria), the primary concern is an abnormality 
localized to the globe. Although leukocoria is a term often used in the pediatric population, this term is not limited 
to children. Any condition that prevents passage of  light through the globe may cause leukocoria, including 
tumors, developmental processes, and infection [25,26]. In itial evaluation in a patient with leukocoria consists of


--- page 11 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 11 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
a thorough assessment by an ophthalmologist. Many of th e aforementioned conditions can be diagnosed based on 
the patient’s clinical history, ophthalmologic inv estigation including ophthalm oscopy, and ophthalmology-
directed US and may not require additional imaging. 
Patients with disconjugate gaze between the two eyes ma y also present with orbital asymmetry. These patients 
may present with diplopia or double vision and is further discussed in Variant 8. 
MRI 
In patients with proptosis or if a mass lesion is suspected within the globe, optic nerve, within the adjacent orbital 
soft tissues, or within the adjacent sk ull base, an MRI of the orbits without and with contrast is the optimal 
imaging modality used to localize and characterize the primary lesion [27-30]. 
MRI has improved soft tissue characterization, and diffusi on-weighted imaging may be particularly useful in 
situations where lymphoma is a consid eration [31]. Although contrast is prefer red, an MRI of the orbits without 
contrast may be appropriate if contrast  cannot be given. An MRI of the head without and with contrast may also 
be added to assess the extent of intracranial disease and to ev aluate for distant intracranial metastasis. A CT of the 
orbits is complementary in assessing orbital lesion charact eristics and the extent of disease in this clinical 
presentation [7]. 
Orbital inflammatory conditions in cluding thyroid eye disease, IgG4-related disease, and idiopathic orbital 
inflammatory syndrome may all present with unilateral or bilateral proptosis as a clinical manifestation. Like 
other orbital conditions, patients with  these conditions may be imaged with CT or MRI, and these modalities 
provide overlapping information related to disease extent. Currently, there is no consensus on the optimal imaging 
modality to assess patients presenting with idiopathic orbital inflammatory disease or IgG4-related orbital disease. 
If intracranial extension is suspected, an MRI of the head is the preferred next step in assessment. 
CT 
For assessment of orbital asymmetry, CT of the orbits with contrast is complementary to MRI [7]. In the setting of 
thyroid eye disease, CT provides useful information about  orbital, muscle, and fat volumes and osseous anatomy, 
particularly when orbital decompression is a surgical consideration [7,32-34]. Orbital inflammatory conditions 
including thyroid eye disease, IgG4-related disease, and idiopathic orbital inflammatory disease may all present 
with unilateral or bilateral proptosis as a clinical manifestation. Like  other orbital conditio ns, patients with these 
conditions may be imaged with CT or MRI, and th ese modalities provide overlappi ng information related to 
disease extent. Currently there is no consensus on the optimal imaging modality to assess patients presenting with 
idiopathic orbital inflammatory disease or IgG4-related orb ital disease. CT of the head with contrast may also be 
added to assess the extent of intracranial disease, partic ularly if MRI is not available or contraindicated. 
Precontrast and postcontrast imaging is typically not necessary in evaluating these patients as the precontrast 
images do not add significant diagnostic information in this scenario. 
CTA, MRA, Arteriography 
Vascular structures in and around the orbit may be imaged  with CTA, MRA, or catheter-based DSA. Similar to 
conventional CT and MRI, CTA and MRA may provid e complementary information. CTA is performed 
following the injection of intravascular iodinated contrast and is typically imaged in the arterial phase. MRA can 
be performed without contrast using the time-of-flight t echnique or with contrast with an added benefit of 
producing time-resolved information. 
Angiographic imaging is helpful in evaluating adults with  a suspected vascular anomaly to define high- or low-
flow vascular components, vascular supply, and drainage. This may be achieved with MRA, CTA, or DSA. MRA 
is the preferred method for evaluating these lesions becau se of the improved soft-tissue lesion characterization 
with this modality, superior anatomic localization, a nd the ability to perform time-resolved techniques. If the 
differential consideration is vascular mass versus malformation, flow characterization may be achieved with time-
resolved MRA [35,36]. 
If a CCF is suspected, noninvasive vascular imaging w ith MRA and CTA are often indicated for diagnosis 
confirmation and pretreatment planning. When MRA or  CTA is combined with anatomic MRI or CT, the 
secondary findings associated with CCF, including proptosis , vascular congestion within the orbit, extraocular 
muscle enlargement, and enlarged superior ophthalmic veins, can be easily identified. DSA is performed for more 
detailed assessment and intervention in patients with confirmed CCFs or in patients with a high index of suspicion 
for CCFs not confirmed on noninvasive imaging [37]. Althoug h DSA is considered the gold standard for imaging


--- page 12 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 12 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
evaluation and treatment and may be appropriate in the acu te assessment of acute visual loss related to suspected 
CCF, it is relatively invasive and carries its own procedural  risks and is typically not performed as the initial test. 
In addition, DSA lacks in the ability to  provide regional soft-tissue information seen with cross-sectional imaging 
that may assist in making the diagnosis. In a retrospec tive comparative analysis between CTA, MRA, and DSA, 
CTA was shown to be as useful as DSA for CCF detection in  a cohort of 53 patients [20]. MRA was slightly less 
successful but still determined as good by demonstrating CCFs in approximately 80% of cases [20]. 
Radiography 
Orbital or skull radiographs are insufficient to detect pathology in patients presenti ng with proptosis and have 
primarily been supplanted by CT. 
Variant 3: Suspected orbital cellulitis, uveitis, or scleritis. Initial imaging. 
Patients presenting with symptoms and signs of orbita l cellulitis (postseptal cellulitis) are often referred for 
imaging to assess for complications including intrao rbital abscess, intracranial involvement, and vascular 
compromise. The source of this infection is often from th e adjacent paranasal sinuses and may be viral, bacterial, 
or fungal [38]. 
Idiopathic orbital inflammatory syndrome (IOIS), IgG4-related orbital disease, and other 
inflammatory/granulomatous processes are potential clin ical and imaging mimics for orbital cellulitis. IOIS, 
previously known as orbital pseudotumor, may present with  signs and symptoms that mimic infection and is a 
diagnosis of exclusion. IgG4-related orbital disease is a relatively recently described inflammatory condition that 
may account for a significant percentage of patients that have been previously described as idiopathic [39-41]. 
Manifestations include eyelid or periocular swelli ng, lacrimal gland enlargement, extraocular muscle 
involvement, intraorbital mass, proptosis, and cranial nerve V involvement. 
CT 
CT of the orbits with contrast is often the initial imag ing modality in the emergent setting for suspected infection 
[2,7,42,43]. CT is superior to MRI for foreign body assessment, calcification detection, and osseous evaluation 
[43]. CT can be used in conjunction with the Chandler criteria to evaluate for the presence of bone erosion and 
subperiosteal abscess, which may require surgical inte rvention [38,44-46]. Imaging findings may show bone 
erosion on CT, opacification of a neighboring infected si nus, and/or intraorbital extension of inflammatory 
disease [47]. In patients who cannot receive contrast, a nonc ontrast orbit CT may still add useful information. 
Precontrast and postcontrast imaging is typically not necessary in evaluating these patients as the precontrast 
images do not add significant diagnostic information in this scenario. 
Currently there is no consensus on the optimal imaging modality to assess patients presenting with IOIS or IgG4-
related orbital disease. Orbital CT and MRI are often comple mentary in their roles. Signs of inflammation may be 
detected with CT or MRI, which show intraconal or extrac onal soft-tissue lesions that are diffuse or localized and 
commonly involve the orbital apex [43,48]. These findings may be initially seen on CT and subsequently further 
evaluated with MRI for improved soft-tissue characterization. 
MRI 
Orbital MRI is complementary to CT in evaluating intraorb ital spread of infection. An MRI of the orbits without 
and with contrast should be considered if a more deta iled assessment of intraorbital spread of infection is 
clinically warranted. In patients with suspected intracrania l extension or complications, an MRI of the brain with 
high-resolution images to include the cavernous sinuses [2,42,43,46,47] provides greater soft-tissue resolution 
than CT. A high index of suspicion and low threshold for MR I is needed if invasive fungal infection is of concern 
in an immunocompromised patient [42,46,47] because of  the morbidity of the disease. Although contrast is 
preferred, in patients who cannot receive contrast, a noncontrast orbital MRI may provide useful information. 
Orbital MRI is complementary to orbital CT in evaluati ng patients for IOIS, IgG4-related orbital disease, or other 
inflammatory/granulomatous disease. Currently there is little evidence to support one modality’s superiority to 
others in evaluating this patient popula tion [39-41]. A hallmark of IOIS in its chronic form is fibrosis, which 
results in decreased signal on T2-weighted MRI sequences [48] . A small subset of patients with isolated ocular 
manifestation of IOIS had posterior scleritis, with in flammatory enhancement of the sclera on postcontrast 
imaging.


--- page 13 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 13 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
CTA, MRA, Arteriography 
CTA or MRA may be added to routine CT or MRI scans if there is a suspicion fo r vascular invasion including 
cavernous sinus thrombosis, particularly in the setting of fungal disease. MRA may be performed without and/or 
with contrast. In the setting of cavernous sinus thro mbosis, a contrast-enhanced MRA may provide additional 
information not provided by a traditional noncontrast MR A examination. There is a limited role for DSA in 
evaluating patients with orbital infection. 
Radiography 
Orbital radiographs are insufficient to detect orbital ce llulitis. Radiographs have largely been supplanted by CT 
when imaging is necessary [49]. 
Variant 4: Suspected optic neuritis. Initial imaging. 
Optic neuritis is defined as an acute inflammatory condition of the optic nerve, and can be unilateral or bilateral. It 
often presents with painful visual loss [50]  but can also be painless. The primary differential consideration 
includes multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica, neuromyelitis optica spectrum, or other 
infectious/granulomatous conditions. A lthough optic neuritis can be idiopathic, it is often seen as the initial 
manifestation of multiple sclerosis. 
MRI 
In patients presenting with a clinical suspicion for optic  neuritis, both MRI of the orbits and MRI of the head 
without and with contrast are the primary imaging studies for initial assessment. This serves two primary 
purposes. The first purpose is to evaluate for abnormal e nhancement and signal changes within the optic nerve, 
and the second is to evaluate the brain for associated in tracranial demyelinating lesions, as the latter is a strong 
predictor of the subsequent development of multiple scl erosis [50-52]. MRI is incorporated into the revised 
McDonald criteria and MAGNIMS consensus guidelines [53] for diagnosing multiple sclerosis, which is 
characterized by establishing dissemination of lesions in space and time [51]. Neuromyelitis optica is a 
demyelinating condition that typically affects the optic ne rves and spinal cord and is best assessed with MRI [54]. 
Serum and cerebrospinal fluid laboratory tests may also  be useful in differentiating between these two entities 
[51,55]. 
CT 
Although an imaging test of the brain may be indicated pr ior to lumbar puncture in patients with optic disc edema 
to exclude a space occupying mass, CT imaging of the h ead is typically not indicated specifically for the 
evaluation of a patient with optic neuritis.  
CTA, MRA, Arteriography 
Angiography is not routinely used in the initial evaluation of optic neuritis. 
Radiography 
Orbital or skull radiographs are insuffi cient to detect pathology in patient s presenting with clinical concern for 
vision loss. 
Variant 5: Visual loss. Etiology identified on ophthalmologic examination or laboratory tests. 
Excluding stroke and ischemic attack, transient visual loss can be due to a range of processes, including cataracts, 
glaucoma, retinal or choroidal detachments, vitreous or  anterior segment hemorrha ge, drusen, hypercoagulability 
syndromes, primary vasospasm, blepharospasm, and me tabolic derangements such as those seen with glucose 
imbalance. These are most often diagnosed with dedi cated ophthalmologic evaluation and laboratory results. A 
complete ophthalmologic evaluation is needed to diagno se these conditions and cross-sectional imaging is usually 
not necessary in cases where glaucoma, cataract, or macular degeneration are identified. 
Please refer to the ACR Appropriateness Criteria ® “Headache” [4] regarding evaluation in the setting of disc 
edema. 
MRI 
MRI is not routinely used in the ev aluation of non-neoplastic ocular pro cesses. In patients with glaucoma, a 
primary cause of irreversible blindness,  there has been interest in applyi ng advanced MRI techniques to earlier 
detection of this disease process; however, additional researc h is needed to validate th e utility of these advanced 
techniques [56].


--- page 14 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 14 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
CT 
CT is not routinely used in the evaluation of nontraumatic, noninfectious, or non-neoplastic ocular processes.  
CTA, MRA, Arteriography 
CTA, MRA, and DSA are not first-line tests in this scenario. 
Radiography 
Orbital or skull radiographs are insufficient to detect pathology in patients presenting with vision loss. 
Variant 6: Visual loss. Intraocular mass, optic nerve, or pre-chiasm symptoms. Initial imaging. 
Monocular visual loss may be due to an intraocular mass, such as melanoma [57], or may involve the intraorbital, 
intracanalicular, or pre-chiasm segments of the optic nerve. This includes lesions intrinsic to the nerve, such as an 
optic nerve glioma, or extrinsic to th e nerve resulting in mass e ffect, such as an optic nerve sheath meningioma. 
The differential diagnosis varies based on the age of the patient. 
MRI 
MRI provides excellent soft-tissue resolution of structures within the orbit, including the globe, muscles, tendons, 
nerves, and vascular structures. MRI of the orbits without and with contrast is the preferred modality in evaluating 
soft-tissue pathology within and around the orbit, particularly in mass characterization, optic nerve pathology, and 
assessing disease within the globe and orbit [1,7,58]. If contr ast cannot be given, a noncontrast orbit MR may still 
provide useful information. If there is a significant in tracranial component, additional MRI of the brain without 
and with contrast may be indicated to evaluate for intracranial spread of disease. 
CT 
CT is superior to MRI for foreign body assessment, calcif ication detection, and osseous evaluation [43]. Orbital 
CT is complementary to MRI in evaluating patients with  ocular, orbital, and skull base neoplasms. In patients 
presenting with clinical suspicion for an  intraorbital mass lesion, orbital CT with contrast may be complementary 
to MRI in providing additional information about adjacent bone involvement, including bone erosion, sclerosis, or 
periosteal reaction that may not be readily seen with MRI [2,7].  
If contrast cannot be given, a noncontrast orbit CT may still add useful information. CT imaging of the head with 
contrast may also be appropriate if more extensive sku ll or skull-base involvement is suspected. Precontrast and 
postcontrast orbital imaging is typically not necessary in evaluating these patients as the precontrast images do not 
add significant diagnostic information in this scenario. 
CTA, MRA, Arteriography 
CTA or MRA are complementary and may be added to rou tine CT or MRI scans if there is a suspicion for an 
intraorbital vascular lesion [35,36]. MRA without and with  contrast may be preferred over CTA if time-resolved 
information is needed in lesion characterization. DSA is not a first-line test in this scenario. 
Radiography 
Orbital or skull radiographs are insufficient to detect pathology in patients presenting with monocular vision loss. 
Variant 7: Nonischemic visual loss. Chiasm or post-chiasm symptoms. Initial imaging. 
If a patient presents with a junctional scotoma or bitempor al hemianopia, a parasellar lesion is suspected, with 
mass effect on the optic chiasm affecting the crossing te mporal fibers. Lesions may arise from the pituitary gland, 
hypothalamus, or adjacent dura, and accompanying endocrine abnormalities may also be present. 
In patients presenting with a homonymous defect, a post- chiasm lesion involving the optic tracts, lateral 
geniculate nucleus, optic radia tions, or primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe is suspected. It is important to 
remember that patients presenting with acute onset of vi sual loss with post-chiasm symptoms may be presenting 
with deficits related to an anterior or posterior circula tion arterial stroke, intracranial hemorrhage, or venous sinus 
thrombosis. Please refer to the ACR Appropriateness Criteria ® “Cerebrovascular Disease” [3] for imaging in this 
context. 
Slowly progressive binocular visual defect findings s uggest an intracranial or skull-base abnormality, including 
primary neoplasms and metastatic lesions. Mass effect  from other intracranial pathology, including abscess, 
multiple sclerosis, or vascular lesions such as arteri ovenous malformations and cerebral aneurysms, may also 
present with a similar visual field deficit.


--- page 15 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 15 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
MRI 
Patients with a junctional scotoma or bitemporal visu al defect are best assessed with an MRI of the  brain without 
and with contrast, which includes the thin-slice profile n eeded to evaluate the pituita ry gland and any suprasellar 
mass effect [43]. Detailed assessment of the optic chia sm and its relationship to an underlying mass are easily 
seen with an MRI of the brain without and with contrast. If contrast cannot be given, an MRI of the brain without 
contrast may be appropriate. 
Patients presenting with a homonymous hemianopia or quadr antanopia defect are best assessed with an MRI of 
the brain without and with contrast [2,7,59-61]. Because the defect is most likely in a post-chiasm location, 
additional smaller field-of-view images of the orbit are typically not necessary. 
CT 
For lesion characterization in and around the sella, CT of the head may be complementary to MRI and add 
additional information on the characteristics of the lesion,  including the presence of calcification such as in a 
craniopharyngioma [7,59,62]. In patients with post-chiasm symptoms, an MRI of the brain is typically preferred 
over CT, particularly in a subacute, slowly progressive presentation. In the acute setting, a noncontrast head CT is 
reasonable for initial imaging. If a patient is unable or unw illing to have MRI, then a CT of the head without and 
with contrast may be an appropriate alternative. 
CTA, MRA, Arteriography 
It is important to remember that patients presenting with  acute onset of visual loss with post-chiasm symptoms 
may be presenting with defic its related to an anterior or posterior circulation arterial stroke, intracranial 
hemorrhage, or venous sinus thrombosis. Pl ease refer to the ACR Appropriateness Criteria ® “Cerebrovascular 
Disease” [3] for imaging in this context. If a cerebral aneurysm or vascular malformation is identified on 
conventional diagnostic imaging, MRA, CTA, and/or  DSA may provide additional information regarding 
aneurysm characterization as well as arterial supply, arte riovenous shunting, and venous  drainage related to an 
arteriovenous malformation. If a vascular mass/malformati on is a differential consideration, vascular flow 
characterization may be achieved with time-resolved  MRA or DSA [35,36]. Please refer to the ACR 
Appropriateness Criteria® “Cerebrovascular Disease” [3] for imaging guidelines in this context. 
If a mass such as a meningioma is identified in close proximity to the sagittal sinus, additional MRV or CTV 
imaging may be indicated to assess the integrity of the dural venous sinus. Postcontrast MRV and CTV are 
complementary in their utility in evaluating the dural venous sinuses. Noncontrast MRV may be performed in the 
event that contrast cannot be administered. 
Radiography 
Orbital or skull radiographs are insufficient to detect pathology in patients presenting with vision loss. 
Variant 8: Ophthalmoplegia or diplopia. Initial imaging. 
Ophthalmoplegia is paralysis of one or more extraocular muscles. This may be caused by impaired motility of the 
muscles, disrupted nerve conduction along the neuromuscular junction, or from denervation of the affected cranial 
nerve or brainstem nucleus. Ophthalm oplegia may also be related to gr anulomatous, inflammatory, neoplastic, 
and traumatic abnormalities that primarily affect the extrao cular muscles. Traumatic orbital injury is covered in 
Variant 1 of this document. 
A patient presenting with diplopia or disconjugate gaze may have an abnormality that involves the globe; the 
extraocular muscles; neuromuscular junction; cranial nerves III, IV and/or VI; or their respective fascicles, nuclei 
or connecting tracts within the brain stem. A broa d differential including developmental, neoplastic, 
granulomatous, infectious, inflammatory , demyelinating, vascular, and traumatic causes can be considered in 
patients with diplopia. This broad differential can be narrowed when one considers the age of the patient, the 
onset of symptoms, and the presence of associated findings . The pattern of involvement can usually lead to the 
anatomical localization of the offending lesion. It is im portant to remember that patients presenting with acute 
onset of diplopia may be presenting with  deficits related to a posterior circ ulation stroke. Please refer to the ACR 
Appropriateness Criteria
® “Cerebrovascular Disease” [3] for imaging in this context.  In the setting of intracranial 
traumatic injury, please refer to the ACR Appropriateness Criteria® “Head Trauma” [16]. 
Patients with isolated cranial nerve III palsies can be divided into pupil-involving or pupil-sparing, suggesting 
vascular compression versus vasculopathic etiologies, resp ectively. Isolated cranial nerve IV palsies are most 
often caused by trauma [63] and rarely nerve sheath tumo rs. Isolated cranial nerve VI palsies may be caused by


--- page 16 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 16 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
lesions within the prepontine cistern, skull base, cavernous  sinus, or sella. Isolated cranial nerve VI palsies may 
also be seen in the setting of increased intracranial pressure without direct compression of the nerve [64]. Multiple 
ipsilateral cranial nerve palsies that af fect cranial nerves III, IV, and VI sugg est a lesion at the cavernous sinus or 
orbital apex [65] and can occur with pathology in the b asilar subarachnoid space, as seen in infectious meningitis 
(TB, fungal, Lyme disease) or noninfectious causes (sar coid, neoplasm, perineural, or leptomeningeal tumor 
spread). In patients with internuclear ophthalmoplegia, a brain-stem lesion affecting the medial longitudinal 
fasciculus should be suspected. A demyelinating plaque  in the setting of multiple sclerosis is a primary 
consideration in younger patients an d stroke in older patients presenting with an acute internuclear 
ophthalmoplegia [66]. Other likely considerations include tumor, hemorrhage, and infection [66]. 
MRI 
MRI of the orbits without and with cont rast is preferred [67] if ophthalmopleg ia is felt to be related to a primary 
disease process within the orbit affecti ng the extraocular muscles or if there is history of trauma, enophthalmos, 
proptosis, orbital inflammation, or chemosis. An MRI of the orbits with the globes imaged during different gaze 
positions may aid in identifying a potential muscular slip or pulley abnormality [68]. 
If the disease process is felt to involve the brain stem, brain, or cisternal segments of the cranial nerves, an MRI of 
the head without and with contrast including additional  small field-of-view high-resolution T2-weighted images 
of the cranial nerves is the preferred imaging modality to  evaluate for an underlying abnormality of the brain, 
brain stem, and cranial nerves [1,2,43]. This dedicated MRI of the cranial nerves primarily focuses on the nuclear, 
cisternal, and skull-base cranial nerve segments and can be centered upon cranial nerves III–IV, including the 
cavernous sinuses. For example, patients with isolated pup il-sparing third-nerve palsies, which primarily involve 
the oculomotor fibers, vasculopathic considerations ar e the primary differential consideration and are best 
evaluated with an MRI examination of the head with special attention to the cranial nerves. 
CT 
In patients with ophthalmoplegia or diplopia with associat ed secondary signs of proptosis, orbital inflammation, 
or trauma, a dedicated orbit CT is typically indicated to evaluate the extraocular muscles. Contrast is often 
indicated in the setting of orbital inflammation assessment  but not indicated in the acute traumatic setting, as 
specified in Variant 1. CT is superior to MRI for fo reign body assessment, calcification detection, and osseous 
evaluation [43]. Although CT imaging of the orbits is prefer red, CT imaging of the head may be appropriate if an 
intracranial abnormality is suspected. Precontrast and postcont rast imaging of the orbits is typically not necessary 
in evaluating these patients as the precontrast images do not add significant diagnostic information in this 
scenario. 
CTA, MRA, Arteriography 
Isolated, pupil-involving third-nerve palsy suggests exte rnal compression of the parasympathetic nerves that 
surround the oculomotor fibers in the third-nerve fascicl es. As the primary consideration is vascular compression 
from an adjacent aneurysm, vascular imaging either with CTA or MRA is indicated [69]. This assessment is not 
performed in isolation but rather as a complement to anatomic cross-sectional imaging. Please refer to the ACR 
Appropriateness Criteria® “Cerebrovascular Disease” [3] for imaging in this context.  There is a limited role for 
DSA in the initial evaluation of patients with diplopia. Ho wever, if an aneurysm is detected in cross-sectional 
evaluation, DSA may be indicated for further assessment and treatment. 
Radiography 
Orbital or skull radiographs are insufficient to detect pathology in patients presenti ng with proptosis and have 
primarily been supplanted by CT. 
Summary of Recommendations 
 Orbital trauma is best assessed with a noncontrast or bit CT and/or noncontrast CT of the head, which are 
often complementary. 
 Orbital asymmetry, exophthalmos, or enophthalmos can be evaluated with contrast-enhanced orbit CT or 
contrast-enhanced orbit MRI, which are often complementary. 
 Contrast-enhanced CT or contrast-enhanced MRI are both appropriate in evalua ting orbital cellulitis, uveitis, 
or scleritis, with CT often performed first during the initial assessment. 
 Optic neuritis is best assessed with a contrast-enhanced MRI of the orbits and contrast-enhanced MRI of the 
head, which are often performed in conjunction with one another.


--- page 17 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 17 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
 There is typically no role for imaging in patients w ith visual loss due to abnor malities such as cataracts, 
macular degeneration, or glaucoma. 
 Evaluation of visual loss localized to the orbit or dis ease process involving the pre-chiasmatic optic nerve is 
best assessed with targeted contrast-enhanced MRI of th e orbits or contrast-enhanced CT of the orbits, which 
are complementary. 
 Evaluation of visual loss involving the chiasm or post- chiasm is best assessed with a contrast-enhanced MRI 
of the brain. Although contrast is preferred, an MRI of the brain without contrast may also be appropriate if 
contrast cannot be given. 
 Diplopia or opthalmoplegia can be evaluated with c ontrast-enhanced MRI of the head, contrast-enhanced 
MRI of the orbits, contrast-enhanced CT of the or bits, or noncontrast MRI of the orbits, which are 
complementary in their roles. Whether to focus th e assessment on the orbits and/or head will depend on 
suspected anatomic localization an d differential diagnosis related to  the patient’s specific clinical 
presentation. 
Summary of Evidence 
Of the 70 references cited in the ACR Appropriateness Criteria® Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss  document, 5 are 
categorized as therapeutic references. Additionally, 64  references are categorized as diagnostic references 
including 1 well-designed study, 3 good-quality studies, a nd 16 quality studies that may have design limitations. 
There are 49 references that may not be useful as primary evidence. There is 1 reference that is a meta-analysis 
study. 
The 70 references cited in the ACR Appropriateness Criteria ® Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss  document  were 
published from 1965 to 2017. 
Although there are references that report on studies with design limitations, 4 well-designed or good-quality 
studies provide good evidence. 
Appropriateness Category Names and Definitions  
Appropriateness Category Name Appropriateness 
Rating Appropriateness Category Definition 
Usually Appropriate 7, 8, or 9 
The imaging procedure or treatment is indicated in 
the specified clinical scenarios at a favorable risk-
benefit ratio for patients. 
May Be Appropriate 4, 5, or 6 
The imaging procedure or treatment may be 
indicated in the specified clinical scenarios as an 
alternative to imaging procedures or treatments with 
a more favorable risk-benefit ratio, or the risk-benefit 
ratio for patients is equivocal. 
May Be Appropriate 
(Disagreement) 5 
The individual ratings are too dispersed from the 
panel median. The different label provides 
transparency regarding the panel’s recommendation. 
“May be appropriate” is the rating category and a 
rating of 5 is assigned. 
Usually Not Appropriate 1, 2, or 3 
The imaging procedure or treatment is unlikely to be 
indicated in the specified clinical scenarios, or the 
risk-benefit ratio for patients is likely to be 
unfavorable. 
Relative Radiation Level Information 
Potential adverse health eff ects associated with radiation exposure are an important factor to consider when 
selecting the appropriate imaging procedure. Because there is  a wide range of radiation exposures associated with 
different diagnostic procedures, a relative radiation le vel (RRL) indication has been included for each imaging 
examination. The RRLs are based on effective dose, which is a radiation dose quantity that is used to estimate 
population total radiation risk associated with an imagi ng procedure. Patients in the pediatric age group are at


--- page 18 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 18 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
inherently higher risk from exposure, both because of orga n sensitivity and longer life expectancy (relevant to the 
long latency that appears to accompany radiation exposure). For these reasons, the RRL dose estimate ranges for 
pediatric examinations are lower as compared to tho se specified for adults (see Table below). Additional 
information regarding radiation dose assessment fo r imaging examinations can be found in the ACR 
Appropriateness Criteria
® Radiation Dose Assessment Introduction document [70]. 
Relative Radiation Level Designations 
Relative Radiation Level* Adult Effective Dose Estimate 
Range 
Pediatric Effective Dose Estimate 
Range 
O 0 mSv 0 mSv 
☢ <0.1 mSv <0.03 mSv 
☢☢ 0.1-1 mSv 0.03-0.3 mSv 
☢☢☢ 1-10 mSv 0.3-3 mSv 
☢☢☢☢ 10-30 mSv 3-10 mSv 
☢☢☢☢☢ 30-100 mSv 10-30 mSv 
*RRL assignments for some of the examinations cannot be made, because the actual patient doses in these procedures vary 
as a function of a number of factors (eg, region of the body exposed to ionizing radiation, the imaging guidance that is 
used). The RRLs for these examinations are designated as “Varies.” 
Supporting Documents 
For additional information on the Appropriateness Crite ria methodology and other supporting documents go to 
www.acr.org/ac. 
References
1. Graves JS, Galetta SL. Acute visual loss and ot her neuro-ophthalmologic emergencies: management. Neurol 
Clin. 2012;30(1):75-99, viii. 
2. Lee AG, Brazis PW, Garrity JA, White M. Im aging for neuro-ophthalmic and orbital disease. Am J 
Ophthalmol. 2004;138(5):852-862. 
3. Salmela MB, Mortazavi S, Jagadeesan BD, et al. A CR Appropriateness Criteria(R) Cerebrovascular Disease. 
J Am Coll Radiol. 2017;14(5S):S34-S61. 
4. American College of Radiology. ACR Appropriateness Criteria ®: Headache. Available at: 
https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/69482/Narrative/. Accessed December 4, 2017. 
5. Goh PS, Gi MT, Charlton A, Tan C, Gangadhara S undar JK, Amrith S. Review of orbital imaging. Eur J 
Radiol. 2008;66(3):387-395. 
6. Conneely MF, Hacein-Bey L, Jay WM. Ma gnetic resonance imaging of the orbit. Semin Ophthalmol. 
2008;23(3):179-189. 
7. Wu AY, Jebodhsingh K, Le T, et al. Indications  for orbital imaging by the oculoplastic surgeon. Ophthal 
Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011;27(4):260-262. 
8. Bord SP, Linden J. Trauma to the globe and orbit. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2008;26(1):97-123, vi-vii. 
9. Stotland MA, Do NK. Pediatric orbital fractures. J Craniofac Surg. 2011;22(4):1230-1235. 
10. Caranci F, Cicala D, Cappabianca S, Briganti F, Brun ese L, Fonio P. Orbital fractures: role of imaging. Semin 
Ultrasound CT MR. 2012;33(5):385-391. 
11. Hink EM, Wei LA, Durairaj VD. Clinical features and treatment of pediatric orbit fractures. Ophthal Plast 
Reconstr Surg. 2014;30(2):124-131. 
12. Ong HS, Qatarneh D, Ford RL, Lingam RK, Lee V. Classification of orbital fractures using the AO/ASIF 
system in a population surveillance cohort of traumatic optic neuropathy. Orbit. 2014;33(4):256-262. 
13. Schouman T, Courvoisier DS, Van Issum C, Terzic A,  Scolozzi P. Can systematic computed tomographic 
scan assessment predict treatment decision in pure orbital floor blowout fractures? J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2012;70(7):1627-1632. 
14. Lakits A, Prokesch R, Scholda C, Nowotny R, Kaid er A, Bankier A. Helical and conventional CT in the 
imaging of metallic foreign bodies in the orbit. Acta Ophthalmol Scand. 2000;78(1):79-83.


--- page 19 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 19 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
15. Lethaus B, Weigl S, Kloss-Brandstatter A, et al. L ooking for landmarks in medial orbital trauma surgery. Int J 
Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2013;42(2):209-213. 
16. Shetty VS, Reis MN, Aulino JM, et al. ACR Appropriateness Criteria Head Trauma. J Am Coll Radiol. 
2016;13(6):668-679. 
17. Bodanapally UK, Shanmuganathan K, Shin RK, et al. Hyperintense Optic Nerve due to Diffusion Restriction: 
Diffusion-Weighted Imaging in Traumatic Optic Neuropathy. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2015;36(8):1536-
1541. 
18. Bolanos Gil de Montes F, Perez Resinas FM, Rodrigu ez Garcia M, Gonzalez Ortiz M. Exophthalmometry in 
Mexican adults. Rev Invest Clin. 1999;51(6):341-343. 
19. de Juan E, Jr., Hurley DP, Sapira JD. R acial differences in normal values of proptosis. Arch Intern Med. 
1980;140(9):1230-1231. 
20. Chen CC, Chang PC, Shy CG, Chen WS, Hung HC. CT  angiography and MR angiography in the evaluation 
of carotid cavernous sinus fistula prior to embolization: a comparison of techniques. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 
2005;26(9):2349-2356. 
21. Bilaniuk LT, Farber M. Imaging of devel opmental anomalies of the eye and the orbit. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol. 1992;13(2):793-803. 
22. Burns NS, Iyer RS, Robinson AJ, Chapman T. Diagnostic  imaging of fetal and pediatric orbital abnormalities. 
AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2013;201(6):W797-808. 
23. Holmes S. Reoperative orbital trauma: management of  posttraumatic enophthalmos and aberrant eye position. 
Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am. 2011;23(1):17-29, v. 
24. Martinez-Capoccioni G, Varela-Martinez E, Martin-Mar tin C. Silent sinus syndrome an acquired condition 
and the essential role of otorhinolaryngologist consultation: a retrospective study. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 
2016;273(10):3183-3188. 
25. Balmer A, Munier F. Differential diagnosis of leukocoria and strabismus, first presenting signs of 
retinoblastoma. Clin Ophthalmol. 2007;1(4):431-439. 
26. Howard GM, Ellsworth RM. Differential diagnosis of re tinoblastoma. A statistical survey of 500 children. I. 
Relative frequency of the lesions which simulate retinoblastoma. Am J Ophthalmol. 1965;60(4):610-618. 
27. Jakobiec FA, Tso MO, Zimmerman LE, Danis P.  Retinoblastoma and intracranial malignancy. Cancer. 
1977;39(5):2048-2058. 
28. Kaufman LM, Mafee MF, Song CD. Retinoblastoma and simulating lesions. Role of CT, MR imaging and 
use of Gd-DTPA contrast enhancement. Radiol Clin North Am. 1998;36(6):1101-1117. 
29. Muller-Forell W, Pitz S. Orbital pathology. Eur J Radiol. 2004;49(2):105-142. 
30. Rauschecker AM, Patel CV, Yeom KW, et al. High-r esolution MR imaging of the orbit in patients with 
retinoblastoma. Radiographics. 2012;32(5):1307-1326. 
31. Hiwatashi A, Yoshiura T, Togao O, et al. Diffusi vity of intraorbital lymphoma vs. IgG4-related DISEASE: 
3D turbo field echo with diffusion-sensitised  driven-equilibrium preparation technique. Eur Radiol. 
2014;24(3):581-586. 
32. Le Moli R, Pluchino A, Muscia V, et al. Graves' or bitopathy: extraocular muscle/total orbit area ratio is 
positively related to the Clinical Activity Score. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2012;22(3):301-308. 
33. Weis E, Heran MK, Jhamb A, et al. Quantitative co mputed tomographic predictors of compressive optic 
neuropathy in patients with thyroid orbitopathy: a volumetric analysis. Ophthalmology. 2012;119(10):2174-
2178. 
34. Wu W, Selva D, Bian Y, et al. Endoscopic medial orbital fat decompression for proptosis in type 1 graves 
orbitopathy. Am J Ophthalmol. 2015;159(2):277-284. 
35. Kahana A, Lucarelli MJ, Grayev AM, Van Buren JJ, Burkat CN, Gentry LR. Noninvasive dynamic magnetic 
resonance angiography with Time-Resolved Imaging of  Contrast KineticS (TRICKS) in the evaluation of 
orbital vascular lesions. Arch Ophthalmol. 2007;125(12):1635-1642. 
36. Poon CS, Sze G, Johnson MH. Orbital lesions: differe ntiating vascular and nonvascular etiologic factors. AJR 
Am J Roentgenol. 2008;190(4):956-965. 
37. Tan AC, Farooqui S, Li X, et al. Ocular manifesta tions and the clinical course of carotid cavernous sinus 
fistulas in Asian patients. Orbit. 2014;33(1):45-51. 
38. Chandler JR, Langenbrunner DJ, Stevens ER. The pat hogenesis of orbital complications in acute sinusitis. 
Laryngoscope. 1970;80(9):1414-1428. 
39. Andrew N, Kearney D, Selva D. IgG4-rela ted orbital disease: a meta-analysis and review. Acta Ophthalmol. 
2013;91(8):694-700.


--- page 20 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 20 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
40. Deschamps R, Deschamps L, Depaz R, et al. High prevalence of IgG4-related lymphoplasmacytic infiltrative 
disorder in 25 patients with orbital infl ammation: a retrospective case series. Br J Ophthalmol. 
2013;97(8):999-1004. 
41. Plaza JA, Garrity JA, Dogan A, Ananthamurthy A, W itzig TE, Salomao DR. Orbital inflammation with IgG4-
positive plasma cells: manifestation of IgG4 systemic disease. Arch Ophthalmol. 2011;129(4):421-428. 
42. De Wyngaert R, Casteels I, Demaerel P. Orbital an d anterior visual pathway infection and inflammation. 
Neuroradiology. 2009;51(6):385-396. 
43. Lee AG, Johnson MC, Policeni BA, Smoker WR. Im aging for neuro-ophthalmic and orbital disease - a 
review. Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2009;37(1):30-53. 
44. Ketenci I, Unlu Y, Vural A, Dogan H, Sahin MI, Tuncer E. Approaches to subperiosteal orbital abscesses. 
Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2013;270(4):1317-1327. 
45. Le TD, Liu ES, Adatia FA, Buncic JR, Blaser S. The effect of adding orbital computed tomography findings 
to the Chandler criteria for classifying pediatric orbi tal cellulitis in predicting which patients will require 
surgical intervention. J AAPOS. 2014;18(3):271-277. 
46. Piromchai P, Thanaviratananich S. Invasive fungal rh inosinusitis versus bacterial rhinosinusitis with orbital 
complications: a case-control study. ScientificWorldJournal. 2013;2013:453297. 
47. Chandrasekharan R, Thomas M, Rupa V. Comparativ e study of orbital involvement in invasive and non-
invasive fungal sinusitis. J Laryngol Otol. 2012;126(2):152-158. 
48. Ding ZX, Lip G, Chong V. Idiopathic orbital pseudotumour. Clin Radiol. 2011;66(9):886-892. 
49. Aalokken TM, Hagtvedt T, Dalen I, Kolbenstvedt A.  Conventional sinus radiography compared with CT in 
the diagnosis of acute sinusitis. Dentomaxillofac Radiol. 2003;32(1):60-62. 
50. Optic Neuritis Study Group. Multiple sclerosis risk after optic neuritis: final optic neuritis treatment trial 
follow-up. Arch Neurol. 2008;65(6):727-732. 
51. Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B, et al. Diagnostic  criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010 revisions to the 
McDonald criteria. Ann Neurol. 2011;69(2):292-302. 
52. Sisto D, Trojano M, Vetrugno M, Trabucco T, Iliceto G, Sborgia C. Subclinical visual involvement in 
multiple sclerosis: a study by MRI, VEPs, frequency-doubling perimetry, st andard perimetry, and contrast 
sensitivity. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2005;46(4):1264-1268. 
53. Filippi M, Rocca MA, Ciccarelli O, et al. MRI criter ia for the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: MAGNIMS 
consensus guidelines. Lancet Neurol. 2016;15(3):292-303. 
54. Pittock SJ, Lennon VA, Krecke K, Wingerchuk DM, Lu cchinetti CF, Weinshenker BG. Brain abnormalities 
in neuromyelitis optica. Arch Neurol. 2006;63(3):390-396. 
55. Takahashi T, Fujihara K, Nakashima I, et al. Anti- aquaporin-4 antibody is involved in the pathogenesis of 
NMO: a study on antibody titre. Brain. 2007;130(Pt 5):1235-1243. 
56. Fiedorowicz M, Dyda W, Rejdak R, Grieb P. Magnetic resonance in studies of glaucoma. Med Sci Monit. 
2011;17(10):RA227-232. 
57. Mahendraraj K, Lau CS, Lee I, Chamberlain RS. Tre nds in incidence, survival, and management of uveal 
melanoma: a population-based study of 7,516 patients fro m the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results 
database (1973-2012). Clin Ophthalmol. 2016;10:2113-2119. 
58. Damento GM, Koeller KK, Salomao DR, Pulido JS. T2  Fluid-Attenuated Inversi on Recovery Imaging of 
Uveal Melanomas and Other Ocular Pathology. Ocul Oncol Pathol. 2016;2(4):251-261. 
59. Buchfelder M, Schlaffer S. Imaging of pituitary pathology. Handb Clin Neurol. 2014;124:151-166. 
60. Gumus K, Koc G, Doganay S, et al. Susceptibility-B ased Differentiation of Intracranial Calcification and 
Hemorrhage in Pediatric Patients. J Child Neurol. 2015;30(8):1029-1036. 
61. Kwancharoen R, Blitz AM, Tavares F, Caturegli P, Gallia GL, Salvatori R. Clinical features of sellar and 
suprasellar meningiomas. Pituitary. 2014;17(4):342-348. 
62. Peng J, Qi S, Pan J, Zhang X, Huang G, Li D. Preliminary Study on Composition and Microstructure of 
Calcification in Craniopharyngiomas. J Craniofac Surg. 2016;27(4):e409-413. 
63. Boffano P, Roccia F, Gallesio C, Karagozoglu KH, Fo rouzanfar T. Diplopia and orbital wall fractures. J 
Craniofac Surg. 2014;25(2):e183-185. 
64. Friedman DI, Liu GT, Digre KB. Revised diagnostic cr iteria for the pseudotumor cerebri syndrome in adults 
and children. Neurology. 2013;81(13):1159-1165. 
65. Aryasit O, Preechawai P, Aui-Aree N. Clinical presentation, aetiology and pr ognosis of orbital apex 
syndrome. Orbit. 2013;32(2):91-94.


--- page 21 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 21 Orbits, Vision and Visual Loss 
66. Keane JR. Internuclear ophthalmopleg ia: unusual causes in 114 of 410 patients. Arch Neurol. 2005;62(5):714-
717. 
67. Suh SY, Clark RA, Le A, Demer JL. Extraocular Muscle Compartments in Superior Oblique Palsy. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2016;57(13):5535-5540. 
68. Hao R, Suh SY, Le A, Demer JL. Rectus Extraocu lar Muscle Size and Pulley Location in Concomitant and 
Pattern Exotropia. Ophthalmology. 2016;123(9):2004-2012. 
69. Lee AG, Hayman LA, Brazis PW. The evaluation of is olated third nerve palsy revisited: an update on the 
evolving role of magnetic resonance, com puted tomography, and catheter angiography. Surv Ophthalmol. 
2002;47(2):137-157. 
70. American College of Radiol ogy. ACR Appropriateness Criteria ® Radiation Dose Assessment Introduction. 
Available at: http://www.acr.org/~/media/ACR/Document s/AppCriteria/RadiationDoseAssessmentIntro.pdf. 
Accessed December 4, 2017. 
 
The ACR Committee on Appropriateness Criteria and its expert panels have  developed criteria for dete rmining appropriate imaging  examinations for 
diagnosis and treatment of specified medi cal condition(s). These criteria are intende d to guide radiologist s, radiation oncologists and referring physicians 
in making decisions regarding radiologic imaging and treatment. Generally, the complexity and severity of a patient’s clinical condition should dictate the 
selection of appropriate imaging procedures or treatments. Only  those examinations generally us ed for evaluation of the patient ’s condition are ranked. 
Other imaging studies necessary to evaluate other co-existent di seases or other medical consequences of this condition are not considered in this 
document. The availability of equipment or personnel may influence the selection of a ppropriate imaging procedures or treatment s. Imaging techniques 
classified as investigational by the FDA have not been consider ed in developing these criteria; however, study of new equipment  and applications should 
be encouraged. The ultimate decision regarding the appropriateness of any specific radiologic examination or treatment must be made by the referring 
physician and radiologist in light of all the circumstances presented in an individual examination.
