--- page 1 ---
Revised 2019 
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 1 Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
American College of Radiology 
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 
Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
Variant 1: Assessment of gravid cervix. Nulliparous or no history of prior preterm birth. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category Relative Radiation Level 
US cervix transabdominal Usually Appropriate O 
US cervix transperineal May Be Appropriate O 
US cervix transvaginal May Be Appropriate O 
Variant 2: Assessment of gravid cervix. History of prior preterm birth. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category Relative Radiation Level 
US cervix transvaginal Usually Appropriate O 
US cervix transperineal May Be Appropriate O 
US cervix transabdominal Usually Not Appropriate O 
Variant 3: Assessment of gravid cervix. Suspected preterm labor. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category Relative Radiation Level 
US cervix transvaginal Usually Appropriate O 
US cervix transperineal May Be Appropriate O 
US cervix transabdominal May Be Appropriate O 
Variant 4: Assessment of gravid cervix. Induction of labor or active term labor. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category Relative Radiation Level 
US cervix transperineal May Be Appropriate (Disagreement) O 
US cervix transabdominal Usually Not Appropriate O 
US cervix transvaginal Usually Not Appropriate O


--- page 2 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 2 Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
ASSESSMENT OF GRAVID CERVIX 
Expert Panel on G yn and OB  Imaging: Edward R. Oliver, MD, PhD a; Katherine E. Maturen, MD, MS b;  
Vickie A. Feldstein, MD c; Liina Poder, MD d; Thomas D. Shipp, MD, RDMS e; Lynn Simpson, MD f;  
Loretta M. Strachowski, MD g; Betsy L. Sussman, MD h; Therese M. Weber, MD i; Tom Winter, MD, MA j;  
Phyllis Glanc, MD.k 
Summary of Literature Review 
Introduction/Background 
Preterm birth (PTB) , defined as delivery before 37 weeks gestational age, remains the leading cause of perinatal 
mortality and morbidity worldwide [1]. In the United States alone, the rate of PTB for the year 2016 was 9.9%, with 
more than two-thirds occurring during the late preterm period (34–36 weeks) and nearly one-third occurring during 
the early preterm period (<34 weeks) [2]. Although advances in neonatal care have resulted in improved survival , 
the associated economic impact of PTB in the United States is high and has been estimated to be $26.2 billion per 
year [3]. 
The most significant risk factor for PTB is a history of prior spontaneous PTB. A short transvaginal cervical length 
(CL), commonly accepted as a length  of ≤25 mm before 24 weeks gestational age, is a clinical finding that is also 
associated with increased risk for preterm delivery [4].  Several options now exist for the management of short CL  
in patients without a history of prior spontaneous PTB  (eg, vaginal progesterone, cerclage, and pessary ) [5-8] and 
in patients with a history of prior spontaneous PTB ( eg, intramuscular progesterone with or without cerclage)  [9]. 
As such, development of effective screening strategies for identifying those at risk for PTB has become an important 
aim, and CL assessment has become an area of particular focus. 
In addition to CL screening for those at risk for PTB, other clinical scenarios may arise in which imaging assessment 
of the gravid cervix may be of interest.  These include suspected preterm labor, induction of labor, and active term 
labor. Additional clinical scenarios, which may require a focused assessment of the gravid cervix, include suspected 
abnormal placentation includi ng placenta previa, vasa previa,  and lower uterine segment and/or cervical fibroids 
that may impede progression of labor and potential umbilical cord prolapse. 
The focus of this document is the assessment of the gravid cervix in singleton gestations. Evaluation of the gravid 
cervix is also pertinent to cases of multiple gestations but is covered in the ACR Appropriateness Criteria® topic on 
“Multiple Gestations” [10]. Similarly, evaluation of the gravid cervix in the setting of  suspected abnormal 
placentation, (eg, placenta previa) will be covered in the upcoming ACR Appropriateness Cri teria® topic on 
“Suspected Placenta Accreta Spectrum Disorder” [11]. 
Special Imaging Considerations 
Although the ACR Appropriateness Criteria methods assume that all procedures are performed and interpreted by 
experts, image acquisition in the gravid cervix merits particular attention given that about one-fourth of images may 
be technically suboptimal [12,13] . Image quality resources include the Cervical Length Education and Review 
(CLEAR) program ( https://clear.perinatalquality.org) and the Fetal Medicine Foundation’s Certificate of 
Competence in cervical assessment (https://fetalmedicine.org/education/cervical-assessment). 
3-D Transvaginal US 
Three-dimensional TVUS acquires a volumetric data set that can be reformatted and analyzed in any plane. Three-
dimensional TVUS may eventually be of benefit for certain clinical scenarios;  however, there is currently 
insufficient data to recommend its routine use. 
                                                           
aChildren’s Hospital of Philadelphia and Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. bPanel Chair, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. cUniversity of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California. dUniversity of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California. eBrigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. fColumbia University, New York, 
New York; American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.  gUniversity of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California.  hThe University of 
Vermont Medical Center, Burlington, Vermont.  iUniversity of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.  jUniversity of Utah, Salt Lake City, 
Utah. kSpecialty Chair, University of Toronto and Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
 The American College of Radiology seeks and encourages collaboration with other organizations on the development of the ACR Appropriateness 
Criteria through society representation on expert panels. Participation by representatives from collaborating societies on th e expert panel does not necessarily 
imply individual or society endorsement of the final document. 
 Reprint requests to: publications@acr.org


--- page 3 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 3 Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
US Elastography Cervix 
US elastography is an imaging technique that assesses tissue stiffness. Although the available data suggest that US 
elastography may be beneficial in evaluating the gravid ce rvix [14-17], technical standard s and normal reference 
values are lacking , and the technique remains investigational. As such, there is cu rrently insufficient data to 
recommend its use in routine screening for PTB in low -risk and high-risk women, suspected preterm labor, and 
predicting successful induction of labor [18-22]. 
Discussion of Procedures by Variant 
Variant 1: Assessment of gravid cervix. Nulliparous or no history of prior preterm birth. Initial imaging.  
US Cervix Transabdominal 
Transabdominal assessment of the cervix is a component of the standard second and third trimester US  evaluation 
according to the ACR-ACOG-AIUM-SMFM-SRU Practice Parameter for the Performance of Standard Diagnostic 
Obstetrical Ultrasound [23]. Although transabdominal assessment of the cervix is less reliable than transvaginal and 
transperineal approaches, recent studies suggest that prevoid transabdominal CL ≤36 mm had high sensitivity 
(96%–100%) for detection of short transvaginal CL ≤25 mm  [24,25]. Therefore, although TVUS is not currently 
recommended for women at low risk for PTB, transvaginal or transperineal US  are preferred in cases in which 
transabdominal evaluation results in inadequate visualization of the cervix or instances in which there are findings 
suspicious for a cervical abnormality. 
US Cervix Transperineal 
Transperineal US is an alternate approach to transvaginal evaluation of the gravid cervix and may be a 
complementary method to transabdominal US in certain clinical situations , such as large body habitus or when 
incomplete distention of the bladder limits transabdominal cervical assess ment. The transperineal approach is 
superior to transabdominal US, although inadequate visualization of the cervix has been reported in up to 22% of 
patients [26]. An inability to adequately assess the cervix via the transperineal approach may result from shadowing 
from the symphysis pubis and rectal gas and stool.  Adequate assessment by transperineal US is also dependent on 
sonographer experience. 
Transperineal assessment of the gravid cervix has been shown to be comparable to TVUS by several studies. Good 
correlation between CL measurements obtained transperineally and transvaginally have been reported in normal 
gravid cervix patients at each trimester, and the accuracy improves as the pregnancy progresses [27]. In a study by 
Hertzberg et al [28], similar levels of diagnostic confidence were achieved via the transperineal and transvaginal 
approaches, although there was a clear preference expressed by the interpreting physician for the latter . CLs were 
found to be comparable after 20 weeks gestational age, and CL measured between 14 and 20 weeks gestational age 
were statistically shorter via the transperineal approach. In a study of women between 22 and 24 weeks gestational 
age, Cicero et al [26] reported transperineal CL comparable to those obtained transvaginally. 
Standard second and third trimester transabdominal US  evaluation may inadequately visualize the cervix or 
demonstrate findings suspicious for shortening.  In such cases, transvaginal or transperineal US  have been 
recommended for further evaluation [23]. If TVUS is declined by the patient or if the risk of TVUS is deemed too 
high (eg, placenta previa, suspected preterm premature rupture of membranes) , transperineal US is a suitable 
alternative. If transperineal US is performed, the above caveats regarding CL in the early second trimester should 
be noted. 
US Cervix Transvaginal 
TVUS allows for the most complete assessment of the cervix, yet its use in universal screening of low-risk women 
remains controversial. Supportive evidence for universal screening comes from two studies evaluating the rates of 
PTB before and after implementation of a universal transvaginal cervical screening program [29,30] . Following 
implementation of their screening program, Son et al [29] demonstrated statistically significant decreases in the 
rates of spontaneous PTB <37 weeks (4.8% versus 4.0%), <34 weeks (1.3% versus 1.0%), and <32 weeks (0.7% 
versus 0.5%). Temming et al [30] demonstrated similar findings following imple mentation of their screening 
program; however, statistically significant decreases only were observed in the rates of spontaneous PTB <28 weeks 
(2.0% versus 0.7%) and <24 weeks (1.5% versus 0.35%). 
Other studies demonstrate no clear benefit to transvaginal  screening, thereby calling into question its 
appropriateness. In one study evaluating a CL screening program in nulliparous women, no statistical difference 
was observed in the rate of spontaneous PTB in patients who underwent screening compared with those who did 
not [31]. In a separate study o f nulliparous women, the predictive accuracy of serial TVUS for spontaneous PTB


--- page 4 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 4 Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
was shown to be low [32]. Among women with spontaneous PTB, short CL (≤25 mm) was observed in only 8% at 
16 to 22 weeks and only 23.3% at 22 to 30 weeks [32]. 
The use of TVUS for screening of low -risk patients is controversial, although screening may be considered. In 
clinical settings in which routine screening is not implemented, TVUS would be preferred in the event that second 
trimester transabdominal images inadequately visualize the cervix or demonstrate findings suspicious for cervical 
shortening (CL ≤36 mm) [4]. 
Although TVUS is not contraindicated in the setting of placenta previa, it should be performed using real -time 
imaging as the probe is advanced. The safety in this setting is based on the presumption that the angle between the 
cervix and the vaginal probe is sufficient  to prevent the probe from inadvertently slipping into the cervix and that 
real-time imaging is used throughout the procedure to assess the relationship between the probe tip and the cervix 
[33]. 
Variant 2: Assessment of gravid cervix. History of prior preterm birth. Initial imaging. 
US Cervix Transabdominal 
Transabdominal US of the cervix may be adversely affected by multiple factors, including poor sonographic 
windows and bladder distention, and, as a result, optimal visualization of the cervix is highly variable [25] . In 
addition, the sensitivity fo r detection of a transvaginally confirmed short cervix (≤25 mm) by transabdominal 
approach is also variable with reported sensitivities ranging between 33% for a transabdominal cutoff length of ≤25 
mm and 96.7% for a transabdominal cutoff length of ≤33 mm  [34,35]. In light of this, transabdominal US 
traditionally has been considered inadequate for CL assessment. 
More recently, several studies have challenged the belief that transabdominal US is not reliable for assessing and 
screening for cervical shortening. In one such study of patients with and without history of prior PTB , a prevoid 
transabdominal CL ≤36 mm was reported as having a sensitivity of 96% for detection of a transvaginal CL ≤25 
mm, whereas a prevoid transabdominal CL ≤35 mm was associated with a sensitivity of 100% for detection of a 
transvaginal CL ≤20 mm [24]. A prospective study designed to test these thresholds confirmed that a transabdominal 
CL of 35 to 36 mm could detect a short cervix  by TVUS. However, the authors reported inadequate visualization 
of the cervix in 50.8% of examinations, as well as multiple technical problems, including shadowing or obscuration 
by the fetus, bladder edge-artifact obscuring portions of the cervix, and unexplained obscuration of the cervix [25]. 
In addition, the authors reported a significant association between suboptimal transabdominal imaging of the cervix 
and a short cervix by TVUS. Given the potential consequences of a missed short CL, transabdominal US for cervical 
screening is not recommended for the routine assessment of patients at high risk for PTB. Situations uncommonly 
may arise in which t ransabdominal US may be considered, such as when the patient declines TVUS and 
transperineal US assessment is inadequate. 
US Cervix Transperineal 
Transperineal US is an alternate approach to transvaginal ev aluation of the gravid cervix and may be useful in 
certain clinical scenarios, such as large body habitus or when incomplete distention of the bladder limits the 
transabdominal cervical assessment. The transperineal approach is superior to transabdominal US, and transperineal 
assessment of the gravid cervix has been shown to be comparable to TV US [27]. Good correlation between CL 
measurements obtained transperineally and transvaginally have been reported in normal gravid patients at each 
trimester [26-28]. In a study by Hertzberg  et al [28], similar levels of diagnostic confidence were achieved with 
both transperineal and transvaginal approaches, noting a clear preference expressed for the latter. CL was found to 
be comparable after 20 weeks gestational age;  however, CL measured between 14 and 20 weeks gestational age 
was statistically shorter via the transperineal approach.  Given the apparent difference in accuracy of transperineal 
CL in the early second trimester, the authors suggested performing transvaginal imaging when short CL are obtained 
transperineally in the early second trimester. In a study of women between 22 and 24 weeks gestational age, Cicero 
et al [26] reported satisfactory transperineal visualization of the cervix in approximately 80% of cases. CLs obtained 
by the transperineal approach during this gestational age were also comparable to those obtained transvaginally. 
TVUS is the preferred approach for assessment of the gravid cervix in high-risk patients, but there may be instances 
in which TVUS is not possible because of patient discomfort or preference. If TVUS is declined by the patient or 
if the risk of TVUS is deemed too high (eg, placenta previa, suspected preterm premature rupture of membranes ), 
transperineal US is a suitable alternative. In such instances, transperineal US  would be indicated, noting the above 
caveats regarding CL in the early second trimester.


--- page 5 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 5 Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
US Cervix Transvaginal 
TVUS is the reference standard of imaging modalities used for assessment of the gravid cervix. The transvaginal 
approach affords the shortest distance between transducer and cervix, and TVUS transducers typically offer higher 
frequency evaluation and greater detailed evaluation. The combination of these features allows for complete 
visualization of the cervix, including the internal os  where changes increasing the risk of PTB first occur. Lastly, 
transvaginal imaging is a highly reproducible test. 
Several studies have demonstrated that identification of a short CL by TVUS decreases the rate of PTB by directing 
patients to appropriate interventions. In a randomized placebo-controlled study by Fonseca et al [6], women with a 
sonographically short cervix who received progesterone demonstrated a 44% reduction in the rate of PTB <34 
weeks, as well as a 41% decrease in neonatal morbidity. A separate randomized placebo-controlled study confirmed 
the benefit of progesterone administration and found a 45% decrease in PTB <33 weeks and a 50% decrease in PTB 
<28 weeks [8]. Reduction in PTB rates was also observed in patients undergoing cervical pessary placement [7]. 
When compared with patients undergoing expectant management, pessary placement was associated with a 78% 
reduction of PTB <34 weeks. Lastly, short CL treated by cerclage has been found to decrease PTB. In a meta-
analysis of 5 trials of high-risk patients with short CL, cerclage placement resul ted in a 30% decrease in PTB <35 
weeks with significantly decreased rates of PTB seen before 37, 32, 28, and 24 weeks [5]. 
Given the availability of several effective interventions for the prevention of PTB, TVUS cervical screening for 
high-risk patients is recommended. Routine TVUS screening is also supported by the American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine [36,37]. 
Although TVUS is not contraindicated in the setting of placenta previa, it should be performed using real -time 
imaging as the probe is advanced. The safety in this setting is based on the presumption that the angle between the 
cervix and the vaginal probe is sufficient to prevent the probe from inadvertently slipping into the cervix and that 
real-time imaging is used throughout the procedure to assess the relationship between the probe tip and the cervix 
[33]. 
Cervical Cerclage 
Patients who have undergone history -indicated cerclage for cervical insufficiency represent a subset of high -risk 
patients. In these patients with a history of one or more second trimester losses, cerclage placement may be offered 
during the early second trimester. In one recent study screening cerclage patients by TVUS until 26 weeks, a shorter 
CL below the cerclage and cervical funneling were shown to be associated with a higher rate of PTB [38] . In a 
separate study evaluating postcerclage patients between 18 and 24 weeks, cervical funneling was the only variable 
independently associated with increased risk of PTB before 34 weeks [39]. Although these and other studies suggest 
that short CL and cervical funneling are associated with higher rates of PTB in patients with cerclage, the Society 
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine does not recommend routine surveillance for this subset of high-risk patients because  
there is insufficient data supporting a clinical benefit to screening [37]. If assessment of the cerclage is performed, 
additional measurements irrespective of approach (eg, transabdominal, transvaginal, or transperineal) may include 
the total length of closed cervix regardless of cerclage sutures, and if funneling is present, the length of closed cervix 
from the level of cervical funneling to the level of the cerclage sutures. 
Variant 3: Assessment of gravid cervix. Suspected preterm labor. Initial imaging. 
US Cervix Transabdominal 
To our knowledge, there is no relevant literature regarding the use of transabdominal US in the evaluation of the 
cervix for suspected preterm labor. 
US Cervix Transperineal 
Transperineal US is an alternate approach to transvaginal evaluation of the gravid cervix.  In one study, adequate 
visualization of the cervix was achieved in 82% of patients in preterm labor with good agreement of transperineal 
and transvaginal measurements with an intraclass correlation coefficient of 0.83 [40]. The mean difference in 
cervical measurements between transperineal and transvaginal approaches was 1.5 mm, with transperineal US  
underestimating CL in most cases. No significant disagreement between both methods was observed above or below 
a length of 25 mm. A study by Dimassi et al [41] also reported a strong correlation in CL obtained by both methods 
as well as a low mean difference in cervical measurements (0.38 mm). 
TVUS would be preferred for assessment of the cervix in cases of suspected preterm labor . Nevertheless, 
transperineal US would be an adequate alternative in the event that TVUS is declined by the patient or if the risk of 
TVUS is deemed too high (eg, placenta previa, suspected preterm premature rupture of membranes).


--- page 6 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 6 Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
US Cervix Transvaginal 
TVUS is the reference standard of imaging modalities used for assessment of the gravid cervix because it allows 
for complete visualization of the cervix, including the internal os  where changes of PTB first occur. Transvaginal 
imaging is highly reproducible. 
There is a significant association between short cervix and spontaneous PTB in patients presenting with suspected 
preterm labor. In one study of patients presenting with symptoms of preterm labor, patients with transvaginal CL 
≤15 mm were more likely to deliver spontaneously ≤35 weeks than those patients with CL ≥15 mm (66.7% versus 
13.5%) [42]. A CL ≤15 mm was also associated with a statistically higher spontaneous premature delivery ≤32 
weeks as well as premature delivery within 7 days and 48 hours of admission when compared with those patients 
with CL ≥15 mm. In those patients who had CL ≥30 mm, the risk of spontaneous PTB was very low as was delivery 
within 7 days and 48 hours of admission [42]. In a more recent study, a CL ≤15 mm was reported to have sensitivity 
and specificity values of 77% and 77%, respectively, and an accuracy of 88% for predicting delivery within 7 days 
of presentation [43] . In addition, this study reported that the presence of cervical fun neling was an independent 
predictor of delivery <37 weeks [43]. Melamed et al [44] also demonstrated an inverse relationship between C L 
and the risk of spontaneous PTB at <37 weeks, 35 weeks, and 32 weeks. A weak but statistically significant 
correlation between CL and the interval between presentation and delivery was also observed, yet the overall 
accuracy of using CL to predict occurrence and timing of spontaneous PTB was relatively poor. In a separate study 
evaluating the relationship between CL and cervical dilatation in patients with threatened preterm labor, CL was 
inversely associated with the risk of spontaneous PTB in patients with cervical dilation ≤3 cm and those with a 
closed cervix [45]. Although the accuracy of CL in predicting preterm delivery was relatively poor for patients with 
and without cervical dilatation, this study also demonstrated that CL measurement had a high negative predictive 
value for spontaneous PTB even in cases of cervical dilatation. 
Taken together, the data demonstrate that although TVUS has limitations in its predictive ability in identifying those 
who will progress to PTB, its greatest value is its high negative predicative value. As such, transvaginal assessment 
of the gravid cervix would be the preferred approach in cases of suspected preterm labor. 
Although TVUS is not contraindicated in the setting of placenta previa, it should be performed using real -time 
imaging as the probe is advanced. The safety in this setting is based on the presumption that the angle between the 
cervix and the vaginal probe is sufficient to prevent the probe from inadvertently slipping into the cervix and that 
real-time imaging is used throughout the procedure to ass ess the relationship between the probe tip and the cervix 
[33]. 
Variant 4: Assessment of gravid cervix. Induction of labor or active term labor. Initial imaging. 
US Cervix Transabdominal 
To our knowledge, there is no relevant literature regarding the use of transabdominal US in the evaluation of the 
cervix prior to induction of labor or during active term labor. 
US Cervix Transperineal 
Transperineal US is a noninvasive approach to assess the cervix and is potentially beneficial in evaluating active 
term labor. Hassan et al [46] first reported the ability to adequately visualize the cervix during labor by transperineal 
approach in a small pilot study. In this study, satisfactory visualization of the cervix was reported in 90% of 
primiparous women. There was also a strong positive correlation between digital and US measurements as well as 
a high intraclass correlation (0.81) between both methods. In subsequent studies, both methods demonstrated good 
agreement with similar intraclass correlations (0.82–0.83) and mean differences in cervical dilatation of 9 to 10 mm 
[47,48]. Successful transperineal US visualization of the cervix was 71% in one of these later studies [47]  and 
somewhat lower than the 90% success rate originally reported [46]. Although transperineal US has potential utility, 
there is insufficient evidence to support routine use in predicting induction of labor outcomes. Moreover, clinical 
situations in which imaging is necessary are uncommon and, as such, imaging is rarely performed. 
US Cervix Transvaginal 
TVUS as a predictor of successful labor induction has been the subject of much interest given that the standard 
clinical method—the Bishop score —is rather limited in its ability to predict labor induction outcomes.  Because 
TVUS is the most sensitive method for assessing length and changes at the internal cervical os, it has been suggested 
that it may help predict cervical ripeness. 
However, a meta-analysis of 31 studies demonstrated limited value in predicting the outcome of induced labor [49]. 
Studies that are more recent also report conflicting data. In one study, a shorter CL prior to induction was associated


--- page 7 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 7 Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
with a shorter interval from induction to delivery, and a CL ≥28 mm was associated with increased risk of failure 
of induction [50]. CL was also reported to be predictive of vaginal delivery and induction-to -delivery interval  
[20,51], although CL was a poor predictor of cesarean delivery [20]. Another study found no efficacy in predicting 
successful vaginal delivery using CL measurement [52]. Lastly, a meta-analysis by Ezebialu et al [53] found no 
difference in labor induction outcomes between patients assessed by  TVUS and Bishop score. At present, there is 
insufficient evidence to support routine use in predicting induction of labor outcomes. Moreover, clinical situations 
in which imagi ng is necessary are uncommon  and, as such, imaging is rarely performed.  Another potential 
application for TVUS at the time of term labor lies in distinguishing true labor from false labor in patients presenting 
with labor symptoms. In one study of term nulliparous and multiparous patients, a CL  cutoff of ≤1.5 cm provided 
the highest specificity (81%), positive predictive value (83%), and positive likelihood ratios (4.2) for distinguishing 
true from false labor [54]. Although promising, the results of the findings have yet to be confirmed by other studies, 
and there is insufficient evidence to support its use and clinical utility. 
Although TVUS is not contraindicated in the setting of placenta previa, it should be performed using real -time 
imaging as the probe is advanced. The safety in this setting is based on the presumption that the angle between the 
cervix and the vaginal probe is sufficient to prevent the probe from inadvertently slipping into the cervix and that 
real-time imaging is used throughout the procedure to assess the relationship between the probe tip and the cervix 
[33]. 
Summary of Recommendations 
• Variant 1: US cervix transabdominal is usually appropriate as the initial imaging for the assessment of a gravid 
cervix in patients who are nulliparous or have no history of prior PTB. 
• Variant 2: US cervix transvaginal is usually appropriate as the initial imaging for the assessment of a gravid 
cervix in patients with a history of PTB. 
• Variant 3: US cervix transvaginal is usually appropriate as the initial imaging for  the assessment of a gravid 
cervix in patients with suspected preterm labor. 
• Variant 4: For the initial imaging, assessment of a gravid cervix with induction of labor or active preterm labor, 
the panel did not agree on recommending US cervix transperineal. There is insufficient medical literature to 
conclude whether or not these patients would benefit from this procedure. This procedure in this patient 
population is controversial but may be appropriate. 
Supporting Documents 
The evidence table, literature search, and appendix for this topic are available at https://acsearch.acr.org/list . The 
appendix includes the strength of evidence assessment and the  final rating round tabulations for each 
recommendation. 
For additional information on the Appropriateness Criteria methodology and other supporting documents go to 
www.acr.org/ac. 
Safety Considerations in Pregnant Patients 
Imaging of the pregnant patient can be challenging, particularly with respect to minimizing radiation exposure and 
risk. For further information and guidance, see the following ACR documents: 
• ACR–SPR Practice Parameter for the Safe and Optimal Performance of Fetal Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI) [55] 
• ACR-SPR Practice Parameter for Imaging Pregnant or Potentially Pregnant Adolescents and Women with 
Ionizing Radiation [56] 
• ACR-ACOG-AIUM-SMFM-SRU Practice Parameter for the Performance of Standard Diagnostic Obstetrical 
Ultrasound [23] 
• ACR Manual on Contrast Media [57] 
• ACR guidance document on MR safe practices: 2013 [58]


--- page 8 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 8 Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
Appropriateness Category Names and Definitions  
Appropriateness Category Name Appropriateness 
Rating Appropriateness Category Definition 
Usually Appropriate 7, 8, or 9 
The imaging procedure or treatment is indicated in the 
specified clinical scenarios at a favorable risk -benefit 
ratio for patients. 
May Be Appropriate 4, 5, or 6 
The imaging procedure or treatment may be indicated 
in the specified clinical scenarios as an alternative to 
imaging procedures or treatments with a more 
favorable risk-benefit ratio, or the risk-benefit ratio for 
patients is equivocal. 
May Be Appropriate 
(Disagreement) 5 
The individual ratings are too dispersed from the panel 
median. The different label provides transparency 
regarding the panel’s recommendation. “May be 
appropriate” is the rating category and a rating of 5 is 
assigned. 
Usually Not Appropriate 1, 2, or 3 
The imaging procedure or treatment is unlikely to be 
indicated in the specified clinical scenarios, or the 
risk-benefit ratio for patients is likely to be 
unfavorable. 
Relative Radiation Level Information 
Potential adverse health effects associated with radiation exposure are an important factor to consider when 
selecting the appropriate imaging procedure. Because there is a wide range of radiation exposures associated with 
different diagnostic procedures, a relative radiation level (RRL) indication has been included for each imaging 
examination. The RRLs are based on effective dose, which is a radiation dose quantity that is used to estimate 
population total radiation risk associ ated with an imaging procedure. Patients in the pediatric age group are at 
inherently higher risk from exposure, because of both organ sensitivity and longer life expectancy (relevant to the 
long latency that appears to accompany radiation exposure). For t hese reasons, the RRL dose estimate ranges for 
pediatric examinations are lower as compared with those specified for adults (see Table below). Additional 
information regarding radiation dose assessment for imaging examinations can be found in the ACR 
Appropriateness Criteria® Radiation Dose Assessment Introduction document [59]. 
Relative Radiation Level Designations 
Relative Radiation Level* Adult Effective Dose Estimate 
Range 
Pediatric Effective Dose Estimate 
Range 
O 0 mSv 0 mSv 
☢ <0.1 mSv <0.03 mSv 
☢☢ 0.1-1 mSv 0.03-0.3 mSv 
☢☢☢ 1-10 mSv 0.3-3 mSv 
☢☢☢☢ 10-30 mSv 3-10 mSv 
☢☢☢☢☢ 30-100 mSv 10-30 mSv 
*RRL assignments for some of the examinations cannot be made, because the actual patient doses in these procedures vary 
as a function of a number of factors (eg, region of the body exposed to ionizing radiation, the imaging guidance that is used). 
The RRLs for these examinations are designated as “Varies.” 
References 
1. Blencowe H, Cousens S, Oestergaard MZ, et al.  National, regional, and worldwide estimates of preterm birth 
rates in the year 2010 with time trends since 1990 for selected countries: a systematic analysis and implications. 
Lancet 2012;379:2162-72.


--- page 9 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 9 Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
2. Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJK, Driscoll AK, Drake P. Births: Final Data for 2016. Natl Vital Stat 
Rep 2018;67:1-55. 
3. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Understanding Premature Birth and Assuring Healthy Outcomes. In: 
Behrman RE, Butler AS, eds. Preterm Birth: Causes, Consequences, and Prevent ion. Washington (DC): 
National Academies Press (US); 2007. 
4. Iams JD, Goldenberg RL, Meis PJ, et al. The length of the cervix and the risk of spontaneous premature delivery. 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Maternal Fetal Medicine Unit Network. N Engl J 
Med 1996;334:567-72. 
5. Berghella V, Rafael TJ, Szychowski JM, Rust OA, Owen J. Cerclage for short cervix on ultrasonography in 
women with singleton gestations and previous preterm birth: a meta -analysis. Obstet Gynecol 2011;117:663-
71. 
6. Fonseca EB, Celik E, Parra M, Singh M, Nicolaides KH, Fetal Medicine Foundation Second Trimester 
Screening G. Progesterone and the risk of preterm birth among women with a short cervix. N Engl J Med 
2007;357:462-9. 
7. Goya M, Pratcorona L, Merced C, et al. Cervical pessary in pregnant women with a short cervix (PECEP): an 
open-label randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2012;379:1800-6. 
8. Hassan SS, Romero R, Vidyadhari D, et al. Vaginal progesterone reduces the rate of preterm birth in women 
with a sonographic short cervix: a multicenter, randomized, double -blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2011;38:18-31. 
9. Society for Maternal -Fetal Medicine Publications. The choice of progestogen for the prevention of preterm 
birth in women with singleton pregnancy and prior preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017;216:B11-B13. 
10. Glanc P, Nyberg DA, Khati NJ, et al. ACR Appropriateness Criteria® Multiple Gestations. J Am Coll Radiol  
2017;14:S476-S89. 
11. American College of Radiology. ACR A ppropriateness Criteria ®: Suspected Placenta Accreta Spectrum 
Disorder. Available at: https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3102403/Narrative/. Accessed November 29, 2019. 
12. Boelig RC, Feltovich H, Spitz JL, Toland G, Berghella V, Iams JD. Assessment of Transvaginal Ultrasound 
Cervical Length Image Quality. Obstet Gynecol 2017;129:536-41. 
13. Iams JD, Grobman WA, Lozitska A, et al. Adherence to criteria for transvaginal ultrasound imaging and 
measurement of cervical length. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2013;209:365 e1-5. 
14. Hernandez-Andrade E, Garcia M, Ahn H, et al. Strain at the internal cervical os assessed with quasi -static 
elastography is associated with the risk of spontaneous preterm delivery at </=34 weeks of gestation. J Perinat 
Med 2015;43:657-66. 
15. Hernandez-Andrade E, Hassan SS, Ahn H, et al. Evaluation of cervical stiffness during pregnancy using 
semiquantitative ultrasound elastography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2013;41:152-61. 
16. Hernandez-Andrade E, Romero R, Korzeniewski SJ, et al. Cervical strain determined by ultrasound 
elastography and its association with spontaneous preterm delivery. J Perinat Med 2014;42:159-69. 
17. Wozniak S, Czuczwar P, Szkodziak P, Milart P, Wozniakowska E, Paszko wski T. Elastography in predicting 
preterm delivery in asymptomatic, low -risk women: a prospective observational study. BMC Pregnancy 
Childbirth 2014;14:238. 
18. Fruscalzo A, Londero AP, Frohlich C, Meyer-Wittkopf M, Schmitz R. Quantitative elastography of the cervix 
for predicting labor induction success. Ultraschall Med 2015;36:65-73. 
19. Hee L, Rasmussen CK, Schlutter JM, Sandager P, Uldbjerg N. Quantitative sonoelastography of the uterine 
cervix prior to induction of labor as a predictor of cervical dil ation time. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand  
2014;93:684-90. 
20. Hwang HS, Sohn IS, Kwon HS. Imaging analysis of cervical elastography for prediction of successful induction 
of labor at term. J Ultrasound Med 2013;32:937-46. 
21. Muscatello A, Di Nicola M, Accurti V, et al. Sonoelastography as method for preliminary evaluation of uterine 
cervix to predict success of induction of labor. Fetal Diagn Ther 2014;35:57-61. 
22. von Schoning D, Fischer T, von Tucher E, et al. Cervical sonoelastography for improving prediction of preterm 
birth compared with cervical length measurement and fetal fibronectin test. J Perinat Med 2015;43:531-6. 
23. American College of Radiology. ACR-ACOG-AIUM-SMFM-SRU Practice Paramater for the Performance of 
Standard Diagnostic Obstetrical Ultrasound. Available at: https://www.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Practice-
Parameters/us-ob.pdf. Accessed November 29, 2019. 
24. Friedman AM, Srinivas SK, Parry S, Elovitz MA, Wang E, Schwartz N. Can transabdominal ultrasound be 
used as a screening test for short cervical length? Am J Obstet Gynecol 2013;208:190 e1-7.


--- page 10 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 10 Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
25. Pandipati S, Combs CA, Fishman A, Lee SY, Mallory K, Ianovich F. Prospective evaluation of a protocol for 
using transabdominal ultrasound to screen for short cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2015;213:99 e1-99 e13. 
26. Cicero S, Skentou C, Souka A, To MS, Nicolaides KH. Cervical length at 22-24 weeks of gestation: comparison 
of transvaginal and transperineal-translabial ultrasonography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2001;17:335-40. 
27. Ozdemir I, Demirci F, Yucel O. Transperineal versus transvaginal ultrasonographic evaluation of the cervix at 
each trimester in normal pregnant women. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2005;45:191-4. 
28. Hertzberg BS, Livingston E, DeLong DM, McNally PJ, Fazekas CK, Kliewer MA. Ultrasonographic evaluation 
of the cervix: transperineal versus endovaginal imaging. J Ultrasound Med 2001;20:1071-8; quiz 80. 
29. Son M, Grobman WA, Ayala NK, Miller ES. A universal mid-trimester transvaginal cervical length screening 
program and its associated reduced preterm birth rate. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2016;214:365 e1-5. 
30. Temming LA, Durst JK, Tuuli MG, et al. Universal cervical length screening: implementation and outcomes. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2016;214:523 e1-23 e8. 
31. Orzechowski KM, Boelig RC, Baxter JK, Berghella V. A universal transv aginal cervical length screening 
program for preterm birth prevention. Obstet Gynecol 2014;124:520-5. 
32. Esplin MS, Elovitz MA, Iams JD, et al. Predictive Accuracy of Serial Transvaginal Cervical Lengths and 
Quantitative Vaginal Fetal Fibronectin Levels f or Spontaneous Preterm Birth Among Nulliparous Women. 
JAMA 2017;317:1047-56. 
33. Timor-Tritsch IE, Yunis RA. Confirming the safety of transvaginal sonography in patients suspected of placenta 
previa. Obstet Gynecol 1993;81:742-4. 
34. Friedman AM, Schwartz N, Ludmir J, Parry S, Bastek JA, Sehdev HM. Can transabdominal ultrasound identify 
women at high risk for short cervical length? Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2013;92:637-41. 
35. Marren AJ, Mogra R, Pedersen LH, Walter M, Ogle RF, Hyett JA. Ultrasound assessment of cervical length at 
18-21 weeks' gestation in an Australian obstetric population: comparison of transabdominal and transvaginal 
approaches. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2014;54:250-5. 
36. Committee on Practice Bulletins -Obstetrics, The American College of Obstetricians Gynecologists. Practice 
bulletin no. 130: prediction and prevention of preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol 2012;120:964-73. 
37. McIntosh J, Feltovich H, Berghella V, Manuck T. The role of routine cervical length screening in selected high- 
and low-risk women for preterm birth prevention. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2016;215:B2-7. 
38. Sim S, Da Silva Costa F, Araujo Junior E, Sheehan PM. Factors associated with spontaneous preterm birth risk 
assessed by transvaginal ultrasound following cervical cerclage. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2015;55:344-9. 
39. Miller ES, Gerber SE. Association between sonographic cervical appearance and preterm delivery after a 
history-indicated cerclage. J Ultrasound Med 2014;33:2181-6. 
40. Gauthier T, Marin B, Garuchet -Bigot A, et al. Transperineal versus transvaginal ultrasound cervical length 
measurement and preterm labor. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2014;290:465-9. 
41. Dimassi K, Hammami A, Bennani S, Halouani A, Triki A, Gara MF. Use of transperineal sonography during 
preterm labor. J Obstet Gynaecol 2016;36:748-53. 
42. Gomez R, Romero R, Nien JK, et al. A short cervix in women with preterm labor and intact membranes: a risk 
factor for microbial invasion of the amniotic cavity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2005;192:678-89. 
43. Maia MC, Nomura R,  Mendonca F, Rios L, Moron A. Is cervical length evaluated by transvaginal 
ultrasonography helpful in detecting true preterm labor? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2019:1-7. 
44. Melamed N, Hiersch L, Domniz N, Maresky A, Bardin R, Yogev Y. Predictive value of cervical length in 
women with threatened preterm labor. Obstet Gynecol 2013;122:1279-87. 
45. Hiersch L, Melamed N, Aviram A, Bardin R, Yogev Y, Ashwal E. Role of Cervical Length Measurement for 
Preterm Delivery Prediction in Women With Threatened Preterm L abor and Cervical Dilatation. J Ultrasound 
Med 2016;35:2631-40. 
46. Hassan WA, Eggebo TM, Ferguson M, Lees C. Simple two -dimensional ultrasound technique to assess 
intrapartum cervical dilatation: a pilot study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2013;41:413-8. 
47. Benediktsdottir S, Eggebo TM, Salvesen KA. Agreement between transperineal ultrasound measurements and 
digital examinations of cervical dilatation during labor. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2015;15:273. 
48. Yuce T, Kalafat E, Koc A. Transperineal ultrasonography for labor management: accuracy and reliability. Acta 
Obstet Gynecol Scand 2015;94:760-65. 
49. Verhoeven CJ, Opmeer BC, Oei SG, Latour V, van der Post JA, Mol BW. Transvaginal sonographic assessment 
of cervical length and wedging for predicting outcome of labor induction at term: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2013;42:500-8.


--- page 11 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 11 Assessment of Gravid Cervix 
50. Brik M, Mateos S, Fernandez-Buhigas I, Garbayo P, Costa G, Santacruz B. Sonographical predictive markers 
of failure of induction of labour in term pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol 2017;37:179-84. 
51. Pereira S, Frick AP, Poon LC, Zamprakou A, Nicolaides KH. Successful induction of labor: prediction by 
preinduction cervical length, angle of progression and cervical elastography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynec ol 
2014;44:468-75. 
52. Prado CA, Araujo Junior E, Duarte G, et al. Predicting success of labor induction in singleton term pregnancies 
by combining maternal and ultrasound variables. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2016;29:3511-8. 
53. Ezebialu IU, Eke AC, Elej e GU, Nwachukwu CE. Methods for assessing pre -induction cervical ripening. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:CD010762. 
54. Kunzier NB, Kinzler WL, Chavez MR, Adams TM, Brand DA, Vintzileos AM. The use of cervical sonography 
to differentiate true from false l abor in term patients presenting for labor check. Am J Obstet Gynecol  
2016;215:372 e1-5. 
55. American College of Radiology. ACR–SPR Practice Parameter for the Safe and Optimal Performance of Fetal 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Available at: https://www.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Practice-
Parameters/mr-fetal.pdf. Accessed November 29, 2019. 
56. American College of Radiology. ACR -SPR Practice Parameter for Imaging Pregnant or Potentially Pregnant 
Adolescents and Women with Ionizing Radiation. Available at: https://www.acr.org/-
/media/ACR/Files/Practice-Parameters/pregnant-pts.pdf. Accessed November 29, 2019. 
57. American College of Radiology. Manual on Contrast Media. Available at: https://www.acr.org/Clinical-
Resources/Contrast-Manual. Accessed November 29, 2019. 
58. Kanal E, Barkovich AJ, Bell C, et al. ACR guidance document on MR safe practices: 2013. J Magn Reson 
Imaging 2013;37:501-30. 
59. American College of Radiology. ACR Appropriateness Criteria ® Radiation Dose Assessment Introduction. 
Available at : https://www.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Appropriateness-
Criteria/RadiationDoseAssessmentIntro.pdf. Accessed November 29, 2019. 
 
The ACR Commit tee on Appropriateness Criteria and its expert panels have developed criteria for determining appropriate imaging examination s for 
diagnosis and treatment of specified medical condition(s). These criteria are intended to guide radiologists, radiation oncologists and referring physicians in 
making decisions regarding radiologic imaging and treatment. Generally, the complexity and severity of a patient’s clinical condition should dictate the 
selection of appropriate imaging procedures or treatments. Only thos e examinations generally used for evaluation of the patient’s condition are ranked. 
Other imaging studies necessary to evaluate other co-existent diseases or other medical consequences of this condition are not considered in this document. 
The availability of equipment or personnel may influence the selection of appropriate imaging procedures or treatments. Imaging techniques classified as 
investigational by the FDA have not been considered in developing these criteria; however, study of new equipment and applications should be encouraged. 
The ultimate decision regarding the appropriateness of any specific radiologic examination or treatment must be made by the r eferring physician and 
radiologist in light of all the circumstances presented in an individual examination.
