--- page 1 ---
Revised 2019 
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 1 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
American College of Radiology 
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 
Acute Trauma to the Knee 
Variant 1: Adult or child 5 years of age or older. Fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. No focal 
tenderness, no effusion, able to walk. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category Relative Radiation Level 
Radiography knee May Be Appropriate ☢ 
Bone scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT knee Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT knee with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
CT knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
CT knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
MR arthrography knee Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
US knee Usually Not Appropriate O 
Variant 2: Adult or child 5 years of age or older. Fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. One or more 
of the following: focal tenderness, effusion, inability to bear weight. Initial imaging. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category Relative Radiation Level 
Radiography knee Usually Appropriate ☢ 
Bone scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT knee Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT knee with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
CT knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
CT knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
MR arthrography knee Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
US knee Usually Not Appropriate O


--- page 2 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 2 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
Variant 3: Adult or skeletally mature child. Fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. No fracture seen 
on radiographs. Suspect occult fracture or internal derangement. Next study. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category Relative Radiation Level 
MRI knee without IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
CT knee without IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢ 
Bone scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT knee Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT knee with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
CT knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
MR arthrography knee Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
US knee Usually Not Appropriate O 
Variant 4: Skeletally immature child. Fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. No fracture seen on 
radiographs. Suspect occult fracture or internal derangement. Next study. 
 Procedure Appropriateness Category Relative Radiation Level 
MRI knee without IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
CT knee without IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢ 
Bone scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT knee Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT knee with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
CT knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
MR arthrography knee Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
US knee Usually Not Appropriate O


--- page 3 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 3 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
Variant 5: Adult or child 5 years of age or older. Fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. Tibial plateau 
fracture on radiographs. Suspect additional bone or soft-tissue injury. Next study. 
Procedure Appropriateness Category Relative Radiation Level 
MRI knee without IV contrast Usually Appropriate O 
CT knee without IV contrast Usually Appropriate ☢ 
Bone scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT knee Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT knee with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
CT knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
MR arthrography knee Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
US knee Usually Not Appropriate O 
Variant 6: Adult or child 5 years of age or older. Acute trauma to the knee. Mechanism unknown. Focal 
patellar tenderness, effusion, able to walk. Initial imaging. 
 Procedure Appropriateness Category Relative Radiation Level 
Radiography knee Usually Appropriate ☢ 
Bone scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT knee Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT knee with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
CT knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
CT knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
MR arthrography knee Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRA knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
US knee Usually Not Appropriate O


--- page 4 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 4 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
Variant 7: Adult or child 5 years of age or older. Significant trauma to the knee (eg, motor vehicle 
accident, knee dislocation). Initial imaging. 
 Procedure Appropriateness Category Relative Radiation Level 
Radiography knee Usually Appropriate ☢ 
CTA lower extremity with IV contrast Usually Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
Arteriography lower extremity May Be Appropriate ☢☢ 
CT knee with IV contrast May Be Appropriate (Disagreement) ☢ 
CT knee without IV contrast May Be Appropriate ☢ 
MRA knee without and with IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRI knee without IV contrast May Be Appropriate O 
MRA knee without IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
Bone scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT knee Usually Not Appropriate ☢☢☢ 
CT knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate ☢ 
MR arthrography knee Usually Not Appropriate O 
MRI knee without and with IV contrast Usually Not Appropriate O 
US knee Usually Not Appropriate O


--- page 5 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 5 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
ACUTE TRAUMA TO THE KNEE 
Expert Panel on Musculoskeletal Imaging: Mihra S. Taljanovic, MD, PhDa; Eric Y. Chang, MDb;  
Alice S. Ha, MD, MSc; Roger J. Bartolotta, MDd; Matthew Bucknor, MDe; Karen C. Chen, MDf;  
Tetyana Gorbachova, MDg; Bharti Khurana, MDh; Alan K. Klitzke, MDi; Kenneth S. Lee, MD, MBAj;  
Pekka A. Mooar, MDk; Jie C. Nguyen, MD, MSl; Andrew B. Ross, MD, MPHm; Richard D. Shih, MDn;  
Adam D. Singer, MDo; Stacy E. Smith, MDp; Jonelle M. Thomas, MD, MPHq; William J. Yost, MDr;  
Mark J. Kransdorf, MDs. 
Summary of Literature Review 
Introduction/Background 
Acute bone and soft-tissue injuries to the knee may result from low- or high-energy trauma and are commonly seen 
in emergency departments as well as in outpatient practices [1]. The most common acute knee injuries result from 
a direct blow, a fall, or a twisting injury [2,3]. The fracture risk increases with age, likely secondary to decreased 
bone mineral density, increased frequency of blunt injury, and inability to protect the knee during a fall [3]. An 
estimated 6.6 million knee injuries presented to emergency departments in the United States from 1999 through 
2008, for a rate of 2.29 knee injuries per 1,000 population. Prompt and accurate diagnosis facilitates adequate 
management and may prevent potential complications [1,4].  
After thorough history and clinical examination, radiographs are usually the initial imaging modality in the 
evaluation of the acutely injured knee [1]. Adequate clinical examination and appropriate application of the 
established decision-making rules can reduce the number of radiographic studies in the setting of acute knee injuries 
with a potential benefit of reducing health care costs and decreasing radiation exposure to the patient [1,5,6]. 
Treatment options for acute traumatic knee injuries depend on the severity of injury and patient factors and include 
conservative or surgical management [1]. 
Special Imaging Considerations 
For the purpose of this document, point-of-care ultrasound (US) is not discussed or listed in the variant tables. 
For the purposes of distinguishing between CT and CT angiography (CTA), ACR Appropriateness Criteria topics 
use the definition in the ACR-NASCI-SIR-SPR Practice Parameter for the Performance and Interpretation of Body 
Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA) [7].  
“CTA uses a thin-section CT acquisition that is timed to coincide with peak arterial or venous 
enhancement. The resultant volumetric dataset is interpreted using primary transverse 
reconstructions as well as multiplanar reformations and 3-D renderings.” 
All elements are essential: 1) timing, 2) reconstructions/reformats, and 3) 3-D renderings. Standard CTs with 
contrast also include timing issues and recons/reformats. Only in CTA; however, is 3-D rendering a required 
element. This corresponds to the definitions that the CMS has applied to the Current Procedural Terminology codes. 
                                                           
aUniversity of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona. bPanel Chair, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, California. cPanel Vice-Chair, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington. dWeill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York. eUniversity of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California. fVA San 
Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, California. gEinstein Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. hBrigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts. iRoswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, New York. jUniversity of Wisconsin Hospital & Clinics, Madison, Wisconsin. kTemple 
University Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. lChildren’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. mUniversity of Wisconsin School of Medicine & Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin. nSchmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University, 
Boca Raton, Florida, American College of Emergency Physicians. oEmory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia. pBrigham & Women’s Hospital 
& Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. qPenn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, Pennsylvania. rUnityPoint Health, Des Moines, 
Iowa, American College of Physicians. sSpecialty Chair, Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, Arizona. 
 The American College of Radiology seeks and encourages collaboration with other organizations on the development of the ACR Appropriateness 
Criteria through society representation on expert panels. Participation by representatives from collaborating societies on the expert panel does not necessarily 
imply individual or society endorsement of the final document. 
 Reprint requests to: publications@acr.org


--- page 6 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 6 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
Discussion of Procedures by Variant 
Variant 1: Adult or child 5 years of age or older. Fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. No focal 
tenderness, no effusion, able to walk. Initial imaging. 
CT Knee 
In the absence of focal tenderness and joint effusion in a patient who is able to walk, CT is not used as the initial 
imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. 
MR Arthrography Knee 
MR arthrography is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. 
MRA Knee 
MR angiography (MRA) is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the 
knee. 
MRI Knee 
MRI is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. 
Radiography Knee 
With no clinical symptoms in the injured knee, including lack of focal tenderness and joint effusion, and with ability 
to walk, knee radiographs may be indicated if a patient >55 years old per Ottawa rules or >50 years old or <12 years 
old per Pittsburgh rule criteria [5, 6, 10]. If the patient is between 5 and 12 years, they fall outside the age range for 
both the Ottawa and Pittsburgh rules and radiographs may be beneficial despite lack of clinical symptoms. 
Radiographs are commonly performed in the setting of acute knee injuries but have a low yield for showing 
fractures. In a retrospective review of 1,967 patients with acute knee injuries by Stiell et al [2], 74.1% of patients 
had knee radiography, and only 5.2% of these had fractures. Therefore, to avoid a large number of negative 
radiographic studies, development of the inclusion criteria for obtaining knee radiographs in the setting of the acute 
trauma was needed. 
The two most commonly used clinical decision criteria, the Ottawa Knee Rule and the Pittsburgh Decision Rule, 
can help to decide when to perform radiographs in acute knee trauma [5,6,8]. 
Ottawa Knee Rule 
The Ottawa Knee Rule [5,6,8] states that patients ≥18 years of age with acute knee pain should have knee 
radiographs if they meet any of the following criteria: 
• Are 55 years of age or older, 
• Have palpable tenderness over the head of the fibula, 
• Have isolated patellar tenderness, 
• Cannot flex the knee to 90°, 
• Cannot bear weight immediately following the injury, or 
• Cannot walk in the emergency room (after taking 4 steps). 
Pittsburgh Decision Rule 
The Pittsburgh Decision Rule states that patients with acute knee trauma who are <12 years old or >50 years old 
should have radiographs as well as patients who cannot take 4 weight-bearing steps in the emergency department 
[5,6]. 
In their prospective study in 178 patients with acute knee trauma with the Ottawa rule criteria applied, Jenny et al 
[8] found a 35% decrease in the number of radiographic examinations with 100% sensitivity for detecting knee 
fracture. Similarly, Cheung et al [6] found a 23% reduction of knee radiographs in 90 patients if the Ottawa rule 
criteria were applied, although they did report 1 patient who had a fracture and did not meet any of the clinical 
criteria, but this fracture was radiographically occult and visible only by MRI. 
In their retrospective study on 106 acute knee trauma patients, Konan et al [5] evaluated the role of the Ottawa and 
Pittsburgh rules to reduce the unnecessary use of radiographs following knee injury. One hundred and one patients 
(95%) had radiographs of their injured knees. Only 5% of these patients had a fracture on radiographs, all with 
Ottawa and Pittsburgh knee rules fulfilled. Using the Ottawa rules, 27 radiographic studies (25%) could have been


--- page 7 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 7 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
avoided without missing a fracture. Using the Pittsburgh rules, 32 radiographic studies (30%) could have been 
avoided. In this study, both the Ottawa and Pittsburgh rules showed high sensitivity in detecting knee fractures [5]. 
Other clinical decision criteria were tested. In an emergency department, in a study of 242 patients >17 years with 
isolated knee injuries sustained 24 hours previously, Weber et al [3] were able to exclude clinically significant 
fractures in patients >18 years who could walk without limping or if there was a twisting injury to the knee and no 
joint effusion. These clinical decision rules were effective in detecting knee fractures with 100% sensitivity and 
with sufficient specificity to eliminate 29% of knee radiographs [3]. 
In their prospective study of 146 patients 3 to 18 years of age with acute trauma to the knee, Moore et al [9] evaluated 
three criteria including: 1) inability to bear weight, 2) inability to flex the knee to 90°, and 3) presence of bony 
tenderness. They found a potential 53% reduction in radiographs if applying only the criteria of ability to take 4 
weight-bearing steps in the emergency department. Three of their patients negative for criterion 3 were found to 
have fractures. 
It is general agreement that radiographs should be obtained and the clinical decision rule should not be applied for 
patients with gross deformity [3], a palpable mass [10], a penetrating injury, prosthetic hardware, an unreliable 
clinical history or physical examination secondary to multiple injuries [3,10], altered mental status (eg, head injury, 
drug or alcohol use, dementia) [3,10], neuropathy (eg, paraplegia, diabetes) [3,10], or a history suggesting increased 
risk of fracture. However, in any case scenario, the physician’s judgment and common sense should supersede 
clinical guidelines [3]. 
For evaluation of the acutely injured knee in patients meeting Ottawa or Pittsburgh rule criteria, a minimum of 2 
radiographs (anteroposterior and lateral) of the affected knee should be obtained. The lateral view is obtained with 
the knee at 25° to 30° of flexion in the lateral decubitus position and should demonstrate the patella in profile. It 
allows the evaluation for the presence of joint effusion. A cross-table lateral view with a horizontal beam enables 
visualization of lipohemarthrosis, frequently seen with intra-articular fractures [11]. Additional commonly 
performed supplemental imaging projections in the acute knee trauma setting include patellofemoral, internal 
oblique, and external oblique views. The patellofemoral view is typically obtained in suspected patellar fractures 
and/or subluxation or dislocation [1]. 
Bone Scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT Knee 
Tc-99m bone scan with single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)/CT knee is not routinely used as 
the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. 
US Knee 
US is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. 
Variant 2: Adult or child 5 years of age or older. Fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. One or more of 
the following: focal tenderness, effusion, inability to bear weight. Initial imaging. 
CT Knee 
CT is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. 
MR Arthrography Knee 
MR arthrography is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. 
MRA Knee 
MRA is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. 
MRI Knee 
MRI is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. 
Radiography Knee 
With one or more positive Ottawa rule criteria, including focal tenderness and/or inability to bear weight, 
radiographs should be the initial imaging modality for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee [5,6,8]. 
Bone Scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT Knee 
Tc-99m bone scan with SPECT/CT knee is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute 
trauma to the knee. 
US Knee 
US is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee.


--- page 8 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 8 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
Variant 3: Adult or skeletally mature child. Fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. No fracture seen on 
radiographs. Suspect occult fracture or internal derangement. Next study. 
CT Knee 
CT may be performed as the next imaging study for the evaluation of suspected radiographically occult knee 
fractures. 
Several studies reported CT to be superior to knee radiographs in detection and classification of fractures. In a study 
by Mustonen et al [12], CT showed 100% and radiographs 83% sensitivity in detection of tibial plateau fractures, 
and CT was superior in further characterization of fracture severity. 
In the setting of acute knee trauma, Mui et al [13] reported 80% sensitivity and 98% specificity of the CT 
examination in detecting bony avulsion fractures and a high negative predictive value for excluding ligamentous 
injuries, but MRI remained necessary for the preoperative detection of meniscal injury. 
Peltola et al [14] compared dual-energy CT examinations with MRI studies as a reference standard in 18 patients 
with acute knee trauma and reported dual-energy CT had 79% sensitivity and 100% specificity in detecting anterior 
cruciate ligament (ACL) ruptures [14]. 
In a study by Heffernan et al [15], 64-channel multidetector CT showed 87.5% to 100% sensitivity and 100% 
specificity for detection of the ACL tears. As on MRI, secondary signs, such as buckling of the posterior cruciate 
ligament, were also useful in their diagnosis. In this study, multidetector CT showed a low sensitivity for other soft-
tissue injuries at the knee; however, its high specificity indicated that apparent posterior cruciate ligament, meniscal, 
and collateral ligament tears can reliably be treated as true-positive findings [15]. 
The dual-energy CT virtual noncalcium technique can subtract calcium from cancellous bone, allowing detection 
[16-18] and possibly grading of the post-traumatic bone marrow contusions [18]. 
However, MRI is superior to CT in detection of bone marrow abnormalities and meniscal and ligamentous injuries 
and may be subsequently performed as clinically indicated. 
MR Arthrography Knee 
With negative radiographs, MR arthrography is not routinely used as the next imaging study for the evaluation of 
suspected occult knee fractures or internal derangement. 
MRA Knee 
With negative radiographs, MRA is not routinely used as the next imaging study for the evaluation of suspected 
occult knee fractures or internal derangement. 
MRI Knee 
MRI has many distinct advantages for the evaluation of the injured knee in the setting of negative radiographs. 
The majority of patients (93.5%) who present with acute knee injuries in the emergency department sustained soft-
tissue injuries rather than osseous injuries [19]. MRI is a proven valuable tool in the treatment decision-making 
process, allowing earlier surgical intervention by obtaining a more accurate diagnosis [20,21]. Frobell et al [22] 
reported a low diagnostic benefit of the initial clinical examination in the setting of acute knee trauma with higher-
than-suspected incidence of the ACL injuries on MRI. In randomized studies of patients with knee injuries [23,24], 
MRI findings shortened the diagnostic completion workup, reduced the number of additional diagnostic procedures, 
and improved quality of life in the first 6 weeks, potentially reducing productivity loss. 
A retrospective study by Cecava et al [25] showed that knee radiography is a highly specific screening test for 
internal derangement in patients <40 years old with acute knee injury. In this patient population, knee effusion >10 
mm on lateral radiograph should prompt consideration for the knee MRI examination, which can potentially 
decrease delayed diagnosis, improve patient outcomes, and decrease disability [25]. 
Magee et al [26] reported 96% sensitivity and 97% specificity of 3T MRI in the detection of meniscal tears in 
correlation with arthroscopy. However, a study by Van Dyck et al [21] showed similar high sensitivities and 
specificities of routine 3T and 1.5T MRI examinations in the evaluation of meniscal and ACL tears with 
arthroscopic correlation. Routine 3T MRI protocol did not significantly improve accuracy for evaluating the knee 
menisci and ACL compared with a similar 1.5T MRI protocol. 
MRI can diagnose the patterns and severity of bone marrow contusions that frequently have an association with the 
specific mechanisms of injury and can predict associated soft-tissue injuries [27,28]. In a study by Song et al [28],


--- page 9 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 9 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
in the setting of the acute noncontact ACL injury, both the presence and the severity of lateral bone contusions were 
associated with high-grade pivot-shift, concomitant lateral meniscal lesions as well as anterolateral ligament 
abnormality. Klengel et al [29] found that the apparent diffusion coefficient maps are more sensitive than 
corresponding proton density-weighted fat-saturated turbo spin-echo MRI sequences for detection of bone marrow 
lesions after knee trauma and allowed detection of significantly more and larger bone marrow lesions. Additionally, 
apparent diffusion coefficient map evaluation improved diagnostic performance in regions with insufficient spectral 
fat saturation, such as the patella. Koster et al [30] showed that the presence of a bone contusion on MRI after acute 
knee trauma is highly predictive of the development of focal osteoarthritis 1 year after trauma. 
MRI facilitates diagnosis of the anterolateral ligament injuries that have frequent association with ACL injuries and 
anterolateral knee instability, of which a minority are associated with Segond fractures [31]. In a study by Kosy et 
al [32], MRI detected a larger number of anterolateral ligament injuries in association with the ACL injuries within 
6 weeks of the acute knee trauma compared with scans performed later, which suggests that some injuries may 
resolve or become less visible with increased chronicity. MRI is proven helpful in detection and characterization of 
posterolateral corner injuries, which can be associated with the ACL ruptures and, if missed, may lead to 
considerable morbidity. In a study by Temponi et al [33], concomitant posterolateral corner injuries and the ACL 
ruptures were present in 19.7% of patients on MRI studies. Precise location and classification of the ACL tears on 
the MRI study may help in preoperative planning, in particular with a growing interest in this ligament preservation 
technique [34]. 
MRI can change management from surgical to conservative in up to 48% of patients presenting with a locked knee, 
which is usually an indication for arthroscopic procedure [35,36]. 
Bone Scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT Knee 
Tc-99m bone scan would not be the next best imaging study to evaluate for radiographically occult fractures and/or 
internal derangement. 
Tc-99m-methylene diophosphate bone SPECT/CT scan has been suggested as an alternative to MRI in evaluating 
suspected bone contusions and meniscal and ACL tears in the setting of acute knee trauma. A SPECT study by 
Even-Sapir et al [37] with arthroscopic and MRI correlation showed promising results in diagnosis of the ACL and 
meniscal tears and the associated bone contusions in patients with acute knee trauma. Another study by Siegel et al 
[38] suggested that the degree of radiotracer uptake in the knee, as determined by SPECT, positively correlates with 
the severity of pathology seen at arthroscopy. However, a more recent SPECT study with arthroscopic correlation 
by Wertman et al [39] showed a lower sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy than MRI in evaluating meniscal 
injuries. 
US Knee 
US is not used as the next best imaging study to evaluate for radiographically occult fractures and/or internal 
derangement. 
US is an excellent and easily performed imaging study in detection of knee joint effusions. However, because of its 
technical limitations, US may only evaluate the outer bone surface and has a limited role in detection of the occult 
knee fractures. Therefore, this imaging modality is not routinely used for the evaluation of suspected occult knee 
fractures but may detect a lipohemarthrosis, which is typically associated with intra-articular fractures. A 
comparison of US studies with radiography and CT examinations by Bonnefoy et al [40] serving as the reference 
standard and using a knee lipohemarthrosis as a criterion, yielded a sensitivity of and specificity of 94% for US 
detection of acute intra-articular fractures. A recent study by Klos et al [41] showed a higher prevalence of Segond 
avulsions fractures on US studies than previously reported in literature on the MRI or radiography. The lateral 
femoral condyle impaction injury was the best variable in predicting the presence of a Segond fracture [41]. 
US is highly accurate in diagnosis of partial-thickness and full-thickness quadriceps tendon tears, with sensitivity 
and specificity approaching 100% [42]. However, the utility of US in the evaluation of the knee menisci, cruciate 
and collateral ligaments, and periarticular soft tissues varies depending on patient factors. In particular, US enables 
limited visualization of the cruciate ligaments, portions of the menisci, and articular surfaces of the knee joint. In a 
study by Wang et al [43], the presence of a joint effusion at US in the setting of acute knee trauma showed a 91% 
positive predictive value for internal derangement. Wareluk et al [44] reported an 85% sensitivity and 86% 
specificity of the US imaging for detection of meniscal tears, with the specificity highest in recent injuries (<1 
month). Alizadeh et al [45] showed comparable sensitivity and specificity of the US and MRI examinations in 
detection of medial meniscal tears in patients who were ≤30 years old with arthroscopic correlation. A meta-analysis


--- page 10 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 10 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
US study by Dai et al including 551 patients from 7 prospective studies revealed pooled sensitivity of 88% and 
specificity of 90% in diagnosis of meniscal injuries [46]. 
Another meta-analysis of 4 US studies including 246 patients revealed pooled sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 
97% in the diagnosis of ACL injuries [47]. An US study in correlation with MRI and pivot shift testing suggested 
a potential utility of US examination in diagnosis of the anterolateral ligament injury [48]. Wang et al [49] found 
2-D US a potentially useful tool in diagnosis of posterior cruciate ligament injuries with a posterior cruciate ligament 
thickness ≥6.5 mm as a recommended diagnostic criterion. 
Variant 4: Skeletally immature child. Fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. No fracture seen on 
radiographs. Suspect occult fracture or internal derangement. Next study. 
CT Knee 
With negative radiographs, CT may be performed as the next imaging study for the evaluation of suspected 
radiographically occult knee fractures [12] and bone marrow contusions [16-18]. CT may diagnose or predict 
ligamentous injuries [14,15,50,51] and predict meniscal [15,50,51] injuries. However, MRI is superior to CT in 
evaluation of bone marrow lesions [27-29], meniscal [21,26] and ligamentous [21,31-34] injuries, and may be 
subsequently performed as clinically indicated. 
MR Arthrography Knee 
With negative radiographs, MR arthrography is not routinely used as the next imaging study for the evaluation of 
suspected occult knee fractures or internal derangement. 
MRA Knee 
With negative radiographs, MRA is not routinely used as the next imaging study for the evaluation of suspected 
occult knee fractures or internal derangement. 
MRI Knee 
MRI should be the next imaging modality to evaluate for the presence of radiographically occult fractures and/or 
internal derangements of the acutely injured knee. With its superb contrast resolution and multiplanar imaging 
capability, MRI is proven to be a highly accurate imaging modality in the evaluation of bone marrow contusions 
and occult fractures [27-29] as well as meniscal [21,26] and ligamentous injuries [21,31-34]. 
Bone Scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT Knee 
Tc-99m bone scan with SPECT/CT would not be the next best imaging study to evaluate for radiographically occult 
fractures and/or internal derangement. 
Even-Sapir et al [37] showed promising results of a SPECT study in diagnosis of the ACL and meniscal tears and 
the associated bone contusions in patients with acute knee trauma with arthroscopic and MRI correlation. However, 
a more recent SPECT study with arthroscopic correlation by Wertman et al [39] showed a lower sensitivity, 
specificity, and accuracy than MRI in evaluating meniscal injuries. 
US Knee 
US would not be the next best imaging study to evaluate for radiographically occult fractures and/or internal 
derangement of the acutely injured knee. However, US may demonstrate a lipohemarthrosis, indicating the presence 
of an intra-articular fracture [40]. US is an excellent imaging modality for the diagnosis of quadriceps tendon tears 
[42] with good performance in the evaluation of the meniscal [44-46] and ligamentous [47-49] injuries. However, 
the utility of US in the evaluation of the knee menisci, cruciate and collateral ligaments, and periarticular soft tissues 
varies depending on patient factors. 
Variant 5: Adult or child 5 years of age or older. Fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. Tibial plateau 
fracture on radiographs. Suspect additional bone or soft-tissue injury. Next study. 
CT Knee 
In patients with radiographic diagnosis of the tibial plateau fracture, CT is frequently performed for further 
classification and characterization of the fracture severity [12,52] and may predict or diagnose ligamentous injuries 
[13-15,50,51] and predict meniscal injuries [15,50]. A study by Spiro et al [50] found that the amount of articular 
surface depression on CT is a predictor of meniscal and ligamentous injuries and can suggest when an MRI is 
indicated to confirm or exclude meniscal and ligamentous injuries [50]. In a study by Mustonen et al [12], CT 
showed 100% sensitivity and radiographs 83% sensitivity in detection of tibial plateau fractures, and CT was 
superior in further characterization of fracture severity. Chang et al [52] reported that CT-reconstructed images


--- page 11 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 11 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
enhance the morphological subclassification of the medial tibial plateau fractures (Schatzker type IV) with common 
involvement of posterolateral quadrants. In the setting of acute knee trauma, Mui et al [13] reported 80% sensitivity 
and 98% specificity of the CT examination in detecting bony avulsion fractures. Tang et al [51] found that lateral 
tibial plateau depression of >11 mm and its specific part involvement on preoperative CT scans could help predict 
a higher risk of the lateral meniscus tear and the ACL avulsion fracture. 
MR Arthrography Knee 
With a radiographic diagnosis of tibial plateau fracture, MR arthrography of the knee is not performed to evaluate 
for additional bone or soft-tissue injury. 
MRA Knee 
With a radiographic diagnosis of tibial plateau fracture, MRA of the knee is not performed to evaluate for additional 
bone or soft-tissue injury. 
MRI Knee 
With a radiographic diagnosis of tibial plateau fracture, MRI would be the next best imaging modality to evaluate 
for the presence of additional radiographically occult fractures and/or internal derangements of the acutely injured 
knee. With its superb contrast resolution and multiplanar imaging capability, MRI is proven to be a highly accurate 
imaging modality in the evaluation of bone marrow contusions and occult fractures [27-29] as well as meniscal 
[21,26] and ligamentous injuries [21,31-34]. 
Bone Scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT Knee 
With a radiographic diagnosis of tibial plateau fracture, Tc-99m bone scan with SPECT/CT is not performed as the 
next best imaging study to evaluate for additional bone or soft-tissue injury. 
US Knee 
With a radiographic diagnosis of tibial plateau fracture, US is not performed as the next best imaging study to 
evaluate for additional bone or soft-tissue injury. 
Variant 6: Adult or child 5 years of age or older. Acute trauma to the knee. Mechanism unknown. Focal 
patellar tenderness, effusion, able to walk. Initial Imaging. 
CT Knee 
CT is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee but is superior to 
knee radiographs in detection and classification of fractures [12]. 
MR Arthrography Knee 
MR arthrography is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. 
MRA Knee 
MRA is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. 
MRI Knee 
MRI is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. MRI aids in 
diagnosis and further characterization of bone and soft-tissue injuries associated with transient lateral dislocation 
of the patella [53-55]. 
Radiography Knee 
With one or more positive Ottawa rule criteria, including focal patellar tenderness and joint effusion, radiographs 
should be the initial imaging modality for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee [5,6,8]. For the evaluation of 
an acutely injured knee joint in patients with positive Ottawa rule criteria, a minimum of 2 radiographs— 
anteroposterior and lateral views of the affected knee—should be obtained [11]. Additional patellofemoral view is 
typically obtained to evaluate for suspected patellar fractures and/or subluxation or dislocation [1]. 
Bone Scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT Knee 
Tc-99m bone scan with SPECT/CT knee is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute 
trauma to the knee. 
US Knee 
US is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee.


--- page 12 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 12 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
Variant 7: Adult or child 5 years of age or older. Significant trauma to the knee (eg, motor vehicle accident, 
knee dislocation). Initial imaging. 
Arteriography Lower Extremity 
Vascular injury may be found in about 30% of patients following posterior knee dislocation [56]. Injuries of the 
popliteal artery require prompt surgical intervention to help limb preservation. Associated peroneal and tibial nerve 
injuries may cause significant morbidity and require an understanding of their pathophysiologic implications to 
maximize limb functionality [57]. Angiography has been the reference standard in the evaluation of vascular injuries 
associated with knee dislocations [58]. However, this is an invasive procedure with associated risk, and with the 
excellent performance of CTA and MRA, it is usually performed in selected cases [58]. 
CT Knee 
CT is not routinely used as the initial imaging study for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee. CT is superior 
to knee radiographs in detection and classification of fractures [12]; however, without IV contrast, CT cannot detect 
vascular injuries. 
CTA Lower Extremity 
With suspected vascular injuries in the setting of knee dislocation, CTA is frequently used because it is less invasive 
and has a similarly high accuracy as conventional angiography [58-60]. 
MR Arthrography Knee 
In patients with significant acute knee trauma with suspected or possible dislocation, MR arthrography of the knee 
is not routinely used as the initial imaging study. 
MRA Knee 
MRI is an accurate method used in the evaluation of soft-tissue, osseous, and neural injuries after knee dislocation 
[61]. MRA may be performed simultaneously with MRI for evaluation of internal derangement and vascular injuries 
with less morbidity compared with conventional angiography [62]. Potter et al [61] reported their experience with 
popliteal fossa MRA with encouraging results and complete agreement between the MRA and conventional 
angiography in patients who had both studies. Similarly, in a study by Tocci et al [62], MRA has been shown to be 
as accurate and useful as conventional angiography in the evaluation of popliteal artery injuries of patients with 
knee dislocations. 
MRI Knee 
With its superb contrast resolution and multiplanar imaging capability, MRI is proven to be a highly accurate 
imaging modality in the evaluation of bone marrow contusions and occult fractures [27-29] as well as meniscal 
[21,26] and ligamentous injuries [21,31,32]. It can be performed in conjunction with MRA for evaluation of internal 
derangement and vascular injuries with less morbidity compared with conventional angiography [62]. 
Radiography Knee 
In the setting of significant acute trauma to the knee, radiographs should be the first imaging study. It is general 
agreement that radiographs should be obtained and the clinical decision rule should not be applied for patients with 
gross deformity [3], a palpable mass [10], a penetrating injury, prosthetic hardware, an unreliable clinical history 
or physical examination secondary to multiple injuries [3,10], altered mental status (eg, head injury, drug or alcohol 
use, dementia) [3,10], neuropathy (eg, paraplegia, diabetes) [3,10], or a history suggesting increased risk of fracture. 
Additionally, in any case scenario, the physician’s judgment and common sense should supersede clinical guidelines 
[3]. 
Bone Scan with SPECT or SPECT/CT Knee 
In patients with significant acute knee trauma with suspected/possible dislocation, Tc-99m bone scan with 
SPECT/CT is not routinely used as the initial imaging study. 
US Knee 
In patients with significant acute knee trauma with suspected or possible dislocation, US is not routinely used as 
the initial imaging study. 
Summary of Recommendations 
• Variant 1: Knee radiographs may be appropriate for the initial imaging of patients 5 years of age or older for 
the evaluation of a fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee when there is no focal tenderness, no effusion, and 
they are able to walk.


--- page 13 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 13 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
• Variant 2: Knee radiographs are usually appropriate as the initial imaging study of patients 5 years of age or 
older for the evaluation of a fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee when at least one of the following is 
present: focal tenderness, effusion, inability to bear weight. 
• Variant 3: MRI knee without IV contrast is usually appropriate as the next imaging study, after radiographs 
did not show fracture, of adults or skeletally mature children, for the evaluation of suspected occult knee 
fractures or internal derangement after a fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. 
• Variant 4: MRI knee without IV contrast is usually appropriate as the next imaging study after radiographs did 
not show fracture, of skeletally immature children, for the evaluation of suspected occult knee fractures or 
internal derangement after a fall or acute twisting trauma to the knee. 
• Variant 5: MRI knee without IV contrast or CT knee without IV contrast is usually appropriate as the next 
imaging study after radiographic diagnosis of tibial plateau fracture, of patients 5 years of age or older, to 
evaluate for the suspicion of additional bone or soft-tissue injury after a fall or acute twisting trauma to the 
knee. These procedures are equivalent alternatives (ie, only 1 procedure will be ordered to provide the clinical 
information to effectively manage the patient’s care). 
• Variant 6: Knee radiographs are usually appropriate as the initial imaging study of patients 5 years of age or 
older for the evaluation of acute trauma to the knee from an unknown mechanism when at least one of the 
following is present: focal tenderness, effusion, ability to walk. 
• Variant 7: Knee radiographs or CTA lower extremity with IV contrast is usually appropriate as the initial 
imaging study, of patients 5 years of age or older, for the evaluation of significant trauma to the knee (eg, motor 
vehicle accident, knee dislocation). These procedures are complementary (eg, more than one procedure is 
ordered as a set or simultaneously where each procedure provides unique clinical information to effectively 
manage the patient’s care). The panel did not agree on recommending CT knee with IV contrast as the initial 
imaging study of patients 5 years of age or older for the evaluation of significant trauma to the knee. There is 
insufficient medical literature to conclude whether or not these patients would benefit from CT knee with IV 
contrast for the evaluation of significant trauma to the knee. CT of the knee with IV contrast in this patient 
population is controversial but may be appropriate. 
Supporting Documents 
The evidence table, literature search, and appendix for this topic are available at https://acsearch.acr.org/list. The 
appendix includes the strength of evidence assessment and the final rating round tabulations for each 
recommendation. 
For additional information on the Appropriateness Criteria methodology and other supporting documents go to 
www.acr.org/ac.


--- page 14 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 14 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
Appropriateness Category Names and Definitions  
Appropriateness Category Name Appropriateness 
Rating Appropriateness Category Definition 
Usually Appropriate 7, 8, or 9 
The imaging procedure or treatment is indicated in the 
specified clinical scenarios at a favorable risk-benefit 
ratio for patients. 
May Be Appropriate 4, 5, or 6 
The imaging procedure or treatment may be indicated 
in the specified clinical scenarios as an alternative to 
imaging procedures or treatments with a more 
favorable risk-benefit ratio, or the risk-benefit ratio for 
patients is equivocal. 
May Be Appropriate 
(Disagreement) 5 
The individual ratings are too dispersed from the panel 
median. The different label provides transparency 
regarding the panel’s recommendation. “May be 
appropriate” is the rating category and a rating of 5 is 
assigned. 
Usually Not Appropriate 1, 2, or 3 
The imaging procedure or treatment is unlikely to be 
indicated in the specified clinical scenarios, or the 
risk-benefit ratio for patients is likely to be 
unfavorable. 
Relative Radiation Level Information 
Potential adverse health effects associated with radiation exposure are an important factor to consider when 
selecting the appropriate imaging procedure. Because there is a wide range of radiation exposures associated with 
different diagnostic procedures, a relative radiation level (RRL) indication has been included for each imaging 
examination. The RRLs are based on effective dose, which is a radiation dose quantity that is used to estimate 
population total radiation risk associated with an imaging procedure. Patients in the pediatric age group are at 
inherently higher risk from exposure, because of both organ sensitivity and longer life expectancy (relevant to the 
long latency that appears to accompany radiation exposure). For these reasons, the RRL dose estimate ranges for 
pediatric examinations are lower as compared with those specified for adults (see Table below). Additional 
information regarding radiation dose assessment for imaging examinations can be found in the ACR 
Appropriateness Criteria® Radiation Dose Assessment Introduction document [63]. 
Relative Radiation Level Designations 
Relative Radiation Level* Adult Effective Dose Estimate 
Range 
Pediatric Effective Dose Estimate 
Range 
O 0 mSv 0 mSv 
☢ <0.1 mSv <0.03 mSv 
☢☢ 0.1-1 mSv 0.03-0.3 mSv 
☢☢☢ 1-10 mSv 0.3-3 mSv 
☢☢☢☢ 10-30 mSv 3-10 mSv 
☢☢☢☢☢ 30-100 mSv 10-30 mSv 
*RRL assignments for some of the examinations cannot be made, because the actual patient doses in these procedures vary 
as a function of a number of factors (eg, region of the body exposed to ionizing radiation, the imaging guidance that is used). 
The RRLs for these examinations are designated as “Varies.” 
References 
1. Strudwick K, McPhee M, Bell A, Martin-Khan M, Russell T. Review article: Best practice management of 
common knee injuries in the emergency department (part 3 of the musculoskeletal injuries rapid review series). 
Emerg Med Australas 2018;30:327-52.


--- page 15 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 15 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
2. Stiell IG, Wells GA, McDowell I, et al. Use of radiography in acute knee injuries: need for clinical decision 
rules. Acad Emerg Med 1995;2:966-73. 
3. Weber JE, Jackson RE, Peacock WF, Swor RA, Carley R, Larkin GL. Clinical decision rules discriminate 
between fractures and nonfractures in acute isolated knee trauma. Ann Emerg Med 1995;26:429-33. 
4. Gage BE, McIlvain NM, Collins CL, Fields SK, Comstock RD. Epidemiology of 6.6 million knee injuries 
presenting to United States emergency departments from 1999 through 2008. Acad Emerg Med 2012;19:378-
85. 
5. Konan S, Zang TT, Tamimi N, Haddad FS. Can the Ottawa and Pittsburgh rules reduce requests for radiography 
in patients referred to acute knee clinics? Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2013;95:188-91. 
6. Cheung TC, Tank Y, Breederveld RS, Tuinebreijer WE, de Lange-de Klerk ES, Derksen RJ. Diagnostic 
accuracy and reproducibility of the Ottawa Knee Rule vs the Pittsburgh Decision Rule. Am J Emerg Med 
2013;31:641-5. 
7. American College of Radiology. ACR–NASCI–SIR–SPR Practice Parameter for the Performance and 
Interpretation of Body Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA). Available at: https://www.acr.org/-
/media/ACR/Files/Practice-Parameters/Body-CTA.pdf?la=en. Accessed November 29, 2019. 
8. Jenny JY, Boeri C, El Amrani H, et al. Should plain X-rays be routinely performed after blunt knee trauma? A 
prospective analysis. J Trauma 2005;58:1179-82. 
9. Moore BR, Hampers LC, Clark KD. Performance of a decision rule for radiographs of pediatric knee injuries. 
J Emerg Med 2005;28:257-61. 
10. Stiell IG, Greenberg GH, Wells GA, et al. Prospective validation of a decision rule for the use of radiography 
in acute knee injuries. JAMA 1996;275:611-5. 
11. Teh J, Kambouroglou G, Newton J. Investigation of acute knee injury. BMJ 2012;344:e3167. 
12. Mustonen AO, Koskinen SK, Kiuru MJ. Acute knee trauma: analysis of multidetector computed tomography 
findings and comparison with conventional radiography. Acta Radiol 2005;46:866-74. 
13. Mui LW, Engelsohn E, Umans H. Comparison of CT and MRI in patients with tibial plateau fracture: can CT 
findings predict ligament tear or meniscal injury? Skeletal Radiol 2007;36:145-51. 
14. Peltola EK, Koskinen SK. Dual-energy computed tomography of cruciate ligament injuries in acute knee 
trauma. Skeletal Radiol 2015;44:1295-301. 
15. Heffernan EJ, Moran DE, Gerstenmaier JF, McCarthy CJ, Hegarty C, McMahon CJ. Accuracy of 64-section 
MDCT in the diagnosis of cruciate ligament tears. Clin Radiol 2017;72:611 e1-11 e8. 
16. Pache G, Bulla S, Baumann T, et al. Dose reduction does not affect detection of bone marrow lesions with dual-
energy CT virtual noncalcium technique. Acad Radiol 2012;19:1539-45. 
17. Pache G, Krauss B, Strohm P, et al. Dual-energy CT virtual noncalcium technique: detecting posttraumatic 
bone marrow lesions--feasibility study. Radiology 2010;256:617-24. 
18. Cao JX, Wang YM, Kong XQ, Yang C, Wang P. Good interrater reliability of a new grading system in detecting 
traumatic bone marrow lesions in the knee by dual energy CT virtual non-calcium images. Eur J Radiol 
2015;84:1109-15. 
19. Blum MR, Goldstein LB. Practical Pain Management. Need for More Accurate ER Diagnoses of ACL Injuries. 
Available at: http://www.practicalpainmanagement.com/pain/acute/sports-overuse/need-more-accurateer-
diagnoses-acl-injuries. Accessed November 29, 2019. 
20. Griffin JW, Miller MD. MRI of the knee with arthroscopic correlation. Clin Sports Med 2013;32:507-23. 
21. Van Dyck P, Vanhoenacker FM, Lambrecht V, et al. Prospective comparison of 1.5 and 3.0-T MRI for 
evaluating the knee menisci and ACL. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2013;95:916-24. 
22. Frobell RB, Lohmander LS, Roos HP. Acute rotational trauma to the knee: poor agreement between clinical 
assessment and magnetic resonance imaging findings. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2007;17:109-14. 
23. Nikken JJ, Oei EH, Ginai AZ, et al. Acute peripheral joint injury: cost and effectiveness of low-field-strength 
MR imaging--results of randomized controlled trial. Radiology 2005;236:958-67. 
24. Oei EH, Nikken JJ, Ginai AZ, et al. Costs and effectiveness of a brief MRI examination of patients with acute 
knee injury. Eur Radiol 2009;19:409-18. 
25. Cecava ND, Dieckman S, Banks KP, Mansfield LT. Traumatic knee injury: correlation of radiographic effusion 
size with the presence of internal derangement on magnetic resonance imaging. Emerg Radiol 2018;25:479-87. 
26. Magee T, Williams D. 3.0-T MRI of meniscal tears. AJR 2006;187:371-5. 
27. Berger N, Andreisek G, Karer AT, et al. Association between traumatic bone marrow abnormalities of the knee, 
the trauma mechanism and associated soft-tissue knee injuries. Eur Radiol 2017;27:393-403.


--- page 16 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 16 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
28. Song GY, Zhang H, Wang QQ, Zhang J, Li Y, Feng H. Bone Contusions After Acute Noncontact Anterior 
Cruciate Ligament Injury Are Associated With Knee Joint Laxity, Concomitant Meniscal Lesions, and 
Anterolateral Ligament Abnormality. Arthroscopy 2016;32:2331-41. 
29. Klengel A, Stumpp P, Klengel S, Bottger I, Ronisch N, Kahn T. Detection of Traumatic Bone Marrow Lesions 
after Knee Trauma: Comparison of ADC Maps Derived from Diffusion-weighted Imaging with Standard Fat-
saturated Proton Density-weighted Turbo Spin-Echo Sequences. Radiology 2017;283:469-77. 
30. Koster IM, Oei EH, Hensen JH, et al. Predictive factors for new onset or progression of knee osteoarthritis one 
year after trauma: MRI follow-up in general practice. Eur Radiol 2011;21:1509-16. 
31. Helito CP, Helito PVP, Leao RV, Demange MK, Bordalo-Rodrigues M. Anterolateral ligament abnormalities 
are associated with peripheral ligament and osseous injuries in acute ruptures of the anterior cruciate ligament. 
Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2017;25:1140-48. 
32. Kosy JD, Schranz PJ, Patel A, Anaspure R, Mandalia VI. The magnetic resonance imaging appearance of the 
anterolateral ligament of the knee in association with anterior cruciate rupture. Skeletal Radiol 2017;46:1193-
200. 
33. Temponi EF, de Carvalho Junior LH, Saithna A, Thaunat M, Sonnery-Cottet B. Incidence and MRI 
characterization of the spectrum of posterolateral corner injuries occurring in association with ACL rupture. 
Skeletal Radiol 2017;46:1063-70. 
34. van der List JP, Mintz DN, DiFelice GS. The Location of Anterior Cruciate Ligament Tears: A Prevalence 
Study Using Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Orthop J Sports Med 2017;5:2325967117709966. 
35. Helmark IC, Neergaard K, Krogsgaard MR. Traumatic knee extension deficit (the locked knee): can MRI 
reduce the need for arthroscopy? Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2007;15:863-8. 
36. McNally EG, Nasser KN, Dawson S, Goh LA. Role of magnetic resonance imaging in the clinical management 
of the acutely locked knee. Skeletal Radiol 2002;31:570-3. 
37. Even-Sapir E, Arbel R, Lerman H, Flusser G, Livshitz G, Halperin N. Bone injury associated with anterior 
cruciate ligament and meniscal tears: assessment with bone single photon emission computed tomography. 
Invest Radiol 2002;37:521-7. 
38. Siegel Y, Golan H, Thein R. 99mTc-methylene diphosphonate single photon emission tomography of the knees: 
intensity of uptake and its correlation with arthroscopic findings. Nucl Med Commun 2006;27:689-93. 
39. Wertman M, Milgrom C, Agar G, Milgrom Y, Yalom N, Finestone AS. Comparison of knee SPECT and MRI 
in evaluating meniscus injuries in soldiers. Isr Med Assoc J 2014;16:703-6. 
40. Bonnefoy O, Diris B, Moinard M, Aunoble S, Diard F, Hauger O. Acute knee trauma: role of ultrasound. Eur 
Radiol 2006;16:2542-8. 
41. Klos B, Scholtes M, Konijnenberg S. High prevalence of all complex Segond avulsion using ultrasound 
imaging. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2017;25:1331-38. 
42. Foley R, Fessell D, Yablon C, Nadig J, Brandon C, Jacobson J. Sonography of traumatic quadriceps tendon 
tears with surgical correlation. J Ultrasound Med 2015;34:805-10. 
43. Wang CY, Wang HK, Hsu CY, Shieh JY, Wang TG, Jiang CC. Role of sonographic examination in traumatic 
knee internal derangement. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2007;88:984-7. 
44. Wareluk P, Szopinski KT. Value of modern sonography in the assessment of meniscal lesions. Eur J Radiol 
2012;81:2366-9. 
45. Alizadeh A, Babaei Jandaghi A, Keshavarz Zirak A, Karimi A, Mardani-Kivi M, Rajabzadeh A. Knee 
sonography as a diagnostic test for medial meniscal tears in young patients. Eur J Orthop Surg Traumatol 
2013;23:927-31. 
46. Dai H, Huang ZG, Chen ZJ, Liu JX. Diagnostic accuracy of ultrasonography in assessing meniscal injury: meta-
analysis of prospective studies. J Orthop Sci 2015;20:675-81. 
47. Wang J, Wu H, Dong F, et al. The role of ultrasonography in the diagnosis of anterior cruciate ligament injury: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Sport Sci 2018;18:579-86. 
48. Cavaignac E, Faruch M, Wytrykowski K, et al. Ultrasonographic Evaluation of Anterolateral Ligament Injuries: 
Correlation With Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Pivot-Shift Testing. Arthroscopy 2017;33:1384-90. 
49. Wang LY, Yang TH, Huang YC, Chou WY, Huang CC, Wang CJ. Evaluating posterior cruciate ligament injury 
by using two-dimensional ultrasonography and sonoelastography. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 
2017;25:3108-15. 
50. Spiro AS, Regier M, Novo de Oliveira A, et al. The degree of articular depression as a predictor of soft-tissue 
injuries in tibial plateau fracture. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2013;21:564-70.


--- page 17 ---
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® 17 Acute Trauma to the Knee 
51. Tang HC, Chen IJ, Yeh YC, et al. Correlation of parameters on preoperative CT images with intra-articular 
soft-tissue injuries in acute tibial plateau fractures: A review of 132 patients receiving ARIF. Injury 
2017;48:745-50. 
52. Chang SM, Zhang YQ, Yao MW, Du SC, Li Q, Guo Z. Schatzker type IV medial tibial plateau fractures: a 
computed tomography-based morphological subclassification. Orthopedics 2014;37:e699-706. 
53. Kirsch MD, Fitzgerald SW, Friedman H, Rogers LF. Transient lateral patellar dislocation: diagnosis with MR 
imaging. AJR 1993;161:109-13. 
54. Paakkala A, Sillanpaa P, Huhtala H, Paakkala T, Maenpaa H. Bone bruise in acute traumatic patellar 
dislocation: volumetric magnetic resonance imaging analysis with follow-up mean of 12 months. Skeletal 
Radiol 2010;39:675-82. 
55. Sanders TG, Paruchuri NB, Zlatkin MB. MRI of osteochondral defects of the lateral femoral condyle: incidence 
and pattern of injury after transient lateral dislocation of the patella. AJR 2006;187:1332-7. 
56. Boisrenoult P, Lustig S, Bonneviale P, et al. Vascular lesions associated with bicruciate and knee dislocation 
ligamentous injury. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res 2009;95:621-6. 
57. Johnson ME, Foster L, DeLee JC. Neurologic and vascular injuries associated with knee ligament injuries. Am 
J Sports Med 2008;36:2448-62. 
58. Howells NR, Brunton LR, Robinson J, Porteus AJ, Eldridge JD, Murray JR. Acute knee dislocation: an evidence 
based approach to the management of the multiligament injured knee. Injury 2011;42:1198-204. 
59. Fleiter TR, Mervis S. The role of 3D-CTA in the assessment of peripheral vascular lesions in trauma patients. 
Eur J Radiol 2007;64:92-102. 
60. Rieger M, Mallouhi A, Tauscher T, Lutz M, Jaschke WR. Traumatic arterial injuries of the extremities: initial 
evaluation with MDCT angiography. AJR 2006;186:656-64. 
61. Potter HG, Weinstein M, Allen AA, Wickiewicz TL, Helfet DL. Magnetic resonance imaging of the multiple-
ligament injured knee. J Orthop Trauma 2002;16:330-9. 
62. Tocci SL, Heard WM, Fadale PD, Brody JM, Born C. Magnetic resonance angiography for the evaluation of 
vascular injury in knee dislocations. J Knee Surg 2010;23:201-7. 
63. American College of Radiology. ACR Appropriateness Criteria® Radiation Dose Assessment Introduction. 
Available at: https://www.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Appropriateness-
Criteria/RadiationDoseAssessmentIntro.pdf. Accessed November 29, 2019. 
 
The ACR Committee on Appropriateness Criteria and its expert panels have developed criteria for determining appropriate imaging examinations for 
diagnosis and treatment of specified medical condition(s). These criteria are intended to guide radiologists, radiation oncologists and referring physicians in 
making decisions regarding radiologic imaging and treatment. Generally, the complexity and severity of a patient’s clinical condition should dictate the 
selection of appropriate imaging procedures or treatments. Only those examinations generally used for evaluation of the patient’s condition are ranked. 
Other imaging studies necessary to evaluate other co-existent diseases or other medical consequences of this condition are not considered in this document. 
The availability of equipment or personnel may influence the selection of appropriate imaging procedures or treatments. Imaging techniques classified as 
investigational by the FDA have not been considered in developing these criteria; however, study of new equipment and applications should be encouraged. 
The ultimate decision regarding the appropriateness of any specific radiologic examination or treatment must be made by the referring physician and 
radiologist in light of all the circumstances presented in an individual examination.
