--- page 1 ---
To access the updated PrEP guideline, visit: 
cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/risk/prep/cdc-hiv-prep-guidelines-2021.pdf
PrEP for the Prevention of HIV Infection in 
the U.S.: 2021 Guideline Summary 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has released the Preexposure Prophylaxis for the 
Prevention of HIV Infection in the United States—2021 Update—A Clinical Practice Guideline. The updates in 
this version of the guideline give health care providers the latest information on prescribing pre-exposure 
prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV prevention to their patients and increasing PrEP use by people who could benefit 
from it. The revisions also:
• Update guidance based on current evidence.
• Include information on recent approvals of PrEP medications by the US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA).
• Clarify some aspects of clinical care.
• Make the guideline simpler to use so that health care providers can apply it more easily.  
Below are key changes in the updated PrEP guideline. 
What Are the New Graded Recommendations? 
GRADE
IIIB
Inform all sexually active adults and adolescents that PrEP can protect them from getting HIV. Providers 
should offer PrEP to anyone who asks for it, including sexually active adults who do not report behaviors that 
put them at risk for getting HIV. Telling all sexually active adults and adolescents about PrEP will increase the 
number of people who know about PrEP. Talking about PrEP may also help patients overcome embarrassment 
or stigma that may prevent them from telling their health care provider about behaviors that put them at risk for 
getting HIV. 
GRADE
IA
Prescribe cabotegravir (CAB) injections as PrEP for sexually active adults. 
The FDA approved CAB for PrEP in 2021. CAB may be right for people:
• Who had problems taking oral PrEP as prescribed.
• Who prefer getting a shot every 2 months instead of taking oral PrEP. 
• Who have serious kidney disease that prevents use of other PrEP medications.
CLINICIANS’ QUICK GUIDE


--- page 2 ---
What Are the Key Changes in the Updated PrEP Guideline?
Patients Who Should Be Prescribed PrEP  
More easily identify patients who would benefit from PrEP. The 
updated guideline includes flow charts offering a few questions 
about sexual or drug injection behaviors that might put patients at 
risk of getting HIV. 
HIV Laboratory Tests
Quickly test patients who are starting or taking PrEP. The updated 
guideline includes two testing algorithms:
• For patients who are starting or restarting PrEP after a long 
stop, test using an HIV antigen/antibody test (a laboratory-based 
test is preferred).
• For patients who are taking or have recently taken PrEP 
(including patients who have taken oral PrEP in the last 
3 months and patients who had a CAB injection in the last 
12 months), test using an HIV antigen/antibody test and a 
qualitative or quantitative HIV-1 RNA test.
• If a patient has a positive antigen/antibody test and a detectable 
HIV-1 RNA test (if applicable) confirming the patient has HIV, 
link that patient to HIV care and treatment. 
• If a patient has a negative antigen/antibody test and an 
undetectable HIV-1 RNA test (if applicable) confirming the 
patient does not have HIV, continue prescribing PrEP.
Oral PrEP Options
Prescribe emtricitabine (F)/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) 
(Truvada® or generic equivalent) or consider the additional option 
of prescribing emtricitabine (F)/tenofovir alafenamide (TAF) 
(Descovy®) for sexually active men and transgender women. In 
2019, the FDA approved F/TAF as PrEP for sexually active men and 
transgender women. The updated guideline adds F/TAF as a PrEP 
option for these groups. F/TAF is not recommended for people 
assigned female sex at birth who could get HIV through receptive 
vaginal sex.
Ongoing Assessments  
For oral PrEP (F/TDF or F/TAF)
CDC revised the recommended assessments for patients taking 
oral PrEP as follows: 
• Assess creatinine clearance once every 12 months for patients 
under age 50 or patients whose estimated creatinine clearance 
was greater than 90 mL/min when they started oral PrEP. 
 – For all other patients, assess creatinine clearance every 
6 months. 
• For patients taking F/TAF, measure patients’ triglyceride and 
cholesterol levels and their weight each year.
• Review the list of medications that may interact with F/TAF 
or F/TDF.
For injectable PrEP (cabotegravir, or CAB)
 
Because the FDA approved CAB for PrEP in 2021 the updated 
guideline includes a new section that details the ongoing 
assessments and follow-up schedule for patients taking CAB.
• Regular kidney, triglyceride, or cholesterol assessments are not 
needed for patients taking CAB, as they are for patients taking 
oral PrEP.
• The follow-up schedule for recommended assessments is 
different for CAB users:
 – HIV testing every 2 months (at each injection visit).
 – Sexually transmitted infection (STI) testing every 4 months 
(at every other injection visit).
What Are Other Considerations 
for Providing PrEP?
 
Same-Day PrEP 
Offer same-day PrEP to patients when 
appropriate. The updated guideline offers 
steps to safely prescribe PrEP to patients on 
the same day as their first evaluation. These 
steps include:
• Conducting baseline assessments and 
tests.
• Offering information on insurance or 
co-pay assistance.
• Scheduling follow-up tests and 
appointments.
• Giving or prescribing oral PrEP or 
CAB injections. 
 
Tele-PrEP 
Provide PrEP by telehealth when available. 
The guideline includes options for offering 
PrEP services by telehealth, such as having 
telephone or web-based visits, using 
laboratory or home testing, and prescribing a 
90-day supply of PrEP medication. 
 
2-1-1 Dosing
Learn about 2-1-1 dosing. The guideline 
now provides information on how to 
correctly use off-label 2-1-1 dosing for oral 
PrEP. This information may benefit gay, 
bisexual, and other men who have sex with 
men who choose to use 2-1-1 dosing. This 
approach is not approved by the FDA and is not 
recommended by CDC.
 
 
Primary Care for PrEP Patients
Address primary care needs during PrEP 
visits. The updated guideline describes how 
health care providers can offer primary care 
services to patients taking PrEP to help 
prevent and screen for other conditions. 
These may include STIs, mental health 
disorders, tobacco/nicotine use, and drug or 
alcohol use disorders.
Pub No 301277         July 2023
