Revised Recommendations for HIV Testing of Adults, 
Adolescents, and Pregnant Women in Health-Care Settings 
Persons using assistive technology might not be able to fully access information in this file. For assistance, please send e-mail to: mmwrq@cdc.gov . Type 508 Accommodation and the title of the report in the subject line of e-mail. 
Revised Recommendations for HIV Testing of Adults, 
Adolescents, and Pregnant Women in Health-Care Settings 
Prepared by 
Bernard M. Branson, MD 1 
H. Hunter Handsfield, MD 2 
Margaret A. Lampe, MPH 1 
Robert S. Janssen, MD 1 
Allan W. Taylor, MD 1 
Sheryl B. Lyss, MD 1 
Jill E. Clark, MPH 3 
1 Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention (proposed) 
2 Division of STD Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention (proposed) and University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 
3 Northrup Grumman Information Technology (contractor with CDC) 
The material in this report originated in the National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), Kevin A. Fenton, 
MD, PhD, Director; and the Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, Timothy D. Mastro, MD, (Acting) Director. 
Corresponding preparer: Bernard M. Branson, MD, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and 
TB Prevention (proposed), 1600 Clifton Road, N.E., MS D-21, Atlanta, GA 30333. Telephone: 404-639-0900; Fax: 404-639-0897; E-mail: 
bbranson@cdc.gov . 
Summary 
These recommendations for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing are intended for all health-care providers 
in the public and private sectors, including those working in hospital emergency departments, urgent care clinics, 
inpatient services, substance abuse treatment clinics, public health clinics, community clinics, correctional health-care facilities, 
and primary care settings. The recommendations address HIV testing in health-care settings only. They do not modify 
existing guidelines concerning HIV counseling, testing, and referral for persons at high risk for HIV who seek or receive 
HIV testing in nonclinical settings (e.g., community-based organizations, outreach settings, or mobile vans). The objectives 
of these recommendations are to increase HIV screening of patients, including pregnant women, in health-care settings; 
foster earlier detection of HIV infection; identify and counsel persons with unrecognized HIV infection and link them to 
clinical and prevention services; and further reduce perinatal transmission of HIV in the United States. These 
revised recommendations update previous recommendations for HIV testing in health-care settings and for screening of 
pregnant women (CDC. Recommendations for HIV testing services for inpatients and outpatients in acute-care 
hospital settings. MMWR 1993;42[No. RR-2]:1--10; CDC. Revised guidelines for HIV counseling, testing, and 
referral. MMWR 2001;50[No. RR-19]:1--62; and CDC. Revised recommendations for HIV screening of 
pregnant women. MMWR 2001;50[No. RR-19]:63--85). 
Major revisions from previously published guidelines are as follows: 
For patients in all health-care settings 
HIV screening is recommended for patients in all health-care settings after the patient is notified that testing 
will be performed unless the patient declines (opt-out screening). 
Persons at high risk for HIV infection should be screened for HIV at least annually. 
Separate written consent for HIV testing should not be required; general consent for medical care should 
be considered sufficient to encompass consent for HIV testing. 
Prevention counseling should not be required with HIV diagnostic testing or as part of HIV screening programs 
in health-care settings. 
For pregnant women 
HIV screening should be included in the routine panel of prenatal screening tests for all pregnant women. 
HIV screening is recommended after the patient is notified that testing will be performed unless the 
patient declines (opt-out screening). 
Separate written consent for HIV testing should not be required; general consent for medical care should be 
considered sufficient to encompass consent for HIV testing. 
Repeat screening in the third trimester is recommended in certain jurisdictions with elevated rates of HIV infection 
among pregnant women. 
Introduction 
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) remain 
leading causes of illness and death in the United States. As of 
December 2004, an estimated 944,306 persons had received 
a diagnosis of AIDS, and of these, 529,113 (56%) had died 
( 1 ). The annual number of AIDS cases and deaths 
declined substantially after 1994 but stabilized during 1999--2004 
( 1 ). However, since 1994, the annual number of cases 
among blacks, members of other racial/ethnic minority populations, and persons exposed through heterosexual contact 
has increased. The number of children reported with AIDS 
attributed to perinatal HIV transmission peaked at 945 in 
1992 and declined 95% to 48 in 2004 ( 1 ), primarily because of the identification of HIV-infected pregnant women and 
the effectiveness of antiretroviral prophylaxis in reducing mother-to-child transmission of HIV 
( 2 ). 
By 2002, an estimated 38%--44% of all adults in the United States had been tested for HIV; 16--22 million 
persons aged 18--64 years are tested annually for HIV 
( 3 ). However, at the end of 2003, of the approximately 1.0--1.2 
million persons estimated to be living with HIV in the United States, an estimated one quarter (252,000--312,000 
persons) were unaware of their infection and therefore unable to benefit from clinical care to reduce morbidity and mortality 
( 4 ). A number of these persons are likely to have transmitted HIV unknowingly 
( 5 ). 
Treatment has improved survival rates dramatically, especially since the introduction of highly active 
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in 1995 ( 6 ). However, progress in effecting earlier diagnosis has been insufficient. During 
1990--1992, the proportion of persons who first tested positive for HIV <1 year before receiving a diagnosis of AIDS was 
51% ( 7 ); during 1993--2004, this proportion declined only modestly, to 39% in 2004 
( 1 ). Persons tested late in the course of their infection were more likely to be black or Hispanic and to have been exposed through heterosexual contact; 
87% received their first positive HIV test result at an acute or referral medical care setting, and 65% were tested for 
HIV antibody because of illness ( 8 ). 
These recommendations update previous recommendations for HIV testing in health-care settings 
( 9 , 10 ) and for screening of pregnant women 
( 11 ). The objectives of these recommendations are to increase HIV screening of 
patients, including pregnant women, in health-care settings; foster earlier detection of HIV infection; identify and 
counsel persons with unrecognized HIV infection and link them to 
clinical and prevention services; and further reduce 
perinatal transmission of HIV in the United States. 
Single copies of this report are available free of charge from CDC's 
National Prevention Information Network, telephone 800-458-5231 (Mondays--Fridays, 9:00 a.m.--8:00 p.m. ET). 
Background 
Definitions 
Diagnostic testing. Performing an HIV test for persons 
with clinical signs or symptoms consistent with HIV infection. 
Screening. Performing an HIV test for all persons in a 
defined population ( 12 ). 
Targeted testing. Performing an HIV test for subpopulations of persons at higher risk, typically defined on the 
basis of behavior, clinical, or demographic characteristics 
( 9 ). 
Informed consent. A process of communication between patient and provider through which an informed patient 
can choose whether to undergo HIV testing or decline to do so. Elements of informed consent typically include 
providing oral or written information regarding HIV, the risks and benefits of testing, the implications of HIV test results, 
how test results will be communicated, and the opportunity to ask 
questions. 
Opt-out screening. Performing HIV screening after 
notifying the patient that 1) the test will be performed and 2) 
the patient may elect to decline or defer testing. Assent is 
inferred unless the patient declines testing. 
HIV-prevention counseling. An interactive process of 
assessing risk, recognizing specific behaviors that increase 
the risk for acquiring or transmitting HIV, and developing a plan to take specific steps to reduce risks 
( 13 ). 
Evolution of HIV Testing Recommendations in Health-Care Settings and for 
Pregnant Women 
In 1985, when HIV testing first became available, the main goal of such testing was to protect the blood 
supply. Alternative test sites were established to deter persons from using blood bank testing to learn their HIV status. At 
that time, professional opinion was divided regarding the value of HIV testing and whether HIV testing should 
be encouraged because no consensus existed regarding whether a positive test predicted transmission to sex partners or 
from mother to infant ( 14 ). No effective treatment existed, and counseling was designed in part to ensure that persons 
tested were aware that the meaning of positive test results was 
uncertain. 
During the next 2 years, the implications of positive HIV serology became evident, and in 1987, the United 
States Public Health Service (USPHS) issued guidelines making HIV counseling and testing a priority as a prevention 
strategy for persons most likely to be infected or who practiced high-risk behaviors and recommended routine testing of 
all persons seeking treatment for STDs, regardless of health-care setting 
( 15 ). "Routine" was defined as a policy to 
provide these services to all clients after informing them that testing would be 
conducted ( 15 ). 
In 1993, CDC recommendations for voluntary HIV counseling and testing were extended to include 
hospitalized patients and persons obtaining health care as outpatients in acute-care hospital settings, including 
emergency departments (EDs) ( 10 ). Hospitals with HIV seroprevalence rates of >1% or AIDS diagnosis rates of >1 per 
1,000 discharges were encouraged to adopt a policy of offering voluntary HIV counseling and testing routinely to all 
patients aged 15--54 years. Health-care providers in acute-care settings were encouraged to structure counseling and 
testing procedures to facilitate confidential, voluntary participation and to include basic information 
regarding the medical implications of the test, the option to receive more information, and documentation of informed consent 
( 10 ). In 1994, guidelines for counseling and testing persons with high-risk behaviors specified prevention 
counseling to develop specific prevention goals and strategies for each person (client-centered counseling) 
( 16 ). In 1995, after perinatal transmission 
of HIV was demonstrated to be substantially reduced by administration of zidovudine to HIV-infected pregnant 
women and their newborns, USPHS recommended that all pregnant women be counseled and 
encouraged to undergo voluntary testing for HIV 
( 17, 18 ). 
In 2001, CDC modified the recommendations for pregnant women to emphasize HIV screening as a routine part 
of prenatal care, simplification of the testing process so pretest counseling would not pose a barrier, and flexibility of the 
consent process to allow multiple types of informed consent 
( 11 ). In addition, the 2001 recommendations for HIV testing in 
health-care settings were extended to include multiple additional clinical venues in both private and public health-care 
sectors, encouraging providers to make HIV counseling and testing more accessible and 
acknowledging their need for flexibility 
( 9 ). CDC recommended that HIV testing be offered routinely to all 
patients in high HIV-prevalence health-care settings. In 
low prevalence settings, in which the majority of clients are at minimal risk, targeted HIV testing on the basis of risk screening 
was considered more feasible for identifying limited numbers of HIV-infected persons 
( 9 ). 
In 2003, CDC introduced the initiative Advancing HIV Prevention: New Strategies for a Changing Epidemic 
( 19 ). Two key strategies of this initiative are 1) to make HIV testing a routine part of medical care on the same voluntary 
basis as other diagnostic and screening tests and 2) to reduce perinatal transmission of HIV further by universal testing of 
all pregnant women and by using rapid tests during labor and delivery or postpartum if the mother was not 
screened prenatally ( 19 ). In its technical guidance, CDC acknowledged that prevention counseling is desirable for all persons 
at risk for HIV but recognized that such counseling might not be appropriate or feasible in all settings 
( 20 ). Because time constraints or discomfort with discussing their patients' risk behaviors caused some providers to perceive requirements 
for prevention counseling and written informed consent as a barrier 
( 12,21--23 ), the initiative advocated 
streamlined approaches. 
In March 2004, CDC convened a meeting of health-care providers, representatives from professional associations, 
and local health officials to obtain advice concerning how best to expand HIV testing, especially in high-volume, 
high-prevalence acute-care settings. Consultants recommended simplifying the HIV screening process to make it more 
feasible and less costly and advocated more frequent diagnostic testing of patients with symptoms. In April 2005, CDC 
initiated a comprehensive review of the literature regarding HIV testing in health-care settings and, on the basis of 
published evidence and lessons learned from CDC-sponsored demonstration projects of HIV screening in health-care 
facilities, began to prepare recommendations to implement these strategies. In August 2005, CDC invited health-care 
providers, 
representatives from public health agencies and community organizations, and persons living with HIV to review 
an outline of proposed recommendations. In November 2005, CDC convened a meeting of researchers, representatives 
of professional health-care provider organizations, clinicians, persons living with HIV, and representatives from 
community organizations and agencies overseeing care of HIV-infected persons to review CDC's proposed recommendations. 
Before final revision of these recommendations, CDC described the proposals at national meetings of researchers and 
health-care providers and, in March 2006, solicited peer review by health-care professionals, in compliance with 
requirements of the Office of Management and Budget for influential scientific assessments, and invited comment from 
multiple professional and community organizations. The final recommendations were 
further refined on the basis of comments from these constituents. 
Rationale for Routine Screening for HIV Infection 
Previous CDC and U.S. Preventive Services Task Force guidelines for HIV testing recommended routine 
counseling and testing for persons at high risk for HIV and for those in acute-care settings in which HIV prevalence was 
> 1% ( 9 , 10 ,24 ). These guidelines proved difficult to implement because 1) the cost of HIV screening often is not 
reimbursed, 2) providers in busy health-care settings often lack the time necessary to conduct risk assessments and might 
perceive counseling requirements as a barrier to testing, and 3) explicit information regarding HIV prevalence typically is 
not available to guide selection of specific settings 
for screening ( 25--29 ). 
These revised CDC recommendations advocate routine voluntary HIV screening as a normal part of medical 
practice, similar to screening for other treatable conditions. Screening is a basic public health tool used to 
identify unrecognized health conditions so treatment can be offered before symptoms develop and, for communicable diseases, 
so interventions can be implemented to reduce the likelihood of continued transmission 
( 30 ). 
HIV infection is consistent with all generally accepted criteria that justify screening: 1) HIV infection is a 
serious health disorder that can be diagnosed before symptoms develop; 2) HIV can be detected by reliable, inexpensive, 
and noninvasive screening tests; 3) infected patients have years of life to gain if treatment is initiated early, before 
symptoms develop; and 4) the costs of screening are reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits 
( 30 ). Among pregnant women, screening has proven substantially more effective than risk-based testing for detecting unsuspected 
maternal HIV infection and preventing perinatal transmission 
( 31--33 ). 
Rationale for New Recommendations 
Often, persons with HIV infection visit health-care settings (e.g., hospitals, acute-care clinics, and sexually 
transmitted disease [STD] clinics) years before receiving a diagnosis but are not tested for HIV 
( 34--36 ). Since the 1980s, the demographics of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the United States have changed; increasing proportions of infected 
persons are aged <20 years, women, members of racial or ethnic minority populations, persons who reside outside 
metropolitan areas, and heterosexual men and women who frequently are unaware that they are at risk for HIV 
( 37 ). As a result, the effectiveness of using risk-based testing to identify HIV-infected persons has diminished 
( 34,35,38,39 ). 
Prevention strategies that incorporate universal HIV screening have been highly effective. For example, screening 
blood donors for HIV has nearly eliminated transfusion-associated HIV infection in the United States 
( 40 ). In addition, incidence of pediatric HIV/AIDS in the United States has 
declined substantially since the 1990s, when 
prevention strategies began to include specific recommendations for routine HIV testing of pregnant women 
( 18 ,41 ). Perinatal transmission rates can be reduced to <2% with universal screening of pregnant women in combination 
with prophylactic administration of antiretroviral drugs 
( 42,43 ), scheduled cesarean delivery when indicated 
( 44,45 ), and avoidance of breast feeding 
( 46 ). 
These successes contrast with a relative lack of progress in preventing sexual transmission of HIV, for which 
screening rarely is performed. Declines in HIV incidence 
observed in the early 1990s have leveled and might even have reversed 
in certain populations in recent years 
( 47, 48 ). Since 1998, the estimated number of new infections has remained stable 
at approximately 40,000 annually ( 49 ). In 2001, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) emphasized prevention services 
for HIV-infected persons and recommended policies for 
diagnosing HIV infections earlier to increase the number of 
HIV-infected persons who were aware of their infections and who were offered clinical and prevention services 
( 37 ). The 
majority of persons who are aware of their HIV infections substantially reduce sexual behaviors that might transmit 
HIV after they become aware they are infected 
( 5 ). In a meta-analysis of findings from eight studies, the prevalence 
of unprotected anal or vaginal intercourse with uninfected partners was on average 68% lower for HIV-infected 
persons who were aware of their status than it was for HIV-infected persons who were 
unaware of their status ( 5 ). To increase diagnosis of HIV 
infection, destigmatize the testing process, link clinical care with prevention, and ensure 
immediate access to clinical care for persons with newly identified HIV infection, IOM and other health-care professionals 
with expertise ( 25,37,50,51 ) have encouraged adoption of routine HIV testing in all health-care settings. 
Routine prenatal HIV testing with streamlined counseling and consent procedures has increased the number 
of pregnant women tested substantially ( 52 ). By contrast, the number of persons at risk for HIV infection who 
are screened in acute-care settings remains low, despite repeated recommendations in support of routine risk-based 
testing in health-care settings 
( 9 , 10 , 15 ,34, 53 ,54 ). In a survey of 154 health-care providers in 10 hospital EDs, 
providers reported caring for an average of 13 patients per week suspected to have STDs, but only 10% of these 
providers encouraged such patients to be tested for HIV while they were in the ED 
( 54 ). Another 35% referred patients to confidential HIV testing sites in the community; however, such referrals have proven ineffective because of 
poor compliance by patients ( 55 ). Reasons cited for not offering HIV testing in the ED included lack of 
established mechanisms to ensure follow-up (51%), lack of the certification perceived as necessary to provide counseling (45%), 
and belief that the testing process was too time-consuming (19%) 
( 54 ). 
With the institution of HIV screening in certain hospitals and EDs, the percentage of patients who test positive 
(2%--7%) often has exceeded that observed nationally at publicly funded HIV counseling and testing sites (1.5%) and 
STD clinics (2%) serving persons at high risk for HIV 
( 53 , 56 -- 59 ). Because patients rarely were seeking testing 
when screening was offered at these hospitals, HIV infections often were identified earlier than they might otherwise have 
been ( 29 ). Targeted testing programs also have been implemented in acute-care settings; nearly two thirds of patients in 
these settings accept testing, but because risk assessment and prevention counseling are time-consuming, only a 
limited proportion of eligible patients can be tested 
( 29 ). Targeted testing on the basis of risk behaviors fails to identify 
a substantial number of persons who are HIV infected 
( 34,35,39 ). A substantial number of persons, including 
persons with HIV infection, do not perceive themselves to be at risk for HIV or do not disclose their risks 
( 53 , 56 , 59 ). Routine HIV testing reduces the stigma associated with testing that 
requires assessment of risk behaviors 
( 60--63 ). More patients accept recommended HIV testing when it is 
offered routinely to everyone, without a risk assessment 
( 54, 56 ). 
In 1999, to increase the proportion of women tested for HIV, IOM recommended 1) adopting a national policy 
of universal HIV testing of pregnant women with patient notification (opt-out screening) as a routine component 
of prenatal care, 2) eliminating requirements for extensive pretest counseling while requiring provision of basic 
information regarding HIV, and 3) not requiring explicit written consent to be tested for HIV 
( 12 ). Subsequent studies have indicated that these policies, as proposed by IOM and other professional organizations 
( 12,64,65 ), reflect an ethical balance among public health goals, justice, and individual rights 
( 66,67 ). Rates of HIV screening are consistently 
higher at settings that provide prenatal and STD services using opt-out screening than at opt-in programs, which require 
pre-test counseling and explicit written consent 
( 52 ,68--74 ). Pregnant women express less anxiety with opt-out 
HIV screening and do not find it difficult to decline a test 
( 68,74 ). In 2006, approximately 65% of U.S. adults 
surveyed concurred that HIV testing should be treated the same as screening for any other disease, without special 
procedures such as written permission from the patient 
( 75 ). 
Adolescents aged 13--19 years represent new cohorts of persons at risk, and prevention efforts need to be repeated 
for each succeeding generation of young persons 
( 63 ). The 2005 Youth Risk Behavior Survey indicated that 47% of 
high school students reported that they had had sexual intercourse at least once, and 37% of sexually active students had 
not used a condom during their most recent act of sexual intercourse 
( 76 ). More than half of all HIV-infected adolescents 
are estimated not to have been tested and are unaware of their infection 
( 77,78 ). Among young (aged 18--24 years) 
men who have sex with men (MSM) surveyed during 2004--2005 in five U.S. cities, 14% were infected with HIV; 79% 
of these HIV-infected MSM were unaware of their infection 
( 56 ). The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends 
that clinicians obtain information from adolescent patients regarding their sexual activity and inform them how to 
prevent HIV infection ( 79 ). Evidence indicates that adolescents prefer to receive this information from their 
health-care providers rather than from their parents, teachers, or friends 
( 80 ). However, fewer than half of clinicians provide 
such 
guidance ( 81 ). Health-care providers' recommendations also influence adolescents' decision to be tested. Among 
reasons for HIV testing provided by 528 adolescents who had primary care providers, 58% cited their 
provider's recommendation as their reason for testing 
( 82 ). 
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recently recommended that clinicians screen for HIV all adults and 
adolescents at increased risk for HIV, on the basis that when HIV is diagnosed early, appropriately timed interventions, 
particularly HAART, can lead to improved health outcomes, including slower clinical progression and reduced mortality 
( 24 ). The Task Force also recommended screening all pregnant women, regardless of risk, but made no recommendation for 
or against routinely screening asymptomatic adults and adolescents with no identifiable risk factors for HIV. The Task 
Force concluded that such screening would detect additional patients with HIV, but the overall number would be 
limited, and the potential benefits did not clearly outweigh the burden on primary care practices or the potential harms of 
a general HIV screening program ( 24,83 ). In making these recommendations, the Task Force considered how 
many patients would need to be screened to prevent one clinical progression or death during the 3-year period after 
screening. On the basis of evidence available for its review, the Task Force was unable to calculate benefits attributable to 
the prevention of secondary HIV transmission to partners 
( 84 ). However, a recent meta-analysis indicated that 
HIV-infected persons reduced high-risk behavior substantially when they became aware of their infection 
( 5 ). Because viral load is the chief biologic predictor of HIV transmission 
( 85 ), reduction in viral load through timely initiation of HAART 
might reduce transmission, even for HIV-infected patients who do not change their risk behavior 
( 86 ). Estimated transmission is 3.5 times higher among persons who are unaware of their infection than among persons who are aware of 
their infection and contributes disproportionately to the number of new HIV infections each year in the United States 
( 87 ). In theory, new sexual HIV infections could be reduced >30% per year if all infected persons could learn their HIV 
status and adopt changes in behavior similar to those adopted by persons 
already aware of their infection ( 87 ). 
Recent studies demonstrate that voluntary HIV screening is cost-effective even in health-care settings in which 
HIV prevalence is low ( 26,27,86 ). In populations for which 
prevalence of undiagnosed HIV infection is 
> 0.1%, HIV screening is as cost-effective as other established screening programs for chronic diseases (e.g., hypertension, 
colon cancer, and breast cancer) ( 27,86 ). Because of the substantial survival advantage resulting from earlier diagnosis of 
HIV infection when therapy can be initiated before 
severe immunologic compromise occurs, screening reaches 
conventional benchmarks for cost-effectiveness even before including the important public health benefit from reduced 
transmission to sex partners ( 86 ). 
Linking patients who have received a diagnosis of HIV 
infection to prevention and care is essential. HIV 
screening without such linkage confers little or no benefit to the 
patient. Although moving patients into care incurs 
substantial costs, it also triggers sufficient survival benefits that justify the additional costs. Even if only a limited fraction of 
patients who receive HIV-positive results are linked to care, the survival benefits per dollar spent on screening represent 
good comparative value ( 26,27,88 ). 
The benefit of providing prevention counseling in conjunction with HIV testing is less clear. HIV counseling 
with testing has been demonstrated to be an effective intervention for HIV-infected participants, who increased their 
safer behaviors and decreased their risk behaviors; HIV counseling and testing as implemented in the studies had little 
effect on HIV-negative participants ( 89 ). However, randomized controlled trials have demonstrated that the nature 
and duration of prevention counseling might influence its effectiveness 
( 90,91 ). Carefully controlled, theory-based prevention counseling in STD clinics has helped HIV-negative participants reduce their risk behaviors compared 
with participants who received only a didactic prevention message from health-care providers 
( 90 ). A more intensive intervention among HIV-negative MSM at high risk, consisting of 10 theory-based individual counseling 
sessions followed by maintenance sessions every 3 
months, resulted in reductions in unprotected sex with partners who 
were HIV infected or of unknown status, compared with MSM who received structured prevention counseling only 
twice yearly ( 91 ). 
Timely access to diagnostic HIV test results also improves health outcomes. Diagnostic testing in health-care 
settings continues to be the mechanism by which nearly half of new HIV infections are identified. During 2000--2003, 
of persons reported with HIV/AIDS who were interviewed in 16 states, 44% were tested for HIV because of illness 
( 8 ). Compared with HIV testing after patients were admitted to the hospital, expedited diagnosis by rapid HIV testing 
in the ED before admission led to shorter hospital stays, increased the number of patients aware of their HIV status 
before 
discharge, and improved entry into outpatient care 
( 92 ). However, at least 28 states have laws or regulations that 
limit health-care providers' ability to order diagnostic testing for HIV infection if the patient is unable to give consent 
for HIV testing, even when the test results are likely to alter the patient's diagnostic or therapeutic management 
( 93 ). 
Of the 40,000 persons who acquire HIV infection each year, an estimated 40%--90% will experience symptoms 
of acute HIV infection ( 94--96 ), and a substantial number will seek medical care. However, acute HIV infection often 
is not recognized by primary care clinicians because the symptoms 
resemble those of influenza, infectious 
mononucleosis, and other viral illnesses 
( 97 ). Acute HIV infection can be diagnosed by detecting HIV RNA in plasma from 
persons with a negative or indeterminate HIV antibody test. One study based on national ambulatory medical care 
surveys estimated that the prevalence of acute HIV infection was 0.5%--0.7% among ambulatory patients who sought care 
for fever or rash ( 98 ). Although the long-term benefit of HAART during acute HIV infection has not been 
established conclusively ( 99 ), identifying primary HIV infection can reduce the spread of HIV that might otherwise occur 
during the acute phase of HIV disease 
( 100,101 ). 
Perinatal HIV transmission continues to occur, primarily among women who lack prenatal care or who were 
not offered voluntary HIV counseling and testing during pregnancy. A substantial proportion of the estimated 
144--236 perinatal HIV infections in the United States each year can be attributed to the lack of timely HIV testing 
and treatment of pregnant women ( 102 ). Multiple barriers to HIV testing have been identified, including language 
barriers; late entry into prenatal care; health-care providers' perceptions that their patients are at low risk for HIV; lack of time 
for counseling and testing, particularly for rapid testing during labor and delivery; and state regulations 
requiring counseling and separate informed consent 
( 103 ). A survey of 653 obstetrical providers in North Carolina suggested 
that not all health-care providers embrace universal testing of pregnant women; the strength with which 
providers recommended prenatal testing to their patients and the numbers of women tested 
depended largely on the providers' perception of the patients' risk behaviors 
( 21 ). Data confirm that testing rates are higher when HIV tests are included 
in the standard panel of screening tests for all pregnant women 
( 52 ,69,104 ). Women also are much more likely to 
be tested if they perceive that their health-care provider strongly recommends HIV testing 
( 105 ). As universal prenatal screening has become more widespread, an increasing proportion of pregnant women who had undiagnosed 
HIV infection at the time of delivery were found to have seroconverted during pregnancy 
( 106 ). A second HIV test during the third trimester for women in settings with 
elevated HIV incidence ( > 17 cases per 100,000 person-years) is 
cost-effective and might result in substantial reductions in mother-to-child HIV transmission 
( 107 ). 
Every perinatal HIV transmission is a sentinel health event, signaling either a missed opportunity for prevention 
or, more rarely, a failure of interventions to prevent perinatal transmission. When these infections occur, they underscore 
the need for improved strategies to ensure that all pregnant women undergo HIV testing and, if found to be HIV 
positive, receive proper interventions to reduce their transmission risk and safeguard their health and the health of their infants. 
Recommendations for Adults and Adolescents 
CDC recommends that diagnostic HIV testing and opt-out HIV screening be a part of routine clinical care in 
all health-care settings while also preserving the patient's option to decline HIV testing and ensuring a 
provider-patient relationship conducive to optimal clinical and preventive care. The recommendations are intended for providers in 
all health-care settings, including hospital EDs, urgent-care clinics, inpatient services, STD clinics or other 
venues offering clinical STD services, tuberculosis (TB) clinics, substance abuse treatment clinics, other public health 
clinics, community clinics, correctional health-care facilities, and primary care settings. The guidelines address HIV testing 
in health-care settings only; they do not modify existing guidelines concerning HIV counseling, testing, and referral 
for persons at high risk for HIV who seek or receive HIV testing in nonclinical settings (e.g., 
community-based organizations, outreach settings, or mobile vans) 
( 9 ). 
Screening for HIV Infection 
In all health-care settings, screening for HIV infection should be performed routinely for all patients aged 
13--64 years. Health-care providers should initiate screening unless prevalence of undiagnosed HIV infection in 
their patients has been documented to be <0.1%. In the 
absence of existing data for HIV prevalence, 
health-care 
providers should initiate voluntary HIV screening until they establish that the diagnostic yield is <1 per 
1,000 patients screened, at which point such screening is no longer warranted. 
All patients initiating treatment for TB should be screened routinely for HIV infection 
( 108 ). 
All patients seeking treatment for STDs, including all patients attending STD clinics, should be 
screened routinely for HIV during each visit for a new complaint, regardless of whether the patient is known or suspected 
to have specific behavior risks for HIV infection. 
Repeat Screening 
Health-care providers should subsequently test all persons likely to be at high risk for HIV at least annually. 
Persons likely to be at high risk include injection-drug users and their sex partners, persons who exchange sex for money 
or drugs, sex partners of HIV-infected persons, and MSM or heterosexual persons who themselves or whose sex 
partners have had more than one sex partner since their most recent HIV test. 
Health-care providers should encourage patients and their prospective sex partners to be tested before initiating 
a new sexual relationship. 
Repeat screening of persons not likely to be at high risk for HIV should be performed on the basis of 
clinical judgment. 
Unless recent HIV test results are immediately available, any person whose blood or body fluid is the source of 
an occupational exposure for a health-care provider should be informed of the incident and tested for HIV infection 
at the time the exposure occurs. 
Consent and Pretest Information 
Screening should be voluntary and undertaken only with the patient's knowledge and understanding that 
HIV testing is planned. 
Patients should be informed orally or in writing that HIV testing will be performed unless they decline 
(opt-out screening). Oral or written information should 
include an explanation of HIV infection and the meanings 
of positive and negative test results, and the patient should be offered an opportunity to ask questions and to decline 
testing. With such notification, consent for HIV screening should be incorporated into the patient's 
general informed consent for medical care on the same basis as are other screening or diagnostic tests; a separate 
consent form for HIV testing is not recommended. 
Easily understood informational materials should be made available in the languages of the 
commonly encountered populations within the service area. The competence of interpreters and bilingual staff 
to provide language assistance to patients with limited 
English proficiency must be ensured. 
If a patient declines an HIV test, this decision should be documented in the medical record. 
Diagnostic Testing for HIV Infection 
All patients with signs or symptoms consistent with HIV infection or an opportunistic illness characteristic of 
AIDS should be tested for HIV. 
Clinicians should maintain a high level of suspicion for acute HIV infection in all patients who have a 
compatible clinical syndrome and who report recent high-risk behavior. When acute retroviral syndrome is a possibility, 
a plasma RNA test should be used in conjunction with an HIV antibody test to diagnose acute HIV infection 
( 96 ). 
Patients or persons responsible for the patient's care should be notified orally that testing is planned, advised of 
the indication for testing and the implications of positive and negative test results, and offered an opportunity to 
ask questions and to decline testing. With such notification, the patient's general consent for medical care is 
considered sufficient for diagnostic HIV testing. 
Similarities and Differences Between Current and Previous Recommendations 
for Adults and Adolescents 
Aspects of these recommendations that remain unchanged from previous recommendations are as follows: 
HIV testing must be voluntary and free from coercion. Patients must not be tested without their knowledge. 
HIV testing is recommended and should be routine for persons attending STD clinics and those seeking 
treatment for STDs in other clinical settings. 
Access to clinical care, prevention counseling, and support services is essential for persons with positive HIV 
test results. 
Aspects of these recommendations that differ from previous recommendations are as follows: 
Screening after notifying the patient that an HIV test will be performed unless the patient declines 
(opt-out screening) is recommended in all health-care settings. Specific signed consent for HIV testing should not 
be required. General informed consent for medical care should be considered sufficient to encompass informed 
consent for HIV testing. 
Persons at high risk for HIV should be screened for HIV at least annually. 
HIV test results should be provided in the same manner as results of other diagnostic or screening tests. 
Prevention counseling should not be required as a part of HIV screening programs in health-care settings. 
Prevention counseling is strongly encouraged for persons at high risk for HIV in settings in which risk behaviors 
are assessed routinely (e.g., STD clinics) but should not have to be linked to HIV testing. 
HIV diagnostic testing or screening to detect HIV infection earlier should be considered distinct from 
HIV counseling and testing conducted primarily as a prevention intervention for uninfected persons at high risk. 
Recommendations for Pregnant Women 
These guidelines reiterate the recommendation for universal HIV screening early in pregnancy but advise 
simplifying the screening process to maximize opportunities for women to learn their HIV status during pregnancy, preserving 
the woman's option to decline HIV testing, and ensuring a 
provider-patient relationship conducive to optimal clinical 
and preventive care. All women should receive HIV screening consistent with the recommendations for adults 
and adolescents. HIV screening should be a routine component of preconception care, maximizing opportunities for 
all women to know their HIV status before conception 
( 109 ). In addition, screening early in pregnancy enables 
HIV-infected women and their infants to benefit from appropriate and timely interventions (e.g., antiretroviral 
medications [ 43 ], scheduled cesarean delivery 
[ 44 ], and avoidance of breastfeeding* 
[ 46 ]). These recommendations are intended 
for clinicians who provide care to pregnant women and newborns and for health policy makers who have responsibility 
for these populations. 
HIV Screening for Pregnant Women and Their Infants 
Universal Opt-Out Screening 
All pregnant women in the United States should be screened for HIV infection. 
Screening should occur after a woman is notified that HIV screening is recommended for all pregnant patients 
and that she will receive an HIV test as part of the routine panel of prenatal tests unless she declines (opt-out 
screening). 
HIV testing must be voluntary and free from coercion. No woman should be tested without her knowledge. 
Pregnant women should receive oral or written information that includes an explanation of HIV infection, 
a description of interventions that can reduce HIV transmission from mother to infant, and the meanings of 
positive and negative test results and should be offered an opportunity to ask questions and to decline testing. 
No additional process or written documentation of 
informed consent beyond what is required for other 
routine prenatal tests should be required for HIV testing. 
If a patient declines an HIV test, this decision should be documented in the medical record. 
Addressing Reasons for Declining Testing 
Providers should discuss and address reasons for declining an HIV test (e.g., lack of perceived risk; fear of the 
disease; and concerns regarding partner violence or 
potential stigma or discrimination). 
Women who decline an HIV test because they have had a previous negative test result should be informed of 
the importance of retesting during each pregnancy. 
Logistical reasons for not testing (e.g., scheduling) should be resolved. 
Certain women who initially decline an HIV test might accept at a later date, especially if their concerns 
are discussed. Certain women will continue to decline testing, and their decisions should be respected and 
documented in the medical record. 
Timing of HIV Testing 
To promote informed and timely therapeutic decisions, health-care providers should test women for HIV as early 
as possible during each pregnancy. Women who decline 
the test early in prenatal care should be encouraged 
to be tested at a subsequent visit. 
A second HIV test during the third trimester, preferably <36 weeks of gestation, is cost-effective even in areas of 
low HIV prevalence and may be considered for all pregnant women. A second HIV test during the third 
trimester is recommended for women who meet one or more of the following criteria: 
--- Women who receive health care in jurisdictions with elevated incidence of HIV or AIDS among women aged 
15--45 years. In 2004, these jurisdictions included Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware, the District of 
Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Louisiana, 
Maryland, Massachusetts, Mississippi, Nevada, New Jersey, New 
York, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, South Carolina, 
Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia. † 
--- Women who receive health care in facilities in which prenatal screening identifies at least one 
HIV-infected pregnant woman per 1,000 women screened. 
--- Women who are known to be at high risk for acquiring HIV (e.g., injection-drug users and their sex 
partners, women who exchange sex for money or drugs, women who are sex partners of HIV-infected persons, and 
women who have had a new or more than one sex partner during this pregnancy). 
--- Women who have signs or symptoms consistent with acute HIV infection. When acute retroviral syndrome is 
a possibility, a plasma RNA test should be used in conjunction with an HIV antibody test to diagnose acute 
HIV infection ( 96 ). 
Rapid Testing During Labor 
Any woman with undocumented HIV status at the time of labor should be screened with a rapid HIV test 
unless she declines (opt-out screening). 
Reasons for declining a rapid test should be explored (see Addressing Reasons for Declining Testing). 
Immediate initiation of appropriate antiretroviral prophylaxis 
( 42 ) should be recommended to women on the basis 
of a reactive rapid test result without waiting for the result of a confirmatory test. 
Postpartum/Newborn Testing 
When a woman's HIV status is still unknown at the time of delivery, she should be screened 
immediately postpartum with a rapid HIV test unless she declines (opt-out screening). 
When the mother's HIV status is unknown postpartum, rapid testing of the newborn as soon as possible after 
birth is recommended so antiretroviral prophylaxis can be 
offered to HIV-exposed infants. Women should be informed 
that identifying HIV antibodies in the newborn indicates that the mother is infected. 
For infants whose HIV exposure status is unknown and who are in foster care, the person legally authorized 
to provide consent should be informed that rapid HIV testing is recommended for infants whose biologic mothers 
have not been tested. 
The benefits of neonatal antiretroviral prophylaxis are best realized when it is initiated 
< 12 hours after birth ( 110 ). 
Confirmatory Testing 
Whenever possible, uncertainties regarding laboratory test results indicating HIV infection status should be 
resolved before final decisions are made regarding reproductive options, antiretroviral therapy, cesarean delivery, or 
other interventions. 
If the confirmatory test result is not available before 
delivery, immediate initiation of appropriate 
antiretroviral prophylaxis ( 42 ) should be recommended to any pregnant patient whose HIV screening test 
result is reactive to reduce the risk for perinatal 
transmission. 
Similarities and Differences Between Current and Previous Recommendations 
for Pregnant Women and Their Infants 
Aspects of these recommendations that remain unchanged from previous recommendations are as follows: 
Universal HIV testing with notification should be 
performed for all pregnant women as early as possible 
during pregnancy. 
HIV screening should be repeated in the third trimester of pregnancy for women known to be at high risk for HIV. 
Providers should explore and address reasons for 
declining HIV testing. 
Pregnant women should receive appropriate health 
education, including information regarding HIV and 
its transmission, as a routine part of prenatal care. 
Access to clinical care, prevention counseling, and support services is essential for women with positive HIV 
test results. 
Aspects of these recommendations that differ from previous recommendations are as follows: 
HIV screening should be included in the routine panel of prenatal screening tests for all pregnant women. 
Patients should be informed that HIV screening is recommended for all pregnant women and that it will be 
performed unless they decline (opt-out screening). 
Repeat HIV testing in the third trimester is recommended for all women in jurisdictions with elevated HIV or 
AIDS incidence and for women receiving health care in facilities with at least one diagnosed HIV case per 
1,000 pregnant women per year. 
Rapid HIV testing should be performed for all women in labor who do not have documentation of results from 
an HIV test during pregnancy. Patients should be informed that HIV testing is recommended for all pregnant 
women and will be performed unless they decline (opt-out screening). Immediate initiation of appropriate 
antiretroviral prophylaxis should be recommended on the basis of a reactive rapid HIV test result, without awaiting the result 
of confirmatory testing. 
Additional Considerations for HIV Screening 
Test Results 
Communicating test results. The central goal of HIV screening in health-care settings is to maximize the number 
of persons who are aware of their HIV infection and receive care and prevention services. Definitive mechanisms 
should be established to inform patients of their test results. HIV-negative test results may be conveyed without 
direct personal contact between the patient and the health-care provider. Persons known to be at high risk for 
HIV infection also should be advised of the need for periodic retesting and should be offered prevention counseling 
or referred for prevention counseling. HIV-positive 
test results should be communicated confidentially 
through personal contact by a clinician, nurse, mid-level practitioner, counselor, or other skilled staff. Because of the risk 
of stigma and discrimination, family or friends should not be used as interpreters to disclose 
HIV-positive test results to patients with limited English proficiency. Active efforts are essential to ensure that HIV-infected patients 
receive their positive test results and linkage to clinical care, counseling, support, and prevention services. If the 
necessary expertise is not available in the health-care venue in which screening is performed, arrangements should be made 
to obtain necessary services from another clinical provider, local health department, or community-based 
organization. 
Health-care providers should be aware that the Privacy Rule under the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) prohibits use or disclosure of a patient's health information, including 
HIV status, without the patient's permission. 
Rapid HIV tests. Because of the time that elapses 
before results of conventional HIV tests are available, 
providing patients with their test results can be resource intensive and challenging for screening programs, 
especially in episodic care settings (e.g., EDs, urgent-care clinics, and STD clinics) in which continuing 
relationships with patients typically do not exist. The use of rapid HIV tests can substantially decrease the number of persons who 
fail to learn their test results and reduce the resources expended to locate persons identified as HIV infected. 
Positive rapid HIV test results are preliminary and must be confirmed before the diagnosis of HIV infection is 
established ( 111 ). 
Participants in HIV vaccine trials. Recipients of preventive HIV vaccines might have 
vaccine-induced antibodies that are detectable by HIV antibody tests. Persons whose test results are HIV positive and who 
are identified as vaccine trial participants might not be infected with HIV and should be encouraged to contact 
or return to their trial site or an associated trial site for the confirmatory testing necessary to determine their 
HIV status. 
Documenting HIV test results. Positive or negative HIV test results should be documented in the 
patient's confidential medical record and should be readily available to all health-care providers involved in the 
patient's clinical management. The HIV test result of a pregnant woman also should be documented in the medical record 
of her infant. If the mother's HIV test result is positive, maternal health-care providers should, after obtaining 
consent from the mother, notify pediatric care providers of the impending birth of an HIV-exposed infant and of 
any anticipated complications. If HIV is diagnosed in the 
infant first, health-care providers should discuss 
the implications for the mother's health and help her to 
obtain care. 
Clinical Care for HIV-Infected Persons 
Persons with a diagnosis of HIV infection need a thorough evaluation of their clinical status and immune function 
to determine their need for antiretroviral treatment or other therapy. HIV-infected persons should receive or be referred 
for clinical care promptly, consistent with USPHS guidelines for management of HIV-infected persons 
( 96 ). HIV-exposed infants should receive appropriate antiretroviral prophylaxis to prevent perinatal HIV transmission as soon as 
possible after birth ( 42 ) and begin trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis at age 4--6 weeks to prevent 
Pneumocystis pneumonia ( 112 ). They should receive subsequent clinical monitoring and diagnostic testing to determine their 
HIV infection status ( 113 ). 
Partner Counseling and Referral 
When HIV infection is diagnosed, health-care providers should strongly encourage patients to disclose their 
HIV status to their spouses, current sex partners, and previous sex partners and recommend that these partners be tested 
for HIV infection. Health departments can assist patients by notifying, counseling, and providing HIV testing for 
partners without disclosing the patient's identity 
( 114 ). Providers should inform patients who receive a new diagnosis of 
HIV infection that they might be contacted by health department staff for a voluntary interview to discuss notification 
of their partners. 
Special Considerations for Screening Adolescents 
Although parental involvement in an adolescent's health care is usually desirable, it typically is not required when 
the adolescent consents to HIV testing. However, laws concerning consent and confidentiality for HIV care differ 
among states ( 79 ). Public health statutes and legal precedents allow for evaluation and treatment of minors for STDs 
without parental knowledge or consent, but not every state has defined HIV infection explicitly as a condition for which 
testing 
or treatment may proceed without parental consent. Health-care providers should endeavor to respect an 
adolescent's request for privacy ( 79 ). HIV screening should be discussed with all adolescents and encouraged for those who 
are sexually active. Providing information regarding HIV infection, HIV testing, HIV transmission, and implications 
of infection should be regarded as an essential component of the anticipatory guidance 
provided to all adolescents as part of primary care 
( 79 ). 
Prevention Services for HIV-Negative Persons 
Risk screening. HIV screening should not be contingent on an assessment of patients' behavioral risks. 
However, assessment of risk for infection with HIV and other STDs and provision of prevention information should 
be incorporated into routine primary care of all sexually 
active persons when doing so does not pose a barrier to 
HIV testing. Even when risk information is not sought, notifying a patient that routine HIV testing will be 
performed might result in acknowledgement of risk behaviors and offers an opportunity to discuss HIV infection and how 
it can be prevented. Patients found to have risk behaviors (e.g., MSM or heterosexuals who have multiple sex 
partners, persons who have received a recent diagnosis 
of an STD, persons who exchange sex for money or drugs, or 
persons who engage in substance abuse) and those who want assistance with changing behaviors should be provided with 
or referred to HIV risk-reduction services (e.g., drug treatment, STD treatment, and 
prevention counseling). 
Prevention counseling. In health-care settings, prevention counseling need not be linked explicitly to HIV 
testing. However, because certain patients might be more likely to think about HIV and consider their risks at the time 
of HIV testing, testing might present an ideal opportunity 
to provide or arrange for prevention counseling to 
assist with behavior changes that can reduce risks for acquiring HIV infection. Prevention counseling should be offered 
or made available through referral in all health-care facilities serving patients at high risk for HIV and at facilities 
(e.g., STD clinics) in which information on HIV risk behaviors is elicited routinely. 
HIV/AIDS Surveillance 
Risk-factor ascertainment for HIV-infected 
persons. CDC recommends that providers ascertain and document 
all known HIV risk factors ( 115 ). Health-care providers can obtain tools and materials to assist with ascertainment 
and receive guidance on risk factors as defined for surveillance purposes from HIV/AIDS surveillance professionals 
in their state or local health jurisdiction. This risk-factor information is important for guiding public health 
decisions, especially for prevention and care, at 
clinical, local, state, and national levels. 
HIV/AIDS case reporting. All states require that health-care providers report AIDS cases and persons with 
a diagnosis of HIV infection to the state or 
local health department. Case report forms are available from the state 
or local health jurisdiction. 
Pediatric exposure reporting. CDC and the Council for State and Territorial Epidemiologists recommend that 
all states and territories conduct surveillance for perinatal HIV exposure and contact providers after 
receiving reports of exposed infants to determine the infant's HIV-infection status. Information concerning dates of maternal HIV 
tests, receipt of prenatal care, maternal and neonatal receipt of antiretroviral drugs, mode of delivery, and breastfeeding 
is collected on the pediatric HIV/AIDS case report form 
( 115 ). 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Recommended thresholds for screening are based on 
estimates of the prevalence of undiagnosed HIV infection in 
U.S. health-care settings, for which no accurate recent data exist. The optimal frequency for retesting is not yet known. 
Cost-effectiveness parameters for HIV screening were based on 
existing program models, all of which include a 
substantial counseling component, and did not consistently consider secondary infections averted as a benefit of screening. To 
assess the need for revised thresholds for screening adults and adolescents or repeat screening of pregnant women and 
to confirm their continued effectiveness, screening programs should monitor the yield of new diagnoses of HIV 
infection, monitor costs, and evaluate whether patients with a diagnosis of HIV infection are linked to and remain engaged in 
care. With minor modifications, laboratory information systems might provide a practical alternative for clinicians to use 
in determining HIV prevalence among their patients who are screened for HIV. 
Primary Prevention and HIV Testing in Nonclinical Settings 
These revised recommendations are designed to increase HIV screening in health-care settings. Often, however, 
the population most at risk for HIV includes persons who are least likely to interact with the conventional 
health-care system ( 47, 116 ). The need to maintain primary prevention 
activities, identify persons at high risk for HIV who 
could benefit from prevention services, and provide HIV testing for persons who are at high risk for HIV in nonclinical 
venues remains undiminished. New approaches (e.g., enlisting HIV-infected persons and HIV-negative persons at high risk 
for HIV to recruit persons from their social, sexual, and drug-use networks for counseling, testing, and referral) 
have demonstrated considerable efficacy for identifying persons who were previously unaware of their HIV infection 
( 117 ). 
Regulatory and Legal Considerations 
These public health recommendations are based on best practices and are intended to comply fully with the 
ethical principles of informed consent ( 67 ). Legislation related to HIV and AIDS has been enacted in every state and 
the District of Columbia ( 118 ), and specific requirements 
related to informed consent and pretest counseling differ 
among states ( 119 ). Certain states, local jurisdictions, or agencies might have statutory or other regulatory impediments to 
opt-out screening, or they might impose other specific requirements for counseling, written consent, confirmatory testing, 
or communicating HIV test results that conflict with these recommendations. Where such policies exist, 
jurisdictions should consider strategies to best implement these recommendations within current parameters and consider steps 
to resolve conflicts with these recommendations. 
Other Guidelines 
Issues that fall outside the scope of these recommendations are addressed by other USPHS guidelines ( Box 1 ). 
Because concepts relevant to HIV management evolve rapidly, USPHS updates recommendations periodically. Current 
updates are available from the National Institutes of Health at 
http://AIDSinfo.nih.gov . Additional guidelines have 
been published by CDC and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office for Civil Rights 
( Box 2 ). 
Acknowledgment 
Ida M. Onorato, MD, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed), contributed to the writing and revision of this report. 
References 
CDC. Cases of HIV infection and AIDS in the United States, 2004. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report 2005;16:16--45. 
Lindegren ML, Byers RH, Thomas P, et al. Trends in perinatal transmission of HIV/AIDS in the United States. JAMA 1999;282:531--8. 
CDC. Number of persons tested for HIV---United States, 2002. MMWR 2004;53:1110--3. 
Glynn M, Rhodes P. Estimated HIV prevalence in the United States at the end of 2003 [Abstract]. Presented at the National HIV 
Prevention Conference, June 12--15, 2005; Atlanta, Georgia. 
Marks G, Crepaz N, Senterfitt JW, Janssen RS. Meta-analysis of high-risk sexual behavior in persons aware and unaware they are infected 
with HIV in the United States: implications for HIV prevention 
programs. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2005;39:446--53. 
Palella FJ, Deloria-Knoll M, Chmiel JS, et al. Survival benefit of initiating antiretroviral therapy in HIV-infected persons in different CD4+ 
cell strata. Ann Intern Med 2003;138:620--6. 
Wortley PM, Chu SY, Diaz T, et al. HIV testing patterns: where, why, and when were persons with AIDS tested for HIV? AIDS 1995;9: 487--92. 
CDC. Late versus early testing of HIV---16 sites, United States, 2000--2003. MMWR 2003;52:581--6. 
CDC. Revised guidelines for HIV counseling, testing, and referral. MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-19):1--62. 
CDC. Recommendations for HIV testing services for inpatients and 
outpatients in acute-care hospital settings. MMWR 1993;42(No. 
RR-2): 1--10. 
CDC. Revised recommendations for HIV screening of pregnant women. MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-19):63--85. 
Institute of Medicine, National Research Council. Reducing the odds: preventing perinatal transmission of HIV in the United States. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1999. 
CDC. Technical guidance on HIV counseling. MMWR 1993;42 (No. RR-2):11--7. 
Association of State and Territorial Health Officials. Guide to public health practice: HTLV-III screening in the community. McLean, 
VA: Association of State and Territorial Health Officials Foundation; 1985. 
CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for counseling and antibody 
testing to prevent HIV infection and AIDS. MMWR 1987;36:509--15. 
CDC. HIV counseling testing and referral: standards and guidelines. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 1994. 
Connor EM, Sealing RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of 
maternal-infant transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with 
zidovudine treatment. N Engl J Med 1994;221:1173--80. 
CDC. U.S. Public Health Service recommendations for human 
immunodeficiency virus counseling and voluntary testing for pregnant 
women. MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-7). 
CDC. Advancing HIV prevention: new strategies for a changing 
epidemic---United States, 2003. MMWR 2003;52:329--32. 
CDC. Advancing HIV prevention: interim technical guidance for 
selected interventions. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, CDC; 2003. 
Troccoli K, Pollard H III, McMahon M, Foust E, Erickson K, Schulkin J. Human immunodeficiency virus counseling and testing practices 
among North Carolina providers. Obstet Gynecol 2002;100:420--7. 
Epstein RM, Morse DS, Frankel RM, Frarey L, Anderson K, Beckman HB. Awkward moments in patient-physician communication about 
HIV risk. Ann Intern Med 1998;128:435--42. 
Kellock DJ, Rogstad KE. Attitudes to HIV testing in general practice. Int J STD AIDS 1998;9:263--7. 
US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for HIV: recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med 2005;143:32--7. 
Frieden TR, Das-Douglas M, Kellerman SE, Henning KJ. Applying public health principles to the HIV epidemic. N Engl J Med 
2005;353:2397--402. 
Walensky RP, Weinstein MC, Kimmel AD, et al. Routine human 
immunodeficiency virus testing: an economic evaluation of current guidelines. 
Am J Med 2005;118:292--300. 
Paltiel AD, Weinstein MC, Kimmel AD, et al. Expanded screening for HIV in the United States---an analysis of cost-effectiveness. N Engl J 
Med 2005;352:586--95. 
Rothman RE. Current Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines for HIV counseling, testing, and referral: critical role of and a call 
to action for emergency physicians. Ann Emerg Med 2004;44: 31--42. 
Lyons MS, Lindsell CJ, Ledyard HK, Frame PT, Trott AT. Emergency department HIV testing and counseling: an ongoing experience in a 
low-prevalence area. Ann Emerg Med 2005;46:22--8. 
Wilson JM, Jungner G. Principles and practice of screening for 
disease. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 1968. 
Barbacci MB, Dalabetta GA, Repke JT, et al. Human immunodeficiency virus infection in women attending an inner-city prenatal 
clinic: ineffectiveness of targeted screening. Sex Transm Dis 1990;17:122--6. 
Fehrs LJ, Hill D, Kerndt PR, Rose TP, Henneman C. Targeted HIV screening at a Los Angeles prenatal/family planning health center. Am J 
Public Health 1991;81:619--22. 
Lindsay MK, Adefris W, Peterson HB, Williams H, Johnson J, Klein L. Determinants of acceptance of routine voluntary human 
immunodeficiency virus testing in an inner-city prenatal population. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:678--90. 
Klein D, Hurley LB, Merrill D, Quesenberry CP Jr. Review of medical encounters in the 5 years before a diagnosis of HIV-1 infection: 
implications for early detection. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2003;32:143--52. 
Alpert PL, Shuter J, DeShaw MG, Webber MP, Klein RS. Factors 
associated with unrecognized HIV-1 infection in an inner-city 
emergency department. Ann Emerg Med 1996;28:159--64. 
Liddicoat RV, Horton NJ, Urban R, Maier E, Christiansen D, Samet JH. Assessing missed opportunities for HIV testing in medical 
settings. J Gen Intern Med 2004;19:349--56. 
Institute of Medicine. No time to lose: getting more from HIV 
prevention. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001. 
Jenkins TC, Gardner EM, Thrun MW, Cohn DL, Burman W. Risk-based human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing fails to detect the 
majority of HIV-infected persons in medical care settings. Sex Transm Dis 2006;33:329--33. 
Chen Z, Branson B, Ballenger A, Peterman TA. Risk assessment to improve targeting of HIV counseling and testing services for STD clinic 
patients. Sex Transm Dis 1998;25:539--43. 
Dodd RY, Notari EP, Stramer SL. Current prevalence and incidence of infectious disease markers and estimated window-period risk in 
the American Red Cross blood donor population. Transfusion 2002;42:975--9. 
CDC. U.S. HIV and AIDS cases reported through December 1999. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report 1999;11. 
Public Health Service Task Force. Recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs in pregnant HIV-1-infected women for maternal health 
and interventions to reduce perinatal HIV-1 transmission in the United States. Available at 
http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/ContentFiles/PerinatalGL.pdf . 
Cooper ER, Charurat M, Mofenson L, et al. Combination antiretroviral strategies for the treatment of pregnant HIV-1--infected women 
and prevention of perinatal HIV-1 transmission. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2002;29:484--94. 
International Perinatal HIV Group. The mode of delivery and the risk of vertical transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1: a 
meta-analysis of 15 prospective cohort studies. N Engl J Med 1999;340:977--87. 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Scheduled 
cesarean delivery and the prevention of vertical transmission of HIV infection. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2000;73:279--81. 
World Health Organization. HIV and infant feeding: guidelines for decision-makers. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2003. 
Karon JM, Fleming PL, Steketee RW, De Cock KM. HIV in the United States at the turn of the century: an epidemic in transition. Am 
J Public Health 2001;91:1060--8. 
CDC. Trends in HIV/AIDS diagnoses---33 states, 2001--2004. MMWR 2005;54:1149--53. 
CDC. U.S. HIV and AIDS cases reported through December 2001. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report 2001;13. 
Beckwith CG, Flanigan TP, del Rio C, et al. It is time to implement 
routine, not risk-based, HIV testing. Clin Infect Dis 
2005;40:1037--40. 
Bozzette SA. Routine screening for HIV infection---timely and cost-effective. N Engl J Med 2005;352:620--1. 
CDC. HIV testing among pregnant women---United States and Canada, 1998--2001. MMWR 2002;51:1013--6. 
CDC. Voluntary HIV testing as part of routine medical 
care---Massachusetts, 2002. MMWR 2004;53:523--6. 
Fincher-Mergi M, Cartone KJ, Mischler J, Pasieka P, Lerner EB, Billittier AJ IV. Assessment of emergency department healthcare 
professionals' behaviors regarding HIV testing and referral for patients with STDs. AIDS Patient Care STDs 2002;16:549--53. 
Coil CJ, Haukoos JS, Witt MD, Wallace RC, Lewis RJ. Evaluation of an emergency department referral system for outpatient HIV testing. 
J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2004;35:52--5. 
CDC. HIV prevalence, unrecognized infection, and HIV testing among men who have sex with men---five U.S. cities, June 2004--April 
2005. MMWR 2005;54:597--601. 
CDC. Routinely recommended HIV testing at an urban urgent-care clinic---Atlanta, Georgia, 2000. MMWR 2001;50:538--41. 
Kelen GD, Shahan JB, Quinn TC. Emergency department--based HIV screening and counseling: experience with rapid and standard 
serologic testing. Ann Emerg Med 1999;33:147--55. 
CDC. Anonymous or confidential HIV counseling and voluntary testing in federally funded testing sites---United States, 1995--1997. MMWR 1999;48:509--13. 
Irwin KL, Valdiserri RO, Holmberg SD. The acceptability of voluntary HIV antibody testing in the United States: a decade of lessons 
learned. AIDS 1996;10:1707--17. 
Hutchinson AB, Corbie-Smith G, Thomas SB, Mohanan S, del Rio C. Understanding the patient's perspective on rapid and routine HIV testing 
in an inner-city urgent care center. AIDS Educ Prev 2004;16:101--14. 
Spielberg F, Branson BM, Goldbaum GM, et al. Overcoming barriers to HIV testing: preferences for new strategies among clients of a 
needle exchange, a sexually transmitted disease clinic, and sex venues for men 
who have sex with men. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2003;32:318--28. 
Copenhaver MM, Fisher JD. Experts outline ways to decrease the 
decade-long yearly rate of 40,000 new HIV infections in the US. AIDS 
Behav 2006;10:105--14. 
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Human immunodeficiency virus 
screening. Pediatrics 1999;104:128. 
Koo DJ, Begier EM, Henn MH, Sepkowitz KA, Kellerman SE. HIV counseling and testing: less targeting, more testing. Am J Public 
Health 2006;96:3--5. 
Lo B, Wolf L, Sengupta S. Ethical issues in early detection of HIV infection to reduce vertical transmission. J Acquir Immune Defic 
Syndr 2000;25:S136--43. 
Bayer R, Fairchild AL. Changing the paradigm for HIV testing---the end of exceptionalism. N Engl J Med 2006;355:647--9. 
Simpson WM, Johnstone FD, Goldberg DJ, Gormley SM, Hart GJ. Antenatal HIV testing: assessment of a routine voluntary approach. 
BMJ 1999;318:1660--1. 
Stringer EM, Stringer JS, Cliver SP, Goldenberg RL, Goepfert AR. Evaluation of a new testing policy for human immunodeficiency virus to 
improve screening rates. Obstet Gynecol 2001;98:1104--8. 
Breese P, Burman W, Shlay J, Guinn D. The effectiveness of a verbal opt-out system for human immunodeficiency virus screening during 
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2004;104:134--7. 
Jayaraman GC, Preiksaitis JK, Larke B. Mandatory reporting of HIV infection and opt-out prenatal screening for HIV infection: effect on 
testing rates. CMAJ 2003;168:679--82. 
Branson BM, Lee JH, Mitchell B, Nolt B, Robbins A, Thomas MC. Targeted opt-in vs. routine opt-out HIV testing in STD clinics 
[Abstract]. Presented at the 13th meeting of the International Society for Sexually Transmitted Diseases Research; July 11--14, 1999; 
Denver, Colorado. 
Stanley B, Fraser J, Cox NH. Uptake of HIV screening in genitourinary medicine after change to "opt-out" consent. BMJ 2003;326:1174. 
Perez F, Zvandaziva C, Engelsmann B, Dabis F. Acceptability of routine HIV testing ("opt-out") in antenatal services in two rural districts 
of Zimbabwe. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2006;41:514--20. 
Kaiser Family Foundation. Survey of Americans on HIV/AIDS. 
Washington, DC: Kaiser Family Foundation; 2006. Available at 
http://www.kff.org/kaiserpolls/7521.cfm . 
CDC. Youth risk behavior surveillance---United States, 2005. In: CDC Surveillance Summaries, June 9, 2006. MMWR 2006;55(No. SS-5). 
Rotheram-Borus MJ, Futterman D. Promoting early detection of 
human immunodeficiency virus infection among adolescents. Arch Pediatr 
Adolesc Med 2000;154:435--9. 
National Institutes of Health, Office of AIDS Research. Report of the working group to review the NIH perinatal, pediatric, and adolescent 
HIV research priorities. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health; 1999. Available at 
http://www.oar.nih.gov/public/pubs/pedreport.pdf . 
American Academy of Pediatrics. Adolescents and human immunodeficiency virus infection: the role of the pediatrician in prevention 
and intervention. Pediatrics 2001;107:188--90. 
Rawitscher LA, Saitz R, Friedman LS. Adolescents' preferences regarding human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)--related physician counseling 
and HIV testing. Pediatrics 1995;96:52--8. 
Rand CM, Auinger P, Klein JD, Weitzman M. Preventive counseling at adolescent ambulatory visits. J Adolesc Health 2005;37:87--93. 
Murphy DA, Mitchell R, Vermund SH, Futterman D. Factors 
associated with HIV testing among HIV-positive and HIV-negative 
high-risk adolescents: the REACH study. Pediatrics 2002;110:36. 
Calonge N, Petitti DB. Screening for HIV (Response). Ann Intern Med 2005;143:916--7. 
Chou R, Huffman LH, Fu R, Smits AK, Korthius PT. Screening for HIV: a review of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 
Ann Intern Med 2005;143:55--73. 
Quinn TC, Wawer MJ, Sewankambo N, et al. Viral load and heterosexual transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Rakai 
Project Study Group. N Engl J Med 2000;342:921--9. 
Sanders GD, Bayoumi AM, Sundaram V, et al. Cost-effectiveness of screening for HIV in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy. 
N Engl J Med 2005;352:570--85. 
Marks G, Crepaz N, Janssen RS. Estimating sexual transmission of HIV from persons aware and unaware that they are infected with the virus 
in the USA. AIDS 2006;20:1447--50. 
Walensky RP, Weinstein MC, Smith HE, Freedberg KA, Paltiel AD. Optimal allocation of testing dollars: the example of HIV counseling, 
testing, and referral. Med Decis Making 2005;25:321--9. 
Weinhardt LS, Carey MP, Johnson BT, Bickham NL. Effects of HIV counseling and testing on sexual risk behavior: a meta-analytic 
review of published research, 1985--1997. Am J Public Health 1999;89:1397--405. 
Kamb ML, Fishbein M, Douglas JM, et al. Efficacy of risk-reduction counseling to prevent human immunodeficiency virus and 
sexually transmitted diseases: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1998;280:1161--7. 
EXPLORE Study Team. Effects of a behavioural intervention to 
reduce acquisition of HIV infection among men who have sex with men: 
the EXPLORE randomised controlled study. Lancet 2004;364:41--50. 
Lubelchek R, Kroc K, Hota B, et al. The role of rapid vs conventional human immunodeficiency virus testing for inpatients: effects on 
quality of care. Arch Intern Med 2005;165:1956--60. 
Halpern SD. HIV testing without consent in critically ill patients. JAMA 2005;294:734--7. 
Kahn JO, Walker BD. Acute human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. N Engl J Med 1998;339:33--9. 
Celum CL, Buchbinder SP, Donnell D, et al. Early human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in the HIV Network for Prevention 
Trials vaccine preparedness cohort: risk behaviors, symptoms, and 
early plasma and genital tract virus load. J Infect Dis 2001;183:23--35. 
US Department of Health and Human Services, Panel on Clinical Practices for Treatment of HIV Infection. Guidelines for the use 
of antiretroviral agents in HIV-1--infected adults and adolescents. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services; 2006. 
Available at 
http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/ContentFiles/AdultandAdolescentGL.pdf . 
Weintrob AC, Giner J, Menezes P, et al. Infrequent diagnosis of 
primary human immunodeficiency virus infection: missed opportunities in 
acute care settings. Arch Intern Med 2003;163:2097--100. 
Coco A, Kleinhans E. Prevalence of primary HIV infection in symptomatic ambulatory patients. Ann Fam Med 2005;3:400--4. 
Smith DE, Walker BD, Cooper DA, Rosenberg ES, Kaldor JM. Is antiretroviral treatment of primary HIV infection clinically justified on the 
basis of current evidence? AIDS 2004;18:709--18. 
Wawer MJ, Gray RH, Sewankambo NK, et al. Rates of HIV-1 transmission per coital act, by stage of HIV-1 infection, in Rakai, Uganda. J 
Infect Dis 2005;191:1403--9. 
Pilcher CD, Eron JJ, Galvin S, Gay C, Cohen MS. Acute HIV revisited: new opportunities for treatment and prevention. J Clin 
Invest 2004;113:937--45. 
CDC. Achievements in public health: reduction in perinatal transmission of HIV infection---United States, 1985--2005. MMWR 
2006;55:592--7. 
US Department of Health and Human Services. Reducing obstetrician barriers to offering HIV testing. Washington, DC: US Department 
of Health and Human Services; 2002. Report OEI-05-01-00260. Available at 
http://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-05-01-00260.pdf . 
Lindsay MK, Johnson N, Peterson HB, Willis S, Williams H, Klein L. Human immunodeficiency virus infection among inner-city 
adolescent parturients undergoing routine voluntary screening, July 1987 to March 1991. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:1096--9. 
Royce RA, Walter EB, Fernandez MI, Wilson TE, Ickovics JR, Simonds RJ. Barriers to universal prenatal HIV testing in 4 US locations in 
1997. Am J Public Health 2001;91:727--33. 
Warren B, Glaros R, Hackel S, et al. Residual perinatal HIV 
transmissions in 25 births occurring in New York state [Abstract]. Presented at 
the National HIV Prevention Conference; June 12--15, 2005; Atlanta, Georgia. 
Sansom SL, Jamieson DJ, Farnham PG, Bulterys M, Fowler MG. Human immunodeficiency virus retesting during pregnancy: costs 
and effectiveness in preventing perinatal transmission. Obstet Gynecol 2003;102:782--90. 
CDC. Controlling tuberculosis in the United States: recommendations from the American Thoracic Society, CDC, and the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. MMWR 2005;54(No. RR-12). 
CDC. Recommendations to improve preconception health and health care---United States. MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-6). 
Wade NA, Birkhead GS, Warren BL, et al. Abbreviated regimens of zidovudine prophylaxis and perinatal transmission of the 
human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J Med 1998;339:1409--14. 
CDC. Protocols for confirmation of reactive rapid HIV tests. MMWR 2004;53:221--2. 
CDC. 1995 revised guidelines for prophylaxis against 
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia for children infected with or perinatally exposed to 
human immunodeficiency virus. MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-4). 
Working Group on Antiretroviral Therapy and Medical Management of HIV-Infected Children, the Health Resources and 
Services Administration (HRSA), and the National Institutes of Health. Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in pediatric HIV infection. 
Available at 
http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/ContentFiles/PediatricGuidelines.pdf . 
CDC. HIV partner counseling and referral services---guidance. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 
1998. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pubs/pcrs/pcrs-doc.htm . 
CDC. CDC guidelines for national human immunodeficiency virus case surveillance, including monitoring for human immunodeficiency 
virus infection and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. MMWR 1999;48(No. RR-13):1--32. 
CDC. HIV and AIDS: United States, 1981--2000. MMWR 2001;50:430--4. 
CDC. Use of social networks to identify persons with undiagnosed HIV infection---seven U.S. cities, October 2003--September 2004. MMWR 2005;54:601--5. 
Gostin LO. Public health strategies for confronting AIDS. Legislative and regulatory policy in the United States. JAMA 1989;261:1621--30. 
Health Research and Educational Trust. Map to HIV testing laws of all U.S. states. Chicago, IL: American Hospital Association; 2006. 
Available at http://www.hret.org/hret/about/map.html . 
* To eliminate the risk for postnatal transmission, HIV-infected women in the United States should not breastfeed. Support services for use of appropriate 
breast milk substitutes should be provided when necessary. In international settings, UNAIDS and World Health Organization recommendations for HIV 
and breastfeeding should be followed ( 46 ). 
† A second HIV test in the third trimester is as cost-effective as other common health interventions when HIV incidence among women of childbearing age is 
> 17 HIV cases per 100,000 person-years 
( 107 ). In 2004, in jurisdictions with available data on HIV case rates, a rate of 17 new HIV diagnoses per year 
per 100,000 women aged 15--45 years was associated with an AIDS case rate of at least nine AIDS diagnoses per year per 100,000 women aged 15--45 
years (CDC, unpublished data, 2005). As of 2004, the jurisdictions listed above exceeded these thresholds. The list of specific jurisdictions where a second test in 
the third trimester is recommended will be updated periodically based on surveillance data. 
Consultants 
Membership List, November 2005 
Chairpersons: Bernard M. Branson, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC; 
H. Hunter Handsfield, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention (proposed) and University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington. 
Presenters: Terje Anderson, National Association of People with AIDS, Silver Spring, Maryland; Yvette Calderon, MD, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, Bronx, New York; Carlos del Rio, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia; Bambi Gaddist, PhD, South Carolina 
African American HIV/AIDS Council, Columbia, South Carolina; Roberta Glaros, MA, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York; Howard 
A. Grossman, MD, American Academy of HIV Medicine, Washington, DC; Sara Guerry, MD, Los Angeles Sexually Transmitted Disease Program, 
Los Angeles, California; Scott D. Halpern, MD, PhD, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Kim Hamlett-Berry, PhD, Department 
of Veterans Affairs, Washington, DC; Scott Kellerman, MD, New York City Bureau of HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control, New York, New York; James 
H. Lee, Texas Department of State Health Services, Austin, Texas; Jason Leider, MD, PhD, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York; A. 
David Paltiel, PhD, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; Liisa Randall, PhD, Michigan Department of Community Health, 
Okemos, Michigan; Cornelis A. Rietmeijer, MD, PhD, Denver Public Health Department, Denver, Colorado; Robert A. Weinstein, MD, Rush Medical 
College, Chicago, Illinois; Noel Zuniga, Bienestar Human Services, Inc., Los Angeles, California. 
Moderators: John Blevins, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia; William C. Page, William C. Page, Inc., Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
Consultants: Chris Aldridge, National Alliance of State and Territorial AIDS Directors, Washington, DC; Terje Anderson, National Association of 
People with AIDS, Silver Spring, Maryland; Arlene Bardeguez, MD, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey; Ronald 
Bayer, PhD, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, New York; Guthrie Birkhead, MD, Council of State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists and New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York; Lora Branch, MS, Chicago Department of Public Health, 
Chicago, Illinois; Daniel Bush, North Jersey Community Research Initiative, Newark, New Jersey; Ahmed Calvo, MD, Health Resources and 
Services Administration, Rockville, Maryland; Sheldon Campbell, MD, PhD, College of American Pathologists and Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut; Suzanne Carlberg-Racich, MPH, Midwest AIDS Training and Education Center, Chicago, Illinois; Sandra Chamblee, Glades 
Health Initiative, Belle Glade, Florida; James Coleman, Whitman Walker Clinic, Inc., Takoma Park, Maryland; Kevin DeCock, MD, Global AIDS 
Program, Nairobi, Kenya; Andrew De Los Reyes, Gay Men's Health Crisis, Inc., New York, New York; Carlos del Rio, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia; Marisa Duarte, MPH, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Atlanta, Georgia; Wayne Duffus, MD, PhD, South 
Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control, Columbia, South Carolina; Enid Eck, Kaiser Permanente, Pasadena, California; Magdalena 
Esquivel, Los Angeles Department of Health Services, Los Angeles, California; Joe Fuentes, Houston Area Community Services, Inc., Houston, Texas; 
Donna Futterman, MD, American Academy of Pediatrics and Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York; Bambi Gaddist, PhD, South 
Carolina African American HIV/AIDS Council, Columbia, South Carolina; Roberta Glaros, MA, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New 
York; Howard A. Grossman, MD, American Academy of HIV Medicine, Washington, DC; Sara Guerry, MD, Los Angeles Sexually Transmitted 
Disease Program, Los Angeles, California; Scott D. Halpern, MD, PhD, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Kim Hamlett-Berry, 
PhD, Department of Veterans Affairs, Washington, DC; Celine Hanson, MD, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Wilbert Jordan, MD, 
National Medical Association and Drew University, Los Angeles, California; Scott Kellerman, MD, New York City Bureau of HIV/AIDS Prevention and 
Control, New York, New York; David Lanier, MD, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville, Maryland; James H. Lee, Texas Department of 
State Health Services, Austin, Texas; Jason Leider, MD, PhD, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York; Elisa Luna, MSW, Washington, 
DC; Robert Maupin, MD, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and LSU Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana; Jenny 
McFarlane, Texas Department of State Health Services, Austin, Texas; Lynne Mofenson, MD, National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, Rockville, Maryland; Eve Mokotoff, MPH, Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists and Michigan Department of Community Health, 
Detroit, Michigan; Susan Moskosky, MS, Office of Population Affairs, Rockville, Maryland; Doralba Muñoz, Union Positiva, Inc., Miami, Florida; 
George Odongi, Dorchester Community Health Center, Quincy, Massachusetts; Debra Olesen, JSI Research and Training, Denver, Colorado; A. David 
Paltiel, PhD, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; Paul Palumbo, MD, Newark, New Jersey; Jim Pickett, AIDS Foundation of Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois; Pam Pitts, MPH, Tennessee Department of Health, Nashville, Tennessee; Borris Powell, Gay Men of African Descent, New York, New York; 
Liisa Randall, PhD, Michigan Department of Community Health, Okemos, Michigan; Mobeen Rathore, MD, University of Florida, Jacksonville, 
Florida; Cornelis A. Rietmeijer, MD, PhD, Denver Public Health Department, Denver, Colorado; Sam Rivera, Fortune Society, New York, New York; 
Ruth Roman, MPH, Health Resources and Services Administration, Rockville, Maryland; Richard Rothman, MD, Johns Hopkins University and 
American College of Emergency Physicians, Baltimore, Maryland; Gale Sampson-Lee, National Black Leadership Commission on AIDS, New York, New York; 
John Schneider, MD, PhD, American Medical Association, Flossmoor, Illinois; Deya Smith-Starks, AIDS Healthcare Foundation, Los Angeles, 
California; Nilda Soto, PROCEED, Inc., Elizabeth, New Jersey; Alice Stek, MD, University of Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
California; Monica Sweeney, MD, Bedford Stuyvesant Family Health Center, Inc., and National Association of Community Health Centers, Brooklyn, New 
York; Donna Sweet, MD, Wichita, Kansas; Wanda Tabora, Iniciativa Communitaria de Investigacion, San Juan, Puerto Rico; Mark Thrun, MD, Denver 
Public Health, Denver, Colorado; Robert A. Weinstein, MD, Rush Medical College, Chicago, Illinois; Carmen Zorilla, MD, University of Puerto Rico School 
of Medicine, San Juan, Puerto Rico; Noel Zuniga, Bienestar Human Services, Inc., Los Angeles, California. 
Peer Reviewers: Connie Celum, MD, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington; Daniel Kuritzkes, MD, HIV Medicine Association and Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Cambridge, Massachusetts; Thomas C. Quinn, MD, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease and Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland. 
CDC, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention Revised Recommendations for HIV Testing in 
Health-Care Settings Project 
Coordinator: Bernard M. Branson, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC. 
Project Manager: Samuel A. Martinez, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention (proposed), CDC. 
CDC Presenters: Brian Boyett, MS, Bernard M. Branson, MD, H. Irene Hall, PhD, Margaret A. Lampe, MPH, Sheryl B. Lyss, MD, Duncan 
A. Mackellar, MPH, Stephanie L. Sansom, PhD, Allan W. Taylor, MD, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 
Prevention (proposed). 
Box 1 
Return to top. 
Box 2 
Return to top. 
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. 
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are 
provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply 
endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content 
of pages found at these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of 
the date of publication. 
Disclaimer 
All MMWR HTML versions of articles are electronic conversions from ASCII text 
into HTML. This conversion may have resulted in character translation or format errors in the HTML version. 
Users should not rely on this HTML document, but are referred to the electronic PDF version and/or 
the original MMWR paper copy for the official text, figures, and tables. 
An original paper copy of this issue can be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20402-9371; telephone: (202) 512-1800. 
Contact GPO for current prices. 
**Questions or messages regarding errors in formatting should be addressed to 
mmwrq@cdc.gov . 
Date last reviewed: 9/12/2006 
HOME   |  
ABOUT MMWR   |  
MMWR SEARCH   |  
DOWNLOADS   |  
RSS 
|  
CONTACT 
POLICY   |  
DISCLAIMER   |  
ACCESSIBILITY 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
1600 Clifton Rd, MailStop E-90, Atlanta, GA 
30333, U.S.A 
Department of Health 
and Human Services
