SEP-1 Has Brought Much Needed Attention to Improving Sepsis Care… But Now Is the Time to Improve SEP-1 - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Crit Care Med 
. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2021 Jul 23. 
Published in final edited form as: Crit Care Med. 2020 Jun;48(6):779–782. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000004305 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
SEP-1 Has Brought Much Needed Attention to Improving Sepsis Care… But Now Is the Time to Improve SEP-1 
Chanu Rhee 
Chanu Rhee , MD MPH 
1. Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical School / Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston MA 
2. Division of Infectious Diseases, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 
Find articles by Chanu Rhee 
1, 2 , Jeffrey R Strich 
Jeffrey R Strich , MD 
3. Critical Care Medicine Department, National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD 
Find articles by Jeffrey R Strich 
3 , Michael Klompas 
Michael Klompas , MD, MPH 
1. Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical School / Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston MA 
2. Division of Infectious Diseases, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 
Find articles by Michael Klompas 
1, 2 , Donald M Yealy 
Donald M Yealy , MD 
4. Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 
Find articles by Donald M Yealy 
4 , Henry Masur 
Henry Masur 
3. Critical Care Medicine Department, National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD 
Find articles by Henry Masur 
3 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1. Department of Population Medicine, Harvard Medical School / Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston MA 
2. Division of Infectious Diseases, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 
3. Critical Care Medicine Department, National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD 
4. Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 
✉ 
Corresponding author: Jeffrey R. Strich, MD, Critical Care Medicine Department, NIH Clinical Center, 10 Center Drive, Room 2C145, Bethesda, MD 20892, 301-496-9320, jeffrey.strich@nih.gov 
Keywords: sepsis, severe sepsis, septic shock, SEP-1, performance measure, antibiotics 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC8300864  NIHMSID: NIHMS1562288  PMID: 32433077 
The publisher's version of this article is available at Crit Care Med 
Despite decades of progress, sepsis remains a major cause of death and disability.( 1 ) Recognizing the high burden of sepsis, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) implemented the Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock Early Management Bundle (SEP-1) in 2015. This measure generated strong reactions from many clinicians, administrators, and policy makers. 
SEP-1 brought welcome attention to sepsis, created more accountability for sepsis care, and catalyzed numerous quality improvement initiatives. At the same time, there is growing concern that there may be unintended consequences of sepsis mandates and the culture of “treat first, ask questions later” that they encourage. 
Critics of SEP-1 recall the well-intended but ill-fated CMS community-acquired pneumonia measure requiring clinicians to give antibiotics to patients within 4-hours of hospital arrival. This measure led to an increase in inappropriate antibiotic prescribing but no appreciable decrease in mortality.( 2 ) Over the past several years, we have seen a similar effect at sites seeking to comply with the antibiotic time threshold in SEP-1; this is magnified by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign’s recent recommendation to target even shorter goals.( 3 ) Setting aggressive time-to-antibiotic targets for all patients with sepsis risks causing more harm than time-to-antibiotic targets for pneumonia because sepsis is even more complicated and prone to misdiagnosis than pneumonia. Clinicians are faced with the challenge of differentiating infected patients from uninfected patients despite the fact that their presentations are often similar. Pressure to administer antibiotics quickly risks forcing premature diagnostic closure, overclassification of patients as infected, and ultimately administration of antibiotics to patients who will not benefit from them and may be harmed by them. Importantly, up to 40% of patients initially treated for sepsis turn out to have a low likelihood of infection when assessed retrospectively.( 4 ) 
Antibiotic stewardship, also a national priority, demands a better approach. A Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recent report estimates 35,000 death per year in the U.S. due to antibiotic-resistance and another 12,800 from C. difficile .( 5 ) Even short courses of antibiotics can increase antibiotic resistance, acute kidney injury, C. difficile infection, and disruption of the gut microbiome.( 6 – 8 ) How and where do we draw the regulatory line between which patients should receive immediate broad-spectrum antibiotics per SEP-1 and which are better served by taking a small amount of time to gather more evidence for or against infection before treating? 
The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), with the endorsement of the American College of Emergency Physicians, Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society, Society for Infectious Disease Pharmacists, and Society of Hospital Medicine now offers recommendations to improve the utility and safety of SEP-1.( 9 ) As authors and endorsers of that position paper who are also actively involved in critical care medicine and emergency care, we advocate for changes to reduce the risk of unintended consequences of the bundle while maintaining a strong focus on its evidence-based elements. Our focus here is on issues related to the diagnosis and management of infection, although we also believe that other aspects of SEP-1, particularly those related to fluid administration and patient reassessment, would also benefit from a similar reconsideration. 
Our core recommendation is to focus antibiotic timing thresholds on septic shock patients alone, moving away from the current approach which targets strict timing thresholds for all patients with any forms of possible sepsis (and often something else instead). We summarize the reasons for this below. 
WHY SEP-1 SHOULD FOCUS ON SEPTIC SHOCK AND NOT SEVERE SEPSIS 
1. Focusing SEP-1’s antibiotic timing requirement on patients with septic shock aligns the measure with the best available evidence. 
The perception that every patient with suspected sepsis requires immediate antibiotics to prevent poor outcomes, regardless of their severity of illness or likelihood of true infection, contributes to antibiotic overprescribing. This mindset ignores the varying levels of certainty of infection, heterogeneous signs, infection sites, and severities of organ dysfunction encompassed by the term “sepsis.”( 10 ) For example, does a patient with isolated hyperbilirubinemia or a minimally elevated lactate level need to be treated with the same urgency as a patient with persistent hypotension? 
The primary studies cited by the 2016 Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines to support their recommendations on immediate antibiotics focused on critically ill patients, most of whom had septic shock.( 11 – 14 ) Two more recent studies included much larger numbers of sepsis patients with and without shock, reporting harm with hourly delays in antibiotics for all patients, but much smaller effects for sepsis without shock.( 15 , 16 ) 
Other recent studies looking at time-to-antibiotics in sepsis patients without shock linearize the association between time-to-antibiotics and death over large time intervals (up to 24 hours or more in some cases) to yield statistically significant hourly effects even when mortality rates only significantly rise after about 5 hours.( 17 , 18 ) Moreover, all observational studies are at risk for residual confounding. The only randomized trial to date comparing differential timing of antibiotics for sepsis found no difference in mortality rates despite >90 minutes difference between study arms in time-to-antibiotics.( 19 ) Fewer than 4% of the patients enrolled in this study had septic shock, hence the findings of this study are most pertinent to sepsis without shock. 
The differential importance of time-to-antibiotics by level of illness has important implications for the initial workup of patients with possible sepsis. Patients who may have septic shock have less margin for error and are often easier to identify than patients without shock. Drawing blood cultures and starting broad spectrum antibiotics immediately is wise in those with shock which appears possibly due to infection, even if the latter is uncertain while further evidence supporting or refuting the diagnosis of septic shock is gathered. Indeed, we recommend administering antibiotics to patients with possible septic shock within one hour given that this is a true medical emergency. For patients without shock, however, we suggest a more nuanced approach calibrated to the probability of infection and severity of illness. Patients with clear infections should be treated immediately. If the diagnosis of infection is unclear, however, we suggest rapid investigations to try to gain more diagnostic clarity before treating. 
Using our suggested approach, we can lessen the rush to quickly give broad antibiotic coverage to many patients (absent shock) in whom there may have been concern for infection at time of first provider contact but do not in fact have an infection. We believe this lessens harm to individual patients without losing recovery opportunities, and this will aid antibiotic stewardship and help optimize antibiotic use for others. The clinical data needed to make the best infection and sepsis judgement can often be collected over a few hours, allowing one to determine if antibiotics are needed or if an appropriate regimen can be narrow rather than broad. 
2. The benefit of bundled care in sepsis without shock is likely overestimated by observational studies due to their high risk of bias. 
Proponents of sepsis mandates point to numerous studies demonstrating the beneficial impact of bundled care in patients with both sepsis and septic shock. These generally come in two types: 1) before-after studies showing lower mortality rates after implementing sepsis bundles, and 2) concurrent implementation studies that demonstrate associations between higher bundle compliance and lower sepsis mortality. Both of these types of studies are susceptible to bias. 
“Before-after” studies generally include educational initiatives and enhanced screening protocols with sepsis bundle roll-outs. By design, this leads to increased detection of patients with earlier and milder forms of sepsis. In turn, this leads to an increase in the overall number of sepsis cases and a parallel decrease in mortality. The risk of ascertainment bias is magnified with administrative data such as ICD codes since coding for sepsis and organ dysfunction is becoming more complete over time.( 20 , 21 ) 
In concurrent bundle implementation studies, there are several reasons why higher bundle compliance might be associated with lower mortality. One possibility, of course, is a causal relationship. Even then, though, the clearest links between bundle use and improved outcomes are in patients with septic shock.( 15 ) Second, bundle compliance might be a marker for better hospital care overall. Third, important confounders are not fully accounted for in observational data and create or magnify associations. For example, many patients fail to receive the mandated 30 cc/kg volume of fluids due to fear of fluid overload in patients with cardiac, respiratory, or renal dysfunction – all of which are important independent risk factors for mortality.( 22 ) Patients may have delays in receiving antibiotics because of other acute illnesses, difficulty in obtaining intravenous access (which tends to occur in older, sicker patients), or because patients’ presenting symptoms do not obviously point to infection. This last point is especially important as emerging data indicate that septic patients with vague presentations tend to be older, sicker, and have a higher risk of death.( 23 ) 
3. Focusing SEP-1 on septic shock would simplify abstraction of “time zero” and make it a more reliable quality metric. 
All of the time-sensitive actions currently required by SEP-1 are anchored against a complex “time zero” definition for severe sepsis. Time zero is defined as the first moment that all 3 of the following are present within a 6-hour window: 1) documentation of suspected infection, b) ≥2 systemic inflammatory response syndrome criteria, and c) ≥1 of many different organ dysfunction criteria. Abstractors searching for time zero need to sort through multiple progress notes, vital sign flowsheets, and laboratory results, a process that can sometimes take an hour or more per case. 
The complicated organ dysfunction criteria are problematic since abstractors must often exercise considerable judgment in deciding whether organ dysfunction is new and whether it is attributable to infection. Not surprisingly, different abstractors often identify different time zeros, yielding very different interpretations of SEP-1 compliance.( 24 ) Adjudication and retraining by expert abstractors can improve reliability but is not always feasible or consistently performed across healthcare systems. Focusing on septic shock would simplify time zero identification and increase measure reliability. 
GUIDANCE ON MANAGING SEPSIS WITHOUT SHOCK 
Our recommendation to focus SEP-1 on septic shock is not meant to trivialize the importance of sepsis without shock. However, it is important to distinguish interventions required by regulatory measures versus those recommended in clinical practice guidelines. Regulatory measures are inherently less flexible than clinical guidelines and should be based on the highest quality of evidence. Regulatory measures are best when they are limited to clearly beneficial interventions and when they are attentive to potential unintended consequences. 
Clinical guidelines, on the other hand, have more room for nuance since they are voluntary and provide graded recommendations with a summation of the supporting literature, possible gaps, and the rationale underlying the ultimate recommendation. As such, guidelines are the more appropriate forum for delivering direction on managing sepsis without shock. Hospitals may choose to go above and beyond what is required by regulatory measures and incorporate interventions recommended by clinical guidelines into their protocols, but these decisions should be up to the discretion of each hospital in accordance with their assessment of local needs and opportunities. 
OTHER POTENTIAL WAYS TO IMPROVE ON SEP-1 
We offer three additional suggestions that go beyond the ideas discussed in the IDSA position paper but that we believe could further enhance SEP-1’s benefits while strengthening CMS’s commitment to antibiotic stewardship. 
1. SEP-1 should require hospitals to measure the time from antibiotic order to infusion for patients with septic shock. 
Requiring hospitals to report the interval from when a clinician places a “stat” antibiotic order and the commencement of the infusion could help bring attention to the need to improve antibiotic delivery systems. This is important since emerging data suggests delays from antibiotic order to infusion are common and associated with mortality.( 25 ) Minimizing this time interval is a process issue that all health care facilities can work to improve. 
If CMS chooses to retain sepsis without shock in the measure, focusing on this metric for all sepsis patients is a logical way to mitigate the current ambiguities around identifying time zero and maintain attention to delivering timely care in the entire spectrum of patients with sepsis, while avoiding unnecessary pressure to start antibiotics in patients in whom clinicians believe infection to be unlikely. 
2. SEP-1 should include a requirement for antibiotic “time-outs” for clinicians, in conjunction with hospitals’ antimicrobial stewardship teams, to assess the potential for antibiotic de-escalation or cessation in patients with suspected sepsis. 
We acknowledge the reality that clinicians, even in the absence of regulatory measures, will often continue to administer empiric broad spectrum antibiotics in patients with suspected sepsis (even without shock). Mandatory and structured reassessments of antibiotic choice, spectrum, and necessity documented in the electronic medical record could mitigate the consequences of overly zealous treatment for possible sepsis, particularly if done collaboratively with antibiotic stewardship teams.( 26 ) 
3. SEP-1 reporting should be feasible using automated analyses of structured electronic health record data. 
Due to SEP-1’s complexity, CMS currently requires hospitals to abstract and report a maximum of 60 sepsis cases per quarter. Patients transferred from other institutions, placed on comfort measures, or who do not meet the SEP-1 time zero criteria are subtracted from the list of patients to be reviewed so in practice many hospitals only report on a handful of patients each month. This means that large hospitals must extrapolate the quality of their sepsis care from a tiny fraction of their septic patients. 
Now that electronic health record systems are almost universally used around the nation, SEP-1 should evolve into a completely automatable measure using a time zero definition that is readily extractible electronically. This will enable hospitals to monitor sepsis care across their entire population in a rapid, efficient, and objective fashion that can eliminate the need for onerous and subjective manual reviews. 
SUMMARY 
We commend CMS and the stewards of SEP-1 for elevating sepsis to a national priority. The current SEP-1 bundle, however, encourages an institutional “rush to treatment” that may benefit some patients but may be potentially harmful in other patients. A more streamlined bundle focused on septic shock alone would help mitigate this risk by focusing the measure on the population most likely to benefit from immediate broad-spectrum antibiotics. This would also increase the efficiency and reliability of the current or any new sepsis measure. 
We believe that professional societies with expertise in managing patients with sepsis in emergency departments, inpatient services and ICUs should have a central role in developing, testing, and assessing future sepsis quality measures. We hope CMS will engage representatives from a wide array of professional societies to collaborate on refining SEP-1 to better encourage early effective care for the patients with sepsis who truly stand to benefit while also promoting a smarter and more rational approach to antibiotic use in everyone else. 
Funding Statement: 
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center. CR received support from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (K08HS025008). 
Copyright form disclosure : Dr. Rhee’s institution received funding from Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (K08 award). Drs. Rhee and Klompas received funding from UptoDate. Drs. Rhee, Strich, and Masur received support for article research from the National Institutes of Health. Drs. Strich and Masur disclosed government work. Dr. Klompas’ institution received funding from the CDC and Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Dr. Yealy’s institution received funding from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the American College of Emergency Physicians, and he received funding from Wolters Kluwer. 
Footnotes 
Publisher's Disclaimer: Disclaimer: 
This editorial represents the views of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official position of the National Institutes of Health or the U.S. Government. 
REFERENCES 
1. Rhee C, Dantes R, Epstein L
et al. : Incidence and Trends of Sepsis in US Hospitals Using Clinical vs Claims Data, 2009–2014. JAMA
2017, 318(13):1241–1249. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Wachter RM, Flanders SA, Fee C, Pronovost PJ: Public reporting of antibiotic timing in patients with pneumonia: lessons from a flawed performance measure. Ann Intern Med
2008, 149(1):29–32. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Levy MM, Evans LE, Rhodes A: The Surviving Sepsis Campaign Bundle: 2018 update. Intensive Care Med
2018, 44(6):925–928. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Klein Klouwenberg PM, Cremer OL, van Vught LA
et al. : Likelihood of infection in patients with presumed sepsis at the time of intensive care unit admission: a cohort study. Crit Care
2015, 19:319. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. CDC. Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the United States, 2019. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2019. [ https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/pdf/threats-report/2019-ar-threats-report-508.pdf ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Teshome BF, Vouri SM, Hampton N, Kollef MH, Micek ST: Duration of Exposure to Antipseudomonal beta-Lactam Antibiotics in the Critically Ill and Development of New Resistance. Pharmacotherapy
2019, 39(3):261–270. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Branch-Elliman W, O’Brien W, Strymish J
et al. : Association of Duration and Type of Surgical Prophylaxis With Antimicrobial-Associated Adverse Events. JAMA Surg
2019, 154(7):590–598. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Bhalodi AA, van Engelen TSR, Virk HS, Wiersinga WJ: Impact of antimicrobial therapy on the gut microbiome. J Antimicrob Chemother
2019, 74(Supplement_1):i6–i15. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. PLACEHOLDER for Infectious Diseases Society of America Position Paper: Recommended Revisions to the National SEP-1 Sepsis Quality Measure. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] 
10. Seymour CW, Kennedy JN, Wang S
et al. : Derivation, Validation, and Potential Treatment Implications of Novel Clinical Phenotypes for Sepsis. JAMA
2019, 321(20):2003–2017. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. Barie PS, Hydo LJ, Shou J, Larone DH, Eachempati SR: Influence of antibiotic therapy on mortality of critical surgical illness caused or complicated by infection. Surg Infect (Larchmt)
2005, 6(1):41–54. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Kumar A, Roberts D, Wood KE
et al. : Duration of hypotension before initiation of effective antimicrobial therapy is the critical determinant of survival in human septic shock. Crit Care Med
2006, 34(6):1589–1596. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. Gaieski DF, Mikkelsen ME, Band RA
et al. : Impact of time to antibiotics on survival in patients with severe sepsis or septic shock in whom early goal-directed therapy was initiated in the emergency department. Crit Care Med
2010, 38(4):1045–1053. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. Ferrer R, Martin-Loeches I, Phillips G
et al. : Empiric Antibiotic Treatment Reduces Mortality in Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock From the First Hour: Results From a Guideline-Based Performance Improvement Program. Crit Care Med
2014. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Seymour CW, Gesten F, Prescott HC
et al. : Time to Treatment and Mortality during Mandated Emergency Care for Sepsis. N Engl J Med
2017, 376(23):2235–2244. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. Liu VX, Fielding-Singh V, Greene JD
et al. : The Timing of Early Antibiotics and Hospital Mortality in Sepsis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2017, 196(7):856–863. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. Whiles BB, Deis AS, Simpson SQ: Increased Time to Initial Antimicrobial Administration Is Associated With Progression to Septic Shock in Severe Sepsis Patients. Crit Care Med
2017, 45(4):623–629. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
18. Peltan ID, Brown SM, Bledsoe JR
et al. : ED Door-to-Antibiotic Time and Long-term Mortality in Sepsis. Chest
2019. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
19. Alam N, Oskam E, Stassen PM
et al. : Prehospital antibiotics in the ambulance for sepsis: a multicentre, open label, randomised trial. Lancet Respir Med
2018, 6(1):40–50. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
20. Rhee C, Murphy MV, Li L
et al. : Comparison of Trends in Sepsis Incidence and Coding Using Administrative Claims Versus Objective Clinical Data. Clin Infect Dis
2015, 60(1):88–95. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
21. Rhee C, Murphy MV, Li L
et al. : Improving documentation and coding for acute organ dysfunction biases estimates of changing sepsis severity and burden: a retrospective study. Crit Care
2015, 19:338. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
22. Truong TN, Dunn AS, McCardle K
et al. : Adherence to fluid resuscitation guidelines and outcomes in patients with septic shock: Reassessing the “one-size-fits-all” approach. J Crit Care
2019, 51:94–98. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
23. Filbin MR, Lynch J, Gillingham TD
et al. : Presenting Symptoms Independently Predict Mortality in Septic Shock: Importance of a Previously Unmeasured Confounder. Crit Care Med
2018, 46(10):1592–1599. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
24. Rhee C, Brown SR, Jones TM
et al. : Variability in determining sepsis time zero and bundle compliance rates for the centers for medicare and medicaid services SEP-1 measure. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2018:1–3. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
25. Kashiouris MG, Zemore Z, Kimball Z
et al. : Supply Chain Delays in Antimicrobial Administration After the Initial Clinician Order and Mortality in Patients With Sepsis. Crit Care Med
2019, 47(10):1388–1395. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
26. Barlam TF, Cosgrove SE, Abbo LM
et al. : Executive Summary: Implementing an Antibiotic Stewardship Program: Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America. Clin Infect Dis
2016, 62(10):1197–1202. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (53.5 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
