ICU Survivorship – The Relationship of Delirium, Sedation, Dementia, and Acquired Weakness - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Crit Care Med 
. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2022 Aug 1. 
Published in final edited form as: Crit Care Med. 2021 Aug 1;49(8):1227–1240. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000005125 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
ICU Survivorship – The Relationship of Delirium, Sedation, Dementia, and Acquired Weakness 
Matthew F Mart 
Matthew F Mart , MD 
1 Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
2 Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction, and Survivorship (CIBS) Center, Nashville, TN 
Find articles by Matthew F Mart 
1, 2 , Brenda T Pun 
Brenda T Pun , DNP, RN, FCCM 
1 Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
2 Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction, and Survivorship (CIBS) Center, Nashville, TN 
Find articles by Brenda T Pun 
1, 2 , Pratik Pandharipande 
Pratik Pandharipande , MD, MSCI, FCCM 
2 Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction, and Survivorship (CIBS) Center, Nashville, TN 
3 Department of Anesthesiology, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
Find articles by Pratik Pandharipande 
2, 3 , James C Jackson 
James C Jackson , PsyD 
1 Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
2 Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction, and Survivorship (CIBS) Center, Nashville, TN 
Find articles by James C Jackson 
1, 2 , E Wesley Ely 
E Wesley Ely , MD, MPH, MCCM 
1 Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
2 Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction, and Survivorship (CIBS) Center, Nashville, TN 
4 Vanderbilt Center for Health Services Research, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
5 Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center (GRECC), Nashville, TN 
6 Vanderbilt Center for Quality Aging, Nashville, TN 
Find articles by E Wesley Ely 
1, 2, 4, 5, 6 
Author information 
Copyright and License information 
1 Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
2 Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction, and Survivorship (CIBS) Center, Nashville, TN 
3 Department of Anesthesiology, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
4 Vanderbilt Center for Health Services Research, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
5 Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center (GRECC), Nashville, TN 
6 Vanderbilt Center for Quality Aging, Nashville, TN 
✉ 
Corresponding Author : Matthew F. Mart, MD, Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction, and Survivorship (CIBS) Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 2525 West End Avenue, Suite 450, Nashville, TN 37203 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC8282752  NIHMSID: NIHMS1701191  PMID: 34115639 
The publisher's version of this article is available at Crit Care Med 
Abstract 
The advent of modern critical care medicine has revolutionized care of the critically ill patient in the last 50 years. The Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) was formed in recognition of the challenges and need for specialized treatment for these fragile patients. As the specialty has grown, it has achieved impressive scientific advances that have reduced mortality and saved lives. With those advances, however, came growing recognition that the burden of critical illness did not end at the doorstep of the hospital. Delirium, once thought to be a mere by-product of critical illness, was found to be an independent predictor of mortality, prolonged mechanical ventilation, and long-lasting cognitive impairment. Similarly, deep sedation and immobility, so often used to keep patients “comfortable” and to facilitate mechanical ventilation and recovery, worsen mortality and lead to the development of ICU-acquired weakness. The realization that these outcomes are inextricably linked to one another and how we manage our patients has helped us recognize the need for culture change. We, as a specialty, now understand that, while celebrating the successes of survival, we now also have a duty to focus on those who survive their diseases. Led by initiatives such as the ICU Liberation Campaign of the SCCM, the natural progression of the field is now focused on getting patients back to their homes and lives unencumbered by disability and impairment. Much work remains to be done, but the futures of our most critically ill patients will continue to benefit if we leverage and build on the history of our first 50 years. 
Keywords: Critical Illness, Survivorship, Delirium, Sedation, Acquired Dementia, Early Mobility and Exercise, ICU-Acquired Weakness, Activities of Daily Living, Post Intensive Care Syndrome 
Introduction 
Over the past 50 years, since the founding of the Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and under its leadership, we have witnessed profound advances in our understanding of how critical illness impacts the human body and a dramatic evolution in the care of the world’s sickest patients. If one peers across the span of critical care medicine’s history, there is a significant change in mindset with regard to the best way to care for patients who receive mechanical ventilation (MV) and other forms of life support with an eye towards preserving the brain and neuromuscular system from life-altering disabilities and impairments. This shift is founded in the rapid advancement in knowledge of the long-term impact of critical illness as a systemic disease process and the collateral iatrogenic damage that our medical interventions can have on the human body and brain. The research-chiseled progression of critical care medicine over these 50 years allows us to adjust an early myopic focus on survival to one that includes implementing early steps in the ICU needed to improve survivorship. These fresh aims ultimately help critical illness survivors return to their pre-illness quality of life, hobbies, social interactions, and employment. 
We now know that the admission diagnosis is just the beginning of the family of diseases that define critical illness. We understand that from the moment a person is placed in our hands in the ICU with organ failure, he or she is very often developing new disease processes that are both organic and iatrogenic. A majority of ICU survivors develop a new or worsening form of cognitive impairment, physical impairment and/or mental health impairment. This syndrome, now called the Post-Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS), was coined originally by an SCCM-sponsored expert panel led by Dr. Dale Needham in 2012 ( 1 ). Through basic science, cohort studies, and expertly designed and conducted randomized controlled trials, critical care medicine has advanced to realize that the physiology of acute disease cannot define our entire approach to the human in medical and surgical crisis. We must also attend to the entire person and not just the etiology of their ICU admission. Indeed, once under our care, it is the entire body, mind, and spirit of the person involved that are affected by the illness and our own clinical decision-making, strongly influenced by the culture of the ICU. In response to this growth in knowledge, the SCCM built the ICU Liberation Campaign . It began with a series of adapted and bundled aspects of care to improve the entire culture of critical care, incorporating a holistic approach that improved upon a mechanistic approach to care that frequently led to over-sedation and immobilization. We came to understand that acquired dementia and weakness are major components of the legacy of our patients’ survivorship that needed addressing on the “front-end” of care, rather than the “back-end.” We know now that delirium and over-sedation, so common in critical illness, lead to acquired dementia and neuromuscular weakness. We also know now that the first steps to preventing these long-lasting impairments starts in the ICU, preventing and treating delirium, targeting light sedation, and exercising our patients, all with the goal of accelerating the recovery of survivors. Our goal in this manuscript is to outline this part of the story of critical care medicine. The history, and the lessons learned from it, are vital to the story of critical care medicine and particularly poignant in the face of the global COVID-19 pandemic that has placed critical care medicine at the forefront of an international public health crisis ( 2 , 3 ). 
The Evolution of Critical Care Medicine and ICU Survivorship 
The European polio epidemic of the 1950s gave rise to much of the what we have come to understand as critical care medicine. Similar previous epidemics in the 1940’s were the sparks that generated the development of negative pressure ventilation, the “iron lung”, as an effort to combat respiratory failure. The precursor to the modern positive pressure ventilator was developed during the European epidemic of the 1950’s, when Dr. Bjorn Ibsen, an innovative anesthesiologist from Denmark, developed the first technique for applying positive-pressure ventilation through a tracheostomy for a young patient in respiratory failure ( 4 , 5 ). From those first efforts to develop a new treatment for respiratory failure, numerous innovative advancements have emerged in the techniques of MV to keep patients alive during periods of critical illness. These initial machines, however, were very rudimentary and often intolerable for patients ( 6 ), frequently leading physicians to take complete control of the body via the perfunctory use of deep sedation and paralysis. While this new technology was undoubtedly life-saving, the subsequent use of deep sedation and paralysis bore new complications such as delirium, new-onset dementia or cognitive impairment, and acquired weakness, the consequences of which we have come to understand more clearly in the following years. 
Towards the end of the century, there was a paradigm shift in our understanding of the ramification of critical illness. Landmark studies shed light on the fact that patients were developing a profound myoneuropathy due to critical illness, and that a large percentage of ARDS survivors were suffering from significant neurocognitive deficits, even though they were admitted for with primary respiratory failure and had not experienced any catastrophic neurological events while in the ICU ( 7 – 10 ). Research in the ensuing two decades confirmed and elucidated these long-term ramifications of critical illness (i.e., PICS) and provided insight into their societal implications. This led to a focus on understanding those mechanisms and designing interventions to reduce the prolonged burden of critical illness among survivors ( 11 – 13 ). It became apparent that, while leveraging our best technology to keep people alive during sepsis and other life-threatening illness, millions of people were acquiring a “neck-up” brain disease and “neck-down” neuromuscular diseases that dramatically affected their lives after the ICU ( 7 – 9 , 14 – 18 ). 
Delirium 
At the end of the 20 th century, most clinicians assessed consciousness in critically ill patients only qualitatively at the bedside, frequently in very rudimentary ways. While the pathology of acute encephalopathy was recognized, a developed approach to describing clinical manifestations, such as delirium, was lacking ( 19 ). Much of the documentation described a patient’s general orientation to person, place and time, or whether or not they had intact brain function. There was little to no formal assessment describing how clearly a patient was thinking. One component of consciousness, arousal , was sometimes measured with poorly validated instruments, but we were not accurately measuring the other major component, content of consciousness , except perhaps to note those patients who were very agitated with hallucinations and delusions. These patients were frequently referred to as having “ICU psychosis,” a term now considered both a misnomer and antiquated ( 20 ). At the time, staff often deemed delirium to be a benign side effect of critical illness, assumed to clear up when a patient was transferred from the ICU. Little was known of the cause or if it truly was benign. Ultimately, our field came to understand this particular manifestation of acute encephalopathy in the critically ill as a spectrum of disease, now called ICU delirium. Delirium’s primary presentation can include hyperactive symptoms and agitation, but it more often manifests with symptoms of lethargy, inattention, and disorganized thinking, the cardinal components of hypoactive delirium. 
For many years, ICU delirium was brushed off as a natural consequence of critical illness. While clinicians had anecdotal experiences demonstrating that alteration in brain function often delayed liberation from MV and ICU discharge, it was not until the development and validation of delirium assessment tools designed specifically for the ICU setting, and the subsequent studies finding delirium to be a robust and independent predictor of mortality and morbidity, that the critical care world began to take notice ( 11 – 13 , 21 ). The two most widely used delirium assessments tools are the Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU) and the Intensive Care Delirium Screen Checklist (ICDSC), both of which were initially published in 2001 ( 11 , 13 ). They are built to be easy, quick, valid and reliable in patients that were critically ill and both verbal (i.e. off mechanical ventilation) or nonverbal on mechanical ventilation ( 11 , 13 ). These tools assess for the cardinal features of delirium, including acute, fluctuating consciousness and inattention ( 22 ). These findings are caused by organic diseases like sepsis (or coronavirus infection), coagulopathy, and hypoxemia, or iatrogenically by receipt of potent psychoactive medications such as GABA-ergic sedatives or opioid analgesics. Once delirium is diagnosed with these tools, then it is up to the clinical team to determine the differential diagnosis of potential causes and address them accordingly. These instruments create a common and validated, reliable language by which to communicate this form of organ dysfunction on rounds in the ICU. This allows coma and delirium to be part of routine organ function monitoring, serving as both an early warning system for changes in clinical status and a catalyst for emerging literature on prognostication ( 23 ). As a result, across the hospital, from medical and surgical wards ( 24 , 25 ), to step down units and post-operative recovery area ( 26 ), and the emergency department ( 27 ), as well as in pediatric populations ( 28 – 30 ), we now use consistent delirium assessment methods to understand that delirium is a phenomenon not just unique to the ICU, but that it is seen across the spectrum of acutely ill patients. 
Delirium develops in up to three-quarters of mechanically ventilated patients during critical illness ( 11 , 24 , 25 , 31 ). Data consistently show that the development and duration of delirium in ICU patients is a “canary in the coal mine,” as it is an independent predictor of untoward outcomes including higher mortality ( Figure 1 ), longer time on the ventilator and longer time in the ICU and the hospital ( 12 , 21 ). Delirium is also predictive of increased healthcare costs ( 32 , 33 ). For survivors of critical illness, the burdens of delirium do not end at hospital discharge. The duration of delirium is a primary risk factor for a form of acquired dementia that lasts years following the ICU stay ( 23 , 34 ), and this long-term cognitive complication of critical illness is a major component of the Post-Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS). 
Figure 1: 
Open in a new tab 
Delirium and coma are associated with 6-month mortality in critically ill patients. Reproduced with permission for the Journal of the American Medical Association from E. Wesley Ely, MD, MPH; Ayumi Shintani, PhD, MPH; Brenda Truman, RN, MSN; et al. Delirium as a predictor of mortality in mechanically ventilated patients in the intensive care unit. JAMA 2004;291(14):1753–1762 
At the same time that we as a field came to understand the numerous negative consequences associated with delirium, the hunt for modifiable risk factors quickened and practices began to change. In 2002, the clinical practice guidelines for sedative and analgesic use in critically ill adults were developed by the Task Force of the American College of Critical Care Medicine (ACCM) as part of the SCCM, in conjunction with the American College of Chest Physicians. They introduced delirium assessment as an important aspect of appropriate analgesic and sedative use ( 35 ). In the mid-2000’s, standard clinical practices at the time came under scrutiny with respect to delirium. The administration of long-acting sedatives, such as benzodiazepines, was found to independently predict of the development of delirium, and hence be an important modifiable risk factor ( 36 – 38 ). These discoveries turned conventional wisdom within the field upside down. By 2013, with rapidly increasing knowledge surrounding delirium, the SCCM renamed its directives to be the “PAD” guidelines with a focus on pain, agitation, and delirium, all interdependent symptoms that need close monitoring in all critically adults, in an ongoing effort to reduce human suffering ( 39 ). 
Now, with the SCCM’s most recent 2018 PADIS guidelines, now including immobility and sleep, delirium assessment and prevention have come of age as an ICU standard and remain an important focus within the field. These guidelines, along with the development of the ICU Liberation Campaign and the ABCDEF Bundle, have re-defined how critical care medicine approaches delirium. No longer is it an expected and overlooked side effect of the ICU environment, but now it is recognized as a significant clinical syndrome representing a valid and reliable phenotype of acute encephalopathy with wide-reaching impact on patient outcomes. This growing recognition has also led to a broader hunt for effective pharmacological treatments over the last two decades. The evidence surrounding pharmacological management of delirium, however, is to date disappointing. Several large randomized controlled trials, such as the HOPE-ICU and MIND-USA studies, demonstrate no benefit to antipsychotics in treating delirium, despite their persistent use in critically ill patients ( 40 – 42 ). Similarly, studies of other pharmacological agents have demonstrated limited benefit in studies to date( 43 ). Future research in the discovery of effective pharmacological treatments for delirium, in addition to best practices such as the ABCDEF bundle, are an important area for future investigation. 
These developments and advances in the management of delirium were not in isolation. They coincided with other advances in within the field, including ventilator management and improved sedation practices, the recognition of ICU-related cognitive impairment in survivors, and the promotion of early rehabilitation and mobility in response to critical illness-related neuromuscular impairments. These aspects of critical illness are no longer seen as disparate, individual issues to be addressed, but instead as linked, interdependent processes to be managed in a symbiotic manner. Assessment for and management of delirium is an indispensable part of usual clinical care among all critically ill patients, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic ( 44 , 45 ). Critically ill patients with COVID-19 are experiencing extremely high rates of delirium and coma that persists for several days, a significant setback from prior progress made in the field ( 46 ). 
Deep Sedation & Paralysis Following Advances in Ventilator Management 
Fifty years ago, Ashbaugh and colleagues published their landmark paper describing the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and the potential benefits of positive end expiratory pressure(PEEP) ( 47 ). In the five decades since, synchronous with many other changes in critical care medicine, there have been significant advances in the use and design of mechanical ventilators. With those advances, however, also came the understanding that inappropriate use of MV paired with deep sedation can lead to significant iatrogenic harm. 
Concomitant with the increasing capabilities of ventilators, there was exponential growth in our understanding of the risks associated with MV. The 1960s and 70s revealed the harms of oxygen toxicity, atelectasis and barotrauma, heralding the era of high tidal volume ventilation to offset those deleterious effects ( 48 , 49 ). Fast-forward into the 1990s and we learned that over distention of the alveoli was also detrimental. Volutrauma leads to lung injury, including the release of inflammatory mediators in the lung, increased permeability, translocation of mediators, bacteria, and endotoxin into the systemic circulation, resulting in multiple organ dysfunction syndrome ( 50 , 51 ). During that time, there was also a growing body of evidence that deep sedation (often with neuromuscular blockade), used to keep patients “comfortable” on mechanical ventilation, contributed to increased mortality ( Figure 2 ) and worsened clinical outcomes, including delirium and immobilization ( 7 , 36 , 52 ). These short-term outcomes from deep sedation and paralysis created larger, long-term problems, ultimately leading to worse long-term cognitive and physical impairments. The syndrome “PICS” was defined to describe these cognitive, functional, mental health, and neuropsychological consequences of critical illness ( 1 ), and with PICS entered a new metric of successful management in the ICU and hospital that focused on the quality of survivorship. Understanding and revising our approach to sedation use has been key in improving outcomes in critical illness survivors. 
Figure 2: 
Open in a new tab 
Kaplan-Meier curves for time to extubation and mortality at 180 days. (A) Time to extubation was significantly longer among patients who were deeply sedated early in the intensive care unit compared with those who were not. Median (interquartile range), 7.7 (6.0–8.6) vs 2.4 (1.9–4.0) days (log-rank, P < 0.001). (B) Those who were deeply sedated early (frist 48 h) showed significantly reduced survival (log-rank P = 0.048) compared with patients who were not deeply sedated. Reproduced with permission of the American Thoracic Society from Yahya Shehabi, Rinaldo Bellomo, Michael C. Reade, Michael Bailey, et al. Early intensive care sedation predicts long-term mortality in ventilated critically ill patients. Am J Resp Crit Care Med 2012; 15:186(8):724–31. Copyright © 2020 American Thoracic Society – all rights reserved. The American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine is an official journal of the American Thoracic Society. 
Interprofessional collaborative work has paved the way to better our understanding of managing patients on mechanical ventilation, particularly with regard to sedation strategies. We have learned over the years what to do and what to avoid. Maintaining light levels of sedation, in conjunction with low tidal volume ventilation using optimal PEEP, daily spontaneous awakening (SATs) and spontaneous breathing trials (SBTs) ( Figure 3 ), and early mobilization and exercise have all been associated with improved outcomes in mechanically ventilated patients ( 50 , 53 – 56 ). There has been a paradigm shift, with these supportive “back-end” therapies now being catapulted to the “front end.” These elements of care are now prioritized and have a central role as part of safe and effective ICU care starting as soon as a patient is in the ICU or put on mechanical ventilation. Substantial questions remain unanswered, however, in our sedation strategies and represent important areas of future research. Recent studies have failed to identify a preferred non-benzodiazepine sedation agent among the most commonly used drugs( 57 ). Similarly, the optimal “dose” of light sedation (or none at all) remains unclear ( 58 ). Further questions regarding the ideal management of analgosedation to promote ventilator synchrony with low-tidal volume ventilation and early mobilization are catalysts for ongoing studies on the “front-end” to improve “back-end” outcomes. 
Figure 3: 
Open in a new tab 
Performance of paired spontaneous awakening trials (SAT) and spontaneous breathing trials (SBT) compared to usual care with spontaneous breathings trials is associated with a significant reduction in mortality. Reproduced with permission of The Lancet from Girard TD, Kress JP, Fuchs BD, Thomason JW, et al. Efficacy and safety of a paired sedation and ventilator weaning protocol for mechanically ventilated patients in intensive care (Awakening and Breathing Controlled trial): a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet . 2008; 371(9607):126–134. All rights reserved. 
While one day we may have a magic bullet to treat ARDS, or sepsis leading to acute respiratory failure, the last 50 years have taught us that a methodical approach with attention to the little things early in a patient’s critical illness makes the greatest difference in outcomes. As critical care medicine deals with the current SARS-CoV2 pandemic, this fact has never been more true or relevant. There is no magic drug or treatment, but patients managed with guideline-driven light sedation strategies along with lung protective mechanical ventilation, and evidence-based critical care will continue to survive, with the goal of thriving, after their critical illness ( 2 , 59 ). 
Acquired Dementia 
Similar to the understanding of the complications of MV and deep sedation, much has been learned in recent decades about the challenges and complications that linger in the brains of survivors of critical illness. Cognitive concerns shape narratives, bend trajectories, and often become permanent fixtures in the lives of bewildered men and women who struggle to make sense of changes they neither anticipated nor asked for. They take many expressions, including deficits in cognition which, in turn, lead to functional disabilities and diminished quality of life, among a panoply of other maladies ( 14 , 15 , 23 , 60 ). When considering the many conditions that define PICS, cognitive problems are reported by many patients to be extremely debilitating in the course of their daily attempts to go back to work or be the matriarchs and patriarchs of their families ( 61 ). 
Since the late 1990s, when the first modern neuropsychologically oriented investigation of individuals after critical illness ensued, over 50 studies of cognition functioning following critical illness have been conducted ( 9 , 14 , 23 , 34 , 62 – 66 ). These studies vary widely in size, in comprehensiveness, and in methodology, among many other variables, making sweeping generalizations difficult. Nevertheless, a variety of durable findings emerge. In general, cognitive impairment affects a quarter to a third of ICU survivors, and occurs in numerous neuropsychological domains including attention, executive functioning, memory, processing speed, and visuo-spatial construction (although language abilities are typically preserved) ( 23 ). Such impairments are of a severity commensurate with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s Dementia ( Figure 4 ). Cognitive impairment frequently persists over time, yet the epidemiology of its natural history is still being described ( 23 ). It is sometimes progressive and marked by neuroanatomical abnormalities such as hippocampal atrophy, though amyloid deposits are not a major component of the findings in one case series ( 67 , 68 ). 
Figure 4: 
Open in a new tab 
Critical Illness is associated with significant cognitive impairment across all age ranges in the year following hospitalization. Reproduced with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine from Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, Jackson JC, Morandi A, et al. Long-term cognitive impairment after critical illness. New Eng J Med . 2013; 369(14):1306–16. All rights reserved. 
Risk factors for cognitive impairment have been extensively described, though which ones are causal versus merely “markers” is somewhat unclear. Frequently identified risk factors include delirium duration, duration of mechanical ventilation, emergent disease, severity of illness, age, education, and the presence of pre-existing cognitive impairment, among several others ( Figure 5 ) ( 69 ). Many mechanisms of injury have been hypothesized and, in some instances, demonstrated in animal models, including the direct effects of inflammation in the context of blood brain barrier permeability, cytokine mediated neuronal injury, and activation of microglia ( 70 – 72 ). A number of conceptual models have been advanced that highlight the dynamic interplay between risk factors and prior vulnerabilities – not surprisingly, individuals with cognitive reserve are likely better able to withstand the “storms” of critical illness, whereas even minor insults may create cognitive problems in those without social and biological “protections” at baseline ( 73 , 74 ). Ongoing studies to understand factors related to both these protections against cognitive dysfunction and the biological mechanisms of cognitive resiliency after critical illness are an important and active area of ongoing research. 
Figure 5: 
Open in a new tab 
Duration of delirium strongly predicts deficits in global cognition at 12-months after critical illness. Reproduced with permission from the New England Journal of Medicine from Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, Jackson JC, Morandi A, et al. Long-term cognitive impairment after critical illness. New Eng J Med . 2013; 369(14):1306–16. All rights reserved. 
Cognition impairment, a form of acquired dementia, is a common and, indeed, even pervasive problem in survivors of critical illness. While decades of efforts have succeeded in identifying this condition and describing it in broad and sometimes rich and vivid strokes, crucial “next steps” await in the neuropsychological arena. Chief among these is that we must describe the neurological sequelae in greater detail– that is, we must mature in the depth, sophistication, and granularity of our work, which necessarily involves a renewed focus on issues of mechanism and basic science models. Moreover, we must strive assiduously to create and implement preventive strategies and approaches to cognitive rehabilitation to overcome memory and executive function deficits. 
Immobilization and ICU-Acquired Weakness 
The burdens of critical care survivors also reach beyond the brain and mind, with many survivors experiencing significant neuromuscular weakness and muscle wasting leading to physical impairments. Collectively, this phenomenon is called “ICU-Acquired Weakness” (ICU-AW), referring to multifactorial and complex disease processes that afflict both the muscle and nervous system of the critically ill ( 75 ). Impairments in neuromuscular function related to critical illness have long been identified ( 7 ), with reports from Sir William Osler describing the phenomenon in patients with sepsis ( 76 ). Following on the heels of the advent of modern critical care medicine, however, there has been greater recognition of myopathies and neuropathies in the critically ill patient ( 8 , 77 ). This increasing recognition is concurrent with the evolution of diagnostics in ICU-AW, including the use of the Medical Research Council (MRC) manual muscle testing scale complemented by the occasional use of electromyography, nerve conduction studies, and muscle biopsies ( 78 ). While mortality from critical illness has fallen, the acknowledgment of physical impairments stemming from iatrogenic insults such as immobilization and deep sedation has increased, burdening ICU survivors and limiting their return to normal lives. 
Critically ill patients frequently receive sedative medications while in the ICU, particularly when receiving mechanical ventilation ( 79 ). As the use of mechanical ventilation was adapted from practices in the operating room to the ICU, so was the use of sedation. As a result, the original reflex was to deeply sedate patients to facilitate “recovery” and synchrony with the mechanical ventilator, most often with drugs prone to accumulation and long-acting effects such as benzodiazepines ( 80 , 81 ). With such deep sedation, however, patients are immobile for significant periods of time ( 82 ). Over time, it became increasingly clear that deep and continuous sedation, with subsequent patient immobilization, precipitated negative downstream consequences, including ICU-AW and muscle wasting as well as prolonged mechanical ventilation, all of which are associated with increased mortality ( 83 – 86 ). With the use of deep sedation and paralysis, more severe muscular weakness is seen, likely as a result of the concomitant immobility these medications wrought ( 87 ). The burden of muscle wasting and weakness during critical illness is not limited to limb muscles, however. The diaphragm is also impacted by muscle wasting and weakness ( 17 ), leading to prolonged mechanical ventilation and complicating ventilator liberation. 
In addition to poor short term outcomes, such as increased hospital mortality and length of stay ( 88 , 89 ), ICU-AW is also associated with long-term mortality, disability, and poor physical function for many years to follow ( 16 , 90 – 92 ). Realization of these facts laid the foundation for investigations into “early rehabilitation”, including mobility interventions and aggressive physical and occupational therapy while patients were still in the ICU. These foundational studies demonstrated that early exercise and mobility is safe and associated with improved physical function ( 55 , 93 , 94 ), galvanizing an “early rehabilitation” movement. Randomized clinical trials evaluating ICU rehabilitation interventions demonstrated mixed results, however, with some trials showing improved physical function ( Figure 6 ) ( 55 , 56 , 93 ) while others showed no improvement over usual care, even when therapy is administered early during an ICU stay ( 95 – 97 ). Novel approaches to mitigate the impact of acquired weakness, such as in-bed cycling and electrical stimulation, have been pursued ( 98 ), but to date such approaches have not yielded consistent improvements in outcomes. Notably, each of these trials varied in their approach to rehabilitation as well as the “dose” and timing of interventions. Despite the potentially mixed findings in trials of early rehabilitation, when similar interventions are combined with light sedation and the mitigation of pain and delirium, there is consistent evidence of improved patient outcomes. Dose-dependent compliance with the ABCDEF bundle, which includes early exercise and mobility as a core component, is associated a lower likelihood of discharge to a facility, less delirium, and lower in-hospital death ( Figure 7 ) ( 99 , 100 ). The combination of early mobility with other complementary care processes creates a holistic approach to clinical care, combining physical, cognitive, and family engagement to help patients recover, creating a philosophy of care that is greater than the sum of its parts. This paradigm shift from a culture of deep sedation and immobility to one of early physical activity and light sedation has revolutionized critical care medicine over the past 25 years, all in response to the realization that the “back end” of critical care has long-lasting impact on ICU survivors. 
Figure 6: 
Open in a new tab 
Early physical therapy intervention improves the functional independence at hospital discharge in critically ill patients. Reproduced with permission from The Lancet from Schweickert WD, Pohlman MC, Pohlman AS, Nigos C, et al. Early physical and occupational therapy in mechanically ventilated, critically ill patients: a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet . 2009; 373(9678):1874–82. 
Figure 7: 
Open in a new tab 
Based on an N>15,000 patients, these data show that increased performance of elements of the ABCDEF bundle is associated with lower hospital mortality and increased odds of discharge from the hospital and the ICU. Reproduced with permission from Critical Care Medicine from Pun BT, Balas MC, Barnes-Daly MA, Thompson JL, et al. Caring for critically ill patients with the ABCDEF bundle: results of the ICU liberation collaborative in over 15,000 adults. Crit Care Med 2019;47(1):3–14. 
Many unanswered questions and ripe areas for investigation remain regarding the mobilization and rehabilitation of critically ill patients, a need amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic. Like the neurological burdens suffered by ICU survivors, further study of ICU-AW and neuromuscular impairment is needed to facilitate both prevention and treatment. Developing successful approaches to improving the implementation and uptake of early rehabilitation and mobilization, along with ongoing rehabilitation efforts after the ICU, remain a priority as well. Describing the impact that light sedation and early physical rehabilitation have on ICU-AW and other physical outcomes several months to years after critical illness will be an important avenue of research, as patients’ burdens sometimes accelerate at the time of discharge to home without their medical team’s presence. Similarly, rehabilitation following discharge from the hospital remains an area that lacks robust data and is an area in urgent need of further research. Eliminating the burden of ICU-AW, and improving legacy of critical care survivorship, will be built upon heeding Dr. Joseph Barcroft’s aphorism that “the condition of exercise is not a mere variant of the condition of rest, but it is the essence of the machine” ( 101 ). Which is to say, enabling and encouraging our patients to be awake, interactive, and mobile, as is the natural state of our minds and bodies, will accelerate the recovery of our survivors. 
Looking Forward and Conclusions 
The 50 years of critical care medicine since the launch of SCCM has been an exemplar of the marvel of modern medicine, yet it has also been a humbling reminder of the very human impact of our work. During the first half of those formative years, we saw our field evolve remarkably in ways that allowed us to keep people alive despite a degree of disease never before thought survivable. However, in the process, our approach to sedation, paralysis, and immobilization precipitated development of a tremendous amount of acquired disease in the human body, now known as PICS, which is the primary determinant of the ICU survivor’s long-term quality of life, disability, and return to normalcy. PICS affects all aspects of the patient’s brain and body, including neurocognitive and psychiatric disease, particularly in the form of acquired dementia, as well as ICU acquired weakness (ICU-AW), a devastating form of systemic myoneuropathy. These injuries incurred during care in the ICU are at least partially preventable by focusing on evidence-based, PADIS guideline-supported approaches such as those in the ABCDEF bundle and championed by the ICU Liberation Campaign ( Table 1 ). Reflecting the development of critical care as a field and the knowledge of long-term outcomes related to treatment in the ICU, the SCCM has identified several care practices that represent best-value care ( 102 ). Integral to such are several elements of the ABCDEF evidence-based safety bundle. Tailoring sedation targets towards light sedation, waking patients up using paired SATs and SBTs, and mobilizing patients early are recognized as key components of value-based care. These recommendations reflect the evolution of critical care and the acknowledgement that delirium prevention and management, sedation stewardship, and early mobilization are key priorities for every ICU patient that have long-reaching impacts on cognitive and physical recovery. 
Table 1: 
Evidence-Based Management of ICU Complications 
Clinical Problem 
ABCDEF Bundle Interventions 
Delirium 
A ssess/Prevent/Manage Pain 
B oth SATS and SBTs 
C hoice of Analgesia and Sedation 
D elirium – Assess, Prevent, and Manage 
E arly Mobility and Exercise 
F amily Engagement and Empowerment 
Deep Sedation & 
Paralysis 
A ssess/Prevent/Manage Pain 
B oth SATS and SBTs 
C hoice of Analgesia and Sedation 
D elirium – Assess, Prevent, and Manage 
Immobility & ICU- 
Acquired Weakness 
A ssess/Prevent/Manage Pain 
B oth SATS and SBTs 
E arly Mobility and Exercise 
F amily Engagement and Empowerment 
Open in a new tab 
Abbreviations: SAT – Spontaneous Awakening Trial; Spontaneous Breathing Trial – Spontaneous Breathing Trial 
The future of research in survivorship after critical illness will continue to be focused on both optimizing care practices in the ICU and the wards as well as confronting the complex and often fragmented care that survivors experience once leaving the hospital. The development of ICU survivor clinics, focused on multidisciplinary specialty care after the ICU, are an active area of research and may represent another tool to improve the recovery trajectory after critical illness. Understanding both the fundamental biological mechanisms of PICS and uncovering promising new treatment approaches across the spectrum of care venues will be vital. 
Thousands of peer-reviewed scientific manuscripts have been published on topics related to delirium, sedation, ventilator management, and early mobilization over the course of the last 50 years of critical care medicine. And yet, for our patients, it is not and cannot be the end of the story. Faced with the ongoing threat of critical illness, the next steps forward for our field are to march forward in our clinical care, armed with evidence and best practices while continuing to search and gain knowledge, all in the service of accelerating the recovery of our patients and improving the legacy of critical care survivorship. 
Conflicts of Interest and Source of Funding: 
Dr. Mart is currently receiving a grant (Arthur and Lisa Wheeler Critical Care Research Fund) from Vanderbilt University Medical Center as well as training support from National Institutes of Health (NHLBI T32 HL087738) and reports no conflicts of interest. Dr. Pun is currently receiving grant funding from the NIH (NHLBI R01HL14678) and reports no conflicts of interest. Dr. Pandharipande is currently receiving a research grant from Pfizer, Inc. in collaboration with NIH, and he has received grant support from the National Institutes of Health (NHLBI R01 HL111111, NIA R01 AG058639, NIGMS R01 GM120484). Dr. Jackson is currently receiving funding from the National Institutes of Health (NIA R01 AG058639, NHLBI R01 HL111111), the Department of Defense, and the Department of Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Health Care System Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center (GRECC) and reports no conflicts of interest. Dr. Ely has received honoraria from Pfizer as lecturer of international CME meetings. He also acknowledges receiving funding from the National Institutes of Health (NIA R01 AG058639, NIA K76 AG054864, NHLBI R01 HL111111, NIGMS R01 GM120484) and the Department of Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Health Care System Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center (GRECC). 
Copyright Form Disclosure: 
Dr. Mart’s institution received funding from the Arthur and Lisa Wheeler Critical Care Research Fund and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI); he received support for article research from the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Dr. Pun received funding from the Society of Critical Care Medicine, the NIH, and the NHLBI; she disclosed the off-label product use of Antipsychotics. Dr. Pandharipande received funding from Pfizer, the NIH, the NHLBI, the National Institute on Aging (NIA), and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences. Dr. Jackson received funding from the NIH, the NIA, the NHLBI, the Department of Defense, and the Department of Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Health Care System Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center (GRECC). Dr. Ely received funding from Pfizer, Orion, and the Department of Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Health Care System GRECC; he received support for article research from the NIH). 
References 
1. Needham DM, Davidson J, Cohen H, Hopkins RO, et al. : Improving long-term outcomes after discharge from intensive care unit: report from a stakeholders’ conference. Critical care medicine
2012; 40(2):502–509 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Devlin JW, O’Neal HRJ, Thomas C, Barnes Daly MA, et al. : Strategies to Optimize ICU Liberation (A to F) Bundle Performance in Critically Ill Adults With Coronavirus Disease 2019. Critical Care Explorations
2020; 2(6):e0139. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. O’Neal HRJ, Lin JC, Devlin JW, Ely EW: Coronavirus Disease 2019: Harnessing Healthy Fear via Knowledge, Attitudes, and Behavior. Critical Care Explorations
2020; 2(6):e0149. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Ibsen B: The anaesthetist’s viewpoint on the treatment of respiratory complications in poliomyelitis during the epidemic in Copenhagen, 1952. Proc R Soc Med
1954; 47(1):72–74 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. Lassen HC: A preliminary report on the 1952 epidemic of poliomyelitis in Copenhagen with special reference to the treatment of acute respiratory insufficiency. Lancet
1953; 1(6749):37–41 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Tobin MJ: Principles and practice of mechanical ventilation / editor, Tobin Martin J.. 3rd edition Edition. New York, McGraw-Hill Medical, 2013 [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Latronico N, Fenzi F, Recupero D, Guarneri B, et al. : Critical illness myopathy and neuropathy. Lancet
1996; 347(9015):1579–1582 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Bolton CF, Gilbert JJ, Hahn AF, Sibbald WJ: Polyneuropathy in critically ill patients. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
1984; 47(11):1223–1231 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. Hopkins RO, Weaver LK, Pope D, Orme JF, et al. : Neuropsychological sequelae and impaired health status in survivors of severe acute respiratory distress syndrome. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
1999; 160(1):50–56 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. Bolton CF: The discovery of critical illness polyneuropathy. Eur J Anaesthesiol Suppl
2008; 42:66–67 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. Ely EW, Inouye SK, Bernard GR, Gordon S, et al. : Delirium in mechanically ventilated patients: validity and reliability of the confusion assessment method for the intensive care unit (CAM-ICU). JAMA
2001; 286(21):2703–2710 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Ely EW, Shintani A, Truman B, Speroff T, et al. : Delirium as a predictor of mortality in mechanically ventilated patients in the intensive care unit. JAMA
2004; 291(14):1753–1762 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. Bergeron N, Dubois MJ, Dumont M, Dial S, et al. : Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist: evaluation of a new screening tool. Intensive care medicine
2001; 27(5):859–864 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. Jackson JC, Hart RP, Gordon SM, Shintani A, et al. : Six-month neuropsychological outcome of medical intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med
2003; 31(4):1226–1234 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Hopkins RO, Weaver LK, Collingridge D, Parkinson RB, et al. : Two-year cognitive, emotional, and quality-of-life outcomes in acute respiratory distress syndrome. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
2005; 171(4):340–347 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. Herridge MS, Cheung AM, Tansey CM, Matte-Martyn A, et al. : One-year outcomes in survivors of the acute respiratory distress syndrome. The New England journal of medicine
2003; 348(8):683–693 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. Levine S, Nguyen T, Taylor N, Friscia ME, et al. : Rapid disuse atrophy of diaphragm fibers in mechanically ventilated humans. The New England journal of medicine
2008; 358(13):1327–1335 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
18. De Jonghe B, Sharshar T, Lefaucheur JP, Authier FJ, et al. : Paresis acquired in the intensive care unit: a prospective multicenter study. Jama
2002; 288(22):2859–2867 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
19. Slooter AJC, Otte WM, Devlin JW, Arora RC, et al. : Updated nomenclature of delirium and acute encephalopathy: statement of ten Societies. Intensive care medicine
2020; 46(5):1020–1022 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
20. Justic M: Does “ICU psychosis” really exist?
Crit Care Nurse
2000; 20(3):28–37 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
21. Ely EW, Gautam S, Margolin R, Francis J, et al. : The impact of delirium in the intensive care unit on hospital length of stay. Intensive care medicine
2001; 27(12):1892–1900 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
22. American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5. Washington DC, American Psychiatric Association, 2013 [ Google Scholar ] 
23. Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, Jackson JC, Morandi A, et al. : Long-term cognitive impairment after critical illness. The New England journal of medicine
2013; 369(14):1306–1316 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
24. Pandharipande P, Cotton BA, Shintani A, Thompson J, et al. : Prevalence and risk factors for development of delirium in surgical and trauma intensive care unit patients. J Trauma
2008; 65(1):34–41 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
25. Vasilevskis EE, Han JH, Hughes CG, Ely EW: Epidemiology and risk factors for delirium across hospital settings. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol
2012; 26(3):277–287 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
26. Card E, Pandharipande P, Tomes C, Lee C, et al. : Emergence from general anaesthesia and evolution of delirium signs in the post-anaesthesia care unit. Br J Anaesth
2015; 115(3):411–417 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
27. Han JH, Wilson A, Vasilevskis EE, Shintani A, et al. : Diagnosing delirium in older emergency department patients: validity and reliability of the delirium triage screen and the brief confusion assessment method. Ann Emerg Med
2013; 62(5):457–465 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
28. Smith HA, Boyd J, Fuchs DC, Melvin K, et al. : Diagnosing delirium in critically ill children: Validity and reliability of the Pediatric Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit. Critical care medicine
2011; 39(1):150–157 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
29. Smith HA, Gangopadhyay M, Goben CM, Jacobowski NL, et al. : The Preschool Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU: Valid and Reliable Delirium Monitoring for Critically Ill Infants and Children. Critical care medicine
2016; 44(3):592–600 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
30. Traube C, Silver G, Kearney J, Patel A, et al. : Cornell Assessment of Pediatric Delirium: a valid, rapid, observational tool for screening delirium in the PICU*. Crit Care Med
2014; 42(3):656–663 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
31. Dubois MJ, Bergeron N, Dumont M, Dial S, et al. : Delirium in an intensive care unit: a study of risk factors. Intensive care medicine
2001; 27(8):1297–1304 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
32. Milbrandt EB, Deppen S, Harrison PL, Shintani AK, et al. : Costs associated with delirium in mechanically ventilated patients. Critical care medicine
2004; 32(4):955–962 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
33. Vasilevskis EE, Chandrasekhar R, Holtze CH, Graves J, et al. : The Cost of ICU Delirium and Coma in the Intensive Care Unit Patient. Med Care
2018; 56(10):890–897 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
34. Girard TD, Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP, Pun BT, et al. : Delirium as a predictor of long-term cognitive impairment in survivors of critical illness. Critical care medicine
2010; 38(7):1513–1520 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
35. Jacobi J, Fraser GL, Coursin DB, Riker RR, et al. : Clinical practice guidelines for the sustained use of sedatives and analgesics in the critically ill adult. Critical care medicine
2002; 30(1):119–141 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
36. Pandharipande P, Shintani A, Peterson J, Pun BT, et al. : Lorazepam is an independent risk factor for transitioning to delirium in intensive care unit patients. Anesthesiology
2006; 104(1):21–26 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
37. Pandharipande PP, Pun BT, Herr DL, Maze M, et al. : Effect of sedation with dexmedetomidine vs lorazepam on acute brain dysfunction in mechanically ventilated patients: the MENDS randomized controlled trial. JAMA
2007; 298(22):2644–2653 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
38. Riker RR, Shehabi Y, Bokesch PM, Ceraso D, et al. : Dexmedetomidine vs midazolam for sedation of critically ill patients: a randomized trial. JAMA
2009; 301(5):489–499 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
39. Barr J, Fraser GL, Puntillo K, Ely EW, et al. : Clinical practice guidelines for the management of pain, agitation, and delirium in adult patients in the intensive care unit. Critical care medicine
2013; 41(1):263–306 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
40. Girard TD, Exline MC, Carson SS, Hough CL, et al. : Haloperidol and Ziprasidone for Treatment of Delirium in Critical Illness. The New England journal of medicine
2018; 379(26):2506–2516 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
41. Page VJ, Ely EW, Gates S, Zhao XB, et al. : Effect of intravenous haloperidol on the duration of delirium and coma in critically ill patients (Hope-ICU): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. The Lancet Respiratory medicine
2013; 1(7):515–523 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
42. Tomichek JE, Stollings JL, Pandharipande PP, Chandrasekhar R, et al. : Antipsychotic prescribing patterns during and after critical illness: a prospective cohort study. Critical care (London, England)
2016; 20(1):378. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
43. Burry L, Hutton B, Williamson DR, Mehta S, et al. : Pharmacological interventions for the treatment of delirium in critically ill adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
2019(9) [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
44. Kotfis K, Williams Roberson S, Wilson JE, Dabrowski W, et al. : COVID-19: ICU delirium management during SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Critical Care
2020; 24(1):176. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
45. Helms J, Kremer S, Merdji H, Clere-Jehl R, et al. : Neurologic Features in Severe SARS-CoV-2 Infection. New England Journal of Medicine
2020; 382(23):2268–2270 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
46. Pun BT, Badenes R, Heras La Calle G, Orun OM, et al. : Prevalence and risk factors for delirium in critically ill patients with COVID-19 (COVID-D): a multicentre cohort study. The Lancet Respiratory medicine
2021 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
47. Ashbaugh DG, Bigelow DB, Petty TL, Levine BE: Acute respiratory distress in adults. Lancet (London, England)
1967; 2(7511):319–323 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
48. Webb HH, Tierney DF: Experimental Pulmonary Edema due to Intermittent Positive Pressure Ventilation with High Inflation Pressures. Protection by Positive End-Expiratory Pressure. American Review of Respiratory Disease
1974; 110(5):556–565 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
49. Tremblay LN, Slutsky AS: Ventilator-induced injury: from barotrauma to biotrauma. Proc Assoc Am Physicians
1998; 110(6):482–488 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
50. ARDSNet: Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome. The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network. The New England journal of medicine
2000; 342(18):1301–1308 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
51. DREYFUSS D, SAUMON G: Ventilator-induced Lung Injury. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
1998; 157(1):294–323 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
52. Griffiths RD, Palmer TE, Helliwell T, MacLennan P, et al. : Effect of passive stretching on the wasting of muscle in the critically ill. Nutrition
1995; 11(5):428–432 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
53. Girard TD, Kress JP, Fuchs BD, Thomason JW, et al. : Efficacy and safety of a paired sedation and ventilator weaning protocol for mechanically ventilated patients in intensive care (Awakening and Breathing Controlled trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet (London, England)
2008; 371(9607):126–134 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
54. de Wit M, Gennings C, Jenvey WI, Epstein SK: Randomized trial comparing daily interruption of sedation and nursing-implemented sedation algorithm in medical intensive care unit patients. Critical care (London, England) 2008; 12(3):R70. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
55. Schweickert WD, Pohlman MC, Pohlman AS, Nigos C, et al. : Early physical and occupational therapy in mechanically ventilated, critically ill patients: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet (London, England)
2009; 373(9678):1874–1882 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
56. Schaller SJ, Anstey M, Blobner M, Edrich T, et al. : Early, goal-directed mobilisation in the surgical intensive care unit: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet (London, England)
2016; 388(10052):1377–1388 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
57. Shehabi Y, Howe BD, Bellomo R, Arabi YM, et al. : Early Sedation with Dexmedetomidine in Critically Ill Patients. The New England journal of medicine
2019; 380(26):2506–2517 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
58. Olsen HT, Nedergaard HK, Strom T, Oxlund J, et al. : Nonsedation or Light Sedation in Critically Ill, Mechanically Ventilated Patients. N Engl J Med
2020 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
59. Tobin MJ: Basing Respiratory Management of COVID-19 on Physiological Principles. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
2020; 201(11):1319–1320 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
60. Jackson JC, Pandharipande PP, Girard TD, Brummel NE, et al. : Depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, and functional disability in survivors of critical illness in the BRAIN-ICU study: a longitudinal cohort study. The Lancet Respiratory medicine
2014; 2(5):369–379 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
61. Fried TR, Bradley EH, Towle VR, Allore H: Understanding the treatment preferences of seriously ill patients. The New England journal of medicine
2002; 346(14):1061–1066 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
62. Rothenhausler HB, Ehrentraut S, Stoll C, Schelling G, et al. : The relationship between cognitive performance and employment and health status in long-term survivors of the acute respiratory distress syndrome: results of an exploratory study. General Hospital Psychiatry
2001; 23(2):88–94 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
63. Sukantarat KT, Burgess PW, Williamson RCN, Brett SJ: Prolonged cognitive dysfunction in survivors of critical illness. Anaesthesia
2005; 60(9):847–853 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
64. Jones C, Griffiths RD, Slater T, Benjamin KS, et al. : Significant cognitive dysfunction in non-delirious patients identified during and persisting following critical illness. Intensive care medicine
2006; 32(6):923–926 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
65. Ehlenbach WJ, Hough CL, Crane PK, Haneuse SJ, et al. : Association between acute care and critical illness hospitalization and cognitive function in older adults. Jama
2010; 303(8):763–770 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
66. Iwashyna TJ, Ely EW, Smith DM, Langa KM: Long-term cognitive impairment and functional disability among survivors of severe sepsis. Jama
2010; 304(16):1787–1794 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
67. Gunther ML, Morandi A, Krauskopf E, Pandharipande P, et al. : The association between brain volumes, delirium duration, and cognitive outcomes in intensive care unit survivors: the VISIONS cohort magnetic resonance imaging study*. Critical care medicine
2012; 40(7):2022–2032 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
68. Jackson JC, Warrington HJ, Kessler R, Kiehl AL, et al. : Florbetapir-PET beta-amyloid imaging and associated neuropsychological trajectories in survivors of critical illness: A case series. J Crit Care
2018; 44:331–336 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
69. Sakusic A, O’Horo JC, Dziadzko M, Volha D, et al. : Potentially Modifiable Risk Factors for Long-Term Cognitive Impairment After Critical Illness: A Systematic Review. Mayo Clin Proc
2018; 93(1):68–82 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
70. van Gool WA, van de Beek D, Eikelenboom P: Systemic infection and delirium: when cytokines and acetylcholine collide. Lancet (London, England)
2010; 375(9716):773–775 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
71. Maldonado JR: Neuropathogenesis of delirium: review of current etiologic theories and common pathways. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry
2013; 21(12):1190–1222 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
72. Cunningham C, Campion S, Lunnon K, Murray CL, et al. : Systemic inflammation induces acute behavioral and cognitive changes and accelerates neurodegenerative disease. Biol Psychiatry
2009; 65(4):304–312 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
73. Dangayach NS, Griffiths SA, Feng R, Keough M, et al. : Resilience, Cognitive Reserve And Brain Reserve In Neurocritical Care: A Prospective Cohort Study. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
2017; 195 [ Google Scholar ] 
74. Calsavara AJC, Costa PA, Nobre V, Teixeira AL: Factors Associated With Short and Long Term Cognitive Changes in Patients With Sepsis. Scientific Reports
2018; 8(1):4509. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
75. Stevens RD, Marshall SA, Cornblath DR, Hoke A, et al. : A framework for diagnosing and classifying intensive care unit-acquired weakness. Crit Care Med
2009; 37(10 Suppl):S299–308 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
76. Osler W: The Principles and Practice of Medicine. New York, Appleton, 1892 [ Google Scholar ] 
77. MacFarlane IA, Rosenthal FD: Severe myopathy after status asthmaticus. Lancet (London, England)
1977; 2(8038):615. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
78. Kress JP, Hall JB: ICU-acquired weakness and recovery from critical illness. The New England journal of medicine
2014; 370(17):1626–1635 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
79. Patel SB, Kress JP: Sedation and analgesia in the mechanically ventilated patient. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
2012; 185(5):486–497 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
80. Hansen-Flaschen JH, Brazinsky S, Basile C, Lanken PN: Use of sedating drugs and neuromuscular blockiing agents in patients requiring mechanical ventilation for respiratory failure. JAMA
1991; 266:2870–2875 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
81. Kress JP, O’Connor MF, Pohlman AS, Olson D, et al. : Sedation of critically ill patients during mechanical ventilation. A comparison of propofol and midazolam. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
1996; 153(3):1012–1018 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
82. Weinert CR, Calvin AD: Epidemiology of sedation and sedation adequacy for mechanically ventilated patients in a medical and surgical intensive care unit. Critical care medicine
2007; 35(2):393–401 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
83. Kollef MH, Levy NT, Ahrens TS, Schaiff R, et al. : The use of continuous i.v. sedation is associated with prolongation of mechanical ventilation. Chest
1998; 114(2):541–548 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
84. Shehabi Y, Chan L, Kadiman S, Alias A, et al. : Sedation depth and long-term mortality in mechanically ventilated critically ill adults: a prospective longitudinal multicentre cohort study. Intensive care medicine
2013; 39(5):910–918 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
85. Shehabi Y, Bellomo R, Reade MC, Bailey M, et al. : Early intensive care sedation predicts long-term mortality in ventilated critically ill patients. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
2012; 186(8):724–731 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
86. Puthucheary ZA, Rawal J, McPhail M, Connolly B, et al. : Acute skeletal muscle wasting in critical illness. JAMA
2013; 310(15):1591–1600 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
87. Moss M, Huang DT, Brower RG, Ferguson ND, et al. : Early Neuromuscular Blockade in the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. N Engl J Med
2019; 380(21):1997–2008 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
88. Ali NA, O’Brien JM Jr., Hoffmann SP, Phillips G, et al. : Acquired weakness, handgrip strength, and mortality in critically ill patients. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
2008; 178(3):261–268 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
89. Sharshar T, Bastuji-Garin S, Stevens RD, Durand MC, et al. : Presence and severity of intensive care unit-acquired paresis at time of awakening are associated with increased intensive care unit and hospital mortality. Critical care medicine
2009; 37(12):3047–3053 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
90. Hermans G, Mechelen HV, Clerckx B, Vanhullebusch T, et al. : Acute Outcomes and 1-Year Mortality of Intensive Care Unit–acquired Weakness. A Cohort Study and Propensity-matched Analysis. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
2014; 190(4):410–420 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
91. Herridge MS, Tansey CM, Matte A, Tomlinson G, et al. : Functional disability 5 years after acute respiratory distress syndrome. The New England journal of medicine
2011; 364(14):1293–1304 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
92. Fan E, Dowdy DW, Colantuoni E, Mendez-Tellez PA, et al. : Physical complications in acute lung injury survivors: a two-year longitudinal prospective study. Crit Care Med
2014; 42(4):849–859 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
93. Morris PE, Goad A, Thompson C, Taylor K, et al. : Early intensive care unit mobility therapy in the treatment of acute respiratory failure. Critical care medicine
2008; 36(8):2238–2243 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
94. Needham DM, Korupolu R, Zanni JM, Pradhan P, et al. : Early physical medicine and rehabilitation for patients with acute respiratory failure: a quality improvement project. Arch Phys Med Rehabil
2010; 91(4):536–542 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
95. Moss M, Nordon-Craft A, Malone D, Van Pelt D, et al. : A Randomized Trial of an Intensive Physical Therapy Program for Patients with Acute Respiratory Failure. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine
2016; 193(10):1101–1110 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
96. Morris PE, Berry MJ, Files DC, Thompson JC, et al. : Standardized Rehabilitation and Hospital Length of Stay Among Patients With Acute Respiratory Failure: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA
2016; 315(24):2694–2702 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
97. Denehy L, Skinner EH, Edbrooke L, Haines K, et al. : Exercise rehabilitation for patients with critical illness: a randomized controlled trial with 12 months of follow-up. Crit Care
2013; 17(4):R156. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
98. Fossat G, Baudin F, Courtes L, Bobet S, et al. : Effect of In-Bed Leg Cycling and Electrical Stimulation of the Quadriceps on Global Muscle Strength in Critically Ill Adults: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA
2018; 320(4):368–378 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
99. Pun BT, Balas MC, Barnes-Daly MA, Thompson JL, et al. : Caring for Critically Ill Patients with the ABCDEF Bundle: Results of the ICU Liberation Collaborative in Over 15,000 Adults. Critical care medicine
2019; 47(1):3–14 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
100. Barnes-Daly MA, Phillips G, Ely EW: Improving Hospital Survival and Reducing Brain Dysfunction at Seven California Community Hospitals: Implementing PAD Guidelines Via the ABCDEF Bundle in 6,064 Patients. Critical care medicine
2017; 45(2):171–178 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
101. Barcroft J: Features in the architecture of physiological function / by Joseph Barcroft. New York, Macmillan Company, 1934 [ Google Scholar ] 
102. Zimmerman JJ, Harmon LA, Smithburger PL, Chaykosky D, et al. : Choosing Wisely For Critical Care: The Next Five. Critical care medicine
2021; 49(3):472–481 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (1.1 MB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
