In Response to: Timing of Antibiotic Administration in Sepsis and Septic Shock: The Impact That a Meta-Analysis Does Not Depict - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Crit Care Med 
. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2017 Oct 1. 
Published in final edited form as: Crit Care Med. 2016 Oct;44(10):e1004–e1005. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001978 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
In Response to: Timing of Antibiotic Administration in Sepsis and Septic
Shock: The Impact That a Meta-Analysis Does Not Depict 
Sarah A Sterling 
Sarah A Sterling 
Find articles by Sarah A Sterling 
, Michael A Puskarich 
Michael A Puskarich 
Find articles by Michael A Puskarich 
, Alan E Jones 
Alan E Jones 
1 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center
School of Medicine, 2500 N State St., Jackson, MS 39216, USA 
Find articles by Alan E Jones 
1 
Author information 
Copyright and License information 
1 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center
School of Medicine, 2500 N State St., Jackson, MS 39216, USA 
✉ 
Contact Information: Alan E. Jones, MD, Chairman, Department
of Emergency Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 N State Street,
Jackson, MS 39216, Tel: +1601-984-5572, Fax: +1601-984-5583,
aejones@umc.edu 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC5411115  NIHMSID: NIHMS838788  PMID: 27635499 
The publisher's version of this article is available at Crit Care Med 
See the article " Timing of Antibiotic Administration in Sepsis and Septic Shock: The Impact That a Meta-Analysis Does Not Depict. " on page e1004. 
To the Editor 
We read with interest the letter from Drs. Shirakura and Kuriyama. 1 Their letter to the editor enumerates several
concerns with our previously published systematic review and meta-analysis which evaluated
the effect of time to antibiotics on outcomes in severe sepsis and septic shock. 2 Though some of these limitations were addressed
in the manuscript, we feel additional clarification is warranted. The comments offered by
Dr. Shirakura et al relate to differences between the aim of our meta analysis, which was to
assess the evidence behind a proposed quality metric that has recently been implemented by
the United States Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) based on the most recent
Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines, versus broader questions regarding the optimal
treatment of well-defined patients. 
The authors point out that there is a broad range of sepsis syndromes and they
opine that pooling these patient for evaluation may not be appropriate. The authors note the
variance in the clinical presentations of sepsis and the wide variability in patient
reserve, response to treatment, and rates of progression. This complexity formed the precise
rationale for further evaluation of the proposed quality metric which fails to even
acknowledge these critical confounders. As there are no randomized clinical trials
evaluating delay in time to antibiotic administration, nor would any be expected due to
ethical concerns, we submit that a meta-analysis of the available data us the most
reasonable approach to answer our a priori question. As expected and noted in the
manuscript, there is significant clinical heterogeneity among included populations. Given
the overall size of the combined studies, however, we are confident that our results are
largely representative of the general population that visit emergency departments (ED). In
clinical practice such heterogeneity is unavoidable and the proposed quality metric makes no
attempt to normalize for such differences between patients; our study made no attempt to
control for this factor. However, an ideal metric would, in our opinion, consider the
severity of illness and clinical confounders when attempt to assess the quality of a
resuscitation. While the authors note there has been a reported inflection point for
survival in murine models of sepsis, a well-controlled model with minimal heterogeneity,
there is no current method of identifying the exact point prior to hospital arrival the
patient may or may not have reached such an inflection point, making this observation moot
in actual clinical practice. 
The authors also address the use of “less than one hour” from time
to antibiotics from shock recognition as the reference group. They point out concerns with
the utilization of this reference point especially in the case of Ferrer et al 5 , the largest contributor of patients in our
analysis, citing higher mortality and higher severity scores in the “less than one
hour” group in that study. Given that the current guideline recommendations suggest
antibiotics within less than one hour of shock recognition, this was the only reasonable
reference group as that time point is the proposed standard. 
Finally, the authors regret our exclusion of studies evaluating only neutropenic or
immunocompromised patients. These patients were excluded as our goal was to evaluate the
impact of time to antibiotics in severe sepsis and septic shock in the typical patient, and
inclusion of such studies would have introduced unnecessary selection bias into our study as
studies of these patients represents a proportionally larger component of the literature
than in clinical practice. However, we agree with the authors that these patients represent
a particularly vulnerable population and thus we believe should be evaluated in separate
analyses. 
In summary, based on the available literature, we found patients failing to meet
the Surviving Sepsis Campaign and CMS quality metric for timing of antibiotics did not
demonstrate significantly increased mortality compared to patients meeting the measure in
undifferentiated ED patients with severe sepsis. We appreciate the authors’ response
and thoughtful insights and agree that the Surviving Sepsis Campaign has increased
recognition, overall care, and outcomes of patients with sepsis. However, based on our
analysis the current literature evidence does not support the current recommended time
frames regarding time to antibiotics as a marker of the overall quality of care in severe
sepsis and septic shock. 
Acknowledgments 
Copyright form disclosures: Dr. Puskarich’s institution received
funding from Salary Support through NIGMS (K23 GM113041-01). 
Footnotes 
The remaining authors have disclosed that they do not have any potential conflicts of
interest. 
Reference List 
1. Shirakura Y, Kuriyama A. Timing of Antibiotic Administration in Sepsis and Septic Shock: The impact
that a meta-analysis does not depict. Crit Care Med. 2016 doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001891. in press. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Sterling SA, Miller WR, Pryor J, Puskarich MA, Jones AE. The Impact of Timing of Antibiotics on Outcomes in Severe Sepsis and Septic
Shock: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Crit Care Med. 2015;43:1907–1915. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001142. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Efron PA, Mohr AM, Moore FA, Moldawer LL. The future of murine sepsis and trauma research models. J Leukoc Biol. 2015;98:945–952. doi: 10.1189/jlb.5MR0315-127R. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Warren HS, Tompkins RG, Moldawer LL, et al. Mice are not men. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;112:E345. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1414857111. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. Ferrer R, Martin-Loeches I, Phillips G, et al. Empiric antibiotic treatment reduces mortality in severe sepsis and septic
shock from the first hour: results from a guideline-based performance improvement
program. Crit Care Med. 2014;42:1749–1755. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000000330. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (31.5 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
