Temperature Control After In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest: Outcomes From the Discover In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest Cohort - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Crit Care Med 
. 2026 Mar 20;54(6):1341–1353. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000007121 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Temperature Control After In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest: Outcomes From the Discover In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest Cohort 
Luke Andrea 
Luke Andrea , MD, MS 
1 Bronx Center for Critical Care Outcomes and Resuscitation Research, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY. 
Find articles by Luke Andrea 
1, ✉ , Katherine M Berg 
Katherine M Berg , MD 
2 Center for Resuscitation Science, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA. 
Find articles by Katherine M Berg 
2 , Nicholas J Johnson 
Nicholas J Johnson , MD 
3 Department of Emergency Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 
Find articles by Nicholas J Johnson 
3 , Oscar J L Mitchell 
Oscar J L Mitchell , MD, MSCE 
4 Center for Resuscitation Science, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Criticial Care, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. 
Find articles by Oscar J L Mitchell 
4 , Alex K Pearce 
Alex K Pearce , MD 
5 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep Medicine, and Physiology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA. 
Find articles by Alex K Pearce 
5 , Adam Green 
Adam Green , MD, MBA 
6 Division of Critical Care, Cooper University Health Care, Camden, NJ. 
Find articles by Adam Green 
6 , Jonathan Elmer 
Jonathan Elmer , MD, MS 
7 Department of Emergency Medicine, Department of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA. 
Find articles by Jonathan Elmer 
7 , Ivan Alfredo Huespe 
Ivan Alfredo Huespe , MD, MS 
8 Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
Find articles by Ivan Alfredo Huespe 
8 , Michael J Lanspa 
Michael J Lanspa , MD, MS 
9 Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Intermountain Medical Center, Murray, UT. 
Find articles by Michael J Lanspa 
9 , Greggory R Davis 
Greggory R Davis , PhD 
10 Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Baton Rouge, LA. 
Find articles by Greggory R Davis 
10 , Ithan D Peltan 
Ithan D Peltan , MD, MSc 
9 Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Intermountain Medical Center, Murray, UT. 
Find articles by Ithan D Peltan 
9 , Nathaniel S Herman 
Nathaniel S Herman , MD 
1 Bronx Center for Critical Care Outcomes and Resuscitation Research, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY. 
Find articles by Nathaniel S Herman 
1 , Rishi Malhotra 
Rishi Malhotra , MD 
1 Bronx Center for Critical Care Outcomes and Resuscitation Research, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY. 
Find articles by Rishi Malhotra 
1 , Maneesha D Bangar 
Maneesha D Bangar , MD 
1 Bronx Center for Critical Care Outcomes and Resuscitation Research, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY. 
Find articles by Maneesha D Bangar 
1 , Lars-Kristofer N Peterson 
Lars-Kristofer N Peterson , MD 
11 Division of Critical Care, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY. 
Find articles by Lars-Kristofer N Peterson 
11 , Nafisa Wadud 
Nafisa Wadud , DO 
12 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Hackensack Meridian Health, JFK University Medical Center, Edison NJ. 
Find articles by Nafisa Wadud 
12 , Haley Mayfield 
Haley Mayfield , BA 
9 Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Intermountain Medical Center, Murray, UT. 
Find articles by Haley Mayfield 
9 , Mariana Vaena 
Mariana Vaena , MD 
8 Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
Find articles by Mariana Vaena 
8 , Pascual Valdez 
Pascual Valdez , MD, PhD 
13 Hospital General de Agudos Dalmacio Vélez Sarsfield, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
Find articles by Pascual Valdez 
13 , Trinity E Howard 
Trinity E Howard , BS 
10 Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Baton Rouge, LA. 
Find articles by Trinity E Howard 
10 , Michael R Loewe 
Michael R Loewe , MD 
14 Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Emergency Medicine Residency Program, Baton Rouge Campus, Baton Rouge, LA. 
Find articles by Michael R Loewe 
14 , Laura Faiver 
Laura Faiver , MD 
15 Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA. 
Find articles by Laura Faiver 
15 , Jonathan Tam 
Jonathan Tam , MD 
16 Department of Emergency Medicine, Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA. 
Find articles by Jonathan Tam 
16 , Saleem M Halablab 
Saleem M Halablab , MD 
17 Center for Resuscitation Science, Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. 
Find articles by Saleem M Halablab 
17 , Aarthi Kaviyarasu 
Aarthi Kaviyarasu , BS 
17 Center for Resuscitation Science, Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. 
Find articles by Aarthi Kaviyarasu 
17 , Michael Baram 
Michael Baram , MD 
18 Korman Lung Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA. 
Find articles by Michael Baram 
18 , Vincent Chan 
Vincent Chan , MD 
18 Korman Lung Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA. 
Find articles by Vincent Chan 
18 , Timothy Crisci 
Timothy Crisci , MD 
18 Korman Lung Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA. 
Find articles by Timothy Crisci 
18 , Nathanial Rosal 
Nathanial Rosal , MD 
18 Korman Lung Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA. 
Find articles by Nathanial Rosal 
18 , Shekhar A Ghamande 
Shekhar A Ghamande , MD 
19 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Baylor Scott and White Medical Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Temple, TX. 
Find articles by Shekhar A Ghamande 
19 , Heath D White 
Heath D White , DO, MS 
19 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Baylor Scott and White Medical Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Temple, TX. 
Find articles by Heath D White 
19 , Braden Anderson 
Braden Anderson , DO 
19 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Baylor Scott and White Medical Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Temple, TX. 
Find articles by Braden Anderson 
19 , Siddharth Dugar 
Siddharth Dugar , MD, FCCP, FCCM, FASE 
20 Department of Critical Care, Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH. 
Find articles by Siddharth Dugar 
20 , Omar Mehkri 
Omar Mehkri , MD, MBA 
20 Department of Critical Care, Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH. 
Find articles by Omar Mehkri 
20 , Talha Saleem 
Talha Saleem , MD 
20 Department of Critical Care, Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH. 
Find articles by Talha Saleem 
20 , Jacob Vine 
Jacob Vine , MD 
21 Center for Resuscitation Science, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA. 
Find articles by Jacob Vine 
21 , John H Lee 
John H Lee , MD, PhD 
22 Center for Resuscitation Science, Department of Emergency Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA. 
Find articles by John H Lee 
22 , Dustin L Norton 
Dustin L Norton , MD 
23 Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Immunologic Disease, Department of Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC. 
Find articles by Dustin L Norton 
23 , John P Gaillard 
John P Gaillard , MD 
23 Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Immunologic Disease, Department of Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC. 
Find articles by John P Gaillard 
23 , Taylor Wachs 
Taylor Wachs , DO 
23 Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Immunologic Disease, Department of Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC. 
Find articles by Taylor Wachs 
23 , J Taylor Herbert 
J Taylor Herbert , MD, PhD 
24 Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC. 
Find articles by J Taylor Herbert 
24 , Vijay Krishnamoorthy 
Vijay Krishnamoorthy , MD, PhD, MPH 
24 Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC. 
Find articles by Vijay Krishnamoorthy 
24 , Gabriel Wardi 
Gabriel Wardi , MD, MPH, FACEP 
25 Department of Emergency Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep Medicine, and Physiology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA. 
Find articles by Gabriel Wardi 
25 , Micah T Long 
Micah T Long , MD, FCCM 
26 Department of Anesthesiology, Division of Critical Care, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine & Public Health, Madison, WI. 
Find articles by Micah T Long 
26 , Lenka Craigova 
Lenka Craigova , MD 
26 Department of Anesthesiology, Division of Critical Care, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine & Public Health, Madison, WI. 
Find articles by Lenka Craigova 
26 , Stephanie C DeMasi 
Stephanie C DeMasi , MD 
27 Department of Emergency Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN. 
Find articles by Stephanie C DeMasi 
27 , Kipp Shipley 
Kipp Shipley , DNP, AGACNP 
28 Critical Care Outreach Team, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN. 
Find articles by Kipp Shipley 
28 , Akram Khan 
Akram Khan , MD 
29 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University School of Medicine, Portland, OR. 
Find articles by Akram Khan 
29 , Nikolai Schnittke 
Nikolai Schnittke , MD 
29 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University School of Medicine, Portland, OR. 
Find articles by Nikolai Schnittke 
29 , Kinsley Hubel 
Kinsley Hubel , MD 
29 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University School of Medicine, Portland, OR. 
Find articles by Kinsley Hubel 
29 , Conor P Crowley 
Conor P Crowley , NP 
30 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, Burlington, MA. 
Find articles by Conor P Crowley 
30 , Christopher K Hansen 
Christopher K Hansen , MD, MPH 
30 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, Burlington, MA. 
Find articles by Christopher K Hansen 
30 , Kenneth W Dodd 
Kenneth W Dodd , MD 
31 Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN. 
Find articles by Kenneth W Dodd 
31 , Saiara Choudhury 
Saiara Choudhury , MD 
31 Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN. 
Find articles by Saiara Choudhury 
31 , Cooper March 
Cooper March , MD 
32 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 
Find articles by Cooper March 
32 , Anthony Martinez 
Anthony Martinez , MD 
33 Ascension Saint Agnes Hospital, Baltimore, MD. 
Find articles by Anthony Martinez 
33 , Alexander Reyes 
Alexander Reyes , MD 
33 Ascension Saint Agnes Hospital, Baltimore, MD. 
Find articles by Alexander Reyes 
33 , Aaron M Joffe 
Aaron M Joffe , DO, EM-QSL, FCCM 
34 Department of Anesthesiology, Valleywise Health Medical Center, Creighton University School of Medicine, Phoenix, AZ. 
Find articles by Aaron M Joffe 
34 , Alex Bui 
Alex Bui , MD 
34 Department of Anesthesiology, Valleywise Health Medical Center, Creighton University School of Medicine, Phoenix, AZ. 
Find articles by Alex Bui 
34 , Krassimir Denchev 
Krassimir Denchev , MD, FASA 
35 Department of Anesthesiology, Wayne State University, Pontiac, MI. 
Find articles by Krassimir Denchev 
35 , Brittany D Bissell Turpin 
Brittany D Bissell Turpin , PharmD, PhD, FCCM, BCCCP 
36 Department of Pharmacy, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY. 
Find articles by Brittany D Bissell Turpin 
36 , Reine Fowajuh 
Reine Fowajuh , MD 
37 Department of Medicine, Cooper University Health Care, Camden, NJ. 
Find articles by Reine Fowajuh 
37 , Jared Ward 
Jared Ward , DO, MPH 
38 Division of Critical Care, Virtua Health, Camden, NJ. 
Find articles by Jared Ward 
38 , Awab Khan 
Awab Khan , DO, MSE, MS 
39 Department of Medicine, Inspira Medical Center Vineland, Vineland, NJ. 
Find articles by Awab Khan 
39 , Clifford Chang 
Clifford Chang , MD 
40 Department of Emergency Medicine, Inspira Medical Center Vineland, Vineland, NJ. 
Find articles by Clifford Chang 
40 , Esteban Richieri 
Esteban Richieri , MD 
41 Hospital General de Agudos Dalmacio Vélez Sarsfield, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
Find articles by Esteban Richieri 
41 , Matias Mirofsky 
Matias Mirofsky , MD, MS 
42 Hospital Municipal de Agudos Dr. Leónidas Lucero, Bahía Blanca, Argentina. 
Find articles by Matias Mirofsky 
42 , Judith Sagardia 
Judith Sagardia , MD, MS 
43 Hospital Nacional Profesor Alejandro Posadas, El Palomar, Argentina. 
Find articles by Judith Sagardia 
43 , Damián Piezny 
Damián Piezny , MD 
43 Hospital Nacional Profesor Alejandro Posadas, El Palomar, Argentina. 
Find articles by Damián Piezny 
43 , Alicia Roxana Gira 
Alicia Roxana Gira , MD 
44 Hospital Universitario Austral, Pilar, Argentina. 
Find articles by Alicia Roxana Gira 
44 , Eleonora Cunto 
Eleonora Cunto , MD 
45 Hospital de Infecciosas Francisco Javier Muñiz, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
Find articles by Eleonora Cunto 
45 , Reham Khan 
Reham Khan , MHI 
46 Society of Critical Care Medicine, Mount Prospect, IL. 
Find articles by Reham Khan 
46 , Tamara Al-Hakim 
Tamara Al-Hakim , MD 
46 Society of Critical Care Medicine, Mount Prospect, IL. 
Find articles by Tamara Al-Hakim 
46 , Michelle N Gong 
Michelle N Gong , MD, MS 
1 Bronx Center for Critical Care Outcomes and Resuscitation Research, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY. 
Find articles by Michelle N Gong 
1 , Ari Moskowitz 
Ari Moskowitz , MD, MPH 
1 Bronx Center for Critical Care Outcomes and Resuscitation Research, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY. 
Find articles by Ari Moskowitz 
1 ; on behalf of Discovery, the Critical Care Research Network of the Society of Critical Care Medicine
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 Bronx Center for Critical Care Outcomes and Resuscitation Research, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY. 
2 Center for Resuscitation Science, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA. 
3 Department of Emergency Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 
4 Center for Resuscitation Science, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Criticial Care, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. 
5 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep Medicine, and Physiology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA. 
6 Division of Critical Care, Cooper University Health Care, Camden, NJ. 
7 Department of Emergency Medicine, Department of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA. 
8 Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
9 Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Intermountain Medical Center, Murray, UT. 
10 Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Baton Rouge, LA. 
11 Division of Critical Care, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY. 
12 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Hackensack Meridian Health, JFK University Medical Center, Edison NJ. 
13 Hospital General de Agudos Dalmacio Vélez Sarsfield, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
14 Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Emergency Medicine Residency Program, Baton Rouge Campus, Baton Rouge, LA. 
15 Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA. 
16 Department of Emergency Medicine, Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA. 
17 Center for Resuscitation Science, Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. 
18 Korman Lung Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA. 
19 Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Baylor Scott and White Medical Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Temple, TX. 
20 Department of Critical Care, Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH. 
21 Center for Resuscitation Science, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA. 
22 Center for Resuscitation Science, Department of Emergency Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA. 
23 Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Immunologic Disease, Department of Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC. 
24 Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC. 
25 Department of Emergency Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep Medicine, and Physiology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA. 
26 Department of Anesthesiology, Division of Critical Care, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine & Public Health, Madison, WI. 
27 Department of Emergency Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN. 
28 Critical Care Outreach Team, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN. 
29 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University School of Medicine, Portland, OR. 
30 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, Burlington, MA. 
31 Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN. 
32 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 
33 Ascension Saint Agnes Hospital, Baltimore, MD. 
34 Department of Anesthesiology, Valleywise Health Medical Center, Creighton University School of Medicine, Phoenix, AZ. 
35 Department of Anesthesiology, Wayne State University, Pontiac, MI. 
36 Department of Pharmacy, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY. 
37 Department of Medicine, Cooper University Health Care, Camden, NJ. 
38 Division of Critical Care, Virtua Health, Camden, NJ. 
39 Department of Medicine, Inspira Medical Center Vineland, Vineland, NJ. 
40 Department of Emergency Medicine, Inspira Medical Center Vineland, Vineland, NJ. 
41 Hospital General de Agudos Dalmacio Vélez Sarsfield, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
42 Hospital Municipal de Agudos Dr. Leónidas Lucero, Bahía Blanca, Argentina. 
43 Hospital Nacional Profesor Alejandro Posadas, El Palomar, Argentina. 
44 Hospital Universitario Austral, Pilar, Argentina. 
45 Hospital de Infecciosas Francisco Javier Muñiz, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
46 Society of Critical Care Medicine, Mount Prospect, IL. 
✉ 
For information regarding this article, E-mail: landrea@montefiore.org 
✉ 
Corresponding author. 
Issue date 2026 Jun. 
Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf of the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. 
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives License 4.0 (CCBY-NC-ND) , where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it is properly cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially without permission from the journal. 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC13185725  NIHMSID: NIHMS2170259   PMID: 41860326 
See " When Strategy Meets Reality: Temperature Management After In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest. " with doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000007139. 
Abstract 
OBJECTIVES: 
A temperature control strategy is strongly recommended for comatose in-hospital cardiac arrest (IHCA) survivors. We aimed to investigate variation in adherence to this recommendation and associations with outcomes, which have not been comprehensively assessed for IHCA. 
DESIGN: 
Prospective observational cohort study with data collected from October 2023 to June 2024. 
SETTING: 
Multicenter, international (24 hospital systems, 46 enrolling hospitals). 
PATIENTS: 
Adults who suffered IHCA, survived initial resuscitation, and remained comatose and eligible for temperature control. 
INTERVENTIONS: 
None. 
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: 
The main exposure was documentation of a temperature control strategy in the first 24 hours after arrest. Outcomes were survival to hospital discharge (primary), use of temperature control therapy, fever (temperature ≥ 38°C), favorable functional outcome (modified Rankin Scale ≤ 3), and favorable neurologic outcome (Cerebral Performance Category score ≤ 2). Among 1006 enrolled patients, 615 (61.1%) remained comatose and were eligible for temperature control; of those, 273 (44.4%) had a documented temperature control strategy. A documented strategy was associated with higher adjusted odds of receiving a temperature control therapy (adjusted odds ratio [aOR], 21.3; 95% CI, 12.3–36.7; p < 0.01), and lower adjusted odds of fever in the first 24 hours after resuscitation (aOR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.43–0.92; p = 0.02). Having a strategy, compared with not, had no statistically significant association with survival (32.6% vs. 28.1%; aOR, 1.19; 95% CI, 0.79–1.80; p = 0.42), favorable functional outcome (9.9% vs. 10.5%; aOR, 1.14; 95% CI, 0.53–2.42; p = 0.74), or favorable neurologic outcome (12.8% vs. 12.3%; aOR, 1.15; 95% CI, 0.63–2.12; p = 0.65). Hospital system specific proportions of temperature control strategy ranged from 0% to 100%. 
CONCLUSIONS: 
Among comatose IHCA survivors, more than half received no documented temperature control strategy. Those with a strategy were less likely to have a fever and more likely to receive temperature control directed therapy, but showed no difference in survival, functional, or neurologic outcomes. 
Keywords: cardiac arrest, guideline adherence, in-hospital cardiac arrest, post-arrest care, temperature control 
KEY POINTS. 
Question : Does adherence to American Heart Association temperature control guidelines for cardiac arrest vary among in-hospital cardiac arrest survivors and is adherence linked to outcomes? 
Findings : We found less than 50% of eligible in-hospital cardiac arrest survivors had documented temperature control strategies with adherence ranging from 0% to 100% across 24 hospital systems. Patients with documented strategies received more temperature management therapies and had a lower burden of fevers, but there was no association with outcomes. 
Meaning : Substantial practice variation was identified in adherence to temperature control recommendations in this a multicenter cohort, highlighting the gap between guidelines and clinical practice. 
Over the past 2 decades, rates for return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) for in-hospital cardiac arrest (IHCA) have improved ( 1 , 2 ); however, improvements in post-ROSC survival have lagged ( 3 , 4 ). This has led to major guideline-writing institutions, including the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (ILCOR) and the American Heart Association (AHA), highlighting the advancement of post-cardiac arrest care as a priority research area ( 5 , 6 ). 
Limited data exists on post-arrest guideline adherence, particularly for IHCA where evidence is generally weaker than out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA) ( 7 ). The AHA 2023 Focused Update on Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support provides class 1 recommendations that all initial comatose cardiac arrest survivors receive care, including a deliberate strategy for temperature control, and be maintained at a temperature between 32°C and 37.5°C ( 8 ). Although temperature control is a fundamental principle of post-arrest care, practice variation in post-IHCA temperature management remains largely unexplored and may contribute to differences in outcomes ( 9 , 10 ). 
Leveraging prospectively collected data from the multicenter Discover In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest (Discover IHCA) study ( 11 ), we evaluated these important gaps for initial IHCA survivors. We describe the association between temperature control strategies and patient-level outcomes, as well as the variation in strategies and therapies across hospital systems. 
METHODS 
Study Design 
Discover IHCA was an international, multicenter, prospective observational cohort study endorsed by the Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) Discovery Research Network, with 24 participating hospital systems enrolling at 46 individual hospitals ( 12 ). SCCM provided resources through the Discovery Clinical Coordinating Center and Data Coordinating Center. Study design, detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria, data collection, and data management have been previously described ( 11 ). Identification of eligible patients was left to individual site research and quality improvement teams; abstractors then used chart review to enter data into a Research Electronic Data Capture Cloud database. Data validation and auditing were performed by the principal investigators at 3-month intervals. All sites obtained local institutional review board approval (provided in Supplement , https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ); all procedures were in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional or regional) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as most recently amended. The study was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov as an observational study ( NCT06207201 ). Local investigators and the study principal investigators were responsible for the accuracy and integrity of the data. 
Patient Population 
This study included adult patients (≥ 18 yr) who suffered IHCA, achieved sustained ROSC, and survived greater than or equal to 6 hours. Only the first arrest during hospital admission was included. Arrests in the operating room, post-anesthesia care unit, and emergency department before an evaluation and hospital admission were excluded. Patients transitioned to comfort-focused care within 6 hours post-ROSC were excluded. Enrollment occurred for 6 months at each site. Due to staggered site initiation, enrollment occurred between October 2023 and June 2024. 
Definitions 
Variable definitions are in the Data Dictionary in the Supplement ( https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). Fever was defined as temperature greater than or equal to 38°C. Abstractors selected temperature control strategies based on review of clinical documentation: no strategy, fever avoidance (a strategy aimed at preventing fevers, often with reactive interventions that are delivered in response to fever), targeted normothermia (an active strategy with a documented goal temperature in the normothermic range), or targeted hypothermia (an active strategy with a target temperature below normothermia) ( 11 ). Strategy selection did not require adherence to the selected strategy. Temperature control therapies were defined as treatments used in the pursuit of a temperature control strategy. Survival was defined as discharged alive or alive in the hospital at 60 days post-ROSC, favorable functional outcome as modified Rankin Scale (mRS) of less than or equal to 3, and favorable neurologic outcome as a Cerebral Performance Category (CPC) score of less than or equal to 2. Abstractors reviewed notes and documentation from services such as physical therapy to determine CPC and mRS. Study variables had selection options of unknown/not reported, which abstractors could select if they were unsure based on chart review. Patients who were not awake and following commands at any point during the first 24 hours post-ROSC were considered eligible for temperature control. Enrolled patients were followed for outcomes through 60 days. 
Exposure and Outcomes 
Our primary exposure was the documentation of a temperature control strategy in the first 24 hours post-ROSC. Sensitivity analyses examined specific strategies. We did not use the delivery of temperature control therapy as the primary exposure since patients managed with a fever avoidance or normothermic strategy who never develop fever may still be appropriately managed without receiving any intervention. Our approach aligns with AHA and ILCOR guidelines recommending a temperature control strategy for all comatose IHCA survivors, with fever prevention or normothermia being acceptable strategies ( 8 , 13 ). The primary outcome was survival. Secondary outcomes included fever in the first 24 hours post-ROSC, use of any temperature control therapy in the first 24 hours post-ROSC, survival with mRS less than or equal to 3, and survival with CPC less than or equal to 2. 
Statistical Analysis 
Characteristics were summarized for the full Discover IHCA cohort and cohort of interest (eligible for temperature control in the first 24 hr post-ROSC). Summary statistics are presented using counts with percentages, means with sd s, or medians with interquartile range (IQR) as appropriate. 
Outcomes were evaluated with mixed-effects logistic regression models of patients eligible for temperature control. We accounted for clustering within hospital systems with hierarchical models (hospital system as a random effect), controlling for potential confounders including baseline characteristics, pre-arrest interventions, and arrest characteristics ( Supplemental eTable 1 , https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). Authors chose covariates based on existing evidence and expert consensus regarding potential confounding of the relationship between temperature control strategy and outcome. We assessed fit of all models using the same set of diagnostic procedures displayed in Supplemental eTable 1 ( https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ): 1) Pearson residuals and random effects to check for potentially influential observations or clusters, 2) variance inflation factors to evaluate for potential multicollinearity, and 3) interclass correlation coefficients to summarize the proportion of total variation attributable to hospitals. If large residuals were detected (potentially influential observations), predicted values were checked; post hoc refitting of models was performed if the large residuals were influential (Supplemental eTable 1, https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). Secondary outcomes used the same model, substituting dependent variables. 
Patient-level analyses of associations between presence of a documented temperature strategy in the first 24 hours post-ROSC and outcomes were reported as adjusted odds ratios (aORs). For fever, given the competing risk with death, patients who died during a fever evaluation period were penalized as having had a fever. A sensitivity analysis replaced fever occurrence with total fever duration, calculated as area under the temperature fever curve over the first 24 hours using the trapezoid rule from temperatures in 6-hour periods ( 14 ). Death during any 6-hour period was penalized as a temperature of 39°C during that and subsequent periods. We also examined the odds of fever, excluding patients who died within 24 hours. To address potential time bias (not being able to document a strategy) for patients who die shortly post-ROSC, we analyzed subgroups who survived at least 12 and 24 hours post-ROSC. To account for potential self-fulfilling prophecy bias and delayed goals-of-care discussions, we conducted a sensitivity analysis of those alive and full code at 24 hours post-ROSC. For hospital-level analysis, we calculated predicted and actual neurologically favorable survival (NFS), defined as survival with CPC score less than or equal to 2. We calculated predicted NFS using the validated Cardiac Arrest Survival Postresuscitation In-Hospital score, which predicts IHCA survival with CPC score of less than or equal to 2 post-ROSC ( 15 , 16 ). Predicted NFS was averaged within each quartile of hospital adherence to a documented strategy. We also calculated actual NFS and unadjusted survival for each quartile. 
Hospital system variability in temperature control strategies and therapies is displayed graphically, ordered by the proportion of patients with a documented temperature control strategy in the first 24 hours post-ROSC. This was overlayed with the proportion of patients who had a fever and temperature control therapies deployed in the first 24 hours post-ROSC. 
Analyses used two-sided p values ( p < 0.05 considered statistically significant). Statistical analyses used Stata/SE 17.0 (StataCorp, College Station, TX); figures GraphPad Prism 10.4.1 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Missing data is in Supplemental eTable 2 ( https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ), complete case analysis was performed. 
RESULTS 
Baseline Characteristics 
A total of 4506 patients were screened with 1006 patients enrolled into the full Discover IHCA study cohort from 24 hospital systems ( Fig. 1 ). Full Discover IHCA cohort characteristics are in Supplemental eTable 2 ( https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). 
Figure 1. 
Open in a new tab 
Discover in-hospital cardiac arrest (IHCA) study patients flow through screening and enrollment. Screening, exclusions, and total enrollments for the Discover IHCA cohort, including the number of patients enrolled at each hospital system. 
Temperature Control Practices 
Of the full cohort, 615 patients (61.1%) were eligible for post-ROSC temperature control; characteristics by eligibility are in Supplemental eTable 3 ( https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). Of the 615 eligible patients, 273 (44.4%) had a documented temperature control strategy. Select characteristics of patients by strategy are in Table 1 ; comprehensive details are in Supplemental eTable 4 ( https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). Among the 237 patients with a strategy, 76 (27.8%) had fever avoidance, 85 (31.2%) had targeted hypothermia (most common goal temperature of 36°C, 88.2%), and the most frequently used strategy was targeted normothermia at 112 patients (41.0%; and Supplemental eTable 5 , https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). Having a temperature control strategy, as opposed to none, resulted in a higher adjusted odds of receiving temperature control therapies (174 [63.7%] vs. 39 [11.4%]; aOR, 21.3; 95% CI, 12.3–36.7; p < 0.01; Fig. 2 ). Closed-loop cooling devices (feedback-controlled devices that circulate fluid in a closed circuit to maintain body temperature via surface pads or intravascular catheters) were used in 86 patients (14.0%) eligible for temperature control (Supplemental eTable 5, https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). 
TABLE 1. 
Cohort Characteristics 
Variable 
All Patients Eligible for Temperature Control ( n = 615) 
No Documented Temperature Control Strategy in First 24 hr Post-ROSC ( n = 342) 
Documented Temperature Control Strategy in First 24 hr Post-ROSC ( n = 273) 
Baseline functional and neurologic status, median (IQR) 
Pre-admission modified Rankin Scale 
3 (1–4) 
2 (1–4) 
3 (1–4) 
Pre-admission Cerebral Performance Category 
1 (1–2) 
1 (1–2) 
1 (1–2) 
Clinical frailty scale 
4 (3–6) 
4 (3–6) 
4.5 (3–6) 
Arrest location, n (%) 
Emergency department 
48 (7.8) 
23 (6.7) 
25 (9.2) 
Nontelemetry floor/ward 
80 (13.0) 
44 (12.9) 
36 (13.2) 
Telemetry floor/ward 
171 (27.9) 
85 (24.9) 
86 (31.5) 
ICU 
269 (43.8) 
165 (48.4) 
104 (38.1) 
Noninvasive imaging 
16 (2.6) 
8 (2.4) 
8 (2.9) 
Procedural suite 
25 (4.1) 
12 (3.5) 
13 (4.8) 
Other 
5 (0.8) 
4 (1.2) 
1 (0.4) 
Number of days in the hospital before arrest, median (IQR) 
Number of days 
4 (1–12) 
4 (1–12) 
4 (1–12) 
Arrest etiology, n (%) 
Primary cardiac 
133 (21.6) 
77 (22.5) 
56 (20.5) 
Primary respiratory 
231 (37.6) 
118 (34.5) 
113 (41.4) 
Metabolic derangement 
45 (7.3) 
27 (7.9) 
18 (6.6) 
Shock 
109 (17.7) 
66 (19.3) 
43 (15.8) 
Medication effect 
7 (1.1) 
6 (1.8) 
1 (0.4) 
Other 
5 (0.8) 
2 (0.6) 
3 (1.1) 
Unknown 
85 (13.8) 
46 (13.5) 
39 (14.3) 
Initial rhythm, n (%) 
Asystole 
96 (15.6) 
50 (14.6) 
46 (16.9) 
Pulseless electrical activity 
384 (62.4) 
210 (61.4) 
174 (63.7) 
Ventricular fibrillation 
46 (7.5) 
22 (6.4) 
24 (8.8) 
Pulseless ventricular tachycardia 
42 (6.8) 
24 (7.0) 
18 (6.6) 
Unknown 
47 (7.6) 
36 (10.5) 
11 (4.0) 
ECPR, n (%) 
ECPR initiated 
29 (4.7) 
15 (4.4) 
14 (5.1) 
Duration of resuscitation, median (IQR) 
Total duration, min 
9 (5–15) 
8 (4–14) 
10 (6–16) 
Open in a new tab 
ECPR = extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation, IQR = interquartile range, ROSC = return of spontaneous circulation. 
Figure 2. 
Open in a new tab 
Association between any documented temperature control strategy (compared with none) and clinical outcomes of interest. This forest plot evaluates the effect of having a temperature control strategy used in the first 24 hr after return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) for patients eligible for temperature control (not awake or following commands in the first 24 hr after ROSC). Survival includes survival to discharge or alive and in the hospital at 60 d post-ROSC. Favorable modified Rankin Scale (mRS) is a mRS score of less than or equal to 3 at discharge or 60 d post-ROSC. Favorable Cerebral Performance Category (CPC) is a CPC score of less than or equal to 2 at discharge or 60 d post-ROSC. All odds ratios are adjusted odds. a The odds of fever refers to any fever in the first 24 hr after ROSC, patients who died in the first 24 hr after ROSC were penalized by being considered to have had a fever. 
Temperature Control and Individual Patient Outcomes 
Of those eligible for temperature control, 157 (25.5%) developed at least one fever in the first 24 hours post-ROSC. After the initial 6 hours post-ROSC, patients with a temperature control strategy had lower temperatures and less fever in every 6-hour period through 48 hours ( Fig. 3 , A and B ; and Supplemental eFig. 1 , https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). Having a strategy, as compared with none, was associated with a lower adjusted odds of fever in the first 24 hours post-ROSC (102 [37.4%] vs. 164 [48.0%]; aOR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.43–0.92; p = 0.02; Fig. 2 ) and lower area under the temperature curve (adjusted difference of –3.88 total area; 95% CI, –5.82 to –1.93; p < 0.01; and Supplemental eFig. 2 , https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). When excluding patients who died less than 24 hours post-ROSC, having a strategy was still associated with less fever, but the finding was no longer statistically significant (Supplemental eFig. 2, https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). 
Figure 3. 
Open in a new tab 
Mean of highest temperature (°C) and percent of patients with fever in each 6-hr period post-return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC). A , The mean of the highest temperature in each 6-hr period for those who are not awake and following commands throughout 96 hr, shown both overall and for those who do and do not have a documented temperature strategy in each 24-hr period. B , The percentage of patients who had a fever in each 6-hr period. Also, it only includes those who are not awake and following commands throughout 96 hr, and it is shown both overall and for those who do and do not have a documented temperature strategy in each 24-hr period. 
A total of 418 (42.9%) of the 1006 enrolled patients survived, including 185 (30.1%) of the 615 eligible for temperature control. There was no statistically significant difference in survival for patients with a documented temperature control strategy as compared with no strategy (89 [32.6%] vs. 96 [28.1%]; aOR, 1.19; 95% CI, 0.79–1.80; p = 0.42; Fig. 2 ). There were no statistically significant differences in survival with mRS less than or equal to 3 (functional outcome; 27 [9.9%] vs. 36 [10.5%]; aOR, 1.14; 95% CI, 0.53–2.42; p = 0.74) or survival with CPC less than or equal to 2 (neurologic outcome; 35 [12.8%] vs. 42 [12.3%]; aOR, 1.15; 95% CI, 0.63–2.12; p = 0.65). 
When using a strategy of targeted hypothermia as the independent variable (compared with any other strategy or no strategy), we did not observe any statistically significant association with survival, functional outcome, or neurologic outcome ( Supplemental eFig. 3 , https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). Temperature control strategy, when analyzed categorically, showed no statistically significant associations with outcomes ( Supplemental eTable 6 , https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). When examining the subgroups of those that survived to 12 and 24 hours, there was no statistically significant association with outcomes ( Supplemental eFig. 4 , https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). The most common reasons for death in those eligible for temperature control were progressive refractory shock (151, 35.3%), comorbid withdrawal of care (138, 32.2%), and neurologic withdrawal of care (73, 17.1%). When examining the subgroup of those alive and full code at 24 hours, there was no statistically significant association with outcomes ( Supplemental eFig. 5 , https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). Median days from ROSC to death was longer with a temperature control strategy (4 d [IQR, 1–8 d] vs. 2 d [IQR, 1–7 d]; p < 0.01). Unadjusted outcomes are in Supplemental eTable 7 ( https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). 
Hospital System Variation in Temperature Control Practices 
Proportions of documented temperature control strategy within 24 hours post-ROSC varied across hospital systems (0% to 100%; mean, 44.1%; sd , 26.1%; Fig. 4 A ). Hospital systems with a higher proportion of a documented temperature strategy employed more temperature control therapies ( Fig. 4 B ). When examining hospital systems within quartiles of strategy use, closed-loop cooling as a therapy increased from the lowest quartile (1 [0.5%]) to the highest (41 [24.1%]; and Supplemental eTable 8 , https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ). 
Figure 4. 
Open in a new tab 
Hospital system variation in temperature control practices, proportion of fever, and therapies deployed in the first 24 hr after return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC). A , Hospital systems ordered by the proportion of patients who had a documented temperature strategy in the first 24 hr after ROSC. Figure 2 A is also overlayed with the proportion of patients at each hospital system that had a fever in the first 24 hr after ROSC. B , The proportion of temperature control therapies actually deployed at each hospital system in the first 24 hr after ROSC. The proportions can add up to greater than 100% because patients were able to receive more than one temperature control therapy. 
Temperature Control and Hospital System Outcomes 
Unadjusted survival at each hospital system ranged from 10.7% to 50.0% (mean, 29.4%). Predicted and observed NFS are in Supplemental eFigure 6 ( https://links.lww.com/CCM/H934 ) averaged into quartiles of hospital strategy documentation; this figure is overlayed with the unadjusted survival for each quartile. 
DISCUSSION 
In this international prospective study of post-IHCA care at 24 hospital systems, we found substantial variation in strategies and therapies for temperature control. Fevers were common, but having a documented temperature control strategy resulted in less fever and lower temperatures over time. Having a temperature control strategy was not associated with improved survival, functional, or neurologic outcomes. 
Temperature control, intended to mitigate hypoxic-ischemic brain injury, remains a core focus of post-arrest care ( 8 , 17 ). In response to growing evidence, guidelines have evolved over time ( 18 ). Updated 2023 AHA guidelines recommend choosing a deliberate strategy for temperature control with a temperature between 32°C and 37.5°C (class 1) and suggest maintaining that temperature for greater than or equal to 24 hours (class 2a) ( 8 ). This is a notable change from the narrower 2020 AHA guidelines range of 32–36°C ( 19 ). The real-world application of changing temperature control guidelines have been examined for the OHCA population, finding a shift away from hypothermic targets, and of concern, higher rates of fever and worsening outcomes ( 20 – 25 ). 
High-quality evidence guiding post-IHCA temperature control remains limited ( 7 ). One small trial of IHCA found no benefit for hypothermia (32–34°C) compared with normothermia ( 26 ). In contrast, a larger trial (both IHCA and OHCA) showed improved neurologic outcomes from hypothermia (33°C) compared with normothermia (37°C) ( 27 ). This finding was especially pronounced in the subgroup of IHCA patients ( 28 ). Real-world post-IHCA temperature control practices remain poorly characterized, and existing databases are not equipped to answer detailed questions about post-IHCA care ( 29 ). How hospitals implement temperature control after IHCA remains a critical gap in knowledge. 
The substantial variation in temperature control strategies and therapies is a key finding of this study, with less than 50% of patients managed with a documented temperature control strategy (high-guideline nonadherence), and less than 40% receiving any temperature control therapy within 24 hours post-ROSC. Fevers post-ROSC were common; at most hospital systems, greater than 20% of patients experienced a fever within 24 hours. Among patients managed with targeted normothermia, we found 21% developed fever and only 25.9% received closed-loop cooling. In contrast, about half of the normothermia arm in the targeted temperature management 2 trial required closed-loop cooling to prevent fever (≥ 37.8°C) ( 30 ). These findings underscore how real-world practice diverges from trial conditions, where efficacy is tested under controlled settings; real-world evidence often reflects the complexities and variability of clinical practice ( 31 – 34 ). Our finding of reduced fever was not significant in a sensitivity analysis excluding, instead of penalizing, early death; this may reflect less power (reduced sample size), fewer patients at risk of fever in the no-strategy group, temperature control itself being associated with less early death, or potentially a truer estimate of the effect of temperature control strategy on fever. 
Despite variation in guideline adherence, we found no relationship between temperature control strategies and survival, functional, or neurologic outcomes. A higher proportion of patients with a documented strategy died due to neurologic withdrawal of care (21.7%) than those with no strategy (13.5%), which may reflect that clinicians are more likely to apply a temperature control strategy for patients perceived to be at higher risk of neurologic injury. Better adherence to having a documented temperature strategy did not translate to better outcomes, despite other key associations with: 1) more temperature control therapy deployed, 2) less fever, 3) lower temperatures, and 4) more days from ROSC until death among nonsurvivors. This hypothesis-generating finding has several potential explanations. First, standardized temperature management may not be beneficial to all; heterogeneity of treatment effects could neutralize outcomes if harms in some offset benefits in others ( 17 ). A personalized approach, with individualized targets based on risk factors (e.g., arrest duration, which is typically shorter in IHCA), may be advantageous ( 28 ). Second, higher-performing hospitals may be implementing additional practices beyond temperature control that improve outcomes. Third, this study may be underpowered for small effect sizes, as point estimates favored having a strategy. Practice variation in post-IHCA care is a modifiable contributor to outcomes that deserves comprehensive study outside of just temperature control. 
This is the largest prospective study of post-IHCA care to date, using granular data from geographically diverse hospital systems. Key limitations remain. A small number of eligible patients were not enrolled due to time constraints, potentially risking selection bias. The majority of hospitals were large academic centers serving urban populations, limiting generalizability. Our primary exposure relied on documentation, and may be unreliable if the documentation was poor; the rationale for strategy choice (or lack of) was not available. Although the presence of a strategy was strongly associated with delivery of temperature control therapy and reduction in fever, strategy and delivery of therapy are not synonymous. Exact timing of temperature control strategies and therapy delivery was not captured, and a 24-hour window was chosen to account for potential delays in documentation. Despite the limitation of exact timing, we do show the impact of a strategy on temperature and fever likely occurs early (Fig. 3 ). Outcome assessment in cardiac arrest research may be influenced by self-fulfilling prophecies and timing of care decisions, such as code status changes or transitions to comfort-focused care; we performed sensitivity analyses to address these potential biases. When performing chart review to determine outcomes, data abstractors were not blinded to the primary exposure, although the primary outcome of survival is highly objective. Patient-centered outcomes of CPC and mRS scores are frequently used in cardiac arrest research, but more granular neurologic or functional outcomes could not be assessed in this analysis. Finally, although this is an international cohort, only one hospital system was located outside of the United States. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this prospective observational cohort of post-IHCA patients from 24 hospital systems, fever was observed frequently, and there was significant variation in temperature control strategies and therapies deployed for temperature control. When compared with patients with a documented temperature control strategy, patients without a documented temperature control strategy were more likely to have fever in the first 24 hours post-ROSC and have higher temperatures during that period, but there was no difference in survival or survival with good neurologic or functional outcomes. 
Supplementary Material 
ccm-54-1341-s001.docx (1.2MB, docx) 
Open in a new tab 
APPENDIX 
The Discover In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest Research Collaborative members are listed as follows: 
Nonauthor Collaborators: Devin S. Videlefsky, MD (Bronx Center for Critical Care Outcomes and Resuscitation Research, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY), Diego Camps, MD (Clinica de Especialidades Villa Maria, Córdoba, Argentina), Christian Dellera, MD (Hospital J. C. Perrando, Chaco, Argentina), Maria Marino, MD (Hospital Interzonal Gral, de Agudos San José de Pergamino, Pergamino, Argentina), Sandra Swieszkowski, MD (Hospital de Clinicas Jose de San Martin, Buenos Aires, Argentina), Pathik Patel, MD (St. Elizabeth Medical Center, Boston, MA), Mohammed Al Tameemi (Department of Critical Care, Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH), Erica Whetten, DNP, APRN, AGACNP-BC (Department of Anesthesiology, Valleywise Health Medical Center, Creighton University School of Medicine, Phoenix, AZ), Sujatha Cumaran, MD, MS (Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC), Kelly Ivins-O’Keefe, MD (US Army Institute of Surgical Research Burn Center, JBSA Ft Sam Houston, TX), Matthew E. Prekker, MD (Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN), Carolyn Klippel, BS (Pulmonary Division, Department of Medicine, Intermountain Medical Center, Murray, UT), Michelle Adamson, MSN, RN (Pulmonary Division, Department of Medicine, Intermountain Medical Center, Murray, UT), Darrin Applegate, BA (Pulmonary Division, Department of Medicine, Intermountain Medical Center, Murray, UT), Jose Pena, MD (Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University School of Medicine, Portland, OR), Edvinas Pocius (Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University School of Medicine, Portland, OR), Genesis Briceno, MD (Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University School of Medicine, Portland, OR), Micah Klumpp, PhD (Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Baton Rouge, LA), Laura Cook, MSN, RN, ACCNS-AG (Department of Anesthesiology, Wayne State University, Pontiac, MI), Michelle Buffmyer-Sieffert, RN (Department of Anesthesiology, Wayne State University, Pontiac, MI), Maile McKeowon (Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA), Ahna Weeks, MD (Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA), Kelly Stewart, MD (Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA), Leenay Coughlin (Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA), Feona Kennedy, MSN, RN (Harborview Medical Center, Seattle, WA), Kevin W. Gibbs, MD (Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Immunologic Disease, Department of Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC), Jordan E. Nogle, DO (Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Immunologic Disease, Department of Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC), John T. Dollerschell, MD (Department of Anesthesiology, Division of Critical Care, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine & Public Health, Madison, WI). 
Footnotes 
The views expressed in this article reflect the results of research conducted by the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the U.S. Army Institute of Surgical Research, the Defense Health Agency, the Department of Defense, nor the U.S. Government. 
Drs. Andrea and Moskowitz had full access to all of the data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis, including and especially any adverse effects. 
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal’s website ( http://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal ). 
This project was endorsed by Discovery, the Critical Care Research Network of the Society of Critical Care Medicine. 
Dr. Andrea received support for article research from the Society of Critical Care Medicine Discovery Network. He received a grant from the Clinical and Translational Science Award program, funded by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), under grant number K12TR004411 to perform research related to this project. Dr. Andrea, Peltan, Bangar, Faiver, Vine, DeMasi, and Awab Khan received support for article research from the NIH. Drs. Johnson’s and Gong’s institutions received funding from the NIH. Dr. Krishnamoorthy received funding from NIH (R01NS130832), not related to this project. Dr. Crowley is a member of the Advanced Life Support Task Force/International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (ILCOR). Dr. Johnson’s institution received funding from the American Heart Association, the ILCOR, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Dr. Mitchell received funding from Ambu. Dr. Peltan’s institution received funding from Regeneron, Novartis, and Bluejay Diagnostics; he received funding from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences. Dr. Faiver’s institution received funding from the NIH (T32HL007820). Dr. Vine’s institution received funding from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI; T32HL155020). Dr. Wardi received funding from Abbott Laboratories and Northwest Anesthesia; he received funding from the NIH (K23GM146092). Dr. Akram Khan’s institution received funding from Direct Biologics and 4D Medical. Dr. Schnittke received support for article research from the Biomedical Advanced Research Development Authority. Dr. Martinez received funding from Bauhealth. Dr. Gong received funding from Novartis, Regeneron, the American Thoracic Society, and Wolters Kluwer. Dr. Moskowitz received funding from the NIH/NHLBI (4R33HL162980), he is a volunteer member of the ILCOR Advanced Life Support Task Force, and he is a volunteer member of the American Heart Association Post-Cardiac Arrest Care Guideline Writing Group. Dr. Dollerschell received speaking endorsements from Edwards Lifesciences on hemodynamic monitoring. The remaining authors have disclosed that they do not have any potential conflicts of interest. 
The Discover In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest Research Collaborative members are listed in the Appendix section. 
This article has an accompanying editorial. 
Contributor Information 
Katherine M. Berg, Email: kberg@bidmc.harvard.edu. 
Nicholas J. Johnson, Email: nickj45@uw.edu. 
Oscar J. L. Mitchell, Email: Oscar.Mitchell@Pennmedicine.upenn.edu. 
Alex K. Pearce, Email: apearce@health.ucsd.edu. 
Adam Green, Email: green-adam@cooperhealth.edu. 
Jonathan Elmer, Email: tamjw@upmc.edu. 
Ivan Alfredo Huespe, Email: ivan.huespe@hospitalitaliano.org.ar. 
Michael J. Lanspa, Email: michael.lanspa@imail.org. 
Greggory R. Davis, Email: greggory.davis@fmolhs.org. 
Ithan D. Peltan, Email: ithan.peltan@imail.org. 
Nathaniel S. Herman, Email: nherman325@gmail.com. 
Rishi Malhotra, Email: rmalhotr@montefiore.org. 
Maneesha D. Bangar, Email: mbangar@montefiore.org. 
Lars-Kristofer N. Peterson, Email: larskris@buffalo.edu. 
Nafisa Wadud, Email: nwadud222@gmail.com. 
Haley Mayfield, Email: Haley.Mayfield@imail.org. 
Mariana Vaena, Email: mariana.vaena@hospitalitaliano.org.ar. 
Pascual Valdez, Email: rpascual46@gmail.com. 
Trinity E. Howard, Email: Trinity.Howard@fmolhs.org. 
Michael R. Loewe, Email: mloew1@lsuhsc.edu. 
Laura Faiver, Email: faiverlk@upmc.edu. 
Jonathan Tam, Email: tamjw@upmc.edu. 
Saleem M. Halablab, Email: saleem.halablab@pennmedicine.upenn.edu. 
Aarthi Kaviyarasu, Email: Aarthi.Kaviyarasu@Pennmedicine.upenn.edu. 
Michael Baram, Email: baramfive@gmail.com. 
Vincent Chan, Email: Vincent.Chan@jefferson.edu. 
Timothy Crisci, Email: Timothy.Crisci@jefferson.edu. 
Nathanial Rosal, Email: Nathaniel.Rosal@jefferson.edu. 
Shekhar A. Ghamande, Email: shekhar.ghamande@bswhealth.org. 
Heath D. White, Email: heath.white@bswhealth.org. 
Braden Anderson, Email: braden.anderson@bswhealth.org. 
Siddharth Dugar, Email: dugars@ccf.org. 
Omar Mehkri, Email: MEHKRIO@ccf.org. 
Talha Saleem, Email: SALEEMT@ccf.org. 
Jacob Vine, Email: jvine@bidmc.harvard.edu. 
John H. Lee, Email: jhlee1@bidmc.harvard.edu. 
Dustin L. Norton, Email: dnorton@wakehealth.edu. 
John P. Gaillard, Email: jgaillar@wakehealth.edu. 
Taylor Wachs, Email: taylordwachs10@gmail.com. 
J. Taylor Herbert, Email: james.herbert@duke.edu. 
Vijay Krishnamoorthy, Email: vijay.krishnamoorthy@duke.edu. 
Gabriel Wardi, Email: gwardi@health.ucsd.edu. 
Micah T. Long, Email: mtlong@wisc.edu. 
Lenka Craigova, Email: craigova@wisc.edu. 
Stephanie C. DeMasi, Email: stephanie.demasi@vumc.org. 
Kipp Shipley, Email: jonathan.k.shipley@vumc.org. 
Akram Khan, Email: rkhan@sccm.org. 
Nikolai Schnittke, Email: schnittk@ohsu.edu. 
Kinsley Hubel, Email: hubel@ohsu.edu. 
Conor P. Crowley, Email: Conor.P.Crowley@lahey.org. 
Christopher K. Hansen, Email: christopher.k.hansen@lahey.org. 
Kenneth W. Dodd, Email: kenneth.dodd@hcmed.org. 
Saiara Choudhury, Email: saiarachoudhury.md@gmail.com. 
Cooper March, Email: marchcm@uw.edu. 
Anthony Martinez, Email: amartine@ascension.org. 
Alexander Reyes, Email: alexander.reyes1@ascension.org. 
Aaron M. Joffe, Email: aaron_joffe@dmgaz.org. 
Alex Bui, Email: alex_bui@dmgaz.org. 
Krassimir Denchev, Email: kdenchev@wayne.edu. 
Brittany D. Bissell Turpin, Email: brittanydbissell@gmail.com. 
Reine Fowajuh, Email: fowajuh-reine@cooperhealth.edu. 
Jared Ward, Email: jward9@virtua.org. 
Awab Khan, Email: rkhan@sccm.org. 
Clifford Chang, Email: chang-clifford@CooperHealth.edu. 
Esteban Richieri, Email: estebanrichieri1992@gmail.com. 
Matias Mirofsky, Email: mmirofsky@gmail.com. 
Judith Sagardia, Email: judithsagardia0007@gmail.com. 
Damián Piezny, Email: damianpiezny80@gmail.com. 
Alicia Roxana Gira, Email: aliciaroxanagira@gmail.com. 
Eleonora Cunto, Email: eleonora1958@gmail.com. 
Reham Khan, Email: rkhan@sccm.org. 
Tamara Al-Hakim, Email: tal-hakim@sccm.org. 
Michelle N. Gong, Email: mgong@montefiore.org. 
Ari Moskowitz, Email: amoskowitz@montefiore.org. 
on behalf of Discovery, the Critical Care Research Network of the Society of Critical Care Medicine: 
Devin S. Videlefsky , Diego Camps , Christian Dellera , Maria Marino , Sandra Swieszkowski , Pathik Patel , Mohammed Al Tameemi , Erica Whetten , Sujatha Cumaran , Kelly Ivins-O’Keefe , Matthew E. Prekker , Carolyn Klippel , Michelle Adamson , Darrin Applegate , Jose Pena , Edvinas Pocius , Genesis Briceno , Micah Klumpp , Laura Cook , Michelle Buffmyer-Sieffert , Maile McKeowon , Ahna Weeks , Kelly Stewart , Leenay Coughlin , Feona Kennedy , Kevin W. Gibbs , Jordan E. Nogle , and John T. Dollerschell 
REFERENCES 
1. Girotra S, Nallamothu BK, Spertus JA, et al. ; American Heart Association Get with the Guidelines–Resuscitation Investigators: Trends in survival after in-hospital cardiac arrest.
N Engl J Med
2012; 367:1912–1920
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Wiberg S, Holmberg MJ, Donnino MW, et al. ; American Heart Association’s Get With The Guidelines®-Resuscitation Investigators: Age-dependent trends in survival after adult in-hospital cardiac arrest.
Resuscitation
2020; 151:189–196
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Sandroni C, Nolan J, Cavallaro F, et al. : In-hospital cardiac arrest: Incidence, prognosis and possible measures to improve survival.
Intensive Care Med
2007; 33:237–245
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Benjamin EJ, Virani SS, Callaway CW, et al. ; American Heart Association Council on Epidemiology and Prevention Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee: Heart disease and stroke statistics—2018 update: A report from the American Heart Association.
Circulation
2018; 137:e67–e492
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. Kleinman ME, Perkins GD, Bhanji F, et al. : ILCOR scientific knowledge gaps and clinical research priorities for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care: A consensus statement.
Resuscitation
2018; 127:132–146
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Hirsch KG, Abella BS, Amorim E, et al. ; American Heart Association and Neurocritical Care Society: Critical care management of patients after cardiac arrest: A scientific statement from the American Heart Association and Neurocritical Care Society.
Circulation
2024; 149:e168–e200
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Sinha SS, Sukul D, Lazarus JJ, et al. : Identifying important gaps in randomized controlled trials of adult cardiac arrest treatments: A systematic review of the published literature.
Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes
2016; 9:749–756
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Perman SM, Elmer J, Maciel CB, et al. ; American Heart Association: 2023 American Heart Association focused update on adult advanced cardiovascular life support: An update to the American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care.
Circulation
2024; 149:e254–e273
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. Rasmussen TP, Riley DJ, Sarazin MV, et al. : Variation across hospitals in in-hospital cardiac arrest incidence among Medicare beneficiaries.
JAMA Netw Open
2022; 5:e2148485.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. Merchant RM, Berg RA, Yang L, et al. ; American Heart Association’s Get With the Guidelines-Resuscitation Investigators: Hospital variation in survival after in-hospital cardiac arrest.
J Am Heart Assoc
2014; 3:e000400.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. Andrea L, Herman NS, Vine J, et al. ; Society of Critical Care Medicine’s Discovery, the Critical Care Research Network DISCOVER In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest (DISCOVER IHCA): Investigator Group: The Discover In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest (Discover IHCA) study: An investigation of hospital practices after in-hospital cardiac arrest.
Crit Care Explor
2024; 6:e1149.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Society of Critical Care Medicine: Discovery, the Critical Care Research Network. 2025. Available at: https://www.sccm.org/Research/Discovery-Research-Network. Accessed July 9, 2025 
13. Greif R, Bray JE, Djärv T, et al. : 2024 International consensus on cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care science with treatment recommendations: Summary from the basic life support; advanced life support; pediatric life support; neonatal life support; education, implementation, and teams; and first aid task forces.
Circulation
2024; 150:e580–e687
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. Gabrielsson J, Weiner D: Non-compartmental analysis.
Methods Mol Biol
2012; 929:377–389
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Chan PS, Spertus JA, Krumholz HM, et al. ; Get With the Guidelines-Resuscitation Registry Investigators: A validated prediction tool for initial survivors of in-hospital cardiac arrest.
Arch Intern Med
2012; 172:947–953
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. Wang CH, Chang WT, Huang CH, et al. : Validation of the cardiac arrest survival postresuscitation in-hospital (CASPRI) score in an East Asian population.
PLoS One
2018; 13:e0202938.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. Beekman R, Khosla A, Buckley R, et al. : Temperature control in the era of personalized medicine: Knowledge gaps, research priorities, and future directions.
J Intensive Care Med
2024; 39:611–622
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
18. Granfeldt A, Holmberg MJ, Nolan JP, et al. ; International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (ILCOR) Advanced Life Support Task Force: Targeted temperature management in adult cardiac arrest: Systematic review and meta-analysis.
Resuscitation
2021; 167:160–172
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
19. Panchal AR, Bartos JA, Cabañas JG, et al. ; Adult Basic and Advanced Life Support Writing Group: Part 3: Adult basic and advanced life support: 2020 American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care.
Circulation
2020; 142(16_Suppl_2):S366–S468
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
20. Roedl K, Wolfrum S, Michels G, et al. : Temperature control in adults after cardiac arrest: A survey of current clinical practice in Germany.
Crit Care
2023; 27:35.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
21. Haddadi C, Kimmoun A, Jacquier M, et al. : Practice survey on recent changes in post cardiac arrest care and temperature management in French intensive care units.
J Crit Care
2024; 84:154903.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
22. Nolan JP, Orzechowska I, Harrison DA, et al. : Changes in temperature management and outcome after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest in United Kingdom intensive care units following publication of the targeted temperature management trial.
Resuscitation
2021; 162:304–311
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
23. Salter R, Bailey M, Bellomo R, et al. ; Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society Centre for Outcome and Resource Evaluation (ANZICS-CORE): Changes in temperature management of cardiac arrest patients following publication of the target temperature management trial.
Crit Care Med
2018; 46:1722–1730
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
24. Bradley SM, Liu W, McNally B, et al. ; Cardiac Arrest Registry to Enhance Survival (CARES) Surveillance Group: Temporal trends in the use of therapeutic hypothermia for out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.
JAMA Netw Open
2018; 1:e184511.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
25. Johnson NJ, Danielson KR, Counts CR, et al. : Targeted temperature management at 33 versus 36 degrees: A retrospective cohort study.
Crit Care Med
2020; 48:362–369
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
26. Wolfrum S, Roedl K, Hanebutte A, et al. ; Hypothermia After In-Hospital Cardiac Arrest Study Group: Temperature control after in-hospital cardiac arrest: A randomized clinical trial.
Circulation
2022; 146:1357–1366
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
27. Lascarrou JB, Merdji H, Le Gouge A, et al. ; CRICS-TRIGGERSEP Group: Targeted temperature management for cardiac arrest with nonshockable rhythm.
N Engl J Med
2019; 381:2327–2337
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
28. Blanc A, Colin G, Cariou A, et al. : Targeted temperature management after in-hospital cardiac arrest: An ancillary analysis of targeted temperature management for cardiac arrest with nonshockable rhythm trial data.
Chest
2022; 162:356–366
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
29. Paratz ED, Rowsell L, Zentner D, et al. ; Australian UCDP Registry: Cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac death registries: A systematic review of global coverage.
Open Heart
2020; 7:e001195.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
30. Dankiewicz J, Cronberg T, Lilja G, et al. ; TTM2 Trial Investigators: Hypothermia versus normothermia after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.
N Engl J Med
2021; 384:2283–2294
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
31. Asai N, Shibata Y, Sakanashi D, et al. : A large gap in patients’ characteristics and outcomes between the real-world and clinical trial settings in community-acquired pneumonia and healthcare-associated pneumonia.
J Clin Med
2022; 11:297.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
32. Mezzacappa C, Ravindra NG, Caraballo C, et al. : Clinical implications of differences between real world and clinical trial usage of left ventricular assist devices for end stage heart failure.
PLoS One
2020; 15:e0242928.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
33. Gue Y, Bloomfield D, Freedholm D, et al. : Comparing the real-world and clinical trial bleeding rates associated with oral anticoagulation treatment for atrial fibrillation.
J Clin Med
2024; 13:2277.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
34. Meitlis I, Hall J, Gunaje N, et al. : Regional variation in temperature control after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.
Resusc Plus
2024; 20:100794.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Articles from Critical Care Medicine are provided here courtesy of Wolters Kluwer Health 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (2.5 MB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
