The Sepsis Chain of Survival: A Comprehensive Framework for Improving Sepsis Outcomes - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Crit Care Med 
. 2025 Jul 16;53(10):e1886–e1892. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000006796 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
The Sepsis Chain of Survival: A Comprehensive Framework for Improving Sepsis Outcomes 
Jorge L Hidalgo 
Jorge L Hidalgo , MD, MACP, MCCM, FCCP 
1 Division of Critical Care and COVID-19-Unit, Belize Healthcare Partners Limited, Belize City, Belize. 
Find articles by Jorge L Hidalgo 
1, ✉ , Vishakha K Kumar 
Vishakha K Kumar , MD, MBA 
2 Department of Research and Quality, Society of Critical Care Medicine, Mount Prospect, IL. 
Find articles by Vishakha K Kumar 
2 , Samuel O Akech 
Samuel O Akech , MBChB, MMed, PhD 
3 Kenya Medical Research Institute—Wellcome Trust Research Program (KWTRP), Nairobi, Kenya. 
Find articles by Samuel O Akech 
3 , Sheila N Myatra 
Sheila N Myatra , MD, FCCM, FICCM 
4 Department of Anesthesiology, Critical Care and Pain, Tata Memorial Hospital, Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai, India. 
Find articles by Sheila N Myatra 
4 , Shevin T Jacob 
Shevin T Jacob , MD, MPH 
5 Department of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom. 
Find articles by Shevin T Jacob 
5 , Teresa Kortz 
Teresa Kortz , MD, MS, PhD 
6 Department of Pediatrics, Critical Care Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Franscisco, CA. 
7 Institute for Global Health Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Franscisco, CA. 
Find articles by Teresa Kortz 
6, 7 , Amanda A Vasquez 
Amanda A Vasquez , MD 
8 General Practitioner at the Critical Care Unit, Belize Healthcare Partners, Belize City, Belize. 
Find articles by Amanda A Vasquez 
8 , Maria Cristina Jiménez Bazzano 
Maria Cristina Jiménez Bazzano , MD, FACP 
9 Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital of Clinics, Faculty of Medical Sciences National University of Asunción, San Lorenzo, Paraguay. 
Find articles by Maria Cristina Jiménez Bazzano 
9 , Marilia Diaz 
Marilia Diaz , RN, MSN, FCCM 
10 Hospital Auxilio Mutuo, San Juan, Puerto Rico. 
11 Universidad Sagrado Corazón, San Juan, Puerto Rico. 
Find articles by Marilia Diaz 
10, 11 , Jennifer Del Rio Rodríguez 
Jennifer Del Rio Rodríguez , PharmD, BCCCP 
10 Hospital Auxilio Mutuo, San Juan, Puerto Rico. 
Find articles by Jennifer Del Rio Rodríguez 
10 , Ana Luisa Najera Garcia 
Ana Luisa Najera Garcia 
12 Clinical Nutrición Hospital Regional de Occidente, Quetzaltenango, Quetzaltenango, Guatemala. 
Find articles by Ana Luisa Najera Garcia 
12 , Rocio Giron 
Rocio Giron , RRT, CPFT 
13 Critical Care Unit, Pulmonary Function Testing and Pulmonary Rehabilitation Unit, Belize Healthcare Partners, Belize City, Belize. 
Find articles by Rocio Giron 
13 , Judith Jacobi 
Judith Jacobi , PharmD, BCCCP, FCCP, MCCM 
14 Critical Care Clinical Pharmacist, National Coalition for IV Push Safety, Lebanon, IN. 
Find articles by Judith Jacobi 
14 , Maureen A Madden 
Maureen A Madden , DNP, RN, CPNP-AC, CCRN, FCCM, FAAN 
15 Department of Pediatrics, Critical Care Medicine, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ. 
Find articles by Maureen A Madden 
15 , Vinay Nadkarni 
Vinay Nadkarni , MD, MS, FCCM 
16 Department of Anesthesiology, Critical Care and Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA. 
Find articles by Vinay Nadkarni 
16 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 Division of Critical Care and COVID-19-Unit, Belize Healthcare Partners Limited, Belize City, Belize. 
2 Department of Research and Quality, Society of Critical Care Medicine, Mount Prospect, IL. 
3 Kenya Medical Research Institute—Wellcome Trust Research Program (KWTRP), Nairobi, Kenya. 
4 Department of Anesthesiology, Critical Care and Pain, Tata Memorial Hospital, Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai, India. 
5 Department of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom. 
6 Department of Pediatrics, Critical Care Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Franscisco, CA. 
7 Institute for Global Health Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Franscisco, CA. 
8 General Practitioner at the Critical Care Unit, Belize Healthcare Partners, Belize City, Belize. 
9 Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital of Clinics, Faculty of Medical Sciences National University of Asunción, San Lorenzo, Paraguay. 
10 Hospital Auxilio Mutuo, San Juan, Puerto Rico. 
11 Universidad Sagrado Corazón, San Juan, Puerto Rico. 
12 Clinical Nutrición Hospital Regional de Occidente, Quetzaltenango, Quetzaltenango, Guatemala. 
13 Critical Care Unit, Pulmonary Function Testing and Pulmonary Rehabilitation Unit, Belize Healthcare Partners, Belize City, Belize. 
14 Critical Care Clinical Pharmacist, National Coalition for IV Push Safety, Lebanon, IN. 
15 Department of Pediatrics, Critical Care Medicine, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ. 
16 Department of Anesthesiology, Critical Care and Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA. 
✉ 
For information regarding this article, E-mail: jlhmmd@gmail.com 
✉ 
Corresponding author. 
Issue date 2025 Oct. 
Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf of the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. 
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives License 4.0 (CCBY-NC-ND) , where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it is properly cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially without permission from the journal. 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC12490334  PMID: 40668160 
See " Surviving Sepsis: Don't Break the Chain. " with doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000006832. 
Abstract 
The “Chain of Survival” concept, developed for cardiac arrest, emphasizes a seamless and interconnected set, of time-critical interventions that are not strictly linear, to improve survival. This paradigm of urgent recognition and response to life-threatening conditions has evolved to apply to acute medical conditions, including sepsis. The “Sepsis Chain of Survival” underscores the importance of early recognition, prompt emergency medical services activation, timely antimicrobial administration and appropriate fluid resuscitation, optimized critical care management, effective source control and infection management, and comprehensive post-sepsis care. By adopting this approach, healthcare systems can improve sepsis outcomes through a coordinated, multifaceted strategy. This model highlights the critical role of public and healthcare worker awareness, education, community response, and continuous monitoring. Addressing the importance and interdependence of each link, this framework aims to improve survival rates and patient recovery by ensuring timely and effective sepsis management across diverse resource settings in infants, children, and adults. 
Keywords: chain of survival, critical care management, early recognition, emergency response, post-sepsis care, sepsis 
The “Chain of Survival” concept refers to interdependent interventions that must occur to optimize survival from life-threatening conditions that require seamless time-critical sequenced interventions, such as sudden cardiac arrest, stroke, severe trauma, choking, anaphylaxis, maternal hemorrhage, and newborn asphyxia ( 1 ). All “Chains of Survival,” inside or outside hospital settings, begin with awareness, recognition and early access to care, in which first actions are delivered as quickly as possible ( 1 – 3 ). Early access includes emergency system activation to get trained responder input and movement to the scene ( 2 ). The concept of the “Chain of Survival” has evolved over several decades, with links to the chain added to incorporate prevention, rehabilitation and recovery. Identifying and implementing effective health system interventions are crucial for better outcomes for sepsis patients across resource variable settings. This paradigm of urgent recognition and response to life-threatening conditions has evolved to apply to other acute medical conditions including sepsis. 
EVOLUTION OF CHAIN OF SURVIVAL 
When the “Chain of Survival” metaphor, promoted by the American Heart Association, was first described to increase chances of survival in sudden cardiac arrest, it included four links: early access, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, defibrillation, and advanced life support ( 1 , 3 ). Subsequently, an additional link was added to the “Chain of Survival” to emphasize the importance of early recognition and response ( 4 ). As the importance of post-resuscitation care was appreciated, the chain expanded to include yet another link, rehabilitation and recovery ( 5 ). This link emphasizes patients’ and their caregivers’ physical, social, and emotional needs beyond hospital survival ( 6 ). 
The chain of survival is now being applied to many life-threatening conditions that require time-critical interventions. Sepsis, as defined by Sepsis-3, is life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection ( 7 ). Sepsis can develop both in the community and within hospital settings. Regardless of where sepsis originates, early recognition, and prompt system activation is vital, which includes Emergency Medical Services (EMS) telephone dispatcher in the community and rapid response protocols in the hospital. The growing recognition of the benefits of conceptualizing sepsis management along a continuum of care in a “Chain of Survival” enables healthcare systems to better address the complexities of sepsis care. For this reason, the time has come to apply the chain of survival concept to sepsis ( 8 , 9 ). 
SEPSIS CHAIN OF SURVIVAL 
The Sepsis Chain of Survival describes a systematic networked approach to improve outcomes for patients of all ages with sepsis ( 10 ). It depicts crucial steps including awareness, early recognition, prompt intervention, and comprehensive management throughout the continuum of care; weakness at any point in the link lessens the chance of survival with a good quality of life ( 11 ). The steps in the link are interdependent but they are not necessarily applied in a linear sequence but all must be taken into consideration for best chances of survival in sepsis. 
The infographic ( Fig. 1 ) is a simple way to educate the public and healthcare workers ( 12 ). It illustrates that each link is critical and interdependent (in a sequence and not always linear), and the Chain of Survival is only as strong as its weakest link ( 12 ). 
Figure 1. 
Open in a new tab 
Sepsis chain of survival. 
Awareness and Prevention 
Awareness is the first step of early action to prevent the progression of infection to sepsis or septic shock and focuses on community and healthcare workforce education to improve recognition of early signs of infection and sepsis and to promote timely care-seeking behavior and targeted intervention ( 13 ). 
Preventing the infections that can precipitate sepsis is critical and consists of two aspects: 1) prevention of infections through implementing public health programs promoting equitable vaccination of vulnerable populations against sepsis-associated infections, Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene programs, which improve access to clean water, sanitation facilities, and hygiene practices ( 14 ), and infection prevention and control within healthcare settings encompassing stringent hand hygiene practices, appropriate disinfection and sterilization protocols, and meticulous surgical site infection prevention and 2) preventing progression to sepsis in the healthcare setting through timely recognition and management of patients with infections at risk of deterioration. 
Ongoing efforts are needed to educate the public, healthcare providers, and caregivers about the signs and symptoms of early sepsis and preventive measures. 
Early Recognition and Call for Help 
Recognition and timely activation of care focuses on detecting early signs of sepsis and promptly activating appropriate care pathways across all settings, from community and pre-hospital environments to healthcare facilities. 
Community members and healthcare providers need to promptly recognize sepsis and take action from signs of infection, such as fever, elevated heart rate, rapid breathing, and altered mental status ( 15 ). Promoting awareness of “danger signs” to recognize potential sepsis is a valuable approach. The World Health Organization’s (WHO) Emergency Triage Assessment and Treatment guidelines have been effective in helping healthcare and community workers identify children in need of urgent care and may have utility in early recognition of sepsis. While not specific to sepsis alone, these danger signs can serve as important indicators that prompt action to further evaluate for sepsis or other severe conditions ( 16 ). By harnessing the potential of existing frameworks and promoting awareness of “danger signs” among healthcare workers and the public, early recognition of sepsis and life-threatening critical conditions can be improved. This, in turn, can lead to better patient outcomes through implementation of timely intervention ( 17 ). 
Training of community pre-hospital responders to recognize sepsis and initiate protocolized management with oxygen administration, appropriate fluid resuscitation, and antimicrobial administration upon arrival at the scene and during transport is essential ( 13 , 18 ). Further ensuring safe and timely transport from the scene to the closest medical facility is imperative. In many low-resource settings (LRS), timely EMS responders may not be available, and community responders often function in this role until help arrives. 
Prediction through early warning algorithms or automated tools implemented in electronic health records are promising approaches within hospital and ICU settings, where enabling technologies can be integrated into clinical workflows to enhance early detection and intervention ( 19 ). Early prediction, monitoring, and screening for deterioration, digital triage tools, and application of sepsis bundles of care including escalation protocols allow for early recognition and timely targeted interventions that can prevent progression to life-threatening organ dysfunction ( 13 ). 
Continuous Source Control 
Rapidly identify the source of infection and treat accordingly. Timely surgical drainage, debridement, or removal of infected devices (e.g., IV catheters, prosthetic devices) is necessary to eliminate the source of infection should be initiated as soon as it is feasible and safe alongside antimicrobial therapy and supportive care ( 20 , 21 ). Source control should be a continuous exercise where necessary. 
Appropriate Fluids, Oxygen, and Antibiotics 
Early antimicrobial therapy (ideally within the first hour), oxygen when required, and appropriate fluid resuscitation are foundational components of sepsis management. Early administration of appropriate and available antimicrobials that target the suspected causative organism (bacteria, virus, fungus, etc.) should be informed by local data on infection trends and susceptibility or resistance ( 7 , 15 , 22 , 23 ). Identify conditions that may require alternative management, such as dengue fever or malaria with fever and severe anemia. Monitor the patient’s response to treatment closely, adjust therapies as needed based on patient response and organ dysfunction and narrow antimicrobial coverage once a definitive organism is identified. 
Fluid resuscitation is a critical component of sepsis management in high-resource settings, where monitoring and adjunctive supportive therapies are available to manage consequences of any excess fluid administration. In LRS, where such supportive measures may not be available, fluid resuscitation should be approached with caution, and alternative strategies may be required ( 24 , 25 ). Specifically, considerations for fluid overload are particularly important in conditions such as acute respiratory distress syndrome, severe anemia/malaria, impaired perfusion in children with fever, severe malnutrition, and dengue fever, and appropriate guidance should be followed ( 26 ). Timely and appropriate administration of supplemental oxygen, where indicated by hypoxia or signs of respiratory distress, can improve tissue oxygenation, support cellular function and mitigate risk of organ dysfunction ( 14 , 27 ). 
Critical Care Without Walls 
Early initiation and critical care management across the continuum of care should be provided, with appropriate monitoring/technology based on resource availability ( 23 ). A coordinated effort across the entire healthcare continuum, including both hospital-based and pre-hospital care providers, is important. While much expertise resides within hospitals, collaboration with community healthcare workers, EMS, and clinics/referral centers is crucial to ensuring seamless care from the community to the hospital setting. Interdisciplinary providers should work together to accomplish a Sepsis Chain of Survival. 
Care may need to be provided in a variety of settings, based on need and resources. The ICU “without walls” concept allows for flexibility and provision of the highest-quality care possible ( 28 ). It denotes provision of time-critical interventions using available resources in any healthcare setting even when ICU is not available. Patients exhibiting signs of worsening sepsis or septic shock require prompt transfer to a critical care capable environment, to facilitate aggressive resuscitation, close monitoring, and delivery of specialized care ( 29 ). Vital signs, laboratory values, and organ function should be monitored closely. Organ support measures, including mechanical ventilation, vasopressor administration, blood products, and renal replacement therapy, should be considered in the context of the patient’s clinical status and resource considerations. 
Post-Sepsis Care and Return to Community 
Post-sepsis care focuses on supporting survivors’ recovery and reintegration into the community. Key interventions include screening for economic and social challenges that may hinder recovery, providing written and verbal sepsis education to empower patients and caregivers, and referring survivors to peer support groups and psychosocial resources. These measures address the physical, cognitive, and emotional consequences of sepsis, including post-intensive care syndrome (PICS), and align with the recommendations of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign 2021 guidelines ( 15 ). Sepsis survivors are at risk for PICS, a condition that encompasses a range of physical, cognitive, and emotional difficulties. PICS can manifest as physical limitations, such as muscle weakness and fatigue, cognitive impairments including memory and attention deficits, and emotional challenges like anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder. Physical limitations associated with PICS often include persistent muscle weakness, joint stiffness, and chronic pain, which can significantly impact a patient’s ability to perform daily activities and reduce their overall quality of life ( 30 , 31 ). Rehabilitation strategies aimed to improve physical function are essential components of post-sepsis care. Early mobility may have potential benefits in sepsis recovery; however, current evidence is mixed ( 30 , 31 ). Post-sepsis care and follow-up are crucial for survivors and their families. Comprehensive post-sepsis care includes proper nutrition, physical rehabilitation, psychologic support, and management of sequelae such as post-sepsis syndrome (persistent physical symptoms or psychologic challenges). Clinics that focus on the post-hospital needs of patients who have been critically ill can facilitate recovery ( 32 , 33 ). Primary healthcare providers should be familiar with the needs of a post-ICU patient and tailor the frequency and nature of visits to the patient/family needs and available resources. Healthcare personnel and family members should monitor for complications such as recurrence of infection, organ dysfunction, or physiologic sequelae and be empowered to actively aid in recovery. Knowledgeable family members and caregivers can be important advocates for community-based education on recognizing and managing sepsis in the community. Critically ill patients who have been in the ICU may have psychologic problems such as mood changes, difficulty sleeping, altered cognition, and anxiety/depression as a part of the post-ICU syndrome. Recognition, counseling, and psychologic support are needed for patients and families or caregivers. This support helps in coping with the emotional and psychologic effects of the situation, reduces stress, and promotes overall well-being. Activities could include debriefing sessions, access to mental health resources, and ongoing support, as needed, but should be contextualized to the system, the individual, and the resources. 
CALL TO ACTION 
The Sepsis Chain of Survival provides a structured framework that simplifies and organizes existing best practices into a cohesive and actionable interdependent interventions ( 8 , 15 ). This framework is designed to be implemented across the continuum of care, encompassing both community and in-hospital locations. The steps are not necessarily linear and do not have to be implemented in sequence, but all steps should be considered in a systematic approach to management of patients with sepsis. It emphasizes the importance of engaging both healthcare systems and communities in the early recognition and effective management of sepsis. The Sepsis Chain of Survival is a “call to action” for healthcare systems worldwide to adopt an integrated, systematic approach to sepsis management for patients of all ages, contextualized at the local level. Promotion of community and healthcare provider awareness and action promotes response to the challenge of treating life-threatening sepsis. The concept of the Sepsis Chain of Survival highlights the necessity of a cohesive and coordinated effort, encouraging optimization of each link, highlighting interdependence of the steps necessary to improve survival and patient/family quality of life outcomes across resource variable settings. 
The implementation of a Sepsis Chain of Survival requires a coordinated effort across diverse community and healthcare settings. The following actions are identified: 
Public Awareness Campaigns: Increase public awareness about what sepsis is, and the importance of early recognition and prompt medical attention. 
Healthcare Provider Training: Enhance training programs for healthcare providers and emergency responders on the early recognition and context-specific management of sepsis. 
Standardized Protocols: Establish standardized, context-appropriate protocols for sepsis management that include prediction, prevention, early recognition, and comprehensive coordinated and team-based care. 
Resource Allocation: Ensure necessary tools and support are provided to implement the Sepsis Chain of Survival effectively across resource variable settings. 
Health Systems Strengthening: In LRS, the availability of essential treatments such as antibiotics, fluids, and oxygen is important. 
Continuous Audit, Monitoring, and Evaluation: Regularly monitor and evaluate the implementation of the Sepsis Chain of Survival to identify areas for improvement and ensure optimal patient outcomes. 
By integrated actions in a Sepsis Chain of Survival, patient survival and recovery can be enhanced, ultimately improving outcomes for sepsis patients globally. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The Sepsis Chain of Survival concept represents a comprehensive and systematic approach to improve outcomes for patients with suspected sepsis, recognizing that timely and coordinated interventions are crucial to manage this life-threatening condition. By extending and contextualizing the well-established principles of the Sudden Cardiac Arrest Chain of Survival model to sepsis management, patient survival and recovery can be enhanced across diverse and global settings, and it can be adapted based on resource availability. Sepsis Chain of Survival does not aim to replace advanced sepsis care but to complement it by establishing a foundation of care that is accessible, actionable, and adaptable. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Robust coordination and governance of sepsis programs should incorporate key components such as the Sepsis Chain of Survival. Alignment with international consensus on adult and pediatric sepsis definitions and guidelines, and adapting to various resource contexts, is desirable ( 7 , 8 , 34 ). Improving resuscitation systems, provider training, and fostering a culture of excellence among healthcare professionals is crucial. Emerging technology such as low bandwidth telecommunication, telemedicine, artificial intelligence, detection, and novel diagnostic and treatment tools hold much anticipated promise to enhance sepsis outcomes ( 35 ). 
Continued education, community involvement, and a holistic approach will enhance patient outcomes worldwide. Several international initiatives have been developed to improve the standardization and implementation of best practices in sepsis care. For example, the WHO’s Emergency Care Systems framework aims to strengthen emergency care in resource-limited settings. Engagement of funders, Ministries of Health, and the WHO is vital for the successful establishment of sepsis as the tracer disease for tracking and reporting system responses to life-threatening diseases. This coordinated effort ensures a comprehensive and robust response to sepsis and other critical health threats ( 36 ). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank the Society of Critical Care Medicine, Surviving Sepsis Campaign in Low-Resource Setting Task Force for their contribution to the project and Ms. Hariyali Patel, MHA, from the Society of Critical Care Medicine, for her project administration support. 
Footnotes 
Supported by a grant from the Laerdal Foundation. 
Dr. Hidalgo received support for article research from the Laerdal Foundation. Dr. Kumar’s institution received funding from the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Dr. Myatra is a member of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines committee. Drs. Kumar’s and Nadkarni’s institutions received funding from the Laerdal Foundation. Dr. Jacob’s institution received funding from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research, the U.K. National Institute for Health and Care Research, and the U.K. Medical Research Council; they disclosed that they are a Board and Executive Member of the Global Sepsis Alliance and African Sepsis Alliance and a member of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines development committee. Dr. Kortz’s institution received funding from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (award number K23AI144029). Dr. Jacobi received funding from the Visante Pharmacy Consulting; she disclosed that she was on the Pfizer Hospital Products Division Advisory Board. Dr. Nadkarni’s institution received funding from the NIH, the U.S. Department of Defense, the Agency for Healthcare Quality and Safety, the Zoll Medical, and the American Heart Association; he received funding from the Society of Critical Care Medicine; and he received support for article research from the NIH. Dr. Madden received funding from Elsevier, the American College of Critical Care Medicine Board of Regents, the National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners, and the AACN National Teaching Institute. The remaining authors have disclosed that they do not have any potential conflicts of interest. 
This article has an accompanying editorial. 
Contributor Information 
Vishakha K. Kumar, Email: vkumar@sccm.org. 
Samuel O. Akech, Email: sakech@gmail.com. 
Sheila N. Myatra, Email: sheila150@hotmail.com. 
Shevin T. Jacob, Email: shevin.jacob@lstmed.ac.uk. 
Teresa Kortz, Email: teresa.kortz@ucsf.edu. 
Amanda A. Vasquez, Email: amandav101@gmail.com. 
Maria Cristina Jiménez Bazzano, Email: mcjbazzano@gmail.com. 
Marilia Diaz, Email: mari_ivette@hotmail.com. 
Jennifer Del Rio Rodríguez, Email: linkjeny@hotmail.com. 
Rocio Giron, Email: Rosciogiron2012@gmail.com. 
Judith Jacobi, Email: jjmowry426@gmail.com. 
Vinay Nadkarni, Email: nadkarni@chop.edu. 
REFERENCES 
1. Newman M: Chain of survival concept takes hold.
J Emerg Med Serv. 1989; 14:11–13 [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Cummins RO, Ornato JP, Thies WH, et al. : Improving survival from sudden cardiac arrest: The “chain of survival” concept. A statement for health professionals from the Advanced Cardiac Life Support Subcommittee and the Emergency Cardiac Care Committee, American Heart Association.
Circulation. 1991; 83:1832–1847
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Newman M: The chain of survival: Converting a nation.
Curr Emerg Cardiac Care. 1990; 1:3 [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Field JM, Hazinski MF, Sayre MR, et al. : Part 1: Executive summary: 2010 American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care.
Circulation. 2010; 122(18 Suppl 3):S640–S656
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. Newman M: The chain of survival revisited. The emergence of early recognition as the unsung vital link.
JEMS. 1998; 23:46–50, 52, 54–56 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Sawyer KN, Camp-Rogers TR, Kotini-Shah P, et al. ; American Heart Association Emergency Cardiovascular Care Committee; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Genomic and Precision Medicine; Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; and Stroke Council: Sudden cardiac arrest survivorship: A scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2020; 141:e654–e685
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. : The third international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3).
JAMA. 2016; 315:801–810
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Weiss SL, Peters MJ, Alhazzani W, et al. : Surviving sepsis campaign international guidelines for the management of septic shock and sepsis-associated organ dysfunction in children.
Intensive Care Med. 2020; 46(Suppl 1):10–67
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. Jouffroy R, Djossou F, Neviere R, et al. : The chain of survival and rehabilitation for sepsis: Concepts and proposals for healthcare trajectory optimization.
Ann Intensive Care. 2024; 14:58.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care: Epidemiology of Sepsis in Australian Public Hospitals.
2020. Available at: https://www.readkong.com/page/epidemiology-of-sepsis-in-australian-public-hospitals-1107722 . Accessed June 19, 2024 [ Google Scholar ] 
11. American Heart Association: Out-of-hospital Chain of Survival. Available at: https://cpr.heart.org/en/resources/cpr-facts-and-stats/out-of-hospital-chain-of-survival . Accessed July 7, 2025 
12. European Resuscitation Council: Part 12: From science to survival. Strengthening the chain of survival in every community.
Resuscitation. 2000; 46:417–430
[ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. Bose SN, Greenstein JL, Fackler JC, et al. : Early prediction of multiple organ dysfunction in the pediatric intensive care unit.
Front Pediatr. 2021; 9:711104.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. McMichael C: Water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) in schools in low-income countries: A review of evidence of impact.
Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019; 16:359.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al. : Surviving sepsis campaign: International guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock 2021.
Intensive Care Med. 2021; 47:1181–1247
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. World Health Organization: Pocket Book of Hospital Care for Children: Guidelines for the Management of Common Illnesses With Limited Resources.
2013. Available at: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241548373 . Accessed June 19, 2024 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. World Health Organization: Emergency Triage Assessment and Treatment (ETAT) Course.
2005. Available at: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9241546875 . Accessed June 19, 2024 [ Google Scholar ] 
18. Nemati S, Holder A, Razmi F, et al. : An interpretable machine learning model for accurate prediction of sepsis in the ICU.
Crit Care Med. 2018; 46:547–553
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
19. Moor M, Rieck B, Horn M, et al. : Early prediction of sepsis in the ICU using machine learning: A systematic review.
Front Med (Lausanne). 2021; 8:607952.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
20. Seymour CW, Gesten F, Prescott HC, et al. : Time to treatment and mortality during mandated emergency care for sepsis.
N Engl J Med. 2017; 376:2235–2244
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
21. Azevedo LCP, Cavalcanti AB, Lisboa T, et al. : Sepsis is an important healthcare burden in Latin America: A call to action!
Rev Bras Ter Intensiva. 2018; 30:402–404
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
22. Strich JR, Heil EL, Masur H: Considerations for empiric antimicrobial therapy in sepsis and septic shock in an era of antimicrobial resistance.
J Infect Dis. 2020; 222(Suppl 2):S119–S131
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
23. Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al. ; Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines Committee including The Pediatric Subgroup: Surviving sepsis campaign: International guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock, 2012.
Intensive Care Med. 2013; 39:165–228
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
24. Maitland K, Kiguli S, Opoka RO, et al. ; FEAST Trial Group: Mortality after fluid bolus in African children with severe infection.
N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:2483–2495
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
25. Myburgh JA, Mythen MG: Resuscitation fluids.
N Engl J Med. 2013; 369:1243–1251
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
26. Maitland K, George EC, Evans JA, et al. ; FEAST trial group: Exploring mechanisms of excess mortality with early fluid resuscitation: Insights from the FEAST trial.
BMC Med. 2013; 11:68.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
27. Siemieniuk RAC, Chu DK, Kim LH, et al. : Oxygen therapy for acutely ill medical patients: A clinical practice guideline.
BMJ. 2018; 363:k4169.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
28. Halpern NA, Pastores SM: Critical care medicine in the United States 2000-2005: An analysis of bed numbers, occupancy rates, payer mix, and costs.
Crit Care Med. 2010; 38:65–71
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
29. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al. : Surviving sepsis campaign: International guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock: 2016.
Crit Care Med. 2017; 45:486–552
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
30. Cuello-Garcia CA, Mai SHC, Simpson R, et al. : Early mobilization in critically ill children: A systematic review.
J Pediatr. 2018; 203:25–33.e6
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
31. Zhang L, Hu W, Cai Z, et al. : Early mobilization of critically ill patients in the intensive care unit: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
PLoS One. 2019; 14:e0223185.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
32. Danesh V, Boehm LM, Eaton TL, et al. : Characteristics of post-ICU and post-COVID recovery clinics in 29 U.S. health systems.
Crit Care Explor. 2022; 4:e0658.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
33. Flores L, Barber A, Korona RB, et al. : Post-ICU clinic.
CHEST Crit Care. 2024; 2:100036 [ Google Scholar ] 
34. Schlapbach LJ, Watson RS, Sorce LR, et al. ; Society of Critical Care Medicine Pediatric Sepsis Definition Task Force: International consensus criteria for pediatric sepsis and septic shock.
JAMA. 2024; 331:665–674
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
35. Desautels T, Calvert J, Hoffman J, et al. : Prediction of sepsis in the intensive care unit with minimal electronic health record data: A machine learning approach.
JMIR Med Inform. 2016; 4:e28.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
36. World Health Organization: Improving the Prevention, Diagnosis and Clinical Management of Sepsis.
2020. Available at: https://www.who.int/activities/improving-the-prevention-diagnosis-and-clinical-management-of-sepsis . Accessed June 19, 2024 [ Google Scholar ] 
Articles from Critical Care Medicine are provided here courtesy of Wolters Kluwer Health 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (853.1 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
