Joint SCCM-ELSO Task Force Position Paper on the Role of the Intensivist in the Initiation and Management of Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Crit Care Med 
. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2021 Jun 1. 
Published in final edited form as: Crit Care Med. 2020 Jun;48(6):838–846. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000004330 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Joint SCCM-ELSO Task Force Position Paper on the Role of the Intensivist in the Initiation and Management of Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation 
Jeffrey DellaVolpe 
Jeffrey DellaVolpe , MD, MPH 
1 Methodist Hospital, San Antonio, Texas, USA 
Find articles by Jeffrey DellaVolpe 
1 , Ryan P Barbaro 
Ryan P Barbaro , MD, MS 
2 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 
Find articles by Ryan P Barbaro 
2 , Jeremy W Cannon 
Jeremy W Cannon , MD 
3 Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 
Find articles by Jeremy W Cannon 
3 , Eddy Fan 
Eddy Fan , MD, PhD 
4 University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Find articles by Eddy Fan 
4 , Wendy R Greene 
Wendy R Greene , MD, FACS, FCCM 
5 Emory University Healthcare, Atlanta, Georgia, USA 
Find articles by Wendy R Greene 
5 , Kyle J Gunnerson 
Kyle J Gunnerson , MD, FCCM 
6 University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 
Find articles by Kyle J Gunnerson 
6 , Lena M Napolitano 
Lena M Napolitano , MD, MCCM 
7 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 
Find articles by Lena M Napolitano 
7 , Ace Ovil 
Ace Ovil , MD 
8 Honor Health/John C. Lincoln Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona, USA 
Find articles by Ace Ovil 
8 , Jeremy C Pamplin 
Jeremy C Pamplin , MD, FCCM 
9 Madigan Army Medical Center, Dupont, Washington, USA 
Find articles by Jeremy C Pamplin 
9 , Matthieu Schmidt 
Matthieu Schmidt , MD, PhD 
10 Sorbonne University, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France 
Find articles by Matthieu Schmidt 
10 , Lauren R Sorce 
Lauren R Sorce , RN, MSN, CPNP-AC/PC 
11 Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA 
Find articles by Lauren R Sorce 
11 , Daniel Brodie 
Daniel Brodie , MD 
12 Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons/New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York, USA 
Find articles by Daniel Brodie 
12 
Author information 
Copyright and License information 
1 Methodist Hospital, San Antonio, Texas, USA 
2 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 
3 Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 
4 University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
5 Emory University Healthcare, Atlanta, Georgia, USA 
6 University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 
7 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 
8 Honor Health/John C. Lincoln Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona, USA 
9 Madigan Army Medical Center, Dupont, Washington, USA 
10 Sorbonne University, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France 
11 Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA 
12 Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons/New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York, USA 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC7422732  NIHMSID: NIHMS1612251  PMID: 32282350 
The publisher's version of this article is available at Crit Care Med 
Abstract 
Objective: 
To define the role of the intensivist in the initiation and management of patients on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). 
Design: 
Retrospective review of the literature and expert consensus 
Setting: 
Series of in-person meetings, conference calls, and emails from January 2018 until March 2019. 
Subjects: 
A multidisciplinary, expert Task Force was appointed and assembled by the Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization (ELSO). Experts were identified by their respective societies based on reputation, experience, and contribution to the field. 
Interventions: 
A MEDLINE search was performed and all members of the Task Force reviewed relevant references, summarizing high-quality evidence when available. Consensus was obtained using a modified Delphi process, with agreement determined by voting using the RAND/UCLA scale, with score ranging from 1 to 9. 
Measurements and Main Results: 
The Task Force developed 18 strong and 5 weak recommendations in 5 topic areas of ECMO initiation and management. These recommendations were organized into five areas related to the care of patients on ECMO: patient selection, management, mitigation of complications, coordination of multidisciplinary care, and communication with surrogate decision-makers. A common theme of the recommendations is ECMO is best performed by a multidisciplinary team, which intensivists are positioned to engage and lead. 
Conclusions: 
The role of the intensivist in the care of patients on ECMO continues to evolve and grow, especially when knowledge and familiarity of the issues surrounding ECMO selection, cannulation, and management are applied. 
INTRODUCTION 
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is a form of respiratory or cardiac life support consisting of a vascular access cannula, a blood pump, and an artificial lung, which removes carbon dioxide and adds oxygen [ 1 ]. While ECMO utilization has expanded rapidly since 2009 [ 2 , 3 ], the majority of ECMO centers remain relatively low volume centers with a median of 15 [interquartile range 5-35] cases per year (4). The clinical implication is that intensive care clinicians are increasingly likely to be involved in the critical care of patients supported by ECMO, regardless of whether they are part of a large ECMO program. These patients are medically complex, at risk for complications, and resource intensive. Consequently, the Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) established a task force to advance ECMO education and investigation. 
The SCCM-ELSO Task Force was appointed as a joint collaboration between the SCCM and the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization (ELSO). The charge of the Task Force was to define the role of the intensivist in the initiation and management of patients on ECMO. We accomplished this charge by reviewing published literature and providing consensus statements written for the intensivist and multidisciplinary ECMO team. 
METHODS 
The Task Force organizing committee convened in January 2018 to define the methodology, select the topics for study, and identify experts in the field. Experts were identified by their respective societies based on reputation, experience, and contribution to the field. 
Through a series of emails, conference calls, and in-person discussions, five topics related to the role of the intensivist in the care of adult patients on ECMO were identified. These were the role of the intensivist in patient selection, management, mitigation of complications, coordination of multidisciplinary care, and communication with surrogate decision-makers. Experts were tasked with developing recommendations within each topic area for consideration by the entire Task Force. 
A MEDLINE search was performed and all members of the Task Force reviewed relevant references, summarizing high-quality evidence when available. In the absence of high-quality evidence, Task Force recommendations were made based on the combination of low-quality evidence and consensus expert opinion among the Task Force. Consensus was obtained using a modified Delphi process, with agreement determined by voting using the RAND/UCLA scale, with score ranging from 1 to 9 (9). Each member of the committee had an equal vote with the highest and lowest scores discarded. Strong agreement required all members to agree with the recommendation with a score of 7 or higher. Weak agreement was achieved when one member ranked the recommendation below 7, but the median was at least a 7. When the committee reached strong agreement statements were characterized as Recommend when the committee reached weak agreement statements were characterized as Consider ( Table 1 ). 
Table 1. 
Recommendations by the Joint SCCM-ELSO Task Force 
Strength of recommendation 
The Role of the Intensivist in the Selection and Timing of ECMO Initiation 
Recommend 
The decision to initiate ECMO and the timing of this decision are complex and should involve a multidisciplinary ECMO team. Intensivists should play a central role in the formation of this team and the discussion about patient selection. 
Recommend 
Future research should seek to identify patient criteria that can identify ECMO candidacy and optimal timing for ECMO initiation. 
Recommend 
The decision to withhold ECMO should be made by a multidisciplinary team that includes intensivists. 
Recommend 
The decision to withhold ECMO should be based on an evaluation of the prognosis, assessing whether ECMO will improve or worsen the overall prognosis. 
Recommend 
The multidisciplinary team assessing ECMO candidacy should be aware the factors associated with reduced and improved ECMO survival, consulting with an ECMO expert when possible. 
Recommend 
Patients with respiratory failure should receive optimal mechanical ventilation and prone positioning where appropriate prior to consideration for ECMO. 
Consider 
* ECMO can be considered for patients with ARDS from a reversible etiology who have received optimized care with P:F ratio < 50 mmHg for > 3 hours, P:F ratio < 80 mmHg for > 6 hours with FiO2>80% and PEEP >10, or arterial pH < 7.25 with paCO2 ≥ 60 mmHg for > 6 hours while trying to maintain Pplat < 32 despite a respiratory rate of 35 breaths per minute. 
Recommend 
Patients with severe respiratory failure who are not responding to conventional management should undergo early transfer to a hospital with ECMO capabilities if clinically feasible. 
Recommend 
cECMO can be considered for patients with cardiogenic shock, especially with signs of poor perfusion and failure of medical therapy, transferring to a specialty center capable of both long term and short-term support options when clinically appropriate. 
Consider 
* ECPR requires emergent, time-sensitive deployment of invasive life support; therefore, we recommend centers offering ECPR establish a multidisciplinary ECMO team with explicit guidelines for patient selection, exclusion, and team member notification. Intensivists should play a central role in the formation of these guidelines and the delivery of subsequent intensive care needs. 
The Role of the Intensivist in Cannulation for ECMO 
Recommend 
Many specialists, including intensivists, can successfully perform cannulation for ECMO. For cases where the intensivist does not cannulate, the intensivist should remain involved in the decisions surrounding cannulation such as timing, configuration, and cannula size, all of which can impact ICU management. 
Recommend 
Intensivists performing cannulation should use percutaneous access in lieu of open cannulation techniques. 
Avoiding and Rescuing Patients from ECMO-related Complications 
Recommend 
Intensivists should be familiar with complications specific to ECMO and should participate in developing institution-specific protocols for preventing and managing these complications. 
Recommend 
Ultrasound, radiography, and/or fluoroscopy should be used to aid in the visualization of vessels, wire, and cannula during cannulation. 
Recommend 
Post-cannulation plain radiographs should be obtained to document cannula positioning. 
Consider 
* For bleeding patients on ECMO, the intensivist role is to evaluate if clinically significant bleeding is present, evaluate the patient’s ability to form and maintain clot, evaluate the ECMO circuit’s clot burden, and assimilate the information to decide if anticoagulation should be reduced or held and assess if bleeding will require further medical or procedural interventions. 
Consider 
* Intracranial hemorrhage on ECMO can be life threatening. Potential options for the managing intensivist include holding/decreasing anticoagulation, evaluation for ECMO discontinuation, serial neurological examination, neuroimaging, and neurosurgical evaluation as appropriate. 
Consider 
* The decision to perform any procedure on patients supported by ECMO should be carefully weighed against the risk of hemorrhage, and performed by clinicians with significant expertise after a plan has been developed for how anticoagulation will be adjusted. 
Recommend 
Hospitals should have a ready and rapidly deployable plan for replacing failed ECMO equipment, as well as a protocol for monitoring equipment in order to diminish the risk of failure. 
Recommend 
Intensive evaluation of the distal extremity is necessary with arterial cannulation with attention to any signs of ischemic injury which can be limb threatening. 
Recommend 
Intensivists should be aware of the clinical manifestations of left ventricular distension and develop clinical thresholds and strategies for decompressing the left ventricle. 
Leading a Multidisciplinary Team 
Recommend 
The establishment of a multidisciplinary care team responsible for daily rounds to provide continuity of care, surveillance of quality metrics, and a mechanism to perform case review at regular intervals is essential. 
Surrogate Decision-Maker Communication 
Recommend 
Established processes should exist for ensuring family-centered communication. Other team members involved in surrogate communications (e.g., palliative care, case management) should be familiar with the unique challenges related to the care of patients receiving ECMO. 
Open in a new tab 
ECMO extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; ARDS acute respiratory distress syndrome; PEEP positive end expiratory pressure; Pplat plateau pressure; cECMO cardiac extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; ECPR extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation; ICU intensive care unit. 
Recommend corresponds to strong agreement 
* 
Consider corresponds to weak agreement 
For the purposes of this Task Force an intensivist is a practitioner who is eligible to sit for critical care medicine boards. 
RESULTS 
The 5 topics identified by the SCCM-ELSO Task Force are as follows, with recommendations as appropriate ( Table 1 ). 
Topic 1. The Role of the Intensivist in the Selection and Timing of ECMO Initiation 
ECMO is neither a definitive treatment nor a destination therapy. ECMO can be deployed as a bridge to recovery, transplant, or destination therapy with mechanical circulatory support (MCS) [ 4 – 7 ]. Decisions regarding ECMO initiation are best made by a combination of an experienced multidisciplinary team and existing center guidelines [ 7 – 10 ]. Due to the many facets of involved in the care of patients on ECMO, a multidisciplinary team consisting of institutional key stakeholders is essential. This team may include intensivists, emergency medicine, anesthesiologists, cardiologists, surgeons, ECMO specialists, pharmacists, nursing, respiratory therapy, rehabilitation team, and palliative care. In emergent situations or circumstances where the entire multidisciplinary team cannot be assembled in an efficient manner, there is value in assembling key personnel. 
The timing of ECMO initiation is also complex. ECMO carries substantial risk of complications and uses significant resources [ 2 , 11 ], but delaying ECMO may risk progressive organ injury and increased risk of mortality [ 12 ]. 
Recommendation: 
The decision to initiate ECMO and the timing of this decision are complex and should involve a multidisciplinary ECMO team. Intensivists should play a central role in the formation of this team and the discussion about patient selection. 
Recommendation: 
Future research should seek to identify patient criteria that can identify ECMO candidacy and optimal timing for ECMO initiation. 
1.1. Contraindications for ECMO Support. 
There are no universally accepted contraindications to ECMO support and we did not achieve consensus on specific contraindications. The American Heart Association, the International ECMO Network and an international group of experts each considered ECMO contraindications [ 7 – 9 ]. ELSO Guidelines have also identified relative contraindications such as end stage malignancy and unrecoverable CNS damage as well as conditions associated with a poor overall prognosis such as prolonged mechanical ventilation time and prolonged CPR without adequate tissue perfusion. These expert panels suggested that experienced multidisciplinary teams evaluate ECMO candidacy. Patients with chronic organ failure who are not candidates for transplant or a long-term device may be poor candidates for ECMO support. 
Recommendation: 
The decision to withhold ECMO should be made by a multidisciplinary team that includes intensivists. 
Recommendation: 
The decision to withhold ECMO should be based on an evaluation of the prognosis, assessing whether ECMO will improve or worsen the overall prognosis. 
1.2. ECMO Outcomes and Risk Factors. 
Hospital mortality for patients receiving ECMO support is approximately 40% for respiratory ECMO (rECMO), 60% for cardiac ECMO (cECMO) and 70% for extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) [ 2 , 12 – 15 ]. The mortality burden has motivated researchers to identify risk factors and prognostic scores that stratify risk within specific patient populations [ 16 – 24 ]. 
Recommendation: 
The multidisciplinary team assessing ECMO candidacy should be aware the factors associated with reduced and improved ECMO survival, consulting with an ECMO expert when possible. 
1.3. Patient Selection and Timing for rECMO Support 
Bridge to recovery. 
Two randomized trials have evaluated the role of ECMO as a bridge to recovery in acute respiratory failure (14, 15). The inclusion criteria of both trials are summarized in Table 2 . The CESAR trial randomized patients with acute respiratory failure to be transferred to an ECMO center for consideration of ECMO or to remain at a conventional treatment center, with the primary outcome of death or severe disability at 6 months. At 6 months, 33 of 90 (37%) patients cared for at an ECMO capable hospital and 46 of 87 (53%) patients cared for at a non-ECMO capable hospital died or had severe disability (relative risk [RR] 0.69; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.05-0.97) [ 13 ]. Of note, the trial was not a comparison of ECMO versus no ECMO, with 22 of 90 (24%) patients randomized to transfer to an ECMO center not receiving ECMO. Also, adherence to standard of care lung-protective ventilation was lower at the non-ECMO capable centers [ 25 ]. 
Table 2. 
Entry criteria for EOLIA and CESAR trials. 
Entry Criteria 
EOLIA 
CESAR 
Severity of lung disease 
ARDS + one of the following: 
1. Hypoxemia despite optimization of mechanical ventilation (Vt set at 6 ml/kg and trial of PEEP ≥ 10 cm H2O) and adjunctive therapies (NO, recruitment maneuvers, prone position, HFO ventilation, almitrine infusion) 
a. P/F < 50 mm Hg with FiO2 ≥ 80% for > 3 hours 
or 
b. P/F < 80 mm Hg with FiO2 ≥ 80% for > 6 hours 
Uncompensated hypercapnia pH < 7.25 with PaCO2 ≥60 mm Hg for > 6 hours despite increasing the respiratory rate increased to 35 breaths per minute while maintain plateau pressure ≤ 32 cm H 2 O (first by reducing tidal volume by steps of 1 mL/kg to 4 mL/kg, and second by PEEP reduction to a minimum of 8 cm H 2 O) 
Acute Respiratory Failure + one of the following: 
1. Murray Score ≥ 3 and FiO 2 100% despite optimum conventional treatment. 
The Murray score is the sum of a-d. 
a. CXR : 0.25 points for each quadrant of CXR consolidation 
b. P/F : 0.25 points if P/F is 225-299; 0.5 points if P/F is 175-224; 0.75 points if PF is 100-174; 1 point if PF is < 100 
c. PEEP : 0.25 points if PEEP is 6-8; 0.5 points if PEEP is 9-11; 0.75 points if PEEP is 12-14; 1 point if PEEP is ≥15 
d. Compliance (tidal volume/ driving pressure): 0.25 points if compliance is 60-79; 0.5 points if compliance is 40-59; 0.75 points if compliance is 20-39; 1 point if compliance is ≤ 19 
2. Acidosis: pH <7.2 
Duration of Mechanical Ventilation 
Receipt of mechanical ventilation for <7 days 
Peak Inspiratory Pressure > 30 cm H2O or FiO2 > 80% for more than 7 days 
Age 
≥18 
18-65 
Exclusions 
Pregnancy; 
BMI > 45; 
Long term ventilatory insufficiency; 
Cardiac failure resulting in VA ECMO; 
HIT; 
Cancer with life expectancy < 5 years; 
Coma after cardiac arrest not due to medications; 
Moribund (SAPS > 90); 
unable to obtain vascular access for ECMO 
Intracranial hemorrhage; 
Contraindication to heparinization; 
Contraindication to continued therapy 
Open in a new tab 
Abbreviations : BMI body mass index; CXR chest x-ray; HFO high frequency oscillation; HIT heparin induced thrombocytopenia; NO nitric oxide; P:F ratio of partial pressure of arterial oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen; PEEP positive end expiratory pressure; SAPS simplified acute physiology score; Vt tidal volume 
The EOLIA trial randomized adults with severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) who had been intubated for < 7 days to receive ECMO or conventional ARDS management. The trial design ensured optimized low-volume, low-pressure ventilation with moderate positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) and strongly encouraged the use of neuromuscular blockade and prone positioning. At 60 days, 44 of 124 (35%) ECMO patients and 57 of 125 (46%) patients in the control group died [RR 0.76; 95% CI 0.55-1.04]. Importantly, crossover to ECMO was allowed for pre-defined refractory hypoxemia, occurring in 35 of 125 (28%) patients. A post-hoc Bayesian analysis of EOLIA as well as a recent meta-analysis demonstrated a high likelihood of mortality benefit from ECMO in this setting [ 26 , 27 ]. 
While specific recommendations for ECMO initiation are made based on available evidence, the ultimate decision to initiate ECMO is a clinical decision and should be weighed in the context of all available clinical data. 
Recommendation: 
Patients with respiratory failure should receive optimal mechanical ventilation and prone positioning where appropriate prior to consideration for ECMO. 
Recommendation: 
ECMO can be considered for patients with ARDS from a reversible etiology who have received optimized care with P:F ratio < 50 mmHg for > 3 hours, P:F ratio < 80 mmHg for > 6 hours with FiO2>80% and PEEP >10, or arterial pH < 7.25 with paCO2 ≥ 60 mmHg for > 6 hours while trying to maintain Pplat < 32 despite a respiratory rate of 35 breaths per minute. 
Recommendation: 
Patients with severe respiratory failure who are not responding to conventional management should undergo early transfer to a hospital with ECMO capabilities if clinically feasible. 
Bridge to transplant: 
In select cases clinicians have elected to use ECMO as a bridge to lung transplant. rECMO in this context is used to facilitate reduced sedation, reduced ventilator support and to promote participation in rehabilitation and ambulation in the pre-transplant period [ 5 , 28 , 29 ]. The evidence is limited to observational cohort studies or expert opinion. 
1.4. Patient Selection and Timing for Cardiac ECMO (cECMO) Support 
Bridge to Recovery: 
cECMO uses a venoarterial configuration primarily to support heart failure and cardiogenic shock [ 1 ]. cECMO as a bridge to recovery is initiated for reversible conditions, such as acute myocardial infarction, refractory ventricular arrhythmias, pulmonary embolism, acute myocarditis, or post-cardiotomy shock [ 8 ]. The decision to initiate cECMO should include evaluation of the benefits and risks of the other modes of MCS (6). 
Recommendation: 
cECMO can be considered for patients with cardiogenic shock, especially with signs of poor perfusion and failure of medical therapy, transferring to a specialty center capable of both long term and short-term support options when clinically appropriate. 
Bridge to transplant or mechanical circulatory support: 
cECMO provides a rapidly deployable cardiopulmonary support option that can provide a bridge to a temporary MCS device, heart transplant, or long-term ventricular assist device. cECMO may be advantageous to alternative MCS strategies in biventricular failure, cardiac arrest, or combined cardiopulmonary failure. 
Extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR): 
ECPR is emergently deployed venoarterial ECMO for circulatory support in a patient who has failed to achieve sustained return of spontaneous circulation with conventional cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) [ 1 ]. Although trials are ongoing, there are currently no randomized controlled trials that address the efficacy of ECPR. Data from observational studies and entry criteria for ongoing trials suggests that patients with younger age, shockable rhythms, reversible etiologies of arrest, witnessed arrests with bystander CPR, and shorter transition times to definitive care are more like to be considered candidates for ECPR [ 9 , 30 ]. 
Recommendation: 
ECPR requires emergent, time-sensitive deployment of invasive life support; therefore, we recommend centers offering ECPR establish a multidisciplinary ECMO team with explicit guidelines for patient selection, exclusion, and team member notification. Intensivists should play a central role in the formation of these guidelines and the delivery of subsequent intensive care needs. 
Topic 2. The Role of the Intensivist in Cannulation for ECMO 
Variation exists in the type of clinicians performing cannulation for ECMO. Cardiothoracic surgeons, general surgeons, vascular surgeons, interventional cardiologists, interventional radiologists, emergency medicine physicians, and intensivists have reported effective and safe cannulation for ECMO [ 31 – 33 ]. Physicians should practice within their trained skill set and be prepared for life-threatening complications can occur during cannulation. Consequently, there must be a plan to address complications including identifying surgical support for intrathoracic surgical emergencies [ 8 , 34 ]. 
Regardless of who performs cannulation, intensivists should be involved in decision-making surrounding cannulation, which will ultimately impact the long-term intensive care unit (ICU) management of these patients. These decisions include ECMO configuration and anatomic cannulation site selection, access approach strategy, cannula size, the use of distal perfusion catheters, and ventricular venting strategy. At times intensivist involvement may not be possible because ECMO cannulations will occur emergently in the operating room, catheterization suite, or emergency department. 
Recommendation: 
Many specialists, including intensivists, can successfully perform cannulation for ECMO. For cases where the intensivist does not cannulate, the intensivist should remain involved in the decisions surrounding cannulation such as timing, configuration, and cannula size, all of which can impact ICU management. 
Recommendation: 
Intensivists performing cannulation should use percutaneous access in lieu of open cannulation techniques. 
2.1. Cannulation Decisions Related to rECMO 
In rECMO there are two types of cannulas: single- and dual-lumen cannulas. Single-lumen cannulas require a minimum of two cannulation sites, while dual-lumen cannulas allow for drainage and return of blood from a single site. Relative to dual-lumen cannulas, single-lumen cannulas can be easier to place, but two-site cannulation has the potential for more recirculation than single-site cannulation [ 35 , 36 ]. 
2.2. Cannulation Decisions Related to cECMO 
cECMO may be initiated with central cannulation through a sternotomy site (e.g. when there is an inability to wean from cardiopulmonary bypass) or peripheral cannulation of an artery and vein, usually via the femoral vasculature. Peripheral cannulation for cECMO places the ipsilateral lower extremity at risk for ischemic injury (see cannula-related complications section below). 
Section 3. Avoiding and Rescuing Patients from ECMO-related Complications 
Adults receiving ECMO are at risk for patient and mechanical complications (see Table 3 ) [ 2 ]. A role of the intensivist is to attempt to avoid complications when possible, monitor for complications, and manage those complications that occur. 
Table 3. 
Adverse events during ECMO among adults from 2013-2017, by indication 
Respiratory n=11,507 
Cardiac n=11,920 
Patient Complications 
Surgical Site Hemorrhage 
808 (7.0) 
1,886 (15.8) 
Pulmonary Hemorrhage 
493 (4.3) 
297 (2.5) 
Intracranial Hemorrhage 
389 (3.4) 
243 (2.0) 
Central Nervous System Infarction 
212 (1.8) 
441 (3.7) 
Seizure EEG confirmed 
46 (0.4) 
71 (0.6) 
CPR Required 
446 (3.9) 
348 (2.9) 
Cardiac Tamponade due to blood 
111 (1.0) 
496 (4.2) 
Limb Amputation 
28 (0.2) 
68 (0.6) 
Mechanical Complications 
Pump malfunction 
116 (1.0) 
72 (0.6) 
Oxygenator failure 
697 (6.1) 
339 (2.8) 
Cannula malfunction 
590 (5.1) 
407 (3.4) 
Open in a new tab 
Recommendation: 
Intensivists should be familiar with complications specific to ECMO and should participate in developing institution-specific protocols for preventing and managing these complications. 
3.1. Cannulation-related Complications 
There is variability in the tools utilized to visualize the wire and cannula in the vessels during ECMO cannulation – including ultrasound, echocardiography, radiography, and fluoroscopy [ 37 ]. These adjunctive modalities can minimize damage to underlying structures, bleeding, and improper cannula placement [ 38 , 39 ]. 
Recommendation: 
Ultrasound, radiography, and/or fluoroscopy should be used to aid in the visualization of vessels, wire, and cannula during cannulation. 
Recommendation: 
Post-cannulation plain radiographs should be obtained to confirm cannula positioning. 
3.2. Extremity Ischemia and Venous Thrombosis 
Arterial cannulation places the cannulated limb at risk of ischemic injury by obstructing distal arterial blood flow, and untreated ischemia can lead to compartment syndromes or amputation ( Table 3 ). The decision to perform arterial ECMO cannulation should be accompanied by a plan to ensure adequate circulation and monitoring of circulation to the distal extremity. Options include end-to-end side graft to the femoral artery, selection of a smaller arterial cannula, or addition of a distal reperfusion cannula, [ 40 – 43 ]. Intensive neurovascular evaluation of the distal extremity is required. Following removal of venous cannulae, deep venous thromboses can be common. 
Recommendation: 
Intensive evaluation of the distal extremity is necessary with arterial ECMO cannulation, with particular attention to any signs of ischemic injury which can be limb threatening. 
3.3. Increased Left Ventricular Afterload 
cECMO cannulation can be associated with increased left ventricular (LV) distension, particularly in the case of peripheral cECMO, due to retrograde arterial blood flow and increased LV afterload. In the setting of poor LV function, this can lead to LV distension, pulmonary edema, or pulmonary hemorrhage. LV decompression can be considered via a surgically placed left atrial or LV vent, catheter-based septostomy, or peripherally inserted axial flow pump [ 44 , 45 ]. 
Recommendation: 
Intensivists should be aware of the clinical manifestations of left ventricular distension and develop clinical thresholds and strategies for decompressing the left ventricle. 
3.4. Bleeding 
Bleeding is one of the most common complications associated with ECMO ( Table 3 ). A critical role of the intensivist is to manage bleeding risk, monitor for bleeding complications and respond to bleeding complications. Intracranial hemorrhage can come to clinical recognition incidentally or overtly, but in either case requires timely evaluation and response [ 46 , 47 ]. Intracranial hemorrhage can lead to fatal herniation and brain death. Giani et al provide Guidance on brain death evaluation among ECMO supported patients [ 48 ]. 
Recommendation: 
For bleeding patients on ECMO, the intensivist role is to evaluate if clinically significant bleeding is present, evaluate the patient’s ability to form and maintain clot, evaluate the ECMO circuit’s clot burden, and assimilate the information to decide if anticoagulation should be reduced or held and assess if bleeding will require further medical or procedural interventions. 
Recommendation: 
Intracranial hemorrhage on ECMO can be life threatening. Potential options for the managing intensivist include holding/decreasing anticoagulation, evaluation for ECMO discontinuation, serial neurological examination, neuroimaging, and neurosurgical evaluation as appropriate. 
There are no consensus recommendations for the optimal anticoagulation strategies, anticoagulation monitoring, or strategies to avoid hemorrhagic complications during ECMO support [ 49 ]. Potential targets for anticoagulation include activated clotting time, partial thromboplastin time, anti-Xa levels, or thromboelastogram values. 
Bleeding can be a complication of procedures performed during ECMO (48). While procedures commonly performed in the ICU (e.g., tracheostomy or tube thoracostomy) are often well tolerated, they may lead to life-threatening hemorrhage in patients receiving ECMO. 
Recommendation: 
The decision to perform any procedure on patients supported by ECMO should be carefully weighed against the risk of hemorrhage, and performed by clinicians with significant expertise after a plan has been developed for how anticoagulation will be adjusted. 
3.5. Thrombosis and Mechanical Failure 
Thrombosis during ECMO is common and can lead to mechanical inefficiency or failure as well as embolic or thrombotic complications to the patient. Severe mechanical thrombosis can require elective or emergent circuitry replacement [ 2 , 50 ]. A plan for rapidly replacing failed equipment is an essential part of the management plan for ECMO patients. 
Recommendation: 
Hospitals should have a ready and rapidly deployable plan for replacing failed ECMO equipment, as well as a protocol for monitoring equipment in order to diminish the risk of failure. 
Topic 4. Leading a Multidisciplinary Team 
Expert consensus recommendations suggest ECMO should be delivered with a formalized multidisciplinary team that encourages communication, invites multidisciplinary perspective, and regularly reviews cases for improvement [ 9 , 10 , 51 , 52 ]. Participants in the ECMO multidisciplinary team may include nurses, physicians, ECMO specialists/perfusionists, nutritionists, pharmacists, respiratory therapists, physical and occupational therapists, hospital administrators, members of the palliative care team, and other key stakeholders at the institution. A process for balancing the expertise of the ECMO multidisciplinary team with the expertise of the remaining critical care team is imperative. The process should address care continuity, emergent decision-making, routine decision-making, and family and team communication. 
In the absence of high quality evidence to guide the care of patients on ECMO, process improvement is an essential part of assessing data and applying it to the care of this specific patient population. Intensivists are in a unique position to lead these multidisciplinary efforts to improve quality of care for patients on ECMO. 
Recommendation: 
The establishment of a multidisciplinary care team responsible for daily rounds to provide continuity of care, surveillance of quality metrics, and a mechanism to perform case review at regular intervals is essential. 
Topic 5: Surrogate Decision-Maker Communication 
When patients are considered for and managed with ECMO, they often lack decision-making capacity [ 12 ], and therefore surrogate decision-makers (SDM) usually partner with the medical team for medical decision-making. Although there is limited evidence regarding family communication in the ECMO population, a trial in critically ill patients found that a family support intervention improved SDM ratings of quality of communication [ 53 ]. We recommend that intensivists have established processes for ensuring effective communication with SDMs. Palliative care physicians, case managers, and ethicists may be helpful partners in facilitating family communications for selected patients requiring ECMO [ 54 , 55 ]. 
Recommendation: 
Established processes should exist for ensuring family-centered communication. Other team members involved in surrogate communications (e.g., palliative care, case management) should be familiar with the unique challenges related to the care of patients receiving ECMO. 
DISCUSSION 
Although complex and resource intensive, ECMO plays an important role in the care of patients with severe cardiac and respiratory failure. The increasing availability and utilization of ECMO underscores the expanding role that intensivists will be expected to play in the management of patients supported by this technology. As with other aspects of critical care, the provision of ECMO is best performed by a multidisciplinary team, which the intensivist is in a unique position to engage, involve, and lead. However, intensivists can only play this role if they are knowledgeable and familiar with ECMO physiology, indications, and complications. This position paper provides 18 strong and 5 weak recommendations in 5 topic areas of ECMO initiation and management. 
There are many essential components of care of patients on ECMO to include anticoagulation, pharmacokinetics, and mechanical ventilation. However, although vital to the daily management of these patients, there is limited evidence demonstrating the superiority of any particular approach. Further efforts will be required to collect and consolidate evidence, garner expert opinion, and develop practice guidelines, in order to properly prepare critical care professionals to manage this complex patient population. 
Footnotes 
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 
Ryan P. Barbaro, MD, MS: Extracorporeal Life Support Organization Steering Committee Member as the ELSO Registry Chair 
Daniel Brodie, MD: ELSO Board of Directors and Steering Committee; Trial Steering Committee, VENT-AVOID trial, ALung Technologies; previously Medical Advisory Board (MAB), ALung Technologies; currently, MAB for Baxter, BREETHE, Hemovent and Novalung 
Jeremy W. Cannon, MD: simulation equipment provided to Penn Medicine Sim Center by PryTime Medical 
Eddy Fan, MD, PhD: personal fees from MC3 Cardiopulmonary and ALung Technologies outside the submitted work; a New Investigator Award from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research; Chair-elect of ATS Critical Care Program Committee 
Lena M. Napolitano, MD, MCCM: American College of Surgeons committee, American Association for Surgery of Trauma Committees, American Board of Surgery Director 
Matthieu Schmidt, MD, PhD: receiving personal fees from Getinge, Xenios and Drager 
Publisher's Disclaimer: DISCLAIMER 
The views expressed are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the official policy or position of the US Army Medical Department, Department of the Army, Department of the Air Force, Department of the Navy, Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. 
Contributor Information 
Jeffrey DellaVolpe, Methodist Hospital, San Antonio, Texas, USA. 
Ryan P. Barbaro, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. 
Jeremy W. Cannon, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. 
Eddy Fan, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
Wendy R. Greene, Emory University Healthcare, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. 
Kyle J. Gunnerson, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. 
Lena M. Napolitano, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. 
Ace Ovil, Honor Health/John C. Lincoln Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona, USA. 
Jeremy C. Pamplin, Madigan Army Medical Center, Dupont, Washington, USA. 
Matthieu Schmidt, Sorbonne University, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France. 
Lauren R. Sorce, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. 
Daniel Brodie, Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons/New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York, USA. 
References 
1. Conrad SA, Broman LM, Taccone FS, Lorusso R, Malfertheiner MV, Pappalardo F, Di Nardo M, Belliato M, Grazioli L, Barbaro RP
et al. : The Extracorporeal Life Support Organization Maastricht Treaty for Nomenclature in Extracorporeal Life Support. A Position Paper of the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2018. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Thiagarajan RR, Barbaro RP, Rycus PT, McMullan DM, Conrad SA, Fortenberry JD, Paden ML, centers Em: Extracorporeal Life Support Organization Registry International Report 2016. ASAIO J
2017, 63(1):60–67. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Sauer CM, Yuh DD, Bonde P: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation use has increased by 433% in adults in the United States from 2006 to 2011. Asaio j
2015, 61(1):31–36. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Brodie D, Bacchetta M: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for ARDS in adults. N Engl J Med
2011, 365(20):1905–1914. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. Fuehner T, Kuehn C, Hadem J, Wiesner O, Gottlieb J, Tudorache I, Olsson KM, Greer M, Sommer W, Welte T
et al. : Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in awake patients as bridge to lung transplantation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2012, 185(7):763–768. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Rousse N, Juthier F, Pincon C, Hysi I, Banfi C, Robin E, Fayad G, Jegou B, Prat A, Vincentelli A: ECMO as a bridge to decision: Recovery, VAD, or heart transplantation?
Int J Cardiol
2015, 187:620–627. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Peura JL, Colvin-Adams M, Francis GS, Grady KL, Hoffman TM, Jessup M, John R, Kiernan MS, Mitchell JE, O’Connell JB
et al. : Recommendations for the use of mechanical circulatory support: device strategies and patient selection: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation
2012, 126(22):2648–2667. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Fan E, Gattinoni L, Combes A, Schmidt M, Peek G, Brodie D, Muller T, Morelli A, Ranieri VM, Pesenti A
et al. : Venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for acute respiratory failure : A clinical review from an international group of experts. Intensive Care Med
2016, 42(5):712–724. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. Abrams D, Garan AR, Abdelbary A, Bacchetta M, Bartlett RH, Beck J, Belohlavek J, Chen YS, Fan E, Ferguson ND
et al. : Position paper for the organization of ECMO programs for cardiac failure in adults. Intensive Care Med
2018. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. Combes A, Brodie D, Bartlett R, Brochard L, Brower R, Conrad S, De Backer D, Fan E, Ferguson N, Fortenberry J
et al. : Position paper for the organization of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation programs for acute respiratory failure in adult patients. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2014, 190(5):488–496. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. Sanaiha Y, Bailey K, Downey P, Seo YJ, Aguayo E, Dobaria V, Shemin RJ, Benharash P: Trends in mortality and resource utilization for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in the United States: 2008–2014. Surgery
2019, 165(2):381–388. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Combes A, Hajage D, Capellier G, Demoule A, Lavoue S, Guervilly C, Da Silva D, Zafrani L, Tirot P, Veber B
et al. : Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation for Severe Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. N Engl J Med
2018, 378(21):1965–1975. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. Peek GJ, Mugford M, Tiruvoipati R, Wilson A, Allen E, Thalanany MM, Hibbert CL, Truesdale A, Clemens F, Cooper N
et al. : Efficacy and economic assessment of conventional ventilatory support versus extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe adult respiratory failure (CESAR): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2009, 374(9698):1351–1363. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. Chen YS, Lin JW, Yu HY, Ko WJ, Jerng JS, Chang WT, Chen WJ, Huang SC, Chi NH, Wang CH
et al. : Cardiopulmonary resuscitation with assisted extracorporeal life-support versus conventional cardiopulmonary resuscitation in adults with in-hospital cardiac arrest: an observational study and propensity analysis. Lancet
2008, 372(9638):554–561. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Chang CH, Chen HC, Caffrey JL, Hsu J, Lin JW, Lai MS, Chen YS: Survival Analysis After Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation in Critically Ill Adults: A Nationwide Cohort Study. Circulation
2016, 133(24):2423–2433. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. Brogan TV, Thiagarajan RR, Rycus PT, Bartlett RH, Bratton SL: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in adults with severe respiratory failure: a multi-center database. Intensive Care Med
2009, 35(12):2105–2114. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. Enger TB, Philipp A, Videm V, Lubnow M, Wahba A, Fischer M, Schmid C, Bein T, Müller T: Prediction of mortality in adult patients with severe acute lung failure receiving veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation: a prospective observational study. Critical Care
2014, 18(2):R67. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
18. Loforte A, Marinelli G, Musumeci F, Folesani G, Pilato E, Martin Suarez S, Montalto A, Lilla Della Monica P, Grigioni F, Frascaroli G
et al. : Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support in refractory cardiogenic shock: treatment strategies and analysis of risk factors. Artif Organs
2014, 38(7):E129–141. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
19. Pappalardo F, Pieri M, Greco T, Patroniti N, Pesenti A, Arcadipane A, Ranieri VM, Gattinoni L, Landoni G, Holzgraefe B
et al. : Predicting mortality risk in patients undergoing venovenous ECMO for ARDS due to influenza A (H1N1) pneumonia: the ECMOnet score. Intensive Care Medicine
2013, 39(2):275–281. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
20. Richardson AS, Schmidt M, Bailey M, Pellegrino VA, Rycus PT, Pilcher DV: ECMO Cardio-Pulmonary Resuscitation (ECPR), trends in survival from an international multicentre cohort study over 12-years. Resuscitation
2017, 112:34–40. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
21. Roch A, Hraiech S, Masson E, Grisoli D, Forel J-M, Boucekine M, Morera P, Guervilly C, Adda M, Dizier S
et al. : Outcome of acute respiratory distress syndrome patients treated with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and brought to a referral center. Intensive Care Medicine
2014, 40(1):74–83. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
22. Schmidt M, Bailey M, Sheldrake J, Hodgson C, Aubron C, Rycus PT, Scheinkestel C, Cooper DJ, Brodie D, Pellegrino V
et al. : Predicting survival after extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe acute respiratory failure. The Respiratory Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation Survival Prediction (RESP) score. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2014, 189(11):1374–1382. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
23. Schmidt M, Burrell A, Roberts L, Bailey M, Sheldrake J, Rycus PT, Hodgson C, Scheinkestel C, Cooper DJ, Thiagarajan RR
et al. : Predicting survival after ECMO for refractory cardiogenic shock: the survival after veno-arterial-ECMO (SAVE)-score. Eur Heart J
2015, 36(33):2246–2256. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
24. Schmidt M, Zogheib E, Rozé H, Repesse X, Lebreton G, Luyt C-E, Trouillet J-L, Bréchot N, Nieszkowska A, Dupont H
et al. : The PRESERVE mortality risk score and analysis of long-term outcomes after extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe acute respiratory distress syndrome. Intensive Care Medicine
2013, 39(10):1704–1713. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
25. Bein T, Graf B, Weber-Carstens S: Ventilatory support versus ECMO for severe adult respiratory failure. Lancet
2010, 375(9714):549–550; author reply 551. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
26. Goligher EC, Tomlinson G, Hajage D, Wijeysundera DN, Fan E, Juni P, Brodie D, Slutsky AS, Combes A: Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation for Severe Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome and Posterior Probability of Mortality Benefit in a Post Hoc Bayesian Analysis of a Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama
2018. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
27. Munshi L, Walkey A, Goligher E, Pham T, Uleryk EM, Fan E: Venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for acute respiratory distress syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Respir Med
2019, 7(2):163–172. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
28. Turner DA, Cheifetz IM, Rehder KJ, Williford WL, Bonadonna D, Banuelos SJ, Peterson-Carmichael S, Lin SS, Davis RD, Zaas D: Active rehabilitation and physical therapy during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation while awaiting lung transplantation: a practical approach. Crit Care Med
2011, 39(12):2593–2598. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
29. Biscotti M, Gannon WD, Agerstrand C, Abrams D, Sonett J, Brodie D, Bacchetta M: Awake Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation as Bridge to Lung Transplantation: A 9-Year Experience. Ann Thorac Surg
2017, 104(2):412–419. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
30. Tonna JE, Johnson NJ, Greenwood J, Gaieski DF, Shinar Z, Bellezo JM, Becker L, Shah AP, Youngquist ST, Mallin MP
et al. : Practice characteristics of Emergency Department extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (eCPR) programs in the United States: The current state of the art of Emergency Department extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ED ECMO). Resuscitation
2016, 107:38–46. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
31. Conrad SA, Grier LR, Scott LK, Green R, Jordan M: Percutaneous cannulation for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation by intensivists: a retrospective single-institution case series. Crit Care Med
2015, 43(5):1010–1015. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
32. Burrell AJ, Pellegrino VA, Sheldrake J, Pilcher DV: Percutaneous Cannulation in Predominantly Venoarterial Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation by Intensivists. Crit Care Med
2015, 43(12):e595. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
33. MacLaren G, Combes A, Bartlett RH: Contemporary extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for adult respiratory failure: life support in the new era. Intensive Care Med
2012, 38(2):210–220. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
34. Danial P, Hajage D, Nguyen LS, Mastroianni C, Demondion P, Schmidt M, Bougle A, Amour J, Leprince P, Combes A
et al. : Percutaneous versus surgical femoro-femoral veno-arterial ECMO: a propensity score matched study. Intensive Care Med
2018, 44(12):2153–2161. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
35. Wang D, Zhou X, Liu X, Sidor B, Lynch J, Zwischenberger JB: Wang-Zwische double lumen cannula-toward a percutaneous and ambulatory paracorporeal artificial lung. Asaio j
2008, 54(6):606–611. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
36. Abrams D, Bacchetta M, Brodie D: Recirculation in venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Asaio j
2015, 61(2):115–121. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
37. Hosmane SR, Barrow T, Ashworth A, Smith E: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation: a radiologists’ guide to who, what and where. Clin Radiol
2015, 70(5):e58–66. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
38. Stulak JM, Dearani JA, Burkhart HM, Barnes RD, Scott PD, Schears GJ: ECMO cannulation controversies and complications. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth
2009, 13(3):176–182. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
39. Hirose H, Yamane K, Marhefka G, Cavarocchi N: Right ventricular rupture and tamponade caused by malposition of the Avalon cannula for venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. J Cardiothorac Surg
2012, 7:36. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
40. Foley PJ, Morris RJ, Woo EY, Acker MA, Wang GJ, Fairman RM, Jackson BM: Limb ischemia during femoral cannulation for cardiopulmonary support. J Vasc Surg
2010, 52(4):850–853. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
41. Lamb KM, DiMuzio PJ, Johnson A, Batista P, Moudgill N, McCullough M, Eisenberg JA, Hirose H, Cavarocchi NC: Arterial protocol including prophylactic distal perfusion catheter decreases limb ischemia complications in patients undergoing extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. J Vasc Surg
2017, 65(4):1074–1079. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
42. Hendrickson SC, Glower DD: A method for perfusion of the leg during cardiopulmonary bypass via femoral cannulation. Ann Thorac Surg
1998, 65(6):1807–1808. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
43. Bisdas T, Beutel G, Warnecke G, Hoeper MM, Kuehn C, Haverich A, Teebken OE: Vascular complications in patients undergoing femoral cannulation for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support. Ann Thorac Surg
2011, 92(2):626–631. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
44. Meani P, Gelsomino S, Natour E, Johnson DM, Rocca HB, Pappalardo F, Bidar E, Makhoul M, Raffa G, Heuts S
et al. : Modalities and Effects of Left Ventricle Unloading on Extracorporeal Life support: a Review of the Current Literature. Eur J Heart Fail
2017, 19
Suppl 2:84–91. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
45. Aiyagari RM, Rocchini AP, Remenapp RT, Graziano JN: Decompression of the left atrium during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation using a transseptal cannula incorporated into the circuit. Crit Care Med
2006, 34(10):2603–2606. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
46. Lorusso R, Barili F, Mauro MD, Gelsomino S, Parise O, Rycus PT, Maessen J, Mueller T, Muellenbach R, Belohlavek J
et al. : In-Hospital Neurologic Complications in Adult Patients Undergoing Venoarterial Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation: Results From the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization Registry. Crit Care Med
2016, 44(10):e964–972. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
47. Lorusso R, Gelsomino S, Parise O, Di Mauro M, Barili F, Geskes G, Vizzardi E, Rycus PT, Muellenbach R, Mueller T
et al. : Neurologic Injury in Adults Supported With Veno-Venous Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation for Respiratory Failure: Findings From the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization Database. Crit Care Med
2017, 45(8):1389–1397. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
48. Giani M, Scaravilli V, Colombo SM, Confalonieri A, Leo R, Maggioni E, Avalli L, Vargiolu A, Citerio G: Apnea test during brain death assessment in mechanically ventilated and ECMO patients. Intensive Care Med
2016, 42(1):72–81. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
49. Sklar MC, Sy E, Lequier L, Fan E, Kanji HD: Anticoagulation Practices during Venovenous Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation for Respiratory Failure. A Systematic Review. Ann Am Thorac Soc
2016, 13(12):2242–2250. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
50. Dalton HJ, Reeder R, Garcia-Filion P, Holubkov R, Berg RA, Zuppa A, Moler FW, Shanley T, Pollack MM, Newth C
et al. : Factors Associated with Bleeding and Thrombosis in Children Receiving Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2017, 196(6):762–771. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
51. Dalia AA, Ortoleva J, Fiedler A, Villavicencio M, Shelton K, Cudemus GD: Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation Is a Team Sport: Institutional Survival Benefits of a Formalized ECMO Team. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth
2018. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
52. Na SJ, Chung CR, Choi HJ, Cho YH, Sung K, Yang JH, Suh GY, Jeon K: The effect of multidisciplinary extracorporeal membrane oxygenation team on clinical outcomes in patients with severe acute respiratory failure. Ann Intensive Care
2018, 8(1):31. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
53. White DB, Angus DC, Shields AM, Buddadhumaruk P, Pidro C, Paner C, Chaitin E, Chang CH, Pike F, Weissfeld L
et al. : A Randomized Trial of a Family-Support Intervention in Intensive Care Units. N Engl J Med
2018, 378(25):2365–2375. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
54. Stephens AL, Bruce CR: Setting Expectations for ECMO: Improving Communication Between Clinical Teams and Decision Makers. Methodist Debakey Cardiovasc J
2018, 14(2):120–125. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
55. Doorenbos AZ, Starks H, Bourget E, McMullan DM, Lewis-Newby M, Rue TC, Lindhorst T, Aisenberg E, Oman N, Curtis JR
et al. : Examining palliative care team involvement in automatic consultations for children on extracorporeal life support in the pediatric intensive care unit. J Palliat Med
2013, 16(5):492–495. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (101.8 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
