The Definition of the Intensivist in the Era of Global Healthcare: 2024 Consensus Statement From the Society of Critical Care Medicine Defining Intensivist Task Force - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Crit Care Med 
. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2025 Oct 28. 
Published in final edited form as: Crit Care Med. 2025 Feb 21;53(3):e548–e554. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000006580 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
The Definition of the Intensivist in the Era of Global Healthcare: 2024 Consensus Statement From the Society of Critical Care Medicine Defining Intensivist Task Force 
Daniel Wu 
Daniel Wu , DO, FACOS, FACS, FCCM 
1 Division of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Penn Medicine — Lancaster General Health, Lancaster, PA. 
2 Division of Trauma, Trinity Health — St Mary Medical Center, Langhorne, PA. 
Find articles by Daniel Wu 
1, 2 , Amy L Dzierba 
Amy L Dzierba , PharmD, FCCP, FASHP, FCCM 
3 Department of Medicine, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY. 
Find articles by Amy L Dzierba 
3 , Enyo A Ablordeppey 
Enyo A Ablordeppey , MD, MPH, FACEP, FCCM 
4 Department of Anesthesiology and Emergency Medicine, Washington University, St Louis, MO. 
Find articles by Enyo A Ablordeppey 
4 , Todd Dorman 
Todd Dorman , MD, MCCM 
5 Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. 
Find articles by Todd Dorman 
5 , Bin Du 
Bin Du , MD 
6 State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Beijing, China. 
7 National Infrastructures for Translational Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Bejing, China. 
8 Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, Beijing, China. 
Find articles by Bin Du 
6, 7, 8 , Alina O Dulu 
Alina O Dulu , MD 
9 Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY. 
Find articles by Alina O Dulu 
9 , Kyle Gunnerson 
Kyle Gunnerson , MD, FCCM 
10 Departments of Emergency Medicine, Anesthesiology, and Internal Medicine/Pulmonary Critical Care, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. 
Find articles by Kyle Gunnerson 
10 , Pamela B Holly 
Pamela B Holly , RRT, BSRT 
11 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Atrium Health Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, NC. 
Find articles by Pamela B Holly 
11 , Johannes Jansen van Rensburg 
Johannes Jansen van Rensburg , MBChB, Mmed (Int) (UFS), FCCM 
12 Department of Pulmonology and Critical Care, Busamed Paardevlei Hospital, Somerset West Cape Town, South Africa. 
Find articles by Johannes Jansen van Rensburg 
12 , Teresa B Kortz 
Teresa B Kortz , MD, MS, PhD 
13 Department of Pediatrics, Division of Critical Care Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA. 
14 Institute for Global Health Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA. 
Find articles by Teresa B Kortz 
13, 14 , Sarah L Livesay 
Sarah L Livesay , DNP, APRN 
15 Adult and Gerontological Nursing, Rush University, College of Nursing, Chicago, IL. 
Find articles by Sarah L Livesay 
15 , Javier Lorenzo 
Javier Lorenzo , MD, FCCM 
16 Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Stanford Medicine, Palo Alto, CA. 
Find articles by Javier Lorenzo 
16 , Maureen A Madden 
Maureen A Madden , DNP, CPNP-AC, CCRN, FCCM 
17 Division of Pediatrics, Critical Care Medicine, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ. 
Find articles by Maureen A Madden 
17 , Piyush Mathur 
Piyush Mathur , MD, FCCM 
18 Department of Anesthesia, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH. 
Find articles by Piyush Mathur 
18 , Sheila Nainan Myatra 
Sheila Nainan Myatra , MD, FICCM, FCCM 
19 Department of Anaesthesiology, Critical Care and Pain, Tata Memorial Hospital, Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai, India. 
Find articles by Sheila Nainan Myatra 
19 , Kathryn E Roberts 
Kathryn E Roberts , MSN, APRN, CCNS, CENP, CCRN, FCCM 
20 Department of Nursing, Nemours Children’s Health, Wilmington, DE. 
Find articles by Kathryn E Roberts 
20 , Gloria M Rodríguez-Vega 
Gloria M Rodríguez-Vega , MD, MCCM 
21 Division of Neurocritical Care Medicine, Hospital Menonita-Caguas, Puerto Rico. 
Find articles by Gloria M Rodríguez-Vega 
21 , Tamas Szakmany 
Tamas Szakmany , MD, PhD, EDIC, DEAA, FCCM 
22 Department of Anaesthesia, Intensive Care and Pain Medicine, Division of Population Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. 
Find articles by Tamas Szakmany 
22 , Ahmed Taha 
Ahmed Taha , MD, FCCM 
23 Critical Care Development, Integrated Hospital Institute, Cleveland Clinic Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. 
Find articles by Ahmed Taha 
23 , Samuel A Tisherman 
Samuel A Tisherman , MD, FCCM 
24 Department of Surgery and the Program in Trauma, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. 
Find articles by Samuel A Tisherman 
24 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 Division of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery, Penn Medicine — Lancaster General Health, Lancaster, PA. 
2 Division of Trauma, Trinity Health — St Mary Medical Center, Langhorne, PA. 
3 Department of Medicine, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY. 
4 Department of Anesthesiology and Emergency Medicine, Washington University, St Louis, MO. 
5 Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. 
6 State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Beijing, China. 
7 National Infrastructures for Translational Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Bejing, China. 
8 Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, Beijing, China. 
9 Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY. 
10 Departments of Emergency Medicine, Anesthesiology, and Internal Medicine/Pulmonary Critical Care, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. 
11 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Atrium Health Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, NC. 
12 Department of Pulmonology and Critical Care, Busamed Paardevlei Hospital, Somerset West Cape Town, South Africa. 
13 Department of Pediatrics, Division of Critical Care Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA. 
14 Institute for Global Health Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA. 
15 Adult and Gerontological Nursing, Rush University, College of Nursing, Chicago, IL. 
16 Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Stanford Medicine, Palo Alto, CA. 
17 Division of Pediatrics, Critical Care Medicine, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ. 
18 Department of Anesthesia, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH. 
19 Department of Anaesthesiology, Critical Care and Pain, Tata Memorial Hospital, Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai, India. 
20 Department of Nursing, Nemours Children’s Health, Wilmington, DE. 
21 Division of Neurocritical Care Medicine, Hospital Menonita-Caguas, Puerto Rico. 
22 Department of Anaesthesia, Intensive Care and Pain Medicine, Division of Population Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. 
23 Critical Care Development, Integrated Hospital Institute, Cleveland Clinic Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. 
24 Department of Surgery and the Program in Trauma, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. 
Drs. Wu and Dzierba share co-first authorship equally. 
✉ 
For information regarding this article, Amy.Dzierba@nyulangone.org 
Issue date 2025 Mar 1. 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC12558668  NIHMSID: NIHMS2117906  PMID: 39982148 
The publisher's version of this article is available at Crit Care Med 
Abstract 
OBJECTIVES: 
The goal of this task force was to examine the 1992 definition of the intensivist, identify gaps, and initiate a path forward to define a concise and practical definition that could be applied globally. 
DESIGN: 
A modified Delphi technique was used to develop a revised definition and roles of the intensivist. We determined a priori that 75% or greater participant agreement for the definition and essential roles of the intensivist was required. 
SETTING: 
A task force consisting of physicians, a respiratory therapist, advanced practice providers, and a pharmacist that practice in critical/intensive care medicine, in various settings, was established with the goal of evaluating and revising the previous definition considering evolving healthcare. 
SUBJECTS: 
The task force participated in online questionnaires related to the definition and roles of the intensivist. 
INTERVENTIONS: 
None. 
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: 
The task force agreed on the following definition of an intensivist: “A physician who has successfully completed an accredited program or equivalent critical care/intensive care medicine training and maintains advanced certification (if available); and shows dedication to the area of critical/intensive care medicine in the way of professional work.” Additionally, the task force determined a list of essential roles of the intensivist categorized into Direct Clinical Care, Unit Management/Unit Involvement, Responsibility to the Community, and Administration and Leadership. 
CONCLUSIONS: 
The revised definition of the intensivist seeks to integrate the intensivist in the current realm of team-based healthcare. The intensivist is a physician who provides care to critically ill patients in collaboration with an interprofessional team. Establishment of a single, revised definition is intended to render clarity of an intensivist’s role and responsibilities for patients, families, and the interprofessional team. 
Keywords: critical care specialist, intensive care physician, intensive care specialist critical care, intensivist 
In 1992, the Society of Critical Care Medicine defined an intensivist focusing on physician qualifications, the role of inpatient care and unit management, and the practice of critical/intensive care medicine (CCM) in the United States ( 1 ). Globally, over the last 30 years the management of specialized care for critically ill and injured patients has evolved including advancement in knowledge and technology, the development of multiple, specialized training pathways, and the expansion of the team caring for patients in the ICU. 
Variability in global definitions of an intensivist exists ( 2 – 10 ) due to differences in the scope of practice, training and certification requirements, regulatory oversight, and resource availability ( Supplemental Table 1 , http://links.lww.com/CCM/H669 ). A retrospective analysis of 105 published studies conducted in the United States found variability and inconsistencies in nomenclature when referring to an intensivist ( 11 ). While none of the studies referenced the 1992 intensivist definition ( 1 ), 60% of the studies defined an intensivist with at least one parameter (background and training, works in an ICU, staffing, and database-related) yielding 34 unique combinations ( 11 ). This variability suggests a lack of agreement on the definition of an intensivist and creates needless ambiguity, misunderstanding, and imprecision. As such, this may lead to obstacles in international research and benchmarking, and confusion in the medical field, in the press, and among laypersons. Therefore, a modern and comprehensive but nuanced “intensivist” definition would offer many benefits internationally. This would establish a denotation of intensivists providing standardization of terminology for future intensivist-based research, insight for administrators to help appreciate the myriad roles associated with intensivists, and recognition among the layperson (e.g., during the COVID-19 pandemic). A standardized term could, thus, potentially affect reimbursement systems, justification for regulatory agencies directing hospitals in credentialing and privileging intensivists, and guide educational curricula for fellowship programs toward real-world expectations. 
METHODS 
Selection and Organization of the Task Force 
A task force comprised of a diverse group of individuals practicing CCM in various specialties was established, ensuring a broad range of perspectives and expertise. The members of the task force included physicians, a respiratory therapist, advanced practice providers, and a pharmacist practicing in ICUs. The goal was to examine the 1992 definition of the intensivist, identify gaps, and initiate a path forward to define a concise and practical definition that could be applied internationally. The task force considered the evolution of CCM combined with contemporary, heterogeneous CCM practice environments. 
Determination of Definition and Roles of an Intensivist 
A modified Delphi technique ( 12 ) was used to develop a definition and roles of the intensivist ( Online Supplement , http://links.lww.com/CCM/H669 ). We determined a priori that 75% or greater participant agreement for the definition and essential roles of the intensivist was required. Data analysis was primarily descriptive. 
Our Delphi consensus study did not seek full research permissions or ethical application. This decision was based on the established methodology of seeking expert consensus as described in the Ethical Delphi Manual ( 13 ) which, recognizes the absence of randomization of participants, no changes to any treatment or patient care, and the understanding that the findings would not be generalized outside of the identified population without additional research. Furthermore, no participant-identifiable data has been used within the analysis or article. All participants gave explicit consent for their anonymized opinions to be used in the process. Procedures were followed in accordance with the ethical standards of the Helsinki Declaration of 1975. 
RESULTS 
Definition of an Intensivist 
All members of the task force were invited for three rounds of voting on the definition of intensivist ( Supplemental Table 2 , http://links.lww.com/CCM/H669 ). Ninety-four percent of the task force participants in round three agreed on the following definition:
A physician who has successfully completed an accredited program or equivalent critical care/intensive care medicine training and maintains advanced certification (if available); and shows dedication to the area of critical/intensive care medicine in the way of professional work. 
The task force agreed that the term “intensivist” refers specifically to an individual physician. In light of this, the task force acknowledged the importance of not minimizing the dedication, commitment, and contribution of nonphysician multidisciplinary members of the CCM team. All members of the CCM team contribute unique knowledge, skills, and expertise that improve care for critically ill patients. Nonetheless, the fundamental differences in undergraduate and postgraduate training pathways between physicians and other medical professionals would make the application of a single definition across all individuals of the CCM team impossible. 
The task force also acknowledged that many physicians from a wide variety of specialty backgrounds caring for critically ill patients may have had training and expertise in the management of specific elements of CCM. The task force consensus was that training in an accredited or equivalent program dedicated to the management of critical care patients is essential to being an intensivist. Other nonintensivist specialists may not have specific training and certification in the holistic and integrated CCM approach to deal with the many potential interactions between one or more acutely impaired organ systems. 
For consistency, the task force recommended restricting the term “intensivist” to physicians who complete an accredited CCM training specialty program or equivalent if the former is not available in their setting, who hold advanced certification including, but not limited to a dedicated postgraduate, board certification or been given rights via a practice pathway by their regulatory or licensing body in CCM medicine. The task force recognized that multiple pathways exist for attaining advanced certification globally. For example, these pathways include subspecialty certification by multiple boards and organizations based upon primary specialty choice in the United States, as well as a single subspecialty certification regardless of primary specialty or a primary specialty of CCM in many other countries ( 14 ). The new definition applies to any physician who has obtained these certifications, regardless of the path taken ( Fig. 1 ). 
Figure 1. 
Open in a new tab 
Intensivist definition and roles. ACGME = Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, CCM = critical/intensive care medicine 
The task force extensively discussed that commitment to CCM extends beyond clinical practice to include research, administrative duties, and related responsibilities within CCM. The new definition does not specify a particular allocation of time for clinical activities, as regulatory bodies and professional organizations in each jurisdiction are best suited to determine these standards. 
There are limitations to this definition. Given the diversity and subspecialization of the field coupled with a variety of pathways to CCM training diverse health policies and the diversity in practice environments, the global definition will require external validation. Additionally, while the definition has been developed by a modified Delphi consensus process with a wide representation of healthcare providers across the globe and aimed to be inclusive, the very nature of defining a specialist will mean that some physicians, who self-define as intensivists, will be excluded. The term “intensivist” is simply defined for reasons of consistency for CCM research reporting, regulatory agencies, reimbursement systems, and hospital administration. 
Roles of the Intensivist 
All members of the task force were invited for two rounds of voting on the roles of the intensivist ( Supplemental Table 3 , http://links.lww.com/CCM/H669 ). The intensivist role has evolved over recent decades. The essential roles are those that any intensivist practicing in diverse settings is expected to perform when necessary ( Fig. 2 ). The task force acknowledged that these roles may be performed by other members of the interprofessional critical care team. An intensivist can serve as the team leader or member of an interprofessional team, coordinating and guiding healthcare professionals to provide specialized care for critically ill patients. The intensivist manages and resuscitates patients with, or at risk for, critical illness and organ failure and initiates interventions to prevent imminent deterioration. This may include directing the safe and timely performance of common CCM procedures. The role of the intensivist in the delivery of patient care has evolved from providing care to patients within the designated units to now including triage, management of, and consultation for, critically ill patients outside of designated ICUs, including telehealth, and postintensive care recovery clinics. 
Figure 2. 
Open in a new tab 
Roles of the intensivist. 
Working with a well-integrated, interprofessional team, the intensivist supports and promotes equitable, ethical, efficient, and high-quality CCM. This includes, but is not limited to, direct patient care, adherence to best practices with interventions that minimize iatrogenic complications, particularly bundles of care, and participation in quality improvement and patient safety initiatives. 
The intensivist in the role of ICU Medical Director is responsible for working with the interprofessional team to establish policies and guidelines for care. The Medical Director should participate in the regular review of unit outcomes that guide quality improvement initiatives, promote safety huddles and interprofessional rounds, and assure compliance with hospital policies and national regulatory bodies. The Medical Director is responsible for representing the ICU to institutional administration. 
There are limitations to these roles. The intensivist roles presented here are not meant to be fundamental activities or services deemed essential to CCM practice in every setting; rather they are meant to be activities or services that will elevate the practice of CCM. Local culture or regulations may limit these roles. Additionally, intensivists practicing in resource-limited areas may not be able to fulfill all these roles due to the scarcity of technology, facilities, and personnel. 
The 1992 intensivist definition ( 1 ) defined multiple aspects of the intensivists’ roles and responsibilities but did not specifically address their role as a team member in the expanding critical care milieu. The evolution of technology and patient complexity prompted the development of interprofessional teams in CCM. Studies in CCM confirm that well-integrated team-based healthcare is critical to the delivery of high-quality patient care ( 15 ). Like the intensivist, each member of the CCM team takes an active role in patient care and may participate in unit management/involvement, system-based practice and community participation, and unit administration and leadership. The skills and competencies of each team member to provide CCM are dictated by their respective profession and role on the CCM team. Depending on the circumstance, any team member may take a team lead role depending on the task and situation, and all should function as members of the interprofessional team. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Intensivists are part of the interprofessional team of professionals providing extensive perspectives and skills to deliver holistic care to critically ill patients. Using a modified Delphi technique, a diverse group of individuals practicing CCM revised the definition and roles of the intensivist for international application. The establishment of a single, revised definition is intended to render clarity of an intensivist’s role and responsibilities for patients, families, and the interprofessional team. Furthermore, this definition provides a foundation for future research in CCM. As the landscape of CCM changes, the role of the intensivist will continue to evolve. The intensivist, alongside a highly integrated and collaborative interprofessional team, will lead these changes. 
Supplementary Material 
Supplemental Material 
NIHMS2117906-supplement-Supplemental_Material.docx (38.4KB, docx) 
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal’s website ( http://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal ). 
KEY POINTS. 
Question: 
What is a modern definition of an intensivist in the realm of global health care? 
Findings: 
Using a modified Delphi method, a task force of diverse individuals practicing in critical/intensive care medicine concluded that an intensivist must be: “A physician who has successfully completed an accredited program or equivalent critical care/intensive care medicine training and maintains advanced certification (if available); and shows dedication to the area of critical/-intensive care medicine in the way of professional work.” 
Meaning: 
The revised definition clarifies an intensivist’s role and responsibilities for patients, families, and the interprofessional team. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank the Society of Critical Care Medicine administrative staff, Mr. Jeremy Nielsen, for his support of this article and Dr. Rahul Kashyap, MD, for his guidance with the modified Delphi process. 
Dr. Wu disclosed that he is an ex officio member of the Council to the Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM). Dr. Dzierba is a member of Executive Committee to the SCCM. Dr. Ablordeppey’s institution received funding from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (award number 5K01HL161026). Dr. Jansen van Rensburg disclosed work for hire. Dr. Kortz’s institution received funding from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (award number K23AI144029). Dr. Livesay received funding from Ceribell, Stoke Challenger/Lombardi Hill LLC, the Neurocritical Care Society, and the World Federation of Intensive and Critical Care. Dr. Madden received funding from the American Association of Critical Care Nurses, the ad hoc member of Council to the SCCM, the American College of Critical Care Medicine Board of Regents, and Elsevier. Dr. Rodríguez-Vega received funding from Chiesi, LifeLink of Puerto Rico, and is a member of Council to the the SCCM. Dr. Szakmany received funding from Thermo Fisher and the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre; he is an Associate Editor at the Journal of the Intensive Care Society and the Editor-In-Chief of Critical Care Explorations. Drs. Gunnerson and Tisherman are members of Council to the SCCM. The remaining authors have disclosed that they do not have any potential conflicts of interest. 
REFERENCES 
1. Guidelines for the definition of an intensivist and the practice of critical care medicine. Guidelines Committee; Society of Critical Care Medicine. Crit Care Med
1992; 20:540–542
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. American Medical Association: Excellence in Critical Care: The Intensivist Program in a Community Hospital. 2012. Available at: https://www.aha.org/case-studies/2012-02-01-excellence-critical-care-intensivist-program-community-hospital . Accessed September 2, 2023 
3. Leapfrog Hospital Survey: Factsheet: ICU Physician Staffing. 2022. Available at: https://ratings.leapfroggroup.org/sites/default/files/inline-files/2022%20IPS%20Fact%20Sheet_0.pdf . Accessed September 2, 2023 
4. Cigna Health: Critical Care Medicine Specialist. 2024. Available at: https://www.cigna.com/knowledge-center/hw/criticalcare-medicine-specialist-ps2189 . Accessed September 2, 2023 
5. American College of Physicians: Critical Care Medicine. 2024. Available at: https://www.acponline.org/about-acp/about-internal-medicine/subspecialties-of-internal-medicine/critical-care-medicine . Accessed June 28, 2024 
6. Amin P, Fox-Robichaud A, Divatia JV, et al. ; Council of the World Federation of Societies of Intensive and Critical Care Medicine: The Intensive care unit specialist: Report from the task force of World Federation of Societies of Intensive and Critical Care Medicine. J Crit Care
2016; 35:223–228
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. College of Intensive Care Medicine of Australia and New Zealand: What is an Intensive Care Specialist?. 2023. Available at: https://cicm.org.au/Web/Web/AboutUs/What-is-an-Intensive-Care-Specialist.aspx#:~:text=An%20intensive%20care%20specialist%20is,leader%20of%20a%20multidisciplinary%20team . Accessed June 28, 2024 
8. European Society of Intensive Care Medicine: What is Intensive Care?
2024. Available at: https://www.esicm.org/patient-and-family/what-is-intensive-care . Accessed June 28, 2024 
9. European Union of Medical Specialists: UEMS European Training Requirements. 2021. Available at: https://www.uems.eu/european-training-requirements . Accessed June 28, 2024 
10. Rungta N, Zirpe KG, Dixit SB, et al. : Indian Society of Critical Care Medicine experts committee consensus statement on ICU planning and designing, 2020. Indian J Crit Care Med
2020; 24:S43–S60
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. Halpern NA, Tan KS, Bothwell LA, et al. : Defining intensivists: A retrospective analysis of published studies in the United States, 2010–2020. Crit Care Med
2024; 52:223–236
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Beiderbeck D, Frevel N, von der Gracht HA, et al. : Preparing, conducting, and analyzing Delphi surveys: Cross-disciplinary practices, new directions, and advancements. MethodsX
2021; 8:101401.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. Millar K, Tomkins S, Bjorneurd E, et al. : Ethical Delphi Manual. 2006. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/254832605_Ethical_Delphi_Manual . Accessed November 20, 2024 
14. Tisherman SA, Spevetz A, Blosser SA, et al. : A case for change in adult critical care training for physicians in the United States: A white paper developed by the critical care as a specialty task force of the Society of Critical Care Medicine. Crit Care Med
2018; 46:1577–1584
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Donovan AL, Aldrich JM, Gross AK, et al. ; University of California, San Francisco Critical Care Innovations Group: Interprofessional care and teamwork in the ICU. Crit Care Med
2018; 46:980–990
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Associated Data 
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. 
Supplementary Materials 
Supplemental Material 
NIHMS2117906-supplement-Supplemental_Material.docx (38.4KB, docx) 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (823.5 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
