Guidelines for the Primary Prevention of Stroke: A Statement for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Stroke 
. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2016 Sep 13. 
Published in final edited form as: Stroke. 2014 Oct 28;45(12):3754–3832. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000046 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Guidelines for the Primary Prevention of Stroke 
A Statement for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association 
James F Meschia 
James F Meschia , MD, FAHA 
Chair 
Find articles by James F Meschia 
, Cheryl Bushnell 
Cheryl Bushnell , MD, MHS, FAHA 
Vice-Chair 
Find articles by Cheryl Bushnell 
, Bernadette Boden-Albala 
Bernadette Boden-Albala , MPH, DrPH 
Find articles by Bernadette Boden-Albala 
, Lynne T Braun 
Lynne T Braun , PhD, CNP, FAHA 
Find articles by Lynne T Braun 
, Dawn M Bravata 
Dawn M Bravata , MD 
Find articles by Dawn M Bravata 
, Seemant Chaturvedi 
Seemant Chaturvedi , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by Seemant Chaturvedi 
, Mark A Creager 
Mark A Creager , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by Mark A Creager 
, Robert H Eckel 
Robert H Eckel , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by Robert H Eckel 
, Mitchell SV Elkind 
Mitchell SV Elkind , MD, MS, FAAN, FAHA 
Find articles by Mitchell SV Elkind 
, Myriam Fornage 
Myriam Fornage , PhD, FAHA 
Find articles by Myriam Fornage 
, Larry B Goldstein 
Larry B Goldstein , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by Larry B Goldstein 
, Steven M Greenberg 
Steven M Greenberg , MD, PhD, FAHA 
Find articles by Steven M Greenberg 
, Susanna E Horvath 
Susanna E Horvath , MD 
Find articles by Susanna E Horvath 
, Costantino Iadecola 
Costantino Iadecola , MD 
Find articles by Costantino Iadecola 
, Edward C Jauch 
Edward C Jauch , MD, MS, FAHA 
Find articles by Edward C Jauch 
, Wesley S Moore 
Wesley S Moore , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by Wesley S Moore 
, John A Wilson 
John A Wilson , MD 
Find articles by John A Wilson , on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council,
Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Clinical
Cardiology, Council on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology, and
Council on Hypertension 
, on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council,
Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Clinical
Cardiology, Council on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology, and
Council on Hypertension 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
Roles 
James F Meschia : MD, FAHA , Chair 
Cheryl Bushnell : MD, MHS, FAHA , Vice-Chair 
Issue date 2014 Dec. 
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement,
and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express
permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining
permission are located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp .
A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears
on the right side of the page. 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC5020564  NIHMSID: NIHMS808056  PMID: 25355838 
The publisher's version of this article is available at Stroke 
See the article " Primary Prevention of Stroke. " in JAMA , volume 316 on page 658. 
Abstract 
The aim of this updated statement is to provide comprehensive and timely
evidence-based recommendations on the prevention of stroke among individuals who
have not previously experienced a stroke or transient ischemic attack.
Evidence-based recommendations are included for the control of risk factors,
interventional approaches to atherosclerotic disease of the cervicocephalic
circulation, and antithrombotic treatments for preventing thrombotic and
thromboembolic stroke. Further recommendations are provided for genetic and
pharmacogenetic testing and for the prevention of stroke in a variety of other
specific circumstances, including sickle cell disease and patent foramen
ovale. 
Keywords: AHA Scientific Statements, atrial fibrillation, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemias, hypertension, intracranial aneurysm, ischemia, prevention and control, smoking, stroke 
Approximately 795 000 people in the United States have a stroke each year,
≈610 000 of whom have had first attacks, resulting in 6.8 million stroke
survivors >19 years of age. 1 
Stroke ranks as the fourth-leading cause of death in the United States. 2 Globally, over the past 4 decades,
stroke incidence rates have fallen by 42% in high-income countries and increased
by >100% in low- and middle-income countries. 3 Stroke incidence rates in low- and middle-income
countries now exceed those in high-income countries. 3 
Stroke is a leading cause of functional impairment. For patients who are
≥65 years of age, 6 months after stroke, 26% are dependent in their
activities of daily living, and 46% have cognitive deficits. 1 Stroke changes the lives not only of those who
experience a stroke but also of their family and other caregivers. A major stroke is
viewed by more than half of those at risk as being worse than death. 4 Despite the advent of reperfusion therapies for
selected patients with acute ischemic stroke, effective prevention remains the best
approach for reducing the burden of stroke. 5 – 7 Primary
prevention is particularly important because >76% of strokes are first
events. 1 Fortunately, there are
enormous opportunities for preventing stroke. An international case-control study of
6000 individuals found that 10 potentially modifiable risk factors explained 90%
of the risk of stroke. 8 As detailed in
the sections that follow, stroke-prone individuals can readily be identified and
targeted for effective interventions. 
This guideline summarizes the evidence on established and emerging stroke risk
factors and represents an update of the last American Heart Association (AHA) statement
on this topic, published in 2011. 9 
Targets for stroke prevention have been reordered to align with the AHA’s public
health campaign for ideal cardiovascular health known as Life’s Simple
7. 10 As with the earlier
document, the guideline addresses prevention of both hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke.
The traditional definition of ischemic stroke as a clinical event is used in most
instances out of necessity because of the design of most stroke prevention studies;
however, where permitted by the evidence, the Writing Group has adopted the updated
tissue-based definition of ischemic stroke as infarction of central nervous system
tissue. 11 
Differences in stroke risk among men and women are well recognized, and certain
risk factors are specific to women’s health (eg, oral contraceptives
[OCs] and hormone replacement therapy). To increase awareness of these
important issues and to provide sufficient coverage of the topic, the AHA has issued a
guideline on the prevention of stroke in women. 11a Key recommendations are summarized in the current document but
not reiterated in full. Readers are encouraged to review the new guideline. 
The committee chair nominated Writing Group members on the basis of their
previous work in relevant topic areas. The AHA Stroke Council’s Scientific
Statement Oversight Committee and the AHA’s Manuscript Oversight Committee
approved all Writing Group members. In consultation with 2 research librarians, we
developed individual search strategies for each topic section and for each database to
identify potentially relevant studies from the PubMed, Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, and Ovid Central Register of Controlled Trials
databases. The Internet Stroke Center/Clinical Trials Registry ( http://www.strokecenter.org/trials/ ) and National Guideline
Clearinghouse ( http://guideline.gov/ ) were also searched. Articles included were
limited to those that were randomized, controlled trials; systematic reviews;
meta-analyses; and in some cases, cohort studies. The database searches were also
limited to articles with English-language citations, with human subjects, and published
between January 1, 2009, and varying end dates, (between October 2, 2012, and December
6, 2012). Medical subject headings (MeSH) and key words, including stroke; ischemic
attack, transient; cerebral infarction; cerebral hemorrhage; ischemia; and
cerebrovascular disorders, in addition to select MeSH and key words on each topic, were
used in the search strategy. The writers used systematic literature reviews covering the
time period since the last review published in 2011 to October 2012. They also reviewed
contemporary published evidence-based guidelines, personal files, and published expert
opinion to summarize existing evidence, to indicate gaps in current knowledge, and, when
appropriate, to formulate recommendations using standard AHA criteria ( Tables 1 and 2 ). All members of the Writing Group had the opportunity to comment on the
recommendations and approved the final version of this document. The guideline underwent
extensive peer review, including review by the Stroke Council Leadership and Scientific
Statements Oversight Committees, before consideration and approval by the AHA Science
Advisory and Coordinating Committee. Because of the diverse nature of the topics
covered, it was not possible to provide a systematic, uniform summary of the magnitude
of the effect associated with each of the recommendations. As with all therapeutic
recommendations, patient preferences must be considered. Risk factors, which directly
increase disease probability and if absent or removed reduce disease probability, or
risk markers, which are attributes or exposures associated with increased probability of
disease but are not necessarily causal 12 of a first stroke, were classified according to their potential for
modification. 7 Although this
distinction is somewhat subjective, risk factors considered both well documented and
modifiable were those with clear, supportive epidemiological evidence and evidence of
risk reduction when modified in the context of randomized clinical trials. Less
well-documented or potentially modifiable risk factors were those either with less clear
epidemiological evidence or without evidence from randomized clinical trials
demonstrating a reduction of stroke risk when modified. 
Table 1. 
Applying Classification of Recommendations and Level of Evidence 
Open in a new tab 
A recommendation with Level of Evidence B or C does not imply that the
recommendation is weak. Many important clinical questions addressed in the
guidelines do not lend themselves to clinical trials. Although randomized
trials are unavailable, there may be a very clear clinical consensus that a
particular test or therapy is useful or effective. 
* 
Data available from clinical trials or registries about the
usefulness/efficacy in different subpopulations, such as sex, age, history
of diabetes, history of prior myocardial infarction, history of heart
failure, and prior aspirin use. 
† 
For comparative effectiveness recommendations (Class I and IIa; Level of
Evidence A and B only), studies that support the use of comparator verbs
should involve direct comparisons of the treatments or strategies being
evaluated. 
Table 2. 
Definition of Classes and Levels of Evidence Used in AHA/ASA Recommendations 
Class I 
Conditions for which there is evidence for
and/or general agreement that the procedure or treatment is useful and
effective. 
Class II 
Conditions for which there is conflicting
evidence and/or a divergence of opinion about the usefulness/efficacy of
a procedure or treatment. 
Class IIa 
The weight of evidence or opinion is in favor
of the procedure or treatment. 
Class IIb 
Usefulness/efficacy is less well established
by evidence or opinion. 
Class III 
Conditions for which there is evidence and/or
general agreement that the procedure or treatment is not
useful/effective and in some cases may be harmful. 
Therapeutic recommendations 
Level of Evidence A 
Data derived from multiple randomized clinical
trials or meta-analyses 
Level of Evidence B 
Data derived from a single randomized trial or
nonrandomized studies 
Level of Evidence C 
Consensus opinion of experts, case studies, or
standard of care 
Diagnostic recommendations 
Level of Evidence A 
Data derived from multiple prospective cohort
studies using a reference standard applied by a masked evaluator 
Level of Evidence B 
Data derived from a single grade A study or
one or more case-control studies, or studies using a reference standard
applied by an unmasked evaluator 
Level of Evidence C 
Consensus opinion of experts 
Open in a new tab 
AHA/ASA indicates American Heart Association/American Stroke Association 
Assessing the Risk of First Stroke 
It may be helpful for healthcare providers and patients to be able to
estimate risk for a first stroke for an individual patient. Patients prefer being
told their own individual risk through the use of a global risk assessment tool,
although it has only a small effect on preferences for reducing risk and no effect
on patient beliefs or behavior compared with standard risk factor
education. 13 As detailed
in other sections, numerous individual factors can contribute to stroke risk. The
levels of evidence supporting a causal relationship among several of these factors
and stroke vary, and specific or proven treatments for some may be lacking. Although
most risk factors have an independent effect, there may be important interactions
between individual factors that need to be considered in predicting overall risk or
choosing an appropriate risk modification program. Risk assessment tools taking into
account the effect of multiple risk factors have been used in community stroke
screening programs and in some guideline statements to select certain treatments for
primary stroke prevention. 14 , 15 Some of the goals of such risk
assessment tools are to identify people at elevated risk who might be unaware of
their risk, to assess risk in the presence of >1 condition, to measure an
individual’s risk that can be tracked and lowered by appropriate
modifications, to estimate risk for selecting treatments or stratification in
clinical trials, and to guide appropriate use of further diagnostic testing. 
Although stroke risk assessment tools exist, the complexities of the
interactions of risk factors and the effects of certain risk factors stratified by
age, sex, race/ethnicity, and geography are incompletely captured by available
global risk assessment tools. In addition, these tools tend to be focused and
generally do not include the full range of possible contributing factors. Some risk
assessment tools are sex specific and give 1-, 5-, or 10-year stroke risk estimates.
The Framingham Stroke Profile (FSP) uses a Cox proportional hazards model with risk
factors as covariates and points calculated according to the weight of the model
coefficients. 16 
Independent stroke predictors include age, systolic blood pressure (SBP),
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, current smoking, established cardiovascular disease
(CVD; myocardial infarction [MI], angina or coronary insufficiency,
congestive heart failure, and intermittent claudication), atrial fibrillation (AF),
and left ventricular hypertrophy on ECG. Additional refinements include a measure of
carotid intima-media thickness (IMT); however, these refinements result in only a
small improvement in 10-year risk prediction of first-time MI or stroke that is
unlikely to be of clinical importance. 17 FSP scores can be calculated to estimate sex-specific, 10-year
cumulative stroke risk. The initial FSP has been updated to account for the use of
antihypertensive therapy and the risk of stroke and stroke or death among
individuals with new-onset AF. 18 , 19 Despite its widespread use, the
validity of the FSP among individuals of different age ranges or belonging to
different race/ethnic groups has been inadequately studied. The FSP has been applied
to ethnic minorities in the United Kingdom and found to vary across groups, but the
suitability of the scale to predict outcomes has not been fully
established. 20 
Alternative prediction models have been developed using other cohorts and
different sets of stroke risk factors. Retaining most of the Framingham covariates,
one alternative stroke risk scoring system omits cigarette smoking and
antihypertensive medication and adds “time to walk 15 feet” and
serum creatinine. 21 Another score
is derived from a mixed cohort of stroke and stroke-free patients and includes
history of stroke, marital status, blood pressure (BP) as a categorical variable,
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, impaired expiratory flow, physical
disability, and a depression score. 22 Several studies have generated risk assessment tools for use in
patients with AF (see Atrial Fibrillation). Risk models have also been developed for
other populations. For example, a stroke prediction model derived for use in Chinese
adults in Taiwan included age, sex, SBP, diastolic BP (DBP), family history of
stroke, AF, and diabetes mellitus and was found to have a discriminative capacity
similar to or better than those of other available stroke models. 23 The model, however, has not been
independently validated. 
Recent guideline statements from the AHA/American Stroke Association have
emphasized the importance of including both stroke and coronary heart disease events
as outcomes in risk prediction instruments intended for primary
prevention. 24 The
AHA/American College of Cardiology (ACC) CV Risk Calculator is available online for
use in estimating risk at http://my.americanheart.org/cvriskcalculator . 
Assessing the Risk of First Stroke: Summary and Gaps 
An ideal stroke risk assessment tool that is simple, is widely
applicable and accepted, and takes into account the effects of multiple risk
factors does not exist. Each available tool has limitations. Newer risk factors
for stroke such as obstructive sleep apnea, not collected in older studies, need
to be considered. 25 Risk
assessment tools should be used with care because they do not include all the
factors that contribute to disease risk. 25 Some potential for harm exists from unnecessary
application of interventions that may result from inappropriate use of risk
assessment tools or from the use of poorly adjudicated tools. The utility of the
FSP or other stroke risk assessment scales as a way of improving the
effectiveness of primary stroke prevention is not well studied. Research is
needed to validate risk assessment tools across age, sex, and race/ethnic
groups; to evaluate whether any of the more recently identified risk factors add
to the predictive accuracy of existing scales; and to determine whether the use
of these scales improves primary stroke prevention. 
Assessing the Risk of First Stroke: Recommendations 
The use of a risk assessment tool such as the AHA/ACC CV Risk
Calculator ( http://my.americanheart.org/cvriskcalculator ) is
reasonable because these tools can help identify individuals who could
benefit from therapeutic interventions and who may not be treated on the
basis of any single risk factor. These calculators are useful to alert
clinicians and patients of possible risk, but basing treatment decisions
on the results needs to be considered in the context of the overall risk
profile of the patient ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Generally Nonmodifiable Risk Factors and Risk Assessment 
Age 
The cumulative effects of aging on the cardiovascular system and the
progressive nature of stroke risk factors over a prolonged period substantially
increase the risk of ischemic stroke and intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). An
analysis of data from 8 European countries found that the combined risk of fatal
and nonfatal stroke increased by 9%/y in men and 10%/y in
women. 26 The incidence
of ICH increases with age from <45 years to >85 years, and the
incidence rates did not decrease between 1980 and 2006. 27 Disturbing trends have been observed in
the risk of stroke in younger individuals. In Greater Cincinnati/Northern
Kentucky, the mean age of stroke decreased from 71.2 years in 1993 to 1994 to
69.2 years in 2005 because of an increase in the proportion of stroke in
individuals between 20 to 54 years of age. 28 The Nationwide Inpatient Sample showed that the rates
of stroke hospitalization increased for individuals between 25 and 34 years of
age and between 35 and 44 years of age from 1998 to 2007. 29 Stroke occurring at younger ages has the
potential to cause greater lifetime impairment and disability. The Framingham
Heart Study estimated the lifetime risk of stroke to be 1 in 6 or more for
middle-aged adults. 30 
Low Birth Weight 
Low birth weight has been associated in several populations with risk of
stroke in later life. Stroke mortality rates among adults in England and Wales
are higher among people with lower birth weights. 31 The mothers of these low-birth-weight
babies were typically poor, were malnourished, had poor overall health, and were
generally socially disadvantaged. 31 A similar study compared a group of South Carolina Medicaid
beneficiaries <50 years of age who had stroke with population control
subjects. 32 The odds
of stroke was more than double for those with birth weights <2500 g
compared with those weighing 4000 g (with a significant linear trend for
intermediate birth weights). A US nationally representative longitudinal study
found an odds ratio (OR) of 2.16 ( P <0.01) for
low-birth-weight babies compared with normal-birth-weight babies for the risk of
stroke, MI, or heart disease by 50 years of age. 33 Differences in birth weight may reflect
differences in birthplace, and these geographic differences may relate to
differences in stroke mortality. 34 Whether the association of birth weight with stroke risk is
causal remains to be clarified. 
Race/Ethnicity 
Epidemiological studies support racial and ethnic differences in the
risk of stroke. 35 
Blacks 36 – 38 and some Hispanic/Latino
Americans 38 – 41 have a higher incidence of all
stroke types and higher mortality rates compared with whites. This is
particularly true for young and middle-aged blacks, who have a substantially
higher risk of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and ICH than whites of the same
age. 36 , 37 In the Atherosclerosis Risk in
Communities (ARIC) study, blacks had an incidence of all stroke types that was
38% (95% confidence interval [CI],
1.01–1.89) higher than that of whites. 42 American Indians have an incidence rate
for stroke of 679 per 100 000 person-years, which is high relative to
non-Hispanic whites. 43 It
remains unclear whether these racial differences are genetic, environmental, or
an interaction between the two. Possible reasons for the higher incidence and
mortality rates of stroke in blacks include a higher prevalence of
prehypertension, hypertension, obesity, and diabetes mellitus. 44 – 49 A higher prevalence of these risk
factors, however, may not explain all of the excess risk. 50 Several studies have suggested that
race/ethnic differences may be the result of social determinants, including
neighborhood characteristics, 51 – 53 
geography, 50 language,
access to and use of health care, 35 and nativity. 54 
Genetic Factors 
A meta-analysis of cohort studies showed that a positive family history
of stroke increases the risk of stroke by ≈30% (OR, 1.3;
95% CI, 1.2–1.5; P <0.00001). 55 The Framingham study showed
that a documented parental history of stroke before 65 years of age was
associated with a 3-fold increase in the risk of stroke in offspring. 56 The odds of both monozygotic
twins having strokes is 1.65-fold higher than for dizygotic twins. 55 Stroke heritability estimates
vary with age, sex, and stroke subtype. 57 , 58 Younger
stroke patients are more likely to have a first-degree relative with
stroke. 57 Women with
stroke are more likely than men to have a parental history of stroke. 58 Recent estimates of
heritability using genome-wide common variant single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) data show similar heritability for cardioembolic (32.6%) and
large-vessel disease (40.3%) but lower heritability for small-vessel
disease (16.1%). 59 
These estimates, however, do not consider the potential contribution of rare
variants. 
Genetic influences on stroke risk can be considered on the basis of
their influence on individual risk factors, the genetics of common stroke types,
and uncommon or rare familial causes of stroke. Many of the established and
emerging risk factors that are described in the sections that follow such as
arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia have both genetic
and environmental or behavioral components. 60 – 62 
Genome-wide association studies have identified common genetic variants for
these risk factors. Studies that assess the effect of the cumulative burden of
risk alleles of stroke risk factors, as measured by a so-called genetic risk
score, are beginning to emerge. For example, the burden of risk alleles for
elevated BP was associated with a modest but significant increase in risk for
ICH (OR, 1.11; 95% CI, 1.02–1.21;
P =0.01) in 1025 cases and 1247 controls of European
ancestry. 63 Whether a
genetic risk score will provide clinically useful information beyond that
afforded by clinical risk factors remains uncertain. Arguably, estimating
genetic risk remains crude because only a few loci influencing stroke risk
factors or stroke susceptibility have been identified. 
Common variants on chromosome 9p21 adjacent to the tumor suppressor
genes CDKN2A and CDKN2B , which were initially
found to be associated with MI, 64 – 66 have
also been associated with large-artery ischemic stroke. 67 Common variants on 4q25 and 16q22,
adjacent to genes involved in cardiac development ( PITX2 and
ZFHX3 , respectively), which were initially found to be
associated with AF, 68 , 69 were subsequently associated
with ischemic stroke, particularly cardioembolic stroke. 69 , 70 Although tests are commercially available for the 9p21,
4q25, and 16q22 risk loci, studies have yet to prove that altering preventive
therapies on the basis of genotypes leads to improved patient outcomes. 
Genome-wide association studies have identified novel genetic variants
influencing risk of stroke. A meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies
from prospective cohorts identified a locus on 12p13 near the
NINJ2 gene associated with incident ischemic
stroke, 71 but large
case-control studies have not replicated this finding. 72 , 73 This inconsistency may be because of a possible effect of
this locus on stroke mortality, 74 a synthetic association from rare variants not well
represented in the subsequent replication studies, or a false-positive
association. Recent meta-analyses of large case-control studies have identified
novel genetic associations with specific stroke subtypes, suggesting that risk
factor profiles and pathological mechanisms may differ across subtypes. Two loci
have been associated with large-vessel stroke in individuals of European
ancestry: a locus on 6p21.1 75 
and a locus on 7q21 near the HDAC9 gene, encoding a protein
involved in histone deacetylation. 76 , 77 A variant in
the PRKCH gene encoding a protein kinase has been associated
with small-vessel stroke in Asians. 78 The genetic variants described to date account for only
a small proportion of stroke risk. Even combined, their predictive value is
likely to be low. 
Personalizing medicine through genetic testing has the potential to
improve the safety of primary prevention pharmacotherapies. For example, genetic
variability in cytochrome P450 2C9 ( CYP2C9 ), vitamin K oxide
reductase complex 1 ( VKORC1 ), and rare missense mutations in
the factor IX propeptide affect sensitivity of patients to vitamin K
antagonists. This has led to testing of various genotype-guided dosing
protocols. A 12-week randomized trial of 455 patients treated with warfarin
showed significantly more time in therapeutic range for the international
normalized ratio (INR) for patients assigned to the genotype-guided dosing
regimen versus standard dosing (67.4% versus 60.3%;
P <0.001). 79 A 4-week randomized trial of 1015 patients treated with
warfarin showed no significant difference in the time in therapeutic range for
the INR (45.2% versus 45.4%;
P =0.91). 80 A 12-week randomized trial of 548 patients treated with
acenocoumarol or phencoumon showed no significant difference in the time in
therapeutic range for the INR (61.6% versus 60.2%;
P =0.52). 81 
A genome-wide association study of individuals taking 80 mg simvastatin
identified common variants on SLCO1B1 that are associated with
myopathy. 82 This may
prove useful in screening for patients being considered for simvastatin therapy,
although randomized validation studies demonstrating the clinical and
cost-effectiveness of its use are lacking. 
Several monogenic disorders are associated with stroke. Although rare,
their effect on the individual patient is substantial because individuals
carrying a mutation are likely to develop stroke or other clinical
characteristics of disease. Thus, identification of the underlying gene for
these disorders is important for diagnosis, counseling, and patient management.
With the exception of sickle cell disease (SCD; discussed below), no treatment
based specifically on genetic factors has yet been shown to reduce incident
stroke. Cerebral autosomal-dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and
leukoencephalopathy is characterized by subcortical infarcts, dementia, migraine
headaches, and white matter changes that are readily apparent on brain magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). 83 
Cerebral autosomal-dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and
leukoencephalopathy is caused by any one of a series of mutations in the
NOTCH3 gene. 83 , 84 Genetic
testing for NOTCH3 mutations is available. Retinal vasculopathy
with cerebral leukodystrophy is caused by mutation in the TREX1 
gene, a DNA exonuclease involved in the response to oxidative DNA
damage. 85 Mutations in
the COL4A1 gene can cause leukoaraiosis and microbleeds and can
present with ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke or as the hereditary angiopathy with
nephropathy, aneurysm, and muscle cramps syndrome. 86 , 87 
Fabry disease is a rare inherited disorder that can also lead to
ischemic stroke. It is caused by lysosomal α-galactosidase A deficiency,
which causes a progressive accumulation of globotriaosylceramide and related
glycosphingolipids. 88 
Deposition affects mostly small vessels in the brain and other organs, although
involvement of the larger vessels has been reported. Enzyme replacement therapy
appears to improve cerebral vessel function. Two prospective, randomized studies
using human recombinant lysosomal α-galactosidase A found a reduction in
microvascular deposits and reduced plasma levels of
globotriaosylceramide. 89 – 91 These
studies had short follow-up periods, and no reduction in stroke incidence was
found. Agalsidase-α and agalsidase-β given at the same dose of
0.2 mg/kg have similar short-term effects in reducing left ventricular
mass. 85 , 92 
Many coagulopathies are inherited as autosomal-dominant
traits. 93 These
disorders, including protein C and S deficiencies, the factor V Leiden mutation,
and various other factor deficiencies, can lead to an increased risk of cerebral
venous thrombosis. 94 – 97 As discussed below, there has
not been a strong association between several of these disorders and arterial
events such as MI and ischemic stroke. 98 , 99 Some
apparently acquired coagulopathies such as the presence of a lupus anticoagulant
or anticardiolipin antibody (aCL) can be familial in ≈10% of
cases. 100 , 101 Inherited disorders of various clotting
factors (ie, factors V, VII, X, XI, and XIII) are autosomal-recessive traits and
can lead to cerebral hemorrhage in infancy and childhood. 102 Arterial dissections, moyamoya
syndrome, and fibromuscular dysplasia have a familial component in 10%
to 20% of cases. 103 , 104 
Intracranial aneurysms are a feature of certain mendelian disorders,
including autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney disease and Ehlers-Danlos type IV
syndrome (so-called vascular Ehlers-Danlos). Intracranial aneurysms occur in
≈8% of individuals with autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney
disease and 7% with cervical fibromuscular dysplasia. 105 , 106 Ehlers-Danlos type IV is associated with dissection of
vertebral and carotid arteries, carotid-cavernous fistulas, and intracranial
aneurysms. 107 
Loss-of-function mutations in KRIT1 , malcavernin, and
PDCD10 genes cause cerebral cavernous malformation
syndromes CCM1, CCM2, and CCM3, respectively. 108 Mutations in the amyloid precursor
protein gene, cystatin C, gelsolin, and BRI2 can cause inherited cerebral
amyloid angiopathy syndromes. 109 
Genetic Factors: Summary and Gaps 
The cause of ischemic stroke remains unclear in as many as 35%
of patients. The use of DNA sequence information, in conjunction with other
“omics” (eg, transcriptomics, epigenomics) and clinical
information to refine stroke origin, although promising, has not yet proven
useful for guiding preventive therapy. Genetic factors could arguably be
classified as potentially modifiable, but because specific gene therapy is not
presently available for most conditions, genetic factors have been classified as
nonmodifiable. It should be recognized that treatments are available for some,
such as Fabry disease and SCD. 
Genetic Factors: Recommendations 
Obtaining a family history can be useful in identifying people
who may have increased stroke risk ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
A ). 
Referral for genetic counseling may be considered for patients
with rare genetic causes of stroke ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Treatment of Fabry disease with enzyme replacement therapy might
be considered, but has not been shown to reduce the risk of stroke, and
its effectiveness is unknown ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Noninvasive screening for unruptured intracranial aneurysms in
patients with ≥2 first-degree relatives with SAH or intracranial
aneurysms might be reasonable ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
C ). 110 
Noninvasive screening may be considered for unruptured
intracranial aneurysms in patients with autosomal-dominant polycystic
kidney disease and ≥1 relatives with autosomal-dominant
polycystic kidney disease and SAH or ≥1 relatives with
autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney disease and intracranial aneurysm
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence C ). 
Noninvasive screening for unruptured intracranial aneurysms in
patients with cervical fibromuscular dysplasia may be considered
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence C ). 
Pharmacogenetic dosing of vitamin K antagonists may be
considered when therapy is initiated ( Class IIb; Level of
Evidence C ). 
Noninvasive screening for unruptured intracranial aneurysms in
patients with no more than 1 relative with SAH or intracranial aneurysms
is not recommended ( Class III; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Screening for intracranial aneurysms in every carrier of
autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney disease or Ehlers-Danlos type IV
mutations is not recommended ( Class III; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Genetic screening of the general population for the prevention
of a first stroke is not recommended ( Class III; Level of
Evidence C ). 
Genetic screening to determine risk for myopathy is not
recommended when initiation of statin therapy is being considered
( Class III; Level of Evidence C ). 
Well-Documented and Modifiable Risk Factors 
Physical Inactivity 
Physical inactivity is associated with numerous adverse health effects,
including an increased risk of total mortality, cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality, and stroke. The 2008 physical activity guidelines for Americans
provide an extensive review and conclude that physically active men and women
generally have a 25% to 30% lower risk of stroke or mortality
than the least active. 111 Two
meta-analyses of physical activity reached the same conclusion. 112 , 113 The benefits appear to occur from a variety of
activities, including leisure-time physical activity, occupational activity, and
walking. Overall, the relationship between activity and stroke is not influenced
by age or sex, but some data suggest linkages between these factors and activity
levels. 114 – 116 
The relationship between the amount or intensity of physical activity
and stroke risk remains unsettled and includes the possibility of a sex
interaction. One study suggested an increasing benefit with greater intensity in
women (median relative risk [RR], 0.82 for all strokes for
moderate-intensity versus no or light activity; RR, 0.72 for high-intensity
versus no or light activity). In men, there was no apparent benefit of higher
intensity (median RR, 0.65 for moderate intensity versus no or light activity;
RR, 0.72 for high intensity versus no or light activity). 111 In contrast, the prospective Northern
Manhattan Study (NOMAS) suggested that moderate- to high-intensity physical
activity was protective against risk of ischemic stroke in men (hazard ratio
[HR], 0.37; 95% CI, 0.18–0.78) but not women
(HR, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.57–1.50). 117 Increased physical activity has also
been associated with a lower prevalence of brain infarcts. 118 Vigorous physical activity, regardless
of sex, was associated with a decreased incidence of stroke in the National
Runners’ Health Study. 119 
The protective effect of physical activity may be partly mediated
through its role in reducing BP 120 and controlling other risk factors for CVD, 121 , 122 including diabetes mellitus 120 and excess body weight. Physical
activity also reduces plasma fibrinogen and platelet activity and elevates
plasma tissue plasminogen activator activity and HDL cholesterol
concentrations. 123 – 125 
Physical activity may also exert positive health effects by increasing
circulating anti-inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin-1 receptor
antagonist and interleukin-10, and modulating immune function in additional
ways. 126 
A large and generally consistent body of evidence from prospective,
observational studies indicates that routine physical activity prevents stroke.
The 2008 physical activity guidelines for Americans recommend that adults should
engage in ≥150 min/wk of moderate-intensity (eg, fast walking) or 75
min/wk of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity (eg, running) or an
equivalent combination of moderate- and vigorous-intensity aerobic activity.
These guidelines also note that some physical activity is better than none and
that adults who participate in any amount of physical activity gain some health
benefits. 111 The 2013
AHA/ACC guideline on lifestyle to reduce cardiovascular risk encourages moderate
to vigorous aerobic physical activity for at least 40 minutes at a time to be
done at least 3 to 4 d/wk for the purpose of reducing BP and improving lipid
profile. 127 
Physical Inactivity: Summary and Gaps 
A sedentary lifestyle is associated with several adverse health effects,
including an increased risk of stroke. Indeed, the global vascular risk
prediction scale including the addition of physical activity, waist
circumference, and alcohol consumption improved prediction of 10-year event
rates in multiethnic communities compared with traditional Framingham
variables. 128 
Clinical trials documenting a reduction in risk of a first or recurrent stroke
with regular physical activity have not been conducted. Evidence from
observational studies is sufficiently strong to make recommendations for routine
physical activity to prevent stroke. 127 
Physical Inactivity: Recommendations 
Physical activity is recommended because it is associated with a
reduction in the risk of stroke ( Class I; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Healthy adults should perform at least moderate- to
vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity at least 40 min/d 3 to 4
d/wk 127 
( Class I; Level of Evidence B ). 
Dyslipidemia 
Total Cholesterol 
Most studies have found high total cholesterol to be a risk factor
for ischemic stroke. In the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT),
comprising >350 000 men, the RR of death resulting from
nonhemorrhagic stroke increased progressively with each higher level of
cholesterol. 129 
In the Alpha-Tocopherol Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) study, which
included >28 000 cigarette-smoking men, the risk of cerebral
infarction was increased among those with total cholesterol levels of
≥7 mmol/L (≥271 mg/dL). 130 In the Asia Pacific Cohort Studies Collaboration
(APCSC), which included 352 033 individuals, there was a 25%
(95% CI, 13–40) increase in ischemic stroke rates for every
1-mmol/L (38.7-mg/dL) increase in total cholesterol. 131 In the Women’s Pooling
Project, which included 24 343 US women <55 years of age with no
previous CVD, and in the Women’s Health Study (WHS), a prospective
cohort study of 27 937 US women ≥45 years of age, higher cholesterol
levels were also associated with increased risk of ischemic
stroke. 132 , 133 In other studies, the
association between cholesterol and stroke was less clear. In the ARIC
study, including 14 175 middle-aged men and women free of clinical CVD, the
relationships between lipid values and incident ischemic stroke were
weak. 134 
Most studies have found an inverse relationship between cholesterol
levels and risk of hemorrhagic stroke. In MRFIT, the risk of death resulting
from ICH was increased 3-fold in men with total cholesterol concentrations
<4.14 mmol/L (160 mg/dL) compared with higher levels. 129 In a pooled cohort
analysis of the ARIC study and the Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS), lower
levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol were inversely
associated with incident intracranial hemorrhage. 135 In the APCSC, there was a
20% (95% CI, 8–30) decreased risk of hemorrhagic
stroke for every 1-mmol/L (38.7-mg/dL) increase in total
cholesterol. 131 
Similar findings were reported in the Ibaraki Prefectural Health Study, in
which the age- and sex-adjusted risk of death from parenchymal hemorrhagic
stroke in people with LDL cholesterol of ≥140 mg/dL was about half
of that in people with LDL cholesterol <80 mg/dL (OR, 0.45;
95% CI, 0.30–0.69). 136 The Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program
reported that serum cholesterol <178 mg/dL increased the risk of ICH
among men ≥65 years (RR, 2.7; 95% CI,
1.4–5.0). 137 In a Japanese nested case-control study, patients with
intraparenchymal hemorrhage had lower cholesterol levels than control
subjects. 138 In
contrast, in the Korean Medical Insurance Corporation Study of ≈115
000 men, low serum cholesterol was not an independent risk factor for
ICH. 139 Overall,
epidemiological studies suggest competing stroke risk related to total
cholesterol levels in the general population: low levels of total
cholesterol increasing risk of ICH and high levels of total cholesterol
increasing risk of ischemic stroke. 
Given the complex relationship between total cholesterol and stroke,
it is noteworthy that there appears to be no positive association between
total cholesterol and stroke mortality. 140 
HDL Cholesterol 
Some epidemiological studies have shown an inverse relationship
between HDL cholesterol and risk of stroke, 141 – 145 whereas others have not. 134 The Emerging Risk Factors
Collaboration performed a meta-analysis involving individual records on 302
430 people without vascular disease from 68 long-term prospective
studies. 146 
Collectively, there were 2.79 million person-years of follow-up. The
aggregated data set included 2534 ischemic strokes, 513 hemorrhagic strokes,
and 2536 unclassified strokes. The analysis adjusted for risk factors other
than lipid levels and corrected for regression dilution. The adjusted HRs
were 0.93 (95% CI, 0.84–1.02) for ischemic stroke, 1.09
(95% CI, 0.92–1.29) for hemorrhagic stroke, and 0.87
(95% CI, 0.80–0.94) for unclassified stroke. There was
modest heterogeneity among studies of ischemic stroke
( I 2 =27%). The absence of an
association between HDL and ischemic stroke and between HDL and hemorrhagic
stroke contrast with the clear inverse association between HDL cholesterol
and coronary heart disease observed in the same meta-analysis. 
Triglycerides 
Epidemiological studies that have evaluated the relationship between
triglycerides and ischemic stroke have been inconsistent, in part because
some have used fasting and others used nonfasting levels. Fasting
triglyceride levels were not associated with ischemic stroke in
ARIC. 134 
Triglycerides did not predict the risk of ischemic stroke among healthy men
enrolled in the Physicians’ Health Study. 147 Similarly, in the Oslo study of
healthy men, triglycerides were not related to the risk of stroke. 148 In contrast, a
meta-analysis of prospective studies conducted in the Asia-Pacific region
found a 50% increased risk of ischemic stroke among those in the
highest quintile of fasting triglycerides compared with those in the lowest
quintile. 149 The
Copenhagen City Heart Study, a prospective, population-based cohort study
comprising ≈14 000 people, found that elevated nonfasting
triglyceride levels increased the risk of ischemic stroke in both men and
women. After multivariate adjustment, there was a 15% (95%
CI, 9–22) increase in the risk of ischemic stroke for each 89-mg/dL
increase in nonfasting triglycerides. HRs for ischemic stroke among men and
women with the highest (≥443 mg/dL) compared with the lowest
(<89 mg/dL) nonfasting triglyceride levels were 2.5 (95% CI,
1.3–4.8) and 3.8 (95% CI, 1.3–11), respectively. The
10-year risks of ischemic stroke were 16.7% and 12.2%,
respectively, in men and women ≥55 years of age with triglyceride
levels of ≥443 mg/dL. 150 Similarly, the WHS found that in models adjusted
for total and HDL cholesterol and measures of insulin resistance, nonfasting
triglycerides, but not fasting triglycerides, were associated with
cardiovascular events, including ischemic stroke. 151 A meta-analysis of 64 randomized
clinical trials that tested lipid-modifying drugs found an adjusted RR of
stroke of 1.05 (95% CI, 1.03–1.07) for each 10-mg/dL
increase in baseline triglycerides, although fasting status is not
specified. 152 In
the Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration meta-analysis, triglyceride levels
were not associated with either ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke risk, and
determination of fasting status did not appear to change the lack of
association. 146 
Treatment of Dyslipidemia 
Treatment with statins (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase
inhibitors) reduces the risk of stroke in patients with or at high risk for
atherosclerosis. 153 , 154 One meta-analysis of 26
trials that included >90 000 patients found that statins reduced the
risk of all strokes by ≈21% (95% CI,
15–27). 153 
Baseline mean LDL cholesterol in the studies ranged from 124 to 188 mg/dL and
averaged 149 mg/dL. The risk of all strokes was estimated to decrease by
15.6% (95% CI, 6.7–23.6) for each 10% reduction
in LDL cholesterol. Another meta-analysis of randomized trials of statins in
combination with other preventive strategies that included 165 792 individuals
showed that each 1-mmol/L (39-mg/dL) decrease in LDL cholesterol was associated
with a 21.1% (95% CI, 6.3–33.5;
P =0·009) reduction in stroke. 155 Several meta-analyses also
found that beneficial effects are greater with greater lipid lowering. One
meta-analysis of 7 randomized, controlled trials of primary and secondary
prevention reported that more intensive statin therapy that achieved an LDL
cholesterol of 55 to 80 mg/dL resulted in a lower risk of stroke than less
intensive therapy that achieved an LDL cholesterol of 81 to 135 mg/dL (OR, 0.80;
95% CI, 0.71–0.89). 156 Another meta-analysis of 10 randomized, controlled
trials of patients with atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease reported a
significant reduction in the composite of fatal and nonfatal strokes with higher
versus lower statin doses (RR, 0.86; 95% CI,
0.77–0.96). 157 
A meta-analysis of 22 trials involving 134 537 patients assessed the
association of LDL cholesterol lowering with a statin and major cardiovascular
events, including stroke, according to risk categories ranging from
<5% to >30% 5-year risk of a major
cardiovascular event. 158 The
risk of major vascular events was lowered by 21% (95% CI,
23–29) for each 39-mg/dL reduction in LDL cholesterol. For every
39-mg/dL reduction in LDL, there was a 24% (95% CI,
5–39) reduction in the risk of stroke in participants with an estimated
5-year risk of major vascular events <10%, which was similar to
the relationship seen in higher-risk categories. Similarly, another
meta-analysis, which included 14 trials reporting stroke outcomes in patients
with an estimated 10-year risk of cardiovascular events of <20%,
found that the RR of stroke was significantly lower among statin recipients than
among control subjects (RR, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.74–0.94). 159 In addition, in
Justification for the Use of statins in Prevention: An Intervention Trial
Evaluating Rosuvastatin (JUPITER), statin treatment reduced the incidence of
fatal and nonfatal stroke compared with placebo (HR, 0.52; 95% CI,
0.34–0.79) in healthy men and women with LDL cholesterol levels
<130 mg/dL and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) levels
≥2.0 mg/L. 160 
Concerns about lowering of LDL cholesterol by statin therapy increasing
the risk of hemorrhagic stroke are not supported. One meta-analysis of 31 trials
comparing statin therapy with a control reported that statin therapy decreased
total stroke (OR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.78–0.91) and found no
difference in the incidence of ICH (OR, 1.08; 95% CI,
0.88–1.32). 161 These findings are consistent with another meta-analysis
that included 23 randomized trials and found that statins were not associated
with an increased risk of ICH (RR, 1.10; 95% CI,
0.86–1.41). 162 The intensity of cholesterol lowering did not correlate
with risk of ICH. 
The beneficial effect of statins on ischemic stroke is most likely
related to their capacity to reduce progression or to induce regression of
atherosclerosis. Meta-analyses of statin trials found that statin therapy slows
the progression of carotid IMT and that the magnitude of LDL cholesterol
reduction correlates inversely with the progression of carotid IMT. 153 , 163 Moreover, beneficial effects on carotid IMT are
greater with higher-intensity statin therapy. 164 – 166 In addition, plaque characteristics appear to improve
with statin therapy. One study using high-resolution MRI reported that intensive
lipid therapy depleted carotid plaque lipid, 167 and another found that high-dose
atorvastatin reduced carotid plaque inflammation as determined by ultrasmall
superparamagnetic iron oxide–enhanced MRI. 168 
Statins should be prescribed in accordance with the 2013
“ACC/AHA Guideline on the Treatment of Blood Cholesterol to Reduce
Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Risk in Adults.” 169 These guidelines represent a dramatic
shift away from specific LDL cholesterol targets. Instead, the guidelines call
for estimating the 10-year risk for atherosclerotic CVD and, based on the
estimated risk, prescribing a statin at low, moderate, or high intensity. The
intensity of statin therapy depends on the drug and the dose. For example,
lovastatin at 20 mg/d is considered low-intensity therapy, and lovastatin at 40
mg/d is considered moderate-intensity therapy. Atorvastatin at 10 mg/d is
considered moderate-intensity therapy, and atorvastatin at 80 mg/d is considered
high-intensity therapy. A cardiovascular risk calculator to assist in estimating
10-year risk can be found online at http://my.americanheart.org/cvriskcalculator . Although the new
guidelines shift focus away from specific lipid targets, values for total
cholesterol and HDL are incorporated into the cardiovascular risk calculator,
along with age, sex, race, SBP, hypertension treatment, diabetes mellitus, and
cigarette smoking. 
The benefits of lipid-modifying therapies other than statins on the risk
of ischemic stroke are not established. A meta-analysis of 78 lipid-lowering
trials involving 266 973 patients reported that statins decreased the risk of
total stroke (OR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.78–0.92), whereas the benefits
of other lipid-lowering interventions were not significant, including diet (OR,
0.92; 95% CI, 0.69–1.23), fibrates (OR, 0.98; 95% CI,
0.86–1.12), and other treatments (OR, 0.81; 95% CI,
0.61–1.08). 170 Reduction in the risk of stroke is proportional to the
reduction in total and LDL cholesterol; each 1% reduction in total
cholesterol is associated with a 0.8% reduction in the risk of stroke.
Similarly, another meta-analysis of 64 randomized, controlled trials reported
that treatment-related decreases in LDL cholesterol were associated with
decreases in all strokes (RR reduction, 4.5% per 10-mg/dL reduction;
95% CI, 1.7–7.2); however, there was no relationship between
triglycerides and stroke. 152 
Niacin increases HDL cholesterol and decreases plasma levels of
lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)]. The Coronary Drug Project found that
treatment with niacin reduced mortality in men with prior MI. 171 In the Atherothrombosis
Intervention in Metabolic Syndrome with Low HDL/High Triglycerides: Impact on
Global Health Outcomes (AIM-HIGH) study of patients with established CVD, the
addition of extended-release niacin to intensive simvastatin therapy did not
reduce the risk of a composite of cardiovascular events, which included ischemic
stroke. 172 In a
meta-analysis of 11 studies comprising 9959 subjects, niacin use was associated
with a significant reduction in cardiovascular events, including a composite of
cardiac death, nonfatal MI, hospitalization for acute coronary syndrome, stroke,
or revascularization procedure (OR, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.49–0.89).
There was an association between niacin therapy and coronary heart disease event
(OR, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.59–0.96) but not with the incidence of
stroke (OR, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.5–1.54). 173 However, there are serious safety
concerns about niacin therapy. The Heart Protection Study 2—Treatment of
HDL to Reduce the Incidence of Vascular Events (HPS2-THRIVE) trial involving 25
693 patients at high risk for vascular disease showed that extended-release
niacin with laropiprant (a prostaglandin D2 signal blocker) caused a significant
4-fold increase in the risk of myopathy in patients taking
simvastatin. 174 
Fibric acid derivatives such as gemfibrozil, fenofibrate, and
bezafibrate lower triglyceride levels and increase HDL cholesterol. The
Bezafibrate Infarction Prevention study, which included patients with prior MI
or stable angina and HDL cholesterol ≤45 mg/dL, found that bezafibrate
did not significantly decrease either the risk of MI or sudden death (primary
end point) or stroke (secondary end point). 175 The Veterans Administration HDL Intervention Trial of
men with coronary artery disease and low HDL cholesterol found that gemfibrozil
reduced the risk of all strokes, primarily ischemic strokes. 176 In the Fenofibrate
Intervention and Event Lowering in Diabetes (FIELD) study, fenofibrate neither
decreased the composite primary end point of coronary heart disease death or
nonfatal MI nor decreased the risk of stroke. In the Action to Control
Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) study of patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus, adding fenofibrate to simvastatin did not reduce fatal cardiovascular
events, nonfatal MI, or nonfatal stroke compared with simvastatin
alone. 177 A
meta-analysis of 18 trials found that fibrate therapy produced a 10%
(95% CI, 0–18) relative reduction in the risk for major
cardiovascular but no benefit on the risk of stroke (RR reduction,
−3%; 95% CI, −16 to 9). 178 
Ezetimibe lowers blood cholesterol by reducing intestinal absorption of
cholesterol. In a study of familial hypercholesterolemia, adding ezetimibe to
simvastatin did not affect the progression of carotid IMT more than simvastatin
alone. 179 In another
trial of subjects receiving a statin, niacin led to greater reductions in mean
carotid IMT than ezetimibe over 14 months
( P =0.003). 180 Counterintuitively, patients receiving ezetimibe who
had greater reductions in the LDL cholesterol had an increase in the carotid IMT
( r =–0.31;
P <0.001). 180 The rate of major cardiovascular events was lower in
those randomized to niacin (1% versus 5%;
P =0.04). Stroke events were not reported. A clinical
outcome trial comparing ezetimibe and simvastatin with simvastatin alone on
cardiovascular outcomes is in progress. 181 Ezetimibe has not been shown to decrease
cardiovascular events or stroke. 
Dyslipidemia: Recommendations 
In addition to therapeutic lifestyle changes, treatment with an
HMG coenzyme-A reductase inhibitor (statin) medication is recommended
for the primary prevention of ischemic stroke in patients estimated to
have a high 10-year risk for cardiovascular events as recommended in the
2013 “ACC/AHA Guideline on the Treatment of Blood Cholesterol to
Reduce Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Risk in Adults” 169 
(Class I; Level of Evidence A) . 
Niacin may be considered for patients with low HDL cholesterol
or elevated Lp(a), but its efficacy in preventing ischemic stroke in
patients with these conditions is not established. Caution should be
used with niacin because it increases the risk of myopathy
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
Fibric acid derivatives may be considered for patients with
hypertriglyceridemia, but their efficacy in preventing ischemic stroke
is not established ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Treatment with nonstatin lipid-lowering therapies such as fibric
acid derivatives, bile acid sequestrants, niacin, and ezetimibe may be
considered in patients who cannot tolerate statins, but their efficacy
in preventing stroke is not established ( Class IIb; Level of
Evidence C ). 
Diet and Nutrition 
A large and diverse body of evidence has implicated several aspects of
diet in the pathogenesis of high BP, the major modifiable risk factor for
ischemic stroke. A scientific statement from the AHA concluded that several
aspects of diet lead to elevated BP. 182 Specifically, dietary risk factors that are causally
related to elevated BP include excessive salt intake, low potassium intake,
excessive weight, high alcohol consumption, and suboptimal dietary pattern.
Blacks are especially sensitive to the BP-raising effects of high salt intake,
low potassium intake, and suboptimal diet. 182 In this setting, dietary changes have the potential to
substantially reduce racial disparities in BP and stroke. 182 , 183 
Nutrition science is generally limited because randomized trials
involving long-term follow-up are challenging to conduct. Nutritional
epidemiology faces challenges of measurement error, confounders, variable
effects of food items, variable reference groups, interactions, and multiple
testing. 184 Keeping
these limitations in mind, it is worth noting that several aspects of diet have
been associated with stroke risk. A meta-analysis found a strong inverse
relationship between servings of fruits and vegetables and subsequent
stroke. 185 Compared
with individuals who consumed <3 servings per day, the RR of ischemic
stroke was less in those who consumed 3 to 5 servings per day (RR, 0.88;
95% CI, 0.79–0.98) and in those who consumed >5 servings
per day (RR, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.66–0.79). The dose-response
relationship extends into the higher ranges of intake. 186 Specifically, in analyses of the
Nurses’ Health Study and the Health Professionals’ Follow-Up
Study, 186 the RR of
incident stroke was 0.69 (95% CI, 0.52–0.92) for people in the
highest versus lowest quintile of fruit and vegetable intake. Median intake in
the highest quintile was 10.2 servings of fruits and vegetables in men and 9.2
in women. For each serving-per-day increase in fruit and vegetable intake, the
risk of stroke was reduced by 6% (95% CI, 1–10). A
subsequent analysis of the Nurses’ Health Study 187 showed that increased intake of
flavonoids, primarily from citrus fruits, was associated with a reduced risk of
ischemic stroke (RR, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.66–0.99;
P =0.04). As highlighted in the 2010 US Dietary
Guidelines, most Americans obtain only 64% and 50% of the
recommended daily consumption of vegetables and fruits, respectively. 188 
A randomized, controlled trial of the Mediterranean diet performed in
7447 individuals at high cardiovascular risk showed that those on an
energy-unrestricted Mediterranean diet supplemented by nuts (walnuts, hazelnuts,
and almonds) had a lower risk of stroke than people on a control diet (3.1
versus 5.9 strokes per 1000 person-years; P =0.003) and
that those on an energy-unrestricted Mediterranean diet supplemented by extra
virgin olive oil had a lower risk of stroke than people on a control diet (4.1
strokes per 1000 person-years; P =0.03). 189 
In ecological studies, 190 prospective studies, 191 , 192 and
meta-analyses, 193 , 194 a higher level of sodium
intake was associated with an increased risk of stroke. In prospective studies,
a higher level of potassium intake was also associated with a reduced risk of
stroke. 195 – 198 It should be emphasized that
a plethora of methodological limitations, particularly difficulties in
estimating dietary electrolyte intake, hinder risk assessment and may lead to
false-negative or even paradoxical results in observational studies. 
One trial tested the effects of replacing regular salt (sodium chloride)
with a potassium-enriched salt in elderly Taiwanese men. 199 In addition to increased overall
survivorship and reduced costs, the potassium-enriched salt reduced the risk of
mortality from cerebrovascular disease (RR, 0.50). This trial did not present
follow-up BP measurements; hence, it is unclear whether BP reduction accounted
for the beneficial effects of the intervention. In contrast, in the
Women’s Health Initiative, a low-fat diet that emphasized consumption of
whole grains, fruits, and vegetables did not reduce stroke incidence; however,
the intervention did not achieve a substantial increase in fruit and vegetable
consumption (mean difference, only 1.1 servings per day) or decrease in BP (mean
difference, <0.5 mm Hg for both SBP and DBP). 200 
The effects of sodium and potassium on stroke risk are likely mediated
through direct effects on BP and effects independent of BP. 201 In clinical trials, particularly
dose-response studies, the relationship between sodium intake and BP is direct
and progressive, without an apparent threshold. 202 – 204 Blacks, hypertensives, and middle-aged and older
adults are especially sensitive to the BP-lowering effects of a reduced sodium
intake. 205 In other
trials, an increased intake of potassium was shown to lower BP 206 and to blunt the pressor
effects of sodium. 207 Diets
rich in fruits and vegetables, including those based on the Dietary Approaches
to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet (rich in fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy
products and reduced in saturated and total fat), lower BP. 208 – 210 As documented in a study by the Institute of
Medicine, 211 sodium
intake remains high and potassium intake quite low in the United States. 
Other dietary factors may affect the risk of stroke, but the evidence is
insufficient to make specific recommendations. 182 In Asian countries, a low intake of
animal protein, saturated fat, and cholesterol has been associated with a
decreased risk of stroke, 212 
but such relationships have been less apparent in Western countries. 213 A recent prospective
study 214 showed that
higher intake of red meat was associated with a higher risk of stroke, but a
higher intake of poultry was associated with a lower risk of stroke.
Additionally, a meta-analysis of prospective studies concluded that intake of
fresh, processed, and total red meat is associated with an increased risk of
ischemic stroke. 215 
Potentially, the source of dietary protein may affect stroke risk. In the
absence of a clinical syndrome of a specific vitamin or nutrient deficiency,
there is no conclusive evidence that vitamins or other supplements prevent
incident stroke. 
Diet and Nutrition: Summary and Gaps 
From epidemiological studies and randomized trials, it is likely that
diets low in sodium and rich in fruits and vegetables, such as the Mediterranean
and DASH-style diets, reduce stroke risk. Few randomized trials with clinical
outcomes have been conducted. US Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend a
sodium intake of <2300 mg/d (100 mmol/d) for the general population. In
blacks, individuals with hypertension, those with diabetes mellitus, those with
chronic kidney disease, and individuals ≥51 years of age, a sodium
intake of <1500 mg is recommended. 188 The AHA recommends <1500 mg sodium per
day. 216 The ideal
lower limit of dietary salt intake remains ill defined and may depend on
comorbidities such as diabetes mellitus and heart failure managed with diuretic
medications. 217 US
Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend that potassium intake be at least
4700 mg/d (120 mmol/d). 188 
Diet and Nutrition: Recommendations 
Reduced intake of sodium and increased intake of potassium as
indicated in the US Dietary Guidelines for Americans are recommended to
lower BP ( Class I; Level of Evidence A ). 
A DASH-style diet, which emphasizes fruits, vegetables, and
low-fat dairy products and reduced saturated fat, is recommended to
lower BP 127 , 218 ( Class I;
Level of Evidence A ). 
A diet that is rich in fruits and vegetables and thereby high in
potassium is beneficial and may lower the risk of stroke ( Class
I; Level of Evidence B ). 
A Mediterranean diet supplemented with nuts may be considered in
lowering the risk of stroke ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Hypertension 
The Seventh Joint National Committee defined hypertension as SBP
>140 mm Hg and DBP >90 mm Hg. 219 The most recent panel appointed by the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute to review hypertension management
guidelines was silent on the issue of defining hypertension but chose instead to
focus on defining BP thresholds for initiating or modifying therapy. 220 Hypertension is a major risk
factor for both cerebral infarction and ICH. The relationship between BP and
stroke risk is strong, continuous, graded, consistent, independent, predictive,
and etiologically significant. 221 Throughout the usual range of BPs, including the
nonhypertensive range, the higher the BP is, the greater the risk of
stroke. 222 
The prevalence of hypertension has plateaued over the past decade. On
the basis of national survey data from 1999 to 2000 and 2007 to 2008, the
prevalence of hypertension in the United States remained stable at
29%. 223 , 224 Hypertension control has
also improved over the past 25 years, with control rates of 27.3%
measured in 1988 to 1994 and 50.1% measured in 2007 to 2008. The
improved control is likely attributable to heightened awareness and treatment.
Awareness of hypertension among US residents significantly increased from
69% in 1988 to 1994 to 81% in 2007 to 2008, and treatment
improved from 54% to 73% over the same period. Despite the
improvements, however, rates of control were lower among Hispanics compared with
whites and among those 18 to 39 years of age compared with older
individuals. 
BP, particularly SBP, rises with increasing age in both
children 225 and
adults. 226 
Individuals who are normotensive at 55 years of age have a 90% lifetime
risk for developing hypertension. 227 More than two thirds of people ≥65 years of
age are hypertensive. 221 
Because the risk of stroke increases progressively with increasing BP
and because many individuals have a BP level below current drug treatment
thresholds, 220 
nondrug or lifestyle approaches are recommended as a means of reducing BP in
nonhypertensive individuals with an elevated BP (ie, pre-hypertension: 120 to
139 mm Hg SBP or 80 to 89 mm Hg DBP). 228 Pharmacological treatment of prehypertension appears
to reduce the risk of stroke. In a meta-analysis of 16 trials involving 70 664
prehypertensive patients, prehypertensive patients randomized to active
antihypertensive treatment had a consistent and statistically significant
22% reduction in the risk of stroke compared with those taking placebo
( P <0.000001). 229 
Behavioral lifestyle changes are recommended by the Seventh Joint
National Committee as part of a comprehensive treatment strategy for
hypertension. 221 
Compelling evidence from >40 years of clinical trials has documented
that drug treatment of hypertension prevents stroke and other BP-related
target-organ damage, including heart failure, coronary heart disease, and renal
failure. 221 A
meta-analysis of 23 randomized trials showed that antihypertensive drug
treatment reduced the risk of stroke by 32% (95% CI,
24–39; P =0.004) compared with no drug
treatment. 230 The use
of antihypertensive therapies among those with mild hypertension (SBP, 140 to
159 mm Hg; DBP, 90 to 99 mm Hg; or both), however, was not clearly shown to
reduce the risk of first stroke in a Cochrane Database Systematic Review,
although a trend of clinically important magnitude was present (RR, 0.51;
95% CI, 0.24–1.08). Because 9% of patients stopped
therapy as a result of side effects, the authors recommended further trials be
conducted. 231 
Several trials have addressed the potential role of antihypertensive
treatment among patients with prevalent CVD but without hypertension. In a
meta-analysis of 25 trials of antihypertensive therapy for patients with
prevalent CVD (including stroke) but without hypertension, patients receiving
antihypertensive medications had a pooled RR for stroke of 0.77 (95% CI,
0.61–0.98) compared with control subjects. 232 The magnitude of the RR reduction was
greater for stroke than for most other cardiovascular outcomes, although the
absolute risk reductions were greater for other outcomes because of their
greater relative frequency. 
In a separate meta-analysis of 13 trials involving 80 594 individuals,
among those either with prevalent atherosclerotic disease or at high risk for
developing it, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (ACEIs) or
angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) therapy reduced the risk of a composite
primary outcome including stroke by 11%, without variability by baseline
BP. 233 There was also
a significant reduction in fatal and nonfatal strokes (OR, 0.91; 95% CI,
0.86–0.97). Non–ACEI/ARB therapies were allowed, but
meta-regression analyses provided evidence that the benefits were not due solely
to BP reductions during the trial. Several other meta-analyses have evaluated
whether specific classes of antihypertensive agents offer protection against
stroke beyond their BP-lowering effects. 230 , 234 – 237 In one of these
meta-analyses evaluating different classes of agents used as first-line therapy
in subjects with a baseline BP >140/90 mm Hg, thiazide diuretics (RR,
0.63; 95% CI, 0.57–0.71), β-blockers (RR, 0.83;
95% CI, 0.72–0.97), ACEIs (RR, 0.65; 95% CI,
0.52–0.82), and calcium channel blockers (RR, 0.58; 95% CI,
0.41–0.84) each reduced the risk of stroke compared with placebo or no
treatment. 236 
Compared with thiazides, β-blockers, ACEIs, and ARBs, calcium channel
blockers appear to have a slightly greater effect on reducing the risk of
stroke, although the effect is not seen for other cardiovascular outcomes and
was of small magnitude (8% relative reduction in risk). 235 One meta-analysis found that
diuretic therapy was superior to ACEI therapy, 230 and another found that calcium channel
blockers were superior to ACEIs. 237 Another found that β-blockers were less effective
in reducing stroke risk than calcium channel blockers (RR, 1.24; 95% CI,
1.11–1.40) or inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system (RR, 1.30;
95% CI, 1.11–1.53). 238 Subgroup analyses from 1 major trial suggest that the
benefit of diuretic therapy over ACEI therapy is especially prominent in
blacks, 239 and
subgroup analysis from another large trial found that β-blockers were
significantly less effective than thiazide diuretics and ARBs at preventing
stroke in those ≥65 years of age than in younger patients. 240 The results of a recent
trial of the direct renin inhibitor aliskiren in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus plus chronic kidney disease or prevalent CVD did not find evidence that
aliskiren reduced cardiovascular end points, including stroke. 241 In general, therefore,
although the benefits of lowering BP as a means to prevent stroke are
undisputed, there is no definitive evidence that any particular class of
antihypertensive agents offers special protection against stroke in all
patients. Further hypothesis-driven trials are warranted, however, to test
differences in efficacy of individual agents in specific subgroups of
patients. 
BP control can be achieved in most patients, but most patients require
therapy with ≥2 drugs. 242 , 243 In 1
open-label trial conducted in Japan, among patients taking a calcium channel
blocker who had not yet achieved a target BP, the addition of a thiazide
diuretic significantly reduced the risk of stroke compared with the addition of
either a β-blocker ( P =0.0109) or an ARB
( P =0.0770). 244 The advantage of the combination of a calcium channel
blocker and thiazide was not seen, however, for other cardiovascular end
points. 
Meta-analyses support that more intensive control of BP (SBP
<130 mm Hg) reduces risk of stroke more than less intensive control
(SBP, 130–139 mm Hg), although the effects on other outcomes and in all
subgroups of patients remain unclear. Among 11 trials with 42 572 participants,
the RR of stroke for those whose SBP was <130 mm Hg was 0.80
(95% CI, 0.70–0.92). The effect was greater among those with
cardiovascular risk factors but without established CVD. 245 This benefit of intensive BP lowering
may be more specific to stroke than to other cardiovascular outcomes, at least
among certain subgroups of patients. Among patients with diabetes mellitus at
high cardiovascular risk enrolled in the ACCORD Blood Pressure Trial, more
intensive BP control (SBP <120 mm Hg) compared with standard control
(<140 mm Hg) led to a significant reduction in risk of stroke, a
prespecified secondary outcome (HR, 0.59; 95% CI,
0.39–0.89). 246 , 247 However,
there was no effect on either the primary composite outcome or overall
mortality. This absence of benefit on nonstroke outcomes was not attributable to
obesity because effects were similar across levels of obesity. A meta-analysis
of 31 trials with 73 913 individuals with diabetes mellitus demonstrated that
more intensive BP reduction significantly reduced the risk of stroke but not
MI. 248 For every 5-mm
Hg reduction in SBP, the risk of stroke decreased by 13% (95%
CI, 5–20). In a secondary analysis of the Losartan Intervention for
Endpoint Reduction in Hypertension (LIFE) trial, however, among 9193
hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy by ECG criteria,
achieving intensive BP control to <130 mm Hg was not associated with a
reduction in stroke after multivariable adjustment, and there was a significant
increase in all-cause mortality (HR, 1.37; 95% CI,
1.10–1.71). 249 The target for BP reduction, therefore, may differ by
patient characteristics and comorbidities. 
Pharmacogenomics may contribute to improving individualized selection of
antihypertensive medications for stroke prevention. For example, in genetic
studies ancillary to the Antihypertensive and Lipid Lowering to Prevent Heart
Attack Trial (ALLHAT), individuals with the stromelysin (matrix
metalloproteinase-3) genotype 6A/6A had higher stroke rates on lisinopril than
on chlorthalidone, and those with the 5A/6A genotype had lower stroke rates on
lisinopril. 250 The
5A/5A homozygotes had the lowest stroke rates compared with those taking
chlorthalidone (HR for interaction=0.51; 95% CI,
0.31–0.85). The effect was not seen for other medications. Carriers of
mutations of the fibrinogen-β gene also had a lower risk of stroke on
lisinopril compared with amlodipine than those who were homozygous for the usual
allele, potentially because ACEIs lower fibrinogen levels and this effect is
more clinically important among those with mutations associated with higher
fibrinogen levels. 251 The
role of genetic testing in hypertension management remains undefined at present,
however. 
Recent evidence suggests that intraindividual variability in BP may
confer risk beyond that caused by mean elevations in BP alone. 252 There is further
observational evidence that calcium channel blockers may have benefits in
reducing BP variability that are not present with β-blockers and that
these benefits may provide additional benefits in stroke risk
reduction. 253 , 254 Twenty-four–hour
ambulatory BP monitoring provides additional insight into risk of stroke and
cardiovascular events. Measurements of nocturnal BP changes (“reverse
dipping” or “extreme dipping”) and the ratio of
nocturnal to daytime BPs may provide data about risk beyond that provided by
mean 24-hour SBP. 255 , 256 Further study of the
benefits on stroke risk reduction of treatments focused on reducing
intraindividual variability in BP and nocturnal BP changes seem warranted. 
Controlling isolated systolic hypertension (SBP ≥160 mm Hg and
DBP <90 mm Hg) in the elderly is also important. The Systolic
Hypertension in Europe (Syst-Eur) Trial randomized 4695 patients with isolated
systolic hypertension to active treatment with a calcium channel blocker or
placebo and found a 42% (95% CI, 18–60;
P =0.02) risk reduction in the actively treated
group. 257 The
Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP) Trial found a 36%
reduction (95% CI, 18–50; P =0.003) in
the incidence of stroke from a diuretic-based regimen. 258 In the Hypertension in the Very Elderly
(HYVET) trial, investigators randomized 3845 patients ≥80 years of age
with SBP ≥160 mm Hg to placebo or indapamide, with perindopril or
placebo added as needed to target a BP <150/80 mm Hg. After 2 years,
there was a reduction in SBP of 15 mm Hg, associated with a 30%
reduction in risk of stroke ( P =0.06), a 39%
reduction in fatal stroke ( P =0.046), and a 21%
reduction in overall mortality ( P =0.02). 257 No trial has focused on
individuals with lesser degrees of isolated systolic hypertension
(SBP=140–159 mm Hg; DBP <90 mm Hg). 
The most recent National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute–appointed panel provides an evidence-based approach to
pharmacological treatment of hypertension. 220 The report focuses on age as a guide for therapeutic
targets, with recommendations to lower BP pharmacologically to a target of
<150/90 mm Hg for patients >60 years of age and target a BP of
<140/90mm Hg for younger patients. However, these recommendations differ
from the 2014 science advisory on high BP control endorsed by the AHA, ACC, and
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in which more aggressive BP targets
are recommended (<140/90 mm Hg) regardless of age. 218 There is concern that raising the SBP
threshold from 140 to 150 mm Hg might reverse some of the gains that have been
achieved in reducing stroke by tighter BP control. For patients with diabetes
mellitus who are at least 18 years of age, the panel originally appointed by the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute to review the evidence on treatment of
hypertension recommends initiating pharmacologic treatment to lower BP at SBP of
≥140 mm Hg or DBP of ≥90 mm Hg and to treat to a goal SBP of
<140 mm Hg and a goal DBP <90 mm Hg. 220 
The International Society on Hypertension in Blacks revised its
recommendations for managing BP in this at-risk population in 2010. 259 In the absence of
target-organ damage, the target should be <135/85 mm Hg; in the presence
of target-organ damage, the target should be <130/80 mm Hg. For patients
who are within 10 mm Hg above target, monotherapy with diuretic or calcium
channel blocker is preferred, and for patients >15/10 mm Hg above
target, 2-drug therapy is preferred either with a calcium channel blocker plus
renin-angiotensin system blocker or, in edematous or volume-overloaded states,
with a thiazide diuretic plus a renin-angiotensin system blocker. Largely on the
basis of a prespecified subgroup analysis of the ALLHAT trial, the National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute panel originally appointed to address
hypertension management recommend that in the general black population,
including those with diabetes mellitus, initial antihypertensive therapy should
include a thiazide-type diuretic or a calcium channel blocker. 220 
Population-wide approaches to reducing BP have also been advocated as
more effective than approaches focused on screening individual patients for the
presence of hypertension and treating them. 235 , 260 Because
the benefits of BP reduction can be seen across the range of measurements in the
population, with and without pre-existing CVD, it may be reasonable to provide
BP-lowering medications to all patients above a certain age (eg, 60 years of
age). 235 Similarly,
on the basis of observational data from 19 cohorts with 177 025 participants
showing lower salt intake to be associated with a lower risk of stroke and other
cardiovascular outcomes, population-wide reductions in salt intake may be
advocated as a way to reduce stroke risk. 194 Self-measured BP monitoring is recommended because
with or without additional support such monitoring lowers BP compared with usual
care. 261 
Hypertension: Summary and Gaps 
Hypertension remains the most important, well-documented modifiable
stroke risk factor, and treatment of hypertension is among the most effective
strategies for preventing both ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke. Across age
groups, including adults ≥80 years of age, the benefit of hypertension
treatment in preventing stroke is clear. Reduction in BP is generally more
important than the specific agents used to achieve this goal. Optimal BP targets
for reducing stroke risk are uncertain. Although the benefits of BP reduction on
stroke risk continue to be seen at progressively lower pressures, adverse
effects on mortality and other outcomes may limit the lower level to which BP
targets can be pushed, particularly among certain subgroups of patients such as
patients with diabetes mellitus. Future studies are needed to determine the
effects of treating BP variability beyond the effects of treatment of mean BP
levels. Hypertension remains undertreated in the community, and additional
programs to improve treatment adherence need to be developed, tested, and
implemented. Both personalized approaches to pharmacotherapy based on
pharmacogenetics and population-level approaches to reducing BP require further
study. 
Hypertension: Recommendations 
Regular BP screening and appropriate treatment of patients with
hypertension, including lifestyle modification and pharmacological
therapy, are recommended ( Class I; Level of Evidence
A ). 
Annual screening for high BP and health-promoting lifestyle
modification are recommended for patients with prehypertension (SBP of
120 to 139 mm Hg or DBP of 80 to 89 mm Hg) ( Class I; Level of
Evidence A ). 
Patients who have hypertension should be treated with
antihypertensive drugs to a target BP of <140/90 mm Hg
( Class I; Level of Evidence A ). 
Successful reduction of BP is more important in reducing stroke
risk than the choice of a specific agent, and treatment should be
individualized on the basis of other patient characteristics and
medication tolerance ( Class I; Level of Evidence
A ). 
Self-measured BP monitoring is recommended to improve BP
control. ( Class I; Level of Evidence A ). 
Obesity and Body Fat Distribution 
Stroke, along with hypertension, heart disease, and diabetes mellitus,
is associated with being overweight or obese. The prevalence of obesity in the
United States has tripled for children and doubled for adults since
1980. 262 Only in the
last 3 years has a leveling off been seen. 263 – 265 
Increasing public awareness and government initiatives have placed this public
health issue in the forefront. 
According to the National Center for Health Statistics data from the
Department of Health and Human Services, in 2009 and 2010, the prevalence of
obesity was 35.7% among adults and 16.9% among children, with a
higher prevalence in adults >60 years of age and adolescents. 263 – 265 Among the race/ethnic groups surveyed
in the United States, age-adjusted rates of obesity indicate the highest rates
in non-Hispanic blacks (49.5%), followed by Mexican Americans
(40.45%) and then all Hispanics (39.1%), with the lowest rate
being among non-Hispanic whites (34.3%). 263 – 265 
A patient’s body mass index (BMI), defined as weight in
kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters, is used to distinguish
overweight (BMI, 25 to 29 kg/m 2 ) from obesity (BMI >30
kg/m 2 ) and morbid obesity (BMI >40
kg/m 2 ). 266 
Men presenting with a waist circumference of >102 cm (40 in) and women
with a waist circumference >88 cm (35 in) are categorized as having
abdominal obesity. 267 
Abdominal obesity can also be measured as the waist-to-hip ratio. For every 0.01
increase in waist-to-hip ratio, there is a 5% increase in risk of
CVD. 268 
Abdominal body fat has proved to be a stronger predictor of stroke risk
than BMI. 269 , 270 In contrast, another study reported
that in men only BMI was significantly associated with stroke, whereas for women
it was waist-to-hip ratio. 271 
Adiposity, however, correlated with risk of ischemic heart disease for both
sexes. When fat distribution measured by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry in
relation to incidence of stroke was studied, there was a significant association
in both men and women between stroke and abdominal fat mass. This association,
however, was not independent of diabetes mellitus, smoking, and
hypertension. 272 
Mounting evidence shows a graded positive relationship between stroke
and obesity independent of age, lifestyle, or other cardiovascular risk factors.
Prospective studies of the relationship between weight (or measures of
adiposity) and incident stroke indicate that in the BMI range of 25 to 50
kg/m 2 there was a 40% increased stroke mortality with
each 5-kg/m 2 increase in BMI. However, in the BMI range of 15 to 24
kg/m 2 , there was no relationship between BMI and
mortality. 273 
A meta-analysis of data from 25 studies involving >2.2 million
people and >30 000 events found an RR for ischemic stroke of 1.22
(95% CI, 1.05–1.41) for overweight people and 1.64 (95%
CI, 1.36–1.99) for obese people. 274 For hemorrhagic stroke, the RR was 1.01 (95%
CI, 0.88–1.17) for overweight people and 1.24 (95% CI,
0.99–1.54) for obese people. This meta-analysis showed an increased risk
of ischemic stroke compared with normal-weight individuals of 22% in
overweight individuals and 64% in obese individuals. When diabetes
mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and other confounders were taken into
account, there was no significant increase in the incidence of hemorrhagic
stroke. These findings have been subsequently borne out in a Chinese study of 27
000 patients. 275 In Japan, a
meta-analysis of 44 000 patients found a positive correlation in both sexes of
elevated BMI with both ischemic and hemorrhagic events. 276 ARIC examined a population of 13 000
black and white participants and found that obesity was a risk factor for
ischemic stroke independently of race. 277 Adjustments for covariates in all these studies
significantly reduced these associations. 
The effects of stroke risk and weight reduction have not been studied
extensively. A Swedish study that followed 4000 patients over 10 to 20 years,
comparing individuals with weight loss through bariatric surgery and obese
subjects receiving usual care, showed significant reductions in diabetes
mellitus, MI, and stroke. 278 
Thirty-six thousand Swedish subjects followed for >13 years again showed
a significant decrease in stroke incidence when more than 3 healthy lifestyle
goals, including normal weight, were met. 279 The Sibutramine Cardiovascular Outcomes (SCOUT) trial
followed up 10 000 patients with CVD or type 2 diabetes mellitus and found that
even modest weight loss reduced cardiovascular mortality in the following 4 to 5
years. 280 Reduction
in body weight improves control of hypertension. A meta-analysis of 25 trials
showed mean SBP and DBP reductions of 4.4 and 3.6 mm Hg, respectively, with a
5.1-kg weight loss. 281 
The US Preventive Services Task Force currently recommends that all
adults be screened for obesity and that patients with a BMI of ≥30
kg/m 2 be referred for intensive multicomponent behavioral
interventions for weight loss. 282 
Obesity and Body Fat Distribution: Summary and Gaps 
Although there is ample evidence that increased weight is associated
with an increased incidence of stroke, with stronger associations for ischemic
events, many questions remain unanswered. There is no clear and compelling
evidence that weight loss in isolation reduces the risk of stroke because of the
difficulty in isolating the effects of weight loss as a single contributing
factor rather than as a component contributing to better control of
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, and other stroke risk
factors. It remains to be determined whether the disparities among studies stem
from choosing BMI, waist-to-hip ratio, or waist circumference as the measure of
obesity. 
Obesity and Body Fat Distribution: Recommendations 
Among overweight (BMI=25 to 29 kg/m 2 ) and
obese (BMI >30 kg/m 2 ) individuals, weight reduction
is recommended for lowering BP ( Class I; Level of Evidence
A ). 
Among overweight (BMI=25 to 29 kg/m 2 ) and
obese (BMI >30 kg/m 2 ) individuals, weight reduction
is recommended for reducing the risk of stroke ( Class I; Level
of Evidence B ). 
Diabetes Mellitus 
People with diabetes mellitus have both an increased susceptibility to
atherosclerosis and an increased prevalence of atherogenic risk factors, notably
hypertension and abnormal blood lipids. In 2010, an estimated 20.7 million
adults or 8.2% of adult Americans had diabetes mellitus. 283 Moreover, the prevalence of
prediabetes among Americans >65 years of age tested in 2005 through 2008
was estimated to be 50%. 283 
Diabetes mellitus is an independent risk factor for stroke. 284 Diabetes mellitus more than
doubles the risk for stroke, and ≈20% of patients with diabetes
mellitus will die of stroke. Duration of diabetes mellitus also increases the
risk of nonhemorrhagic stroke (by 3%/y of diabetes duration). 284 For those with prediabetes,
fasting hyperglycemia is associated with stroke. 285 In a study of 43 933 men (mean age,
44.3±9.9 years) free of known CVD and diabetes mellitus at baseline
between 1971 and 2002, a total of 595 stroke events (156 fatal and 456 nonfatal
strokes) occurred. Age-adjusted fatal, nonfatal, and total stroke event rates
per 10 000 person-years for normal fasting plasma glucose (80–109
mg/dL), impaired fasting glucose (110–125 mg/dL), and undiagnosed
diabetes mellitus (≥126 mg/dL) were 2.1, 3.4, and 4.0
( P trend =0.002); 10.3, 11.8, and 18.0
( P trend =0.008); and 8.2, 9.6, and 12.4
( P trend =0.008), respectively. 285 
In the Greater Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky Stroke Study, ischemic
stroke patients with diabetes mellitus were younger, more likely to be black,
and more likely to have hypertension, MI, and high cholesterol than patients
without diabetes mellitus. 286 
Age-specific incidence rates and rate ratios showed that diabetes mellitus
increased ischemic stroke incidence for all ages but that the risk was most
prominent before 55 years of age in blacks and before 65 years of age in whites.
Although Mexican Americans had a substantially greater incidence rate for the
combination of ischemic stroke and ICH than non-Hispanic whites, 40 there is insufficient evidence
that the presence of diabetes mellitus or other forms of glucose intolerance
influenced this rate. In the Strong Heart Study (SHS), 6.8% of 4549
Native American participants 45 to 74 years of age at baseline without prior
stroke had a first stroke over 12 to 15 years, and diabetes mellitus and
impaired glucose tolerance increased the HR to 2.05. 43 
In NOMAS, which included 3298 stroke-free community residents, 572
reported a history of diabetes mellitus, and 59% (n=338) had
elevated fasting blood glucose. 287 Those subjects with an elevated fasting glucose had an
increased stroke risk (HR, 2.7; 95% CI, 2.0–3.8), but those with
a fasting blood glucose level of <126 mg/dL were not at increased
risk. 
Stroke risk can be reduced in patients with diabetes mellitus. In the
Steno-2 Study, 160 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and persistent
microalbuminuria were assigned to receive either intensive therapy, including
behavioral risk factor modification and the use of a statin, an ACEI, an ARB, or
an antiplatelet drug as appropriate, or conventional therapy with a mean
treatment period of 7.8 years. 288 Patients were subsequently followed up for an average of
5.5 years. The primary end point was time to death resulting from any cause. The
risk of cardiovascular events was reduced by 60% (HR, 0.41; 95%
CI, 0.25–0.67; P <0.001) with intensive versus
conventional therapy, and strokes were reduced from 30 to 6. In addition,
intensive therapy was associated with a 57% lower risk of death from
cardiovascular causes (HR, 0.43; 95% CI, 0.19–0.94;
P =0.04). Eighteen of the 30 strokes were fatal in
the conventional group, and all 6 were fatal in the intensive group. 
In the Euro Heart Survey on Diabetes and the Heart, 3488 patients were
enrolled, 59% without and 41% with diabetes mellitus. 289 Evidence-based medicine was
defined as the combined use of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors,
β-adrenergic receptor blockers, antiplatelet agents, and statins. In
patients with diabetes mellitus, the use of evidence-based medicine (RR, 0.37;
95% CI, 0.20–0.67; P =0.001) had an
independent protective effect on 1-year mortality and on cardiovascular events
(RR, 0.61; 95% CI, 0.40–0.91; P =0.015)
compared with those without diabetes mellitus. Although stroke rates were not
changed, there was an ≈50% reduction in cerebrovascular
revascularization procedures. 
Glycemic Control 
The effect of previous randomization of the UK Prospective Diabetes
Study (UKPDS) 290 to
either conventional therapy (dietary restriction) or intensive therapy
(either sulfonylurea or insulin or, in overweight patients, metformin) for
glucose control was assessed in an open-label extension study. In post-trial
monitoring, 3277 patients were asked to attend UKPDS clinics annually for 5
years; however, there were no attempts to maintain their previously assigned
therapies. 291 A
reduction in MI and all-cause mortality was found; however, stroke incidence
was not affected by assignment to either sulfonylurea/insulin or metformin
treatment. 
Three major recent trials have evaluated the effects of reduced
glycemia on CVD events in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. The ACCORD
recruited 10 251 patients (mean age, 62 years) with a mean glycated
hemoglobin of 8.1%. 292 Participants were then randomized to receive intensive
(glycated hemoglobin goal, <6.0%) or standard (goal,
7.0%–7.9%) therapy. The study was stopped earlier
than planned because of an increase in all-cause mortality in the intensive
therapy group with no difference in the numbers of fatal and nonfatal
strokes. The Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: Preterax and Diamacron
MR Controlled Evaluation (ADVANCE) Trial included 11 140 patients (mean age,
66.6 years) with type 2 diabetes mellitus and used a number of strategies to
reduce glycemia in an intensive treatment group. 293 Mean glycated hemoglobin levels
were 6.5% versus 7.4% at 5 years, with no effect of more
intensive therapy on the risk of CVD events or on the risk of nonfatal
strokes between groups. In another study, 1791 US veterans (Veterans Affairs
Diabetes Trial) with an average duration of diabetes mellitus of >10
years (mean age, 60.4 years) were randomized to a regimen to decrease
glycated hemoglobin by 1.5% or standard care. 294 After 5.6 years, the mean levels of
glycated hemoglobin were 6.9% versus 8.4%, with no
difference in the number of macrovascular events, including stroke, between
the 2 groups. 295 From the
available clinical trial results, there is no evidence that reduced glycemia
decreases the short-term risk of macrovascular events, including stroke, in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. A glycated hemoglobin goal of
<7.0% has been recommended by the American Diabetes
Association to prevent long-term microangiopathic complications in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. 296 Whether control to this level also reduces the
long-term risk of stroke requires further study. In patients with
recent-onset type I diabetes mellitus, intensive diabetes therapy aimed at
achieving near-normal glycemia can be accomplished with good adherence but
with more frequent episodes of severe hypoglycemia. 297 Although glycemia was similar
between the groups over a mean 17 years of follow-up in the Diabetes Control
and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and
Complications (DCCT/EDIC) study, intensive treatment reduced the risk of any
CVD event by 42% (95% CI, 9–63;
P =0.02) and the combined risk nonfatal MI, stroke,
or death from CVD events by 57% (95% CI, 12–79;
P =0.02). 298 The decrease in glycated hemoglobin was associated
with the positive effects of intensive treatment on the overall risk of CVD.
There were too few strokes, however, to evaluate the effect of improved
glycemia during the trial, and as with type 2 diabetes mellitus, there
remains no evidence that tight glycemic control reduces risk of stroke. 
Despite the lack of convincing support from any individual clinical
trial for intensified glycemic control to reduce stroke incidence in
patients with diabetes mellitus, a recent meta-analysis provided some
supportive evidence in a subgroup of patients with diabetes mellitus. From
649 identified studies, the authors identified 9 relevant trials, which
provided data for 59 197 patients and 2037 stroke events. 299 Overall, intensive
control of glucose compared with usual care had no effect on incident stroke
(RR, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.88–1.06;
P =0.445); however, in a stratified analyses, a
beneficial effect was seen in patients with diabetes mellitus and a BMI
>30 kg/m 2 (RR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.75–0.99;
P =0.041). 
Diabetes Mellitus and Hypertension 
More aggressive lowering of BP in patients with diabetes mellitus
and hypertension reduces stroke incidence. 300 In addition to comparing the
effects of more intensive glycemic control and standard care on the
complications of type 2 diabetes mellitus, the UKPDS found that tight BP
control (mean BP, 144/82 mm Hg) resulted in a 44% reduction
(95% CI, 11–65; P =0.013) in the
risk of stroke compared with more liberal control (mean BP, 154/87 mm
Hg). 301 There was
also a nonstatistically significant 22% (RR, 0.78; 95% CI,
0.45–1.34) risk reduction with antihypertensive treatment in
subjects with diabetes mellitus in SHEP. 302 In UKPDS, 884 patients with type 2
diabetes mellitus who attended annual UKPDS clinics for 5 years after study
completion were evaluated. 303 Differences in BP between the 2 groups, standard of
care and more aggressive BP lowering, disappeared within 2 years. There was
a nonsignificant trend toward reduction in stroke with more intensive BP
control (RR, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.55–1.07;
P =0.12). Continued efforts to maintain BP targets
might have led to maintenance of the benefit. 
The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) study compared the
addition of an ACEI to the current medical regimen in high-risk patients.
The substudy of 3577 patients with diabetes mellitus with a previous
cardiovascular event or an additional cardiovascular risk factor (total
population, 9541 participants) showed a reduction in the ACEI group in the
primary combined outcome of MI, stroke, and cardiovascular death by
25% (95% CI, 12–36;
P =0.0004) and stroke by 33% (95%
CI, 10–50; P =0.0074). 304 Whether these benefits represent a
specific effect of the ACEI or were simply the result of BP lowering remains
unclear. The LIFE study compared the effects of an ARB with a
β-adrenergic receptor blocker in 9193 people with essential
hypertension (160–200/95–115 mm Hg) and
electrocardiographically determined left ventricular hypertrophy over 4
years. 305 BP
reductions were similar for each group. The 2 regimens were compared among
the subgroup of 1195 people who also had diabetes mellitus in a prespecified
analysis. 306 
There was a 24% reduction (RR, 0.76; 95% CI,
0.58–0.98) in major vascular events and a nonsignificant 21%
reduction (RR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.55–1.14) in stroke among
those treated with the ARB. 
The ADVANCE Trial also determined whether a fixed combination of
perindopril and indapamide or matching placebo in 11 140 patients with type
2 diabetes mellitus would decrease major macrovascular and microvascular
events. 307 After
4.3 years of follow-up, subjects assigned to the combination had a mean
reduction in BP of 5.6/2.2 mm Hg. The risk of a composite of major
macrovascular and microvascular events was reduced by 9% (HR, 0.91;
95% CI, 0.83–1.00; P =0.04), but
there was no reduction in the incidence of major macrovascular events,
including stroke. 
In the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial (ASCOT), the
effects of 2 antihypertensive treatment strategies (amlodipine with the
addition of perindopril as required [amlodipine-based] or
atenolol with addition of thiazide as required
[atenolol-based]) for the prevention of major cardiovascular
events were compared in 5137 patients with diabetes mellitus. 308 The target BP was
<130/80 mm Hg. The trial was terminated early because of reductions
in mortality and stroke with the amlodipine-based regimen. In patients with
diabetes mellitus, the amlodipine-based therapy reduced the incidence of
total cardiovascular events and procedures compared with the atenolol-based
regimen (HR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.76–0.98;
P =0.026), including a 25% reduction
( P =0.017) in fatal and nonfatal strokes. 
The open-label ACCORD trial randomized trial 4733 participants to 1
of 2 groups with different treatment goals: SBP <120 mm Hg as the
more intensive goal and SBP <140 mm Hg as the less intensive goal.
Randomization to the more intensive goal did not reduce the rate of the
composite outcome of fatal and nonfatal major CVD events (HR, 0.88;
95% CI, 0.73–1.06; P =0.20). Stroke
was a prespecified secondary end point occurring at annual rates of
0.32% (more intensive) and 0.53% (less intensive) treatment
(HR, 0.59; 95% CI, 0.39–0.89;
P =0.01). 247 
In the Avoiding Cardiovascular Events in Combination Therapy in
Patients Living with Systolic Hypertension (ACCOMPLISH) trial, 11 506
patients (6746 with diabetes mellitus) with hypertension were randomized to
treatment with benazepril plus amlodipine or benazepril plus
hydrochlorothiazide. 309 The primary end point was the composite of death
resulting from CVD, nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, hospitalization for
angina, resuscitated cardiac arrest, and coronary revascularization. The
trial was terminated early after a mean follow-up of 36 months when there
were 552 primary outcome events in the benazepril/amlodipine group
(9.6%) and 679 in the benazepril/hydrochlorothiazide group
(11.8%), an absolute risk reduction of 2.2% (HR, 0.80;
95% CI, 0.72–0.90; P <0.001). There
was, however, no difference in stroke between the groups. Of the
participants in the ACCOMPLISH trial with diabetes mellitus, the primary
outcome results were similar. 
Two recent meta-analyses investigated the effect of BP lowering in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. The first included 37 760 patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus or impaired fasting glucose/impaired glucose
tolerance with achieved SBP of ≤135 versus ≤140 mm Hg, and
the follow-up was at least 1 year. 310 Intensive BP control was associated with a
10% reduction in all-cause mortality (OR, 0.90; 95% CI,
0.83–0.98) and a 17% reduction in stroke, but there was a
20% increase in serious adverse effects. Meta-regression analysis
showed continued risk reduction for stroke to a SBP of <120 mm Hg.
However, at levels of <130 mm Hg, there was a 40% increase
in serious adverse events with no benefit for other outcomes. 
In the second meta-analysis, 73 913 patients with diabetes mellitus
(295 652 patient-years of exposure) were randomized in 31 intervention
trials. 248 
Overall, more aggressive treatment reduced stroke incidence by 9%
( P =0.006), and lower versus less aggressive BP
control reduced the risk of stroke by 31% (RR, 0.61; 95% CI,
0.48–0.79). In a meta-regression analysis, the risk of stroke
decreased by 13% (95% CI, 0.05–0.20;
P =0.002) for each 5-mm Hg reduction in SBP and
by 11.5% (95% CI, 0.05–0.17;
P <0.001) for each 2-mm Hg reduction in DBP. 
Lipid-Altering Therapy and Diabetes Mellitus 
Although secondary subgroup analyses of some studies did not find a
benefit of statins in patients with diabetes mellitus, 311 , 312 the Medical Research Council/British Heart
Foundation Heart Protection Study (HPS) found that the addition of a statin
to existing treatments in high-risk patients resulted in a 24%
reduction (95% CI, 19–28) in the rate of major CVD
events. 313 A
22% reduction (95% CI, 13–30) in major vascular
events (regardless of the presence of known coronary heart disease or
cholesterol levels) and a 24% reduction (95% CI,
6–39; P =0.01) in strokes were found among
5963 diabetic individuals treated with the statin in addition to best
medical care. 314 The
Collaborative Atorvastatin Diabetes Study (CARDS) reported that in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus, at least 1 additional risk factor
(retinopathy, albuminuria, current smoking, or hypertension), and an LDL
cholesterol level <160 mg/dL but without a history of CVD, treatment
with a statin resulted in a 48% reduction (95% CI,
11–69) in stroke. 315 
In a post hoc analysis of the Treating to New Targets (TNT) study,
the effects of intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol with high-dose (80 mg
daily) versus low-dose (10 mg daily) atorvastatin on CVD events were
compared for patients with coronary heart disease and diabetes
mellitus. 316 
After a median follow-up of 4.9 years, higher-dose treatment was associated
with a 40% reduction in the time to a CVD event (HR, 0.69;
95% CI, 0.48–0.98; P =0.037). 
Clinical trials with a statin or any other single intervention in
patients with high CVD risk, including the presence of diabetes mellitus,
are often insufficiently powered to determine an effect on incident stroke.
In 2008, data from 18 686 individuals with diabetes mellitus (1466 with type
1 and 17 220 with type 2 diabetes mellitus) were assessed to determine the
impact of a 1.0-mmol/l (≈40-mg/dL) reduction in LDL
cholesterol. 317 
During a mean follow-up of 4.3 years, there were 3247 major cardiovascular
events with a 9% proportional reduction in all-cause mortality per
1-mmol/L LDL cholesterol reduction (RR, 0.91; 95% CI,
0.82–1.01; P =0.02) and a 13%
reduction in vascular death (RR, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.76–1.00;
P =0.008). There were also reductions in MI or
coronary death (RR, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.69–0.87;
P <0.0001) and stroke (RR, 0.79; 95% CI,
0.67–0.93; P =0.0002). A subgroup analysis
was carried out from the Department of Veterans Affairs High-Density
Lipoprotein Intervention Trial (VA-HIT) in which subjects received either
gemfibrozil (1200 mg/d) or placebo for 5.1 years. 318 Compared with those with normal
fasting plasma glucose, the risk for major cardiovascular events was higher
in subjects with either known (HR, 1.87; 95% CI, 1.44–2.43;
P =0.001) or newly diagnosed (HR, 1.72;
95% CI, 1.10–2.68; P =0.02) diabetes
mellitus. Gemfibrozil treatment did not affect the risk of stroke among
subjects without diabetes mellitus, but treatment was associated with a
40% reduction in stroke in those with diabetes mellitus (HR, 0.60;
95% CI, 0.37–0.99; P = 0.046). 
The FIELD study assessed the effect of fenofibrate on
cardiovascular events in 9795 subjects 50 to 75 years of age with type 2
diabetes mellitus who were not taking a statin therapy at study
entry. 319 The
study population included 2131 people with and 7664 people without previous
CVD. Over 5 years, 5.9% of patients (n=288) on placebo and
5.2% (n=256) on fenofibrate had a coronary event
( P =0.16). There was a 24% (RR, 0.76;
95% CI, 0.62–0.94; P =0.010)
reduction in nonfatal MI. There was no effect on stroke with fenofibrate. A
higher rate of statin therapy initiation occurred in patients allocated to
placebo, which might have masked a treatment effect. The ACCORD trial
randomized 5518 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who were being
treated with open-label simvastatin to double-blind treatment with
fenofibrate or placebo. 177 There was no effect of added fenofibrate on the
primary outcome (first occurrence of nonfatal MI, nonfatal stroke, or death
from cardiovascular causes [HR, 0.92; 95% CI,
0.79–1.08; P =0.32]) and no effect
on any secondary outcome, including stroke (HR, 1.05; 95% CI,
0.71–1.56; P =0.80). 
A recent meta-analysis examining the effects of fibrates on stroke
in 37 791 patients included some patients with diabetes mellitus. 320 Overall, fibrate therapy
was not associated with a significant reduction on the risk of stroke (RR,
1.02; 95% CI, 0.90–1.16; P =0.78).
However, a subgroup analysis suggested that fibrate therapy reduced fatal
stroke (RR, 0.49; 95% CI, 0.26–0.93;
P =0.03) in patients with diabetes mellitus, CVD, or
stroke. 
Diabetes Mellitus, Aspirin, and Stroke 
The benefit of aspirin in the primary prevention of cardiovascular
events, including stroke in patients with diabetes mellitus, remains
unclear. A recent study at 163 institutions throughout Japan enrolled 2539
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and no history of atherosclerotic
vascular disease. 321 
Patients were assigned to receive low-dose aspirin (81 or 100 mg/d) or no
aspirin. Over 4.37 years, a total of 154 atherosclerotic vascular events
occurred (68 in the aspirin group [13.6 per 1000
person-years] and 86 in the nonaspirin group [17.0 per 1000
person-years; HR, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.58–1.10;
P =0.16]). Only a single fatal stroke
occurred in the aspirin group, but 5 strokes occurred in the nonaspirin
group; thus, the study was insufficiently powered to detect an effect on
stroke. 
Several large primary prevention trials have included subgroup
analyses of patients with diabetes mellitus. The Antithrombotic
Trialists’ Collaboration meta-analysis of 287 randomized trials
reported effects of antiplatelet therapy (mainly aspirin) versus control in
135 000 patients. 322 
There was a nonsignificant 7% reduction in serious vascular events,
including stroke, in the subgroup of 5126 patients with diabetes
mellitus. 
A meta-analysis covering the interval between 1950 and 2011
included 7 studies in patients with diabetes mellitus without previous CVD
and helps to shed new light on this controversial topic. 323 A total of 11 618
participants were included in the analysis. The overall relative risk for
major cardiovascular events was 0.91 (95% CI, 0.82–1.00),
but an effect on stroke incidence was not found (RR, 0.84; 95% CI,
0.64–1.11). Because hyperglycemia reduces platelet sensitivity to
aspirin, 324 an
important consideration in patients with diabetes mellitus is aspirin dose.
In another meta-analysis, there was no evidence that aspirin dose explained
the lack of an aspirin effect on cardiovascular and stroke mortality in
patients with diabetes mellitus. 325 However, the systematic review identified an
important gap in randomized, controlled trials for using anywhere between
101 to 325 mg aspirin daily in patients with diabetes mellitus. 
Diabetes: Summary and Gaps 
A comprehensive program that includes tight control of hypertension
with ACEI or ARB treatment reduces the risk of stroke in people with diabetes
mellitus. Glycemic control reduces microvascular complications, but there
remains no evidence that improved glycemic control reduces the risk of incident
stroke. Adequately powered studies show that treatment of patients with diabetes
mellitus with a statin decreases the risk of a first stroke. Although a subgroup
analysis of VA-HIT suggests that gemfibrozil reduces stroke in men with diabetes
mellitus and dyslipidemia, a fibrate effect was not seen in FIELD, and ACCORD
found no benefit of adding fenofibrate to statin. However, the subgroup analysis
from fibrate trials suggests a benefit of fibrates in patients with diabetes
mellitus and a BMI >30 kg/m 2 . 
Diabetes: Recommendations 
Control of BP in accordance with an AHA/ACC/CDC
Advisory 218 
to a target of <140/90 mm Hg is recommended in patients with
type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus ( Class I; Level of Evidence
A ). 
Treatment of adults with diabetes mellitus with a statin,
especially those with additional risk factors, is recommended to lower
the risk of first stroke ( Class I; Level of Evidence
A ). 
The usefulness of aspirin for primary stroke prevention for
patients with diabetes mellitus but low 10-year risk of CVD is unclear
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
Adding a fibrate to a statin in people with diabetes mellitus
is not useful for decreasing stroke risk ( Class III; Level of
Evidence B ). 
Cigarette Smoking 
Virtually every multivariable assessment of stroke risk factors (eg,
Framingham, 16 
CHS, 326 and the
Honolulu Heart Study 327 ) has
identified cigarette smoking as a potent risk factor for ischemic stroke,
associated with an approximate doubling of risk. Data from studies largely
conducted in older age groups also provide evidence of a dose-response
relationship, and this has been extended to young women from an ethnically
diverse cohort. 328 Smoking is
also associated with a 2- to 4-fold increased risk for SAH. 329 – 332 The data for ICH (apart from SAH), however, are
inconsistent. A multicenter case-control study found an adjusted OR of 1.58
(95% CI, 1.02–2.44) 333 for ICH, and analyses from the Physicians’
Health Study 332 and
WHS 331 also found
such an association, but other studies, including a pooled analysis of the ARIC
and CHS cohorts, found no relationship between smoking and ICH risk. 135 , 334 – 336 A
meta-analysis of 32 studies estimated the RR for ischemic stroke to be 1.9
(95% CI, 1.7–2.2) for smokers versus nonsmokers, the RR for SAH
to be 2.9 (95% CI, 2.5–3.5), and the RR for ICH to be 0.74
(95% CI, 0.56–0.98). 335 
The annual number of stroke deaths attributed to smoking in the United
States is estimated to be between 21 400 (without adjustment for potential
confounding factors) and 17 800 (after adjustment), which suggests that smoking
contributes to 12% to 14% of all stroke deaths. 337 From data available from the
National Health Interview Survey and death certificate data for 2000 through
2004, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated that smoking
resulted in an annual average of 61 616 stroke deaths among men and 97 681
stroke deaths among women. 338 
Cigarette smoking may potentiate the effects of other stroke risk
factors, including SBP 339 and
OCs. 340 , 341 For example, a synergistic effect
exists between the use of OCs and smoking on the risk of cerebral infarction.
With nonsmoking, non-OC users serving as the reference group, the odds of
cerebral infarction were 1.3 times greater (95% CI, 0.7–2.1) for
women who smoked but did not use OCs, 2.1 times greater (95% CI,
1.0–4.5) for nonsmoking OC users, and 7.2 times greater (95% CI,
3.2–16.1) for OC users who smoked. 340 There was also a synergistic effect of smoking and OC
use on hemorrhagic stroke risk. With nonsmoking, non-OC users as the reference
group, the odds of hemorrhagic stroke were 1.6 times greater (95% CI,
1.2–2.0) for women who smoked but did not use OCs, 1.5 times greater
(95% CI, 1.1–2.1) for nonsmoking OC users, and 3.7 times greater
(95% CI, 2.4–5.7) for OC users who smoked. 341 
Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (also referred to as passive or
second-hand smoke) is an established risk factor for heart disease. 342 , 343 Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke may also be a
risk factor for stroke, with a risk approaching the doubling found for active
smoking, 344 – 349 although 1 study found no
association. 350 
Because the dose of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke is substantially
lower than for active smoking, the magnitude of the risk associated with
environmental tobacco smoke is surprising. This apparent lack of a dose-response
relationship may be explained in part by physiological studies suggesting a
tobacco smoke exposure threshold rather than a linear dose-response
relationship. 351 
Recent studies of the effects of smoking bans in communities have also shown
that these bans are associated with a reduction in the risk of stroke. After
Arizona enacted a statewide ban on smoking in most indoor public places.
including workspaces, restaurants, and bars, there was a 14% reduction
in strokes in counties that had not previously had a ban in place. 352 A study of New York State
did not find a reduction in strokes despite a decrease in risk of MI when it
enacted a comprehensive smoking ban in enclosed workspaces, restaurants, and
construction sites. 353 
Smoking likely contributes to increased stroke risk through both
short-term effects on the risk of thrombus generation in atherosclerotic
arteries and long-term effects related to increased atherosclerosis. 354 Smoking as little as a
single cigarette increases heart rate, mean BP, and cardiac index and decreases
arterial distensibility. 355 , 356 Beyond the immediate effects
of smoking, both active and passive exposure to cigarette smoke is associated
with the development of atherosclerosis. 357 In addition to placing individuals at increased risk
for both thrombotic and embolic stroke, cigarette smoking approximately triples
the risk of cryptogenic stroke among individuals with a low atherosclerotic
burden and no evidence of a cardiac source of emboli. 358 , 359 
Although the most effective preventive measures are to never smoke and
to minimize exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, risk is reduced with
smoking cessation. Smoking cessation is associated with a rapid reduction in the
risk of stroke and other cardiovascular events to a level that approaches, but
does not reach, that of those who never smoked. 354 , 360 – 362 
Although sustained smoking cessation is difficult to achieve, effective
behavioral and pharmacological treatments for nicotine dependence are
available. 363 – 365 Comprehensive reviews and
recommendations for smoking cessation are provided in the 2008 Surgeon
General’s report, 363 
the 2008 update from the Public Health Service, 366 and the 2009 affirmation of these
recommendations from the US Preventive Services Task Force. 367 The combination of counseling and
medications is more effective than either therapy alone. 367 
With regard to specific pharmacotherapy, in a meta-analysis current to
January 2012, nicotine replacement therapy, bupropion, and varenicline were all
superior to inert control medications, but varenicline was superior to each of
the other active interventions in direct comparisons. 368 Emerging evidence suggests that
varenicline may be more cost-effective than nicotine replacement
therapy. 369 
Cigarette Smoking: Summary and Gaps 
Cigarette smoking increases the risk of ischemic stroke and SAH, but
the data on ICH are inconclusive. Epidemiological studies show a reduction in
stroke risk with smoking cessation and with community-wide smoking bans.
Although effective programs to facilitate smoking cessation exist, data showing
that participation in these programs leads to a long-term reduction in stroke
are lacking. 
Cigarette Smoking: Recommendations 
Counseling, in combination with drug therapy using nicotine
replacement, bupropion, or varenicline, is recommended for active
smokers to assist in quitting smoking ( Class I; Level of
Evidence A ). 
Abstention from cigarette smoking is recommended for patients
who have never smoked on the basis of epidemiological studies showing a
consistent and overwhelming relationship between smoking and both
ischemic stroke and SAH ( Class I; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Community-wide or statewide bans on smoking in public spaces
are reasonable for reducing the risk of stroke and MI ( Class
IIa; Level of Evidence B ). 
Atrial Fibrillation 
AF, even in the absence of cardiac valvular disease, is associated with
a 4- to 5-fold increased risk of ischemic stroke resulting from embolism of
stasis-induced thrombi forming in the left atrial appendage (LAA). 370 About 2.3 million Americans
have either sustained or paroxysmal AF. 370 Embolism of appendage thrombi associated with AF
accounts for ≈10% of all ischemic strokes and an even higher
fraction in the very elderly in the United States. 371 The absolute stroke rate averages
≈3.5%/y for 70-year-old individuals with AF, but the risk varies
20-fold among patients, depending on age and other clinical features (see
below). 372 , 373 AF is also an independent predictor of
increased mortality. 374 
Paroxysmal AF increases stroke risk similar to sustained AF. 375 
There is an important opportunity for primary stroke prevention in
patients with AF because the dysrhythmia is diagnosed before stroke in many
patients. However, a substantial minority of AF-related stroke occurs in
patients without a prior diagnosis of the condition. Studies of active screening
of patients >65 years of age for AF in primary care settings show that
pulse assessment by trained personnel increases the detection of undiagnosed
AF. 376 , 377 Systematic pulse assessment during
routine clinic visits followed by 12-lead ECG in those with an irregular pulse
resulted in a 60% increase in the detection of AF. 376 
Risk Stratification in Patients With AF 
Once the diagnosis of AF is established, the next step is to
estimate an individual’s risks for cardioembolic stroke and for
hemorrhagic complications of antithrombotic therapy. For estimating risk of
AF-related cardioembolic stroke, more than a dozen risk stratification
schemes have been proposed on the basis of various combinations of clinical
and echocardiographic predictors. 373 The widely used CHADS 2 scheme ( Table 3 ) yields a score of 0 to 6, with
1 point each given for congestive heart failure, hypertension, age
≥75 years, and diabetes mellitus and with 2 points given for prior
stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA). 378 
Table 3. 
Stroke Risk Stratification Schemes for Patients With Atrial Fibrillation 
CHADS 2 378 
CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc 379 
Scoring
system 
Congestive heart failure–1
point 
Hypertension–1
point 
Age ≥75 y–1
point 
Diabetes mellitus–1
point 
Stroke/TIA–2
points 
Risk scores range: 0–6
points 
Levels of risk for thromboembolic
stroke 
Low risk for stroke=0
points 
Moderate risk=1
point 
High risk ≥2 points 
Scoring
system 
Congestive heart failure–1
point 
Hypertension–1
point 
Age 65–74 y–1
point 
≥75 y–2
points 
Diabetes mellitus–1
point 
Stroke/TIA–2
points 
Vascular disease (eg, peripheral artery
disease, myocardial infarction, aortic plaque)–1
point 
Female sex–1
point 
Risk scores range: 0–9
points 
Levels of risk for thromboembolic
stroke 
Low risk=0
points 
Moderate risk=1
point 
High risk ≥2 points 
ACCP treatment guidelines based on estimated
risk for thromboembolic stroke 380 
HAS-BLED 381 
Low risk: no
therapy 
Moderate risk: OAC 
High risk:
OAC 
Hypertension–1
point 
Abnormal renal function–1
point 
Abnormal liver function–1
point 
Prior stroke–1 point
Prior major bleeding or bleeding
predisposition–1 point 
INR in therapeutic range
<60% of time–1 point 
Age
>65 y–1 point 
Use of antiplatelet or
nonsteroidal drugs–1 point 
Excessive alcohol
use–1 point 
Risk scores range: 0–9
points 
Score >2 associated with clinically
relevant and major bleeding. 382 
Open in a new tab 
ACCP indicates American College of Chest Physicians; INR, international
normalized ratio; OAC, oral anticoagulation; and TIA, transient ischemic
attack. 
This scheme has been tested in multiple independent cohorts of AF
patients, with 0 points corresponding to low risk
(0.5%–1.7%), 1 point reflecting moderate risk
(1.2%/y–2.2%/y), and ≥2 points indicating
high risk (1.9%/y–7.6%/y). 373 The
CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc scheme ( Table 3 ) modifies CHADS 2 by adding an age category (1
point for age 65 to 74 years, 2 points for age ≥75 years) and adding
1 point each for diagnosis of vascular disease (such as peripheral artery
disease, MI, or aortic plaque) and for female sex. The main advantage of the
more cumbersome CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc scheme for primary stroke
prevention is improved stratification of individuals estimated to be at low
to moderate risk using CHADS 2 (scores of 0 to 1). A study of 45
576 such patients found combined stroke and thromboembolism rates per 100
person-years ranging from 0.84 for CHADS 2 of 0 to 1 or
CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc of 0 to 1.79, 3.67, 5.75, and 8.18
for CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc of 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively,
resulting in significantly improved prediction. 383 
Instruments have also been proposed for stratifying risk of
bleeding associated with warfarin treatment for AF. In the HAS-BLED scheme
( Table 3 ), 1 point is assigned
each for hypertension, abnormal renal or liver function, past stroke, past
bleeding history or predisposition, labile INR (ie, poor time in therapeutic
range), older age (age >65 years), and use of certain drugs
(concomitant antiplatelet or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent use,
alcohol abuse). 381 In a
validation analysis of data from 2293 subjects randomized to idraparinux or
vitamin K antagonist therapy, the HAS-BLED score was moderately predictive
(HAS-BLED >2: HR, 1.9 for clinically relevant bleeding; HR, 2.4 for
major bleeding). 382 The
ATRIA Risk Score 384 
derived its point scheme from the Anticoagulation and Risk Factors in Atrial
Fibrillation study, assigning 3 points for anemia or severe renal disease
(estimated glomerular filtration rate <30 mL/min or dialysis
dependent), 2 for age ≥75 years, and 1 for any prior hemorrhage
diagnosis or hypertension. Subjects in a validation cohort were successfully
divided into groups at low (ATRIA score of 0 to 3, <1%/y)
and high (ATRIA score of 5 to 10, >5%/y) risk for major
hemorrhage. Most of these analyses stratifying risk of future bleeding have
not focused on intracranial hemorrhages, the category of major bleeding with
the greatest long-term effect on quality of life. Another limitation of
prediction scales for hemorrhage is that several of their components such as
age and hypertension are also risks for cardioembolic stroke. 
Selecting Treatment to Reduce Stroke Risk in Patients With AF 
Adjusted-dose warfarin has generally been the treatment of choice
for patients at high risk for cardioembolic stroke and acceptably low risk
of hemorrhagic complications, particularly intracranial hemorrhage.
Treatment with adjusted-dose warfarin (target INR, 2 to 3) robustly protects
against stroke (RR reduction, 64%; 95% CI, 49–74),
virtually eliminating the excess risk of ischemic stroke associated with AF
if the intensity of anticoagulation is adequate and reducing all-cause
mortality by 26% (95% CI, 3–23). 385 In addition,
anticoagulation reduces stroke severity and poststroke mortality. 386 – 388 Compared with aspirin,
adjusted-dose warfarin reduces stroke by 39% (95% CI,
22–52). 385 , 389 
Three newer oral anticoagulants have been approved in the United
States for stroke prevention in patients with nonvalvular AF: the direct
thrombin inhibitor dabigatran (dosed at 150 mg twice daily in patients with
creatinine clearance ≥30 mL/min) and the direct factor Xa inhibitors
rivaroxaban (20 mg once daily for patients with creatinine clearance
≥50 mL/min) and apixaban (5 mg twice daily for patients with no more
than 1 of the following characteristics: age ≥80 years, serum
creatinine ≥1.5 mg/dL, or body weight ≤60 kg). Clinical
trial data and other information for these agents were recently reviewed in
an AHA/American Stroke Association science advisory 390 and are briefly summarized
here. 
The Randomized Evaluation of Long-Term Anticoagulant Therapy
(RE-LY) trial 391 
randomized 18 113 patients to dabigatran 150 mg or 110 mg twice daily or
adjusted-dose warfarin (target INR, 2 to 3). The study enrolled patients
with and without a history of prior stroke but with overall moderate to high
risk of stroke (mean CHADS 2 score, 2.1) and excluded patients who
had stroke within 14 days (6 months for severe stroke), increased bleeding
risk, creatinine clearance <30 mL/min, or active liver disease. The
primary outcome of stroke or systemic embolism during the mean 2-year
follow-up occurred at a rate of 1.7%/y in the warfarin (INR, 2 to 3)
group compared with 1.11%/y in the 150 mg dabigatran group
(RR=0.66 versus warfarin; 95% CI, 0.53–0.82;
P <0.001 for superiority). Intracranial
hemorrhage rates were strikingly lower with 150 mg dabigatran relative to
adjusted-dose warfarin (0.30%/y versus 0.74%/y; RR, 0.40;
95% CI, 0.27–0.60). However, the overall rates of major
bleeding were not different between the groups (3.11%/y versus
3.36%/y; P =0.31), and gastrointestinal
bleeding was more frequent on 150 mg dabigatran (1.51%/y versus
1.12%/y; RR, 1.50; 95% CI, 1.19–1.89). MI was also
increased in the 150 mg dabigatran group (0.74%/y versus
0.53%/y; RR, 1.38; 95% CI, 1.00–1.91), 392 although this difference
was no longer significant when silent MIs or unstable angina, cardiac
arrest, and cardiac death were included. 391 Meta-analysis of 7 trials of
dabigatran use for various indications has supported the possibility of a
small but consistent increased risk of MI or acute coronary syndrome versus
the risk observed in various control arms of these studies (OR, 1.33;
95% CI, 1.03–1.71;
P =0.03). 393 Finally, analyses of multiple
patient subgroups, categorized by nationality, 394 CHADS 2 score, 395 and the presence or
absence of prior TIA/stroke, have not found evidence for differences in the
risk/benefit profile for dabigatran. In the subgroup of patients ≥75
years of age, 396 
dabigatran 150 mg was associated with increased gastrointestinal hemorrhage
relative to warfarin (OR, 1.79; 95% CI, 1.35–2.37) but
reduced ICH (OR, 0.42; 95% CI, 0.25–0.70). 
The Rivaroxaban Versus Warfarin in Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation
(ROCKET AF) Trial 397 
randomized 14 264 patients with nonvalvular AF to rivaroxaban 20 mg/d or
adjusted-dose warfarin (target INR, 2 to 3). A CHADS 2 score of
≥2 was required, yielding a mean score for enrolled subjects of 3.5,
which was higher than in the RE-LY and ARISTOTLE trials; more than half of
the participants had a stroke, TIA, or systemic embolism before enrollment.
Over a median follow-up of 707 days, the primary end point of ischemic and
hemorrhagic stroke and systemic embolism in patients as actually treated
(the prespecified analysis plan for efficacy in this study) occurred in
1.7%/y in those receiving rivaroxaban and 2.2%/y in those on
warfarin (HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.66–0.96;
P <0.001 for noninferiority; analyzed by intention
to treat, HR, 0.88; 95% CI, 0.74–1.03;
P <0.001 for noninferiority;
P =0.12 for superiority). The primary safety end
point of major or nonmajor bleeding occurred in 14.9% of patients
per year in those receiving rivaroxaban and 14.5% in those on
warfarin (HR, 1.03; 95% CI, 0.96–1.11;
P =0.44). ICH (0.5% versus 0.7%; HR,
0.67; 95% CI, 0.47–0.93) and fatal bleeding (0.2%
versus 0.5%; HR, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.31–0.79), however,
were reduced on rivaroxaban relative to warfarin. Subsequent subgroup
analysis of the 6796 subjects without previous stroke or TIA 398 found rivaroxaban to
have borderline superiority to warfarin in intention-to-treat analysis of
efficacy (HR, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.58–1.01), supporting its use
in primary prevention. Other subgroup analyses 397 found no differences in the
effectiveness of rivaroxaban according to age, sex, CHADS 2 score,
or the presence of moderate renal insufficiency 399 (creatinine clearance, 30 to 49
mL/min; these subjects were randomized to rivaroxaban 15 rather than 20
mg/d). Important concerns have been raised about the interpretation of
ROCKET AF, most notably the relatively poor management of warfarin (mean
time in therapeutic range, 55%) and the relatively high number of
outcomes (stroke or systemic embolism) beyond the 2-day monitoring period
after drug cessation. 400 
Apixaban has been studied in 2 phase III trials. The Apixaban
Versus Acetylsalicylic Acid to Prevent Strokes in Atrial Fibrillation
Patients Who Have Failed or Are Unsuitable for Vitamin K Antagonist
Treatment (AVERROES) trial 401 compared apixaban 5 mg twice daily with aspirin 81 to
324 mg daily in 5599 subjects with nonvalvular AF unsuitable for warfarin
therapy. The Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke and Other Thromboembolic
Events in Atrial Fibrillation (ARISTOTLE) trial 402 compared the same dose of apixaban
with adjusted-dose warfarin (target INR, 2 to 3) among 18 201 patients with
nonvalvular AF. Subjects in each study had at least 1 additional risk factor
for stroke (prior stroke or TIA, age ≥75 years, hypertension,
diabetes mellitus, heart failure, or peripheral artery disease). A reduced
dose of apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily was used in both studies for subjects
with at least 2 of the following: ≥80 years, body mass ≤60
kg, or serum creatinine ≥1.5 mg/dL. AVERROES was terminated after a
mean follow-up of 1.1 years when an interim analysis found apixaban to be
markedly superior to aspirin for the prevention of stroke or systemic
embolism (1.6%/y versus 3.7%/y; HR, 0.45; 95% CI,
0.32–0.62) with similar rates of major bleeding (1.4%/y
versus 1.2%/y). Germane to primary prevention, apixaban was also
superior to aspirin in subjects without prior TIA or stroke (HR, 0.51;
95% CI, 0.35–0.74). 403 Over a median 1.8 years of follow-up in ARISTOTLE,
the primary outcome occurred in 1.27%/y in the apixaban group
(analyzed as intention to treat) and 1.60%/y in the warfarin group
(HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.66–0.95;
P <0.001 for noninferiority;
P =0.01 for superiority). Much of the difference
between the groups could be attributed to a reduction in ICH in the apixaban
group (0.24%/y versus 0.47%/y); the differences in ischemic
or uncertain type of stroke were minimal (0.97%/y versus
1.05%/y). Major bleeding events were similarly less frequent on
apixaban (2.13%/y versus 3.09%/y; HR, 0.69; 95% CI,
0.60–0.80). Subgroup analysis 404 found a similar magnitude effect for primary
prevention of stroke or systemic embolism in subjects without prior stroke
or TIA (1.01%/y versus 1.23%/y; HR, 0.82; 95% CI,
0.65–1.03), with the sharpest difference again in risk of ICH
(0.29%/y versus 0.65%/y; HR, 0.44; 95% CI,
0.30–0.66). Another secondary analysis found consistent efficacy of
apixaban in subjects with impaired renal function (estimated glomerular
filtration rate <80 mL/min) and significantly greater reduction in
major bleeding among those with more advanced dysfunction (estimated
glomerular filtration rate ≤50 mL/min). 405 Because of the clustering of stroke
observed after discontinuation of apixaban, a black box warning was required
for this agent (as for rivaroxaban), indicating that coverage with another
anticoagulant should be strongly considered at the time of cessation unless
there is pathological bleeding. 
Early analyses 406 – 409 suggest that the newer oral anticoagulants can be
cost-effective, particularly for patients at high risk of cardioembolism or
hemorrhage. A Markov decision model using data from RE-LY, for example,
found that dabigatran 150 mg twice daily provided 0.36 additional
quality-adjusted life-years at a cost of $9000, 407 representing an incremental
cost-effectiveness ratio ($25 000 per quality-adjusted life-year)
that is within the range tolerated by many healthcare systems. These
analyses are based on only a single trial of dabigatran, however, and
similar evaluations have yet to be performed for rivaroxaban and apixaban.
The cost-effectiveness of newer anticoagulants relative to adjusted-dose
warfarin is predicted to be sensitive to the cost of the medications, the
risk for cardioembolism or hemorrhage (cost-effectiveness improving with
increasing risk), and the quality of INR control on warfarin. 
There are many factors to consider in the selection of an
anticoagulant for patients with nonvalvular AF. The newer agents offer
clearly attractive features such as fixed dose, lack of required blood
monitoring, absence of known interaction with the immune complexes
associated with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, 410 and fewer identified drug
interactions than warfarin. Most notably, each appears to confer lower risk
than adjusted-dose warfarin for ICH, arguably the strongest determinant of
long-term safety for anticoagulation ( Table
4 ). 
Table 4. 
Odds ratios of intracranial hemorrhage relative to warfarin with an INR of 2.0 to
3.0 
Drug 
Dose(s) 
OR (95% CI) 
Reference 
Apixaban 
5 mg twice daily 
0.42 (0.30 to 0.58) 
Granger 402 
2.5 or 5 mg twice daily 
0.17 (0.01 to 4.30) 
Ogawa 321 
Dabigatran 
110 to 150 mg twice daily 
0.36 (0.26 to 0.49) 
Connolly 392 
Rivaroxaban 
20 mg daily 
0.65 (0.46 to 0.92) 
Patel 397 
15 mg daily 
0.50 (0.17 to 1.46) 
Hori 394 
Open in a new tab 
CI indicates confidence interval; INR, international normalized ratio; and
OR, odds ratio. Adapted with permission from Chatterjee et al. 411 Copyright ©
2013, American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Authorization for
this adaptation has been obtained both from the owner of the copyright in
the original work and from the owner of copyright in the translation or
adaptation. 
These agents also raise important concerns, however, including
substantial cost to the healthcare system, renal clearance, short
half-lives, general unavailability of a monitoring test to ensure
compliance, and lack of a specific agent to reverse their anticoagulant
effects. 412 
Although a dabigatran dose of 75 mg twice daily was approved for patients
with creatinine clearance of 15 to 30 mL/min, such subjects were in fact
excluded from RE-LY and have not been extensively studied. The short
half-lives of the newer anticoagulants raise the possibility of increased
risk of cardioembolism if doses are missed, a concern heightened by the
relatively large number of events in ROCKET AF occurring between 2 and 7
days after discontinuation of rivaroxaban. 400 In assessments of the lack of
reversing agent for the newer anticoagulants, it is important to consider
that even warfarin-related ICH mortality rates are extremely high despite
the availability of reversing agents. 413 An analysis of ICH events occurring on dabigatran
150 mg twice daily and adjusted-dose warfarin in RE-LY found no difference
in mortality (35% versus 36%) and, because of the lower
overall risk of bleeding with dabigatran, significantly fewer deaths caused
by ICH (13 versus 32; P <0.01). 
In studies of antiplatelet agents for nonvalvular AF, aspirin
offers modest protection against stroke (RR reduction, 22%;
95% CI, 6–35). 385 No convincing data favor 1 dose of aspirin
(50–325 mg daily) over another. Two randomized trials assessed the
potential role of the combination of clopidogrel (75 mg daily) plus aspirin
(75–100 mg daily) for preventing stroke in patients with AF. The AF
Clopidogrel Trial With Irbesartan for Prevention of Vascular Events (ACTIVE)
investigators compared this combination antiplatelet regimen with
adjusted-dose warfarin (target INR, 2 to 3) in AF patients with 1 additional
risk factor for stroke in ACTIVE W and found a reduction in stroke risk with
warfarin compared with the dual antiplatelet regimen (RR reduction,
40%; 95% CI, 18–56;
P =0.001) and no significant difference in risk of
major bleeding. 385 , 414 ACTIVE A compared the
combination of clopidogrel and aspirin with aspirin alone in AF patients who
were deemed unsuitable for warfarin anticoagulation and who had at least 1
additional risk factor for stroke (≈25% were deemed
unsuitable because of concern for warfarin-associated bleeding). 415 Dual antiplatelet
therapy resulted in a significant reduction in all strokes (including
parenchymal ICH) over treatment with aspirin alone (RR reduction,
28%; 95% CI, 17–38;
P =0.0002) but also resulted in a significant
increase in major bleeding (RR increase, 57%; 95% CI,
29–92; P <0.001). Overall and in absolute
terms, major vascular events (the study primary end point) were decreased
0.8%/y, but major hemorrhages increased 0.7%/y (RR for major
vascular events and major hemorrhages, 0.97; 95% CI,
0.89–1.06; P =0.54). Disabling/fatal stroke,
however, was decreased by dual antiplatelet therapy (RR reduction,
26%; 95% CI, 11–38;
P =0.001). A post hoc analysis of randomized trial
data that used relative weighting of events suggested a modest net benefit
from the combination of aspirin and clopidogrel over aspirin
alone. 416 
Recommendations for the selection of antithrombotic therapy for
patients with nonvalvular AF have had to adjust for 2 emerging trends: a
decreasing rate of stroke for any given CHADS 2 risk
category, 417 
possibly related to improving control of other stroke risk factors, and the
appearance of the newer oral anticoagulants with a lower risk of ICH. These
2 trends tend to have opposing effects on the tipping point at which the
benefits of anticoagulation outweigh its risks: A lower stroke risk argues
for more limited use of anticoagulation, and safer agents argue for more
extensive use. 418 On the
basis of the decreasing risk of AF-related stroke, the 2012 American College
of Chest Physicians evidence-based practice guidelines 380 suggested that patients with
nonrheumatic AF at low stroke risk (ie, CHADS 2 =0) be
treated with no therapy rather than any antithrombotic agent (American
College of Chest Physicians grade 2B; ie, weak recommendation, moderate
evidence); for those patients preferring antithrombotic treatment, aspirin
rather than anticoagulation was recommended (grade 2B). These guidelines
also favored oral anticoagulation rather than antiplatelet therapy for those
at moderate risk (ie, CHADS 2 =1; grade 2B) and for those
at high risk (ie, CHADS 2 ≥2; American College of Chest
Physicians grade 1B, ie strong recommendation, moderate evidence) and the
use of dabigatran (the only approved newer anticoagulant when the guidelines
were formulated) rather than warfarin as oral anticoagulant (grade 2B). For
patients in these groups who select antiplatelet rather than anticoagulant
therapy, the guidelines recommended combination aspirin plus clopidogrel
rather than aspirin alone (grade 2B). Of these clinical scenarios, the
greatest uncertainty surrounds the management of patients at moderate risk
(CHADS 2 =1). A large cohort study did not find net
clinical benefit of warfarin for AF patients with a CHADS 2 score
of 1, 417 and a
decision-analysis model predicted that anticoagulation would be beneficial
in this group only when the lower risk of ICH associated with the newer
agents was assumed. 418 
Most guidelines have not explicitly incorporated risk for
anticoagulant-related hemorrhagic complications, largely because of the
paucity of precise data on the risk of bleeding. Some of the risks for
hemorrhage are also risks for cardioembolism and thus do not necessarily
argue against anticoagulation. Age >75 years, for example, is a
factor favoring rather than opposing anticoagulation. 377 One bleeding risk that appears
sufficient to tip the balance away from anticoagulation in nonvalvular AF is
a history of lobar ICH suggestive of cerebral amyloid angiopathy. 419 Other risks for ICH such
as certain genetic profiles or the presence of asymptomatic cerebral
microbleeds on neuroimaging do not currently appear sufficient by themselves
to outweigh the benefits of anticoagulation in patients at average risk of
cardioembolism. 420 
For patients treated with adjusted-dose warfarin, the initial
3-month period is a particularly high-risk period for bleeding 421 and requires especially
close anticoagulation monitoring. ICH is the most devastating complication
of anticoagulation, but the absolute increase in risk is small for INR
≤3.5. 387 
Treatment of hypertension in AF patients reduces the risk of both ICH and
ischemic stroke and hence has dual benefits for anticoagulated patients with
AF. 422 – 424 A consensus statement on
the delivery of optimal anticoagulant care (focusing primarily on warfarin)
has been published. 425 
The combined use of warfarin with antiplatelet therapy increases the risk of
intracranial and extracranial hemorrhage. 426 Because adjusted-dose warfarin
(target INR, 2 to 3) appears to offer protection against MI comparable to
that provided by aspirin in AF patients, 427 the addition of aspirin is not
recommended for most patients with AF and stable coronary artery
disease. 428 , 429 There are meager data on
the type and duration of optimal antiplatelet therapy when combined with
warfarin in AF patients with recent coronary angioplasty and
stenting. 430 , 431 The combination of
clopidogrel, aspirin, and warfarin has been suggested for at least 1 month
after placement of bare metal coronary stents in patients with AF. 432 Because drug-eluting
stents require even more prolonged antiplatelet therapy, bare metal stents
are generally preferred for AF patients taking warfarin. 433 , 434 A lower target INR of 2.0 to 2.5
has been recommended in patients requiring warfarin, aspirin, and
clopidogrel after percutaneous coronary intervention during the period of
combined antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy. 435 
Closure of the LAA has been evaluated as an alternative approach to
stroke prevention in nonvalvular AF. 436 In a trial of 707 subjects randomized 2:1 to
percutaneous LAA closure with the WATCHMAN device (in which patients were
treated with warfarin for at least 45 days after device placement, then
aspirin plus clopidogrel from echocardiographically demonstrated closure of
the LAA until 6 months after placement, then aspirin alone) versus
adjusted-dose warfarin (target INR, 2 to 3), LAA closure was noninferior to
warfarin for preventing the primary outcome of ischemic or hemorrhagic
stroke, cardiac or unexplained death, or systemic embolism during the mean
18-month follow-up (RR, 0.62; 95% CI, 0.35–1.25;
P <0.001 for noninferiority). Hemorrhagic stroke
was less frequent in the LAA closure group (RR, 0.09; 95% CI,
0–0.45), but ischemic stroke was insignificantly more frequent (RR,
1.34; 95% CI, 0.60–4.29), in part because of
procedure-related strokes (occurring in 5 of the 449 patients in whom LAA
closure was attempted, including 2 with long-term residual deficits). At
1588 patient-years of follow-up, the rate of the primary efficacy end point
of stroke, systemic embolism, and cardiovascular death was not inferior for
the WATCHMAN device compared with warfarin. 437 Although this approach appears
promising, there are substantial reasons for proceeding cautiously with this
treatment, including the relatively modest power of the trial, the exclusion
of subjects with firm contraindications to anticoagulation (who would
otherwise appear to be ideal candidates for LAA closure), and the lack of
comparison to the newer, potentially more effective oral anticoagulants.
Other potential nonpharmacological approaches such as therapeutic
cardioversion and rhythm control do not reduce stroke risk. 438 Intervals of
asymptomatic AF also persist after apparently successful radiofrequency
ablation, 439 
suggesting a persistent need for antithrombotic treatment after this
procedure. 
Several randomized, clinical trials have consistently shown that
rhythm control does not protect against stroke relative to rate
control. 438 , 440 – 442 For patients with AF of ≥48
hours or when duration is unknown, it is recommended that patients receive
warfarin to an INR of 2.0 to 3.0 for 3 weeks before and 4 weeks after
chemical or electrical cardioversion. 443 Subgroup analyses of ROCKET AF 444 and RE-LY 445 suggest that protection
from cardioembolism around the time of cardioversion appears to be
comparable for warfarin and the novel oral anticoagulants. 
AF: Summary and Gaps 
AF is a prevalent, potent, and treatable risk factor for embolic
stroke. Knowing which treatment offers the optimal balance of benefits and risks
for a particular patient remains challenging, however. Complicating the decision
is that the field is rapidly changing, with ongoing changes in the epidemiology
of AF-related stroke, improvements in the ability to predict risk of stroke and
hemorrhage, and a growing armamentarium of effective therapies. This fluid
environment has contributed to a proliferation of proposed guidelines, which can
vary substantially. 
One clear goal is therefore to continue to collect sufficient data on
risk stratification and treatment effects to strengthen the foundation for
future recommendations. A key step toward this goal is head-to-head comparison
of the newer anticoagulants with each other and with emerging alternatives such
as LAA closure. 
Despite improving public awareness, anticoagulation for suitable AF
patients remains underused, particularly among the very elderly. A potential
benefit of the newer anticoagulants would be to improve use and compliance for
appropriate patients. Another step toward optimizing the use of anticoagulants
is large-scale MRI studies of cerebral microbleeds to determine whether and when
they should alter the decision to prescribe anticoagulants, especially in the
elderly. Risk for future ICH may be particularly important in selecting one of
the newer anticoagulants because the major advantage of these agents may be
their reduced risk for this complication. 
AF: Recommendations 
For patients with valvular AF at high risk for stroke, defined
as a CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc score of ≥2 and
acceptably low risk for hemorrhagic complications, long-term oral
anticoagulant therapy with warfarin at a target INR of 2.0 to 3.0 is
recommended ( Class I; Level of Evidence A ). 
For patients with nonvalvular AF, a
CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc score of ≥2, and
acceptably low risk for hemorrhagic complications, oral anticoagulants
are recommended ( Class I ). Options include warfarin
(INR, 2.0 to 3.0) ( Level of Evidence A ), dabigatran
( Level of Evidence B ), apixaban ( Level of
Evidence B ), and rivaroxaban ( Level of Evidence
B ). The selection of antithrombotic agent should be
individualized on the basis of patient risk factors (particularly risk
for intracranial hemorrhage), cost, tolerability, patient preference,
potential for drug interactions, and other clinical characteristics,
including the time that the INR is in therapeutic range for patients
taking warfarin. 
Active screening for AF in the primary care setting in patients
>65 years of age by pulse assessment followed by ECG as
indicated can be useful ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
B ). 
For patients with nonvalvular AF and
CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc score of 0, it is reasonable to
omit antithrombotic therapy ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
B ). 
For patients with nonvalvular AF, a
CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc score of 1, and an acceptably low
risk for hemorrhagic complication, no antithrombotic therapy,
anticoagulant therapy, or aspirin therapy may be considered
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence C ). The selection of
antithrombotic agent should be individualized on the basis of patient
risk factors (particularly risk for intracranial hemorrhage), cost,
tolerability, patient preference, potential for drug interactions, and
other clinical characteristics, including the time that the INR is in
the therapeutic range for patients taking warfarin. 
Closure of the LAA may be considered for high-risk patients
with AF who are deemed unsuitable for anticoagulation if performed at a
center with low rates of periprocedural complications and the patient
can tolerate the risk of at least 45 days of postprocedural
anticoagulation ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
Other Cardiac Conditions 
Cardiac conditions other than AF that are associated with an increased
risk for stroke include acute MI; ischemic and nonischemic cardiomyopathy;
valvular heart disease, including prosthetic valves and infective endocarditis;
patent foramen ovale (PFO) and atrial septal aneurysms (ASAs); cardiac tumors;
and aortic atherosclerosis. 
Acute MI 
A meta-analysis of population-based studies published between 1970
and 2004 found that the risk of ischemic stroke after acute MI was 11.1 per
1000 (95% CI, 10.7–11.5) during the index hospitalization,
12.2 per 1000 (95% CI, 10.4–14.0) at 30 days, and 21.4
(95% CI, 14.1–28.7) at 1 year. 446 Factors associated with increased
stroke risk included advanced age, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, anterior
MI, AF, and congestive heart failure. Importantly, the risk of embolic
stroke is increased in patients with anterior MI and left ventricular
thrombus. Contemporary studies have found that left ventricular thrombus
affects ≈6% to 15% of patients with anterior MI and
≈27% with anterior MI and left ventricular ejection fraction
<40%. 447 – 449 Systemic embolism occurs in ≈11% of
patients with left ventricular thrombus. 450 In the Warfarin, Aspirin
Reinfarction Study, (WARIS II), warfarin, combined with aspirin or given
alone, compared with aspirin alone reduced the risk of thromboembolic stroke
but was associated with a greater risk of bleeding. 451 A meta-analysis of 14 trials
comprising 25 307 patients with an acute coronary syndrome reported that
aspirin plus warfarin, in which the achieved INR was 2.0 to 3.0, compared
with aspirin alone reduced the risk of death, nonfatal MI, and nonfatal
thromboembolic stroke but doubled the risk of major bleeding. 452 A meta-analysis of 24
542 patients in 10 randomized trials that evaluated the efficacy of warfarin
after acute MI found a stroke incidence over 5 years of 2.4%. In
this meta-analysis, warfarin decreased the risk of stroke (OR, 0.75;
95% CI, 0.63–0.89) but increased the risk of bleeding. The
2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-segment–elevation
MI (STEMI) states that anticoagulant therapy with a vitamin K antagonist is
reasonable for patients with STEMI and asymptomatic left ventricular mural
thrombi ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence C ) and that
anticoagulant therapy may be considered for patients with STEMI and anterior
apical akinesis or dyskinesis ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
C ). 453 
Cardiomyopathy 
The incidence of stroke in patients with cardiomyopathy and sinus
rhythm is ≈1 per 100 patient-years. 454 – 456 The Warfarin/Aspirin Study in Heart Failure (WASH)
randomized patients with heart failure, reduced left ventricular systolic
function, and no other indications for anticoagulant therapy to warfarin,
aspirin, or no treatment. 454 There was no difference between groups in the primary
composite cardiovascular end point, which included stroke. The Warfarin and
Antiplatelet Therapy in Chronic Heart Failure (WATCH) trial randomized
patients with heart failure, reduced left ventricular systolic function, and
sinus rhythm to warfarin, clopidogrel, or aspirin. The study was terminated
early because of slow enrollment. There was no difference in the composite
primary end point of death, nonfatal MI, or nonfatal stroke, but warfarin
was associated with fewer nonfatal strokes than aspirin or
clopidogrel. 455 
The Warfarin Versus Aspirin in Reduced Cardiac Ejection Fraction (WARCEF)
trial randomized 2305 patients with reduced left ventricular ejection
fraction and sinus rhythm to warfarin or aspirin and followed them up for up
to 6 years. 457 There was
no difference in the primary composite outcome of ischemic stroke, ICH, or
death resulting from any cause (HR, 0.93; 95% CI,
0.79–1.10), but there was a significant reduction in the rate of
ischemic stroke with warfarin compared with aspirin (0.72 versus 1.36 events
per 100 patient-years; HR, 0.52; 95% CI, 0.33–0.82). The
rate of major hemorrhage, however, was greater in the warfarin than in the
aspirin group. The 2009 ACCF/AHA guideline for the diagnosis and management
of heart failure in adults states that the usefulness of anticoagulation is
not well established in patients with heart failure who do not have AF or a
previous thromboembolic event. 458 The American College of Chest Physicians
guidelines on antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis state that
the usefulness of anticoagulation is not well established in patients with
heart failure who do not have AF or a previous thromboembolic event
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 458 Based on the more recent WARCEF
trial, 457 this
recommendation is upgraded in this document to state that anticoagulants or
antiplatelet agents are reasonable for patients with heart failure who do
not have AF or a previous thromboembolic event ( Class IIa; Level of
Evidence B ). 
Valvular Heart Disease 
The risk of embolic stroke is increased in patients with rheumatic
mitral valve disease, even in the absence of AF, and in patients with
prosthetic heart valves. Rheumatic carditis is the most common cause of
mitral stenosis. Studies from the middle part of the last century found an
annual incidence of systemic embolism among patients with rheumatic mitral
valve disease of 1.5% to 4.7% (reviewed by Whitlock et
al 459 ). Thrombus
and subsequent embolism may be more likely to occur in large left atria. The
ACCF/AHA guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease recommend
anticoagulation in patients with mitral stenosis and a prior embolic event,
even in sinus rhythm ( Class I; Level of Evidence B ), and in
patients with mitral stenosis with left atrial thrombus ( Class I;
Level of Evidence B ). 460 Reports on the association of embolic stroke with
mitral valve prolapse have been inconsistent. 461 – 463 A population-based study of patients from Olmsted
County, Minnesota, found an increased RR of stroke or TIA among patients
with mitral valve prolapse who were initially in sinus rhythm (RR, 2.2;
95% CI, 1.5–3.2). 464 Independent factors associated with stroke
included older age, mitral valve thickening, and the development of AF. The
ACCF/AHA guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease recommend
aspirin therapy for patients with mitral valve prolapse who experience TIAs
( Class I; Level of Evidence C ) and warfarin for these
patients with a history of stroke and mitral regurgitation, AF, or left
atrial thrombus ( Class I; Level of Evidence C ). 460 The risk of stroke is
also increased in patients with mitral annular calcification. There was an
increased risk of stroke (RR, 2.1; 95% CI, 1.2–3.6) among
participants in the Framingham study who had mitral annular
calcification. 465 
Risk of stroke was associated with the severity of mitral annular
calcification. Similarly, in the SHS, a cohort study of American Indians,
stroke incidence was increased among those with mitral annular calcification
(RR, 3.1; 95% CI, 1.8–5.2). 466 In contrast, in the multiethnic
NOMAS, mitral annular calcification was associated with an increased risk of
MI and vascular death but not ischemic stroke. 467 There is no evidence that
anticoagulant therapy reduces the risk of stroke in patients with mitral
annular calcification. Calcific aortic stenosis is an uncommon cause of
embolic stroke, unless disrupted by valvuloplasty, transcatheter aortic
valve replacement, or open surgical aortic valve replacement. 468 
Prosthetic heart valves can serve as a source of thromboembolism.
The risk of embolic stroke is greater in patients with mechanical valves
than bioprosthetic valves. The annual incidence of thromboembolism in
patients with bioprosthetic valves and sinus rhythm is ≈0.7%
(reviewed by Bonow et al 460 ). Among patients with bioprosthetic valves, the risk
of embolism is greatest within the first 3 months after implantation and is
higher with mitral than aortic bioprosthetic valves. 469 ACCF/AHA guidelines for the
management of patients with valvular heart disease recommend aspirin after
aortic or mitral valve replacement with a bioprosthesis in patients with no
risk factors (ie, AF, previous thromboembolism, left ventricular
dysfunction, and hypercoagulable condition) and warfarin (INR, 2.0 to 3.0)
after aortic or mitral valve replacement with a bioprosthesis in patients
with additional risk factors ( Class I; Level of Evidence
C ). During the first 3 months after aortic or mitral valve
replacement with a bioprosthesis, the guidelines indicate that it is
reasonable to give warfarin to achieve an INR of 2.0 to 3.0 ( Class
IIa; Level of Evidence C ). 
In the first 3 months after bioprosthetic valve implantation,
aspirin is recommended for aortic valves; the combination of aspirin and
clopidogrel is recommended if the aortic valve is transcatheter; and vitamin
K antagonist therapy with a target INR of 2.5 is recommended for mitral
valves. After 3 months, aspirin is recommended. 459 
A meta-analysis of 46 studies comprising 13 088 patients who
received mechanical mitral or aortic valve prostheses reported an incidence
of valve thrombosis or embolism in the absence of antithrombotic therapy of
8.6 per 100 patient-years (95% CI, 7.0–10.4). Risk of
embolism was lower in patients with tilting disk and bileaflet valves than
in those with caged ball valves (no longer used). 470 Antithrombotic therapy with a
vitamin K antagonist reduced the risk of thromboembolic events to 1.8 per
100 patient-years (95% CI, 1.7–1.9). Even among
anticoagulated patients, the risk of embolism is higher among those with
mechanical mitral valves than mechanical aortic valves. 471 , 472 ACC/AHA guidelines for the management of patients
with valvular heart disease recommend warfarin (INR, 2.0 to 3.0) after
aortic valve replacement with bileaflet mechanical or Medtronic Hall
prostheses in patients with no risk factors ( Class I; Level of
Evidence B ), warfarin (INR, 2.5 to 3.5) in patients with risk
factors ( Class I; Level of Evidence B ), and warfarin (INR,
2.5 to 3.5) after mitral valve replacement with any mechanical valve
( Class IIa; Level of Evidence C ). 460 The addition of low-dose aspirin to
warfarin is recommended for all patients with mechanical valves
( Class IIa; Level of Evidence C ). 
The novel oral anticoagulants (factor Xa inhibitors and direct
thrombin inhibitors) are not indicated for the prevention of thromboembolism
associated with mechanical heart valves. The randomized, phase II study to
evaluate the safety and pharmacokinetics of oral dabigatran etexilate in
patients after heart valve replacement (RE-ALIGN) trial showed an increase
in thromboembolic and bleeding complications with dabigatran compared to
warfarin in patients with mechanical heart valves. 473 
About 20% to 40% of patients with endocarditis
suffer embolic events, the majority of which affect the central nervous
system. 474 , 475 The rate of embolic
events decreases rapidly after the initiation of antibiotic
therapy. 476 – 478 The risk of embolic stroke is associated with the size
of the vegetation, involvement of the mitral valve, and infection by
Staphylococcus aureus . 475 , 476 , 479 
Anticoagulant therapy does not reduce the risk of embolic stroke and may
increase the risk of cerebral hemorrhage. 474 Anticoagulant therapy should not be
used to treat patients with infective endocarditis unless indicated for
other cardiovascular conditions. 459 Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis, also known
as marantic endocarditis, is associated with malignant neoplasms,
antiphospholipid antibodies (aPLs), and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
and may be a source of an embolic stroke. 480 Anticoagulant therapy is indicated
for patients with nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis and systemic
embolism. 459 
PFO and ASAs 
A PFO is present in ≈15% to 25% of the
adult population, and ASA occurs in 1% to 4%. A PFO serves
as a right-to-left conduit for paradoxical emboli originating in the veins,
whereas ASA may be a nidus for thrombus formation. PFO and ASA have been
associated with stroke in many, but not all, studies. 481 – 487 In the Patent Foramen Ovale in Cryptogenic Stroke
Study (PICSS), a PFO was detected by transesophageal echocardiography more
often in patients with cryptogenic stroke than in those with known causes of
stroke (39.2% versus 29.9%, respectively). 482 Another study also found
that the prevalence of PFO was greater among patients with cryptogenic
stroke than among those with known causes of stroke, including patients
<55 years of age (OR, 4.70; 95% CI, 1.89–11.68;
P <0.001) and patients ≥55 years of age
(OR, 2.92; 95% CI, 1.70–5.01). 488 A meta-analysis of case-control
studies of patients who have had an ischemic stroke found that among
patients ≤55 years of age there are significant associations with
PFO (OR, 3.10; 95% CI, 2.29–4.21), ASA (OR, 6.14;
95% CI, 2.47–15.22), and PFO plus ASA (OR, 15.59;
95% CI, 2.83–85.87). 486 In patients >55 years of age, the
association with PFO was not significant (OR, 1.27; 95% CI,
0.80–2.01), although it was for ASA (OR, 3.43; 95% CI,
1.89–6.22) and for PFO plus ASA (OR, 5.09; 95% CI,
1.25–20.74). In a population-based study from Olmstead County,
Minnesota, in which the mean participant age was 66.9±13.3 years,
PFO was not associated with increased risk of stroke (HR, 1.46; 95%
CI, 0.74–2.88), whereas there was an association with ASA (HR, 3.72;
95% CI, 0.88–15.71). 489 In the multiethnic NOMAS, in which the mean age
was 68.7±10.0 years, PFO was not associated with increased risk of
stroke (HR, 1.64; 95% CI, 0.87–3.09), nor was the
coexistence of PFO and ASA (HR, 1.25; 95% CI,
0.17–9.24). 483 Another study examining the characteristics of PFO
observed larger PFOs, longer tunnels, and a greater frequency of ASA in
patients with stroke than in those without stroke. 490 One study of patients with
cryptogenic stroke found that the risk of recurrent stroke was 2.3%
(95% CI, 0.3–4.3) among patients with PFO alone, 0%
in those with ASA alone, 15.2% (95% CI, 1.8–28.6) in
patients with both PFO and ASA, and 4.2% (95% CI,
1.8–6.6) in patients with neither. 491 Further analyses from NOMAS with
longer follow-up also failed to find evidence for an increased risk of first
stroke with PFO (adjusted HR, 1.10; 95% CI, 0.64–1.91) and
provided further evidence that PFO is not associated with subclinical
cerebrovascular disease. 492 
No study has examined treatments to prevent initial strokes in
patients with PFO or ASA. Accordingly, given the uncertainties and
relatively low risk of initial stroke caused by PFO or ASA and the potential
risk of antithrombotic therapy or invasive treatments, no treatment is
recommended for the primary prevention of stroke in people with PFO or ASA.
Several studies have examined the treatment of PFO with antithrombotic
therapy or percutaneous closure devices in patients with cryptogenic stroke,
but a discussion of secondary prevention exceeds the scope of this
document. 482 , 493 – 495 
Cardiac Tumors 
Benign primary cardiac tumors such as myxomas, papillary
fibroelastomas, and primary malignant cardiac neoplasms such as sarcomas may
embolize to the brain and cause ischemic stroke. 496 , 497 Embolic stroke is most likely to occur with
intracavitary tumors that have friable surfaces. Myxoma is the most common
cardiac tumor, and the majority of them occur in the left atrium. 498 About 30% to
40% of myxomas embolize. 499 Stroke or TIA is the presenting symptoms in half
of the patients with papillary fibroelastomas. 500 Surgical excision of atrial myxomas
is recommended. Surgical intervention, including removal or occasionally
valve replacement, is recommended for symptomatic fibroelastomas and for
fibroelastomas that are >1 cm in diameter or appear mobile, even if
asymptomatic, because they pose a risk for embolism. 501 Recommendations for the treatment
of malignant cardiac neoplasms depend on the precise nature and extent of
the tumor and are beyond the scope of this document. 502 
Aortic Atherosclerosis 
Plaques ≥4 mm in size, particularly large, complex plaques,
are associated with an increased risk of cryptogenic strokes. 503 – 506 In the French Study of Aortic
Plaques in Stroke, plaques >4 mm were found to be independent
predictors of recurrent stroke (RR, 3.8; 95% CI,
1.8–7.8). 507 Among patients with cryptogenic stroke who
participated in PICSS, large plaques detected by transesophageal
echocardiography were associated with an increased risk of recurrent
ischemic stroke or death over a 2-year follow-up (HR, 6.42; 95% CI,
1.62–25.46), as were those with complex morphology (HR, 9.50;
95% CI, 1.92–47.10). 504 Atheroembolism from aortic plaques is also a cause
of stroke associated with cardiac surgery. 505 , 506 , 508 There
are no prospective, randomized trials examining the efficacy of medical
therapy to reduce the risk of stroke caused by embolic events from large
thoracic aortic plaques. One nonrandomized study found that warfarin reduced
the risk of recurrent stroke in patients with mobile thoracic atheroma
detected by transesophageal echocardiography. 509 In another nonrandomized study,
patients with aortic plaques >4 mm thick treated with oral
anticoagulants had fewer stroke and peripheral embolic events than those
treated with antiplatelet therapy. 510 A retrospective analysis of patients with severe
thoracic aortic plaque found that statin therapy (OR, 0.3; 95% CI,
0.2–0.6), but not warfarin (OR, 0.7; 95% CI,
0.4–1.2) or antiplatelet therapy (OR, 1.4; 95% CI,
0.8–2.4), reduced the risk of stroke, TIA, and peripheral
emboli. 511 
Other Cardiac Conditions: Summary and Gaps 
Cardiac conditions, including MI, cardiomyopathy, valvular heart
disease, PFO and ASAs, cardiac tumors, and aortic atherosclerosis, are
associated with an increased risk for stroke. Therapies to prevent stroke in
many of these conditions are based on well-reasoned consensus of opinion, but
randomized, prospective trials to support these decisions are often lacking. For
example, therapy with a vitamin K antagonist is reasonable for patients with
STEMI and left ventricular mural thrombi, but clinical trials could inform the
duration of treatment. Prospective trials are lacking to determine whether
antithrombotic therapy is useful for the primary prevention of stroke in
patients with mitral valve prolapse and mitral regurgitation who do not have AF.
Comparative-effectiveness trials would be useful to determine which
antithrombotic would be most effective in reducing the risk of stroke in
patients with large aortic plaques. 
Other Cardiac Conditions: Recommendations 
Anticoagulation is indicated in patients with mitral stenosis
and a prior embolic event, even in sinus rhythm ( Class I; Level
of Evidence B ). 
Anticoagulation is indicated in patients with mitral stenosis
and left atrial thrombus ( Class I; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Warfarin (target INR, 2.0–3.0) and low-dose aspirin are
indicated after aortic valve replacement with bileaflet mechanical or
current-generation, single-tilting-disk prostheses in patients with no
risk factors * 
( Class I; Level of Evidence B ); warfarin (target
INR, 2.5–3.5) and low-dose aspirin are indicated in patients
with mechanical aortic valve replacement and risk factors * ( Class I;
Level of Evidence B ); and warfarin (target INR,
2.5–3.5) and low-dose aspirin are indicated after mitral valve
replacement with any mechanical valve ( Class I; Level of
Evidence B ). 
Surgical excision is recommended for the treatment of atrial
myxomas ( Class I; Level of Evidence C ). 
Surgical intervention is recommended for symptomatic
fibroelastomas and for fibroelastomas that are >1 cm or appear
mobile, even if asymptomatic ( Class I; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Aspirin is reasonable after aortic or mitral valve replacement
with a bioprosthesis ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
B ). 
It is reasonable to give warfarin to achieve an INR of 2.0 to
3.0 during the first 3 months after aortic or mitral valve replacement
with a bioprosthesis ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Anticoagulants or antiplatelet agents are reasonable for
patients with heart failure who do not have AF or a previous
thromboembolic event ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
A ). 
Vitamin K antagonist therapy is reasonable for patients with
STEMI and asymptomatic left ventricular mural thrombi ( Class
IIa; Level of Evidence C ). 
Anticoagulation may be considered for asymptomatic patients
with severe mitral stenosis and left atrial dimension ≥55 mm by
echocardiography ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
Anticoagulation may be considered for patients with severe
mitral stenosis, an enlarged left atrium, and spontaneous contrast on
echocardiography ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence C ). 
Anticoagulant therapy may be considered for patients with STEMI
and anterior apical akinesis or dyskinesis ( Class IIb; Level of
Evidence C ). 
Antithrombotic treatment and catheter-based closure are not
recommended in patients with PFO for primary prevention of stroke
( Class III; Level of Evidence C ). 
Asymptomatic Carotid Artery Stenosis 
Atherosclerotic stenosis in the extracranial internal carotid artery or
carotid bulb has been associated with an increased risk of stroke. What follows
is a summary of recommendations for managing asymptomatic patients with carotid
atherosclerotic stenosis. Further details are available in an earlier guideline
endorsed by the AHA that is dedicated to this topic. 512 
Previous randomized trials have shown that prophylactic carotid
endarterectomy (CEA) in appropriately selected patients with carotid stenosis
results in a relative risk reduction of stroke of 53% and an absolute
5-year risk reduction of 6% compared with patients treated by medical
management alone. 513 – 515 However, since these trials
were performed, medical management has improved. The question has been raised if
invasive treatment of carotid bifurcation disease remains an effective way to
reduce stroke risk compared to contemporary medical management alone. 
Assessment of Carotid Stenosis 
A hemodynamically significant carotid stenosis produces a pressure
drop across the lesion, a flow reduction distal to the lesion, or both. This
generally corresponds to a 60% diameter-reducing stenosis as
reflected by catheter angiography as measured with the North American
method. This method was first described in publications from the Joint Study
of Extracranial Arterial Occlusive Disease of the 1960s 516 and has been used in multiple
trials carried out in North America. This method measures the minimal
residual lumen at the level of the stenotic lesion compared with the
diameter of the more distal internal carotid artery where the walls of the
artery first become parallel. It uses the following formula:
stenosis=(1−N/D)×100%, where N is the
diameter at point of maximum stenosis and D is the diameter of the arterial
segment distal to the stenosis where the arterial walls first become
parallel. This method is in contrast to the European method, which estimates
stenosis of the internal carotid bulb. 
Because the randomized trials of CEA for symptomatic and
asymptomatic disease in North America used catheter angiography, this has
become the gold standard against which other imaging technologies are
compared. Historically, catheter angiography carried an ≈1%
risk of causing a stroke in patients with atherosclerotic disease. 513 , 517 – 519 The complication rate has been dropping over the
past several years, and the permanent stroke complication rate is
<0.2%. 519 Duplex ultrasound is the noninvasive method of
screening the extracranial carotid artery for an atherosclerotic stenosis
with the lowest cost and risk. Although there can be considerable variation
in the accuracy of duplex scanning among laboratories, 520 certification programs are
available that set standards for levels of performance and accuracy. Duplex
ultrasound may be insensitive to differentiating high-grade stenosis from
complete occlusion. MR angiography (MRA), with and without contrast, is also
used as a noninvasive method for evaluating arterial anatomy and has the
advantage of providing images of both the cervical and intracranial portions
of the carotid artery and its proximal intracranial branches. MRA may
overestimate the degree of stenosis, and as with duplex ultrasound, there
may be errors when high-grade stenosis is differentiated from complete
occlusion. MR contrast material may cause debilitating nephrogenic systemic
fibrosis in patients with renal dysfunction. When concordant, the
combination of duplex ultrasound and MRA is more accurate than either test
alone. 521 
Computed tomographic angiography is another means of identifying and
measuring stenosis of the extracranial carotid artery. 522 Like MRA, it has the advantage of
being able to evaluate the intracranial circulation. Disadvantages of
computed tomographic angiography include radiation exposure and the need for
intravenous injection of contrast material. Atherosclerotic calcification
may confound accurate measurement of stenosis with computed tomographic
angiography. 
A variety of vascular risk factors reviewed in this guideline are
associated with carotid atherosclerosis. 523 , 524 Carotid bruit can reflect an underlying carotid
stenosis. However, the sensitivity for detecting carotid stenosis is low. In
NOMAS, auscultation had a sensitivity of 56% and a specificity of
98%. 525 
Endarterectomy for Asymptomatic Carotid Stenosis 
The first study with >1000 patients comparing CEA plus best
medical therapy to medical therapy alone was the Asymptomatic Carotid
Atherosclerosis Study (ACAS). 513 The primary outcome was the composite of any
stroke or death occurring in the perioperative period and ipsilateral
cerebral infarction thereafter. During follow-up after 34 centers randomized
1662 patients, the Data and Safety Monitoring Committee called a halt to the
trial because of a clear benefit in favor of CEA. Patients randomized to
surgery had contrast angiography showing diameter-reducing lesions of
≥60% using the North American method of measurement. Both
treatment groups received what at the time was considered best medical
management. The aggregate risk over 5 years for ipsilateral stroke, any
perioperative stroke, and death was 5.1% for the surgical patients
and 11% for the medical patients (RR reduction, 53%;
95% CI, 22–72). The 30-day stroke morbidity and all-cause
mortality for CEA was 2.3%, which included a 1.2% stroke
complication rate for catheter angiography. It was suggested that the
complications of angiography should be considered part of the risk of
surgery because an angiogram would not have been performed if surgery were
not contemplated. It should be noted that ACAS was conducted at a time when
best medical management was limited to control of BP, the control of
diabetes mellitus, and the use of daily aspirin. The value of statins and
newer antiplatelet drugs had not been established. 
The Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST), carried out
primarily in European centers, 514 included 3120 patients with asymptomatic carotid
stenoses of ≥70%, as measured by duplex ultrasonography.
Subjects were randomized to immediate CEA versus indefinite deferral of the
operation. The trial used end points that were different from those used in
ACAS (perioperative stroke, MI or death, and nonperioperative stroke). The
net 5-year risks were 6.4% in the immediate surgery group and
11.8% in the deferred surgery group for any stroke or perioperative
death (net gain, 5.4%; 95% CI, 3.0–7.8;
P <0.0001). In subgroup analysis, the benefits
of CEA were confined to patients <75 years of age. 
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke–sponsored Carotid Revascularization of Primary Prevention of
Stroke (CREST-2) trial will be comparing centrally managed, intensive
medical therapy with or without CEA. 526 
Careful screening of surgeons participating in clinical trials
might lead to results that cannot be generalized to the community. This is
particularly evident when the complications from angiography are removed
from the surgical group. When this is done, the 30-day rate of stroke and
death for CEA in ACAS was 1.54%. 517 The perioperative complication rate
in ACST was 3.1%. 
The results of CEA for asymptomatic patients were examined in the
National Hospital Discharge Database for 2003 and 2004. 527 The rate of the combination of
stroke and death for CEA was 1.16%. This compares favorably with the
rate of the combination of stroke and death for carotid artery
stent/angioplasty during the same interval, which was 2.24%. These
estimates, however, are based on administrative data and are limited to the
procedural hospitalization. A 10-state survey of 30-day complication rates
after CEA performed in asymptomatic patients a few years earlier found rates
that varied from 1.4% (Georgia) to 6.0%
(Oklahoma). 528 
Thus, it would appear the perioperative complication rates for CEA found in
the ACAS trial could be similar or better in the community; however, in at
least some areas, rates may be higher. More recently, complication rates
from the CREST trial were reported. 529 CEA in asymptomatic patients carried a combined
risk of stroke and death of 1.4%. Additionally, a registry
maintained by the Society for Vascular Surgery documented a 30-day
postoperative combined rate of stroke and death of 1.35%. 530 This rate among
unselected surgeons was comparable to the rate seen among surgeons selected
to participate in a trial. 
Endovascular Treatment for Asymptomatic Carotid Stenosis 
Carotid angioplasty and stenting (CAS) is being performed more
frequently. 531 
The Stenting and Angioplasty With Protection in Patients at High Risk for
Endarterectomy (SAPPHIRE) trial found that CAS was not inferior (within
3%; P =0.004) to endarterectomy (based on a
composite outcome of stroke, MI, or death within 30 days or death resulting
from neurological cause or ipsilateral stroke between 31 and 365 days) in a
group of patients considered to be at high risk for CEA. 532 About 70% of the
subjects had an asymptomatic stenosis, with rates of stroke, MI, or death of
5.4% with stenting and 10.2% with endarterectomy
( P =0.20) at 30 days. At 1 year, the composite
end point occurred in 9.9% of the CAS patients and 21.5% of
the CEA patients ( P =0.02). Three-year outcomes from
the SAPPHIRE trial showed that patients receiving CAS had a significantly
higher death rate (20.0%) than stroke rate
(10.1%), 533 raising questions about the long-term value of the
procedure in this high-risk cohort. In addition, there was no medically
treated control group, and the complication rates in both treatment arms
were high enough to raise questions about the benefit of either intervention
over medical therapy alone. 
Several industry-supported registries have reported periprocedural
complication rates of 2.1% to 8.3%. 534 The lack of medically treated
control groups makes the results of these registries difficult to
interpret. 
CREST enrolled both symptomatic and asymptomatic patients with
carotid stenosis who could technically undergo either CEA or CAS. 535 Asymptomatic patients
could be included if they had a stenosis of ≥60% on
angiography, ≥70% on ultrasonography, or
≥80% on computed tomographic angiography or MRA if the
stenosis on ultrasonography was 50% to 69%. Randomization
was stratified according to symptom status. The primary end point was a
composite of stroke, MI, or death resulting from any cause during the
periprocedural period or any ipsilateral stroke within 4 years after
randomization. There was no difference in the estimated 4-year occurrence of
the composite primary end point between stenting (7.2%) and
endarterectomy (6.8%; HR, 1.11; 95% CI, 0.81–1.51;
P =0.51), with no significant heterogeneity
based on symptom status. CREST demonstrated an interaction of age on the
primary end point, with age >70 years showing a significant benefit
for CEA over CAS. CAS had a higher periprocedural stroke/death rate for
patients >64 years of age. 529 Patient age may be among the factors to consider
when choosing between the 2 procedures. The periprocedural rate of stroke
was higher with CAS than with CEA (4.1% versus 2.3%;
P =0.01), and the periprocedural rate of MI was
lower with CAS than with CEA (1.1% versus 2.3%;
P =0.03). In the periprocedural period, point
estimates for the rates of any stroke or death among asymptomatic patients
were low (2.5% in CAS versus 1.4% for CEA; HR, 1.88;
95% CI, 0.79–4.42; P =0.15). The
overall estimated 4-year rate of any periprocedural stroke or death or
postprocedural ipsilateral stroke, however, was higher with stenting
compared with endarterectomy (HR, 1.50; 95% CI, 1.05–2.15;
P =0.03). Although the trial was not powered to
evaluate symptomatic and asymptomatic patients separately, there was a trend
favoring CEA over CAS in both the symptomatic (HR, 1.37; 95% CI,
0.90–2.09; P =0.14) and asymptomatic (HR,
1.86; 95% CI, 0.95–3.66; P =0.07)
groups. Post hoc analysis found that major and minor stroke negatively
affected quality of life at 1 year (Short Form-36, physical component
scale), with minor stroke affecting mental health at 1 year (Short Form-36,
mental component scale), but the effect of periprocedural MI did not
negatively affect quality of life. Having MI or stroke, including minor
stroke, was associated with a higher mortality rate. 
The advantage of revascularization over medical therapy by itself
was not addressed by CREST, which did not randomize a group of asymptomatic
subjects to medical therapy without revascularization. Hospital costs for
CAS tend to be greater than for CEA. 536 – 538 The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke–sponsored CREST-2 trial will be comparing centrally managed,
intensive medical therapy with or without carotid stenting with embolic
protection. 539 
Screening of Asymptomatic Carotid Stenosis 
Although carotid artery stenosis is a risk factor for stroke, not
every carotid stenosis carries the same risk for future stroke. There have
been attempts to identify those patients with carotid stenosis who are at
high risk for future events. Two methods have shown promise. The first
method uses transcranial Doppler (TCD) to count the number of presumed
embolic events, known as high-intensity transient signals per unit time.
Although this technique has shown that patients with frequent high-intensity
transient signals have a higher subsequent stroke rate than those without
high-intensity transient signals, the test is time-consuming to perform and
has not received uniform acceptance. Additionally, the effect of intensive
medical therapy on high-intensity transient signals has not been adequately
assessed. Another method of study uses plaque analysis in a computerized
algorithm using B-mode insonation of the carotid plaque. Population
screening for asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis is not recommended by the
US Preventive Services Task Force, which found “no direct evidence
that screening adults with duplex ultrasonography for asymptomatic stenosis
reduces stroke.” 540 Screening for other risk factors is addressed in
relevant sections of this guideline. 
Asymptomatic Carotid Stenosis: Summary and Gaps 
Medical therapy has advanced since clinical trials have been completed
comparing endarterectomy plus best medical therapy with best medical therapy
alone in patients with an asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis. 541 Recent studies suggest that
the annual rate of stroke in medically treated patients with an asymptomatic
carotid artery stenosis has fallen to ≤1%. 541 – 543 In the ACST, the rate of absolute benefit from CEA per
year was lower in patients on lipid-lowering therapy (0.6%/y) compared
with patients not on lipid lowering therapy (1.5%/y). 544 ACST had no explicit targets
for LDL, and intensive targets (eg, LDL <70 mg/dL) may further reduce
the benefit of revascularization. Statin therapy is appropriate for patients
with asymptomatic carotid stenosis, whether or not they undergo
revascularization. 
Interventional therapy has also advanced, particularly in terms of
perioperative management and device design. Because the absolute reduction in
stroke risk with CEA in patients with an asymptomatic stenosis is small,
however, the benefit of revascularization may be reduced or eliminated with
current medical therapy. 541 
The benefit of CEA for carotid stenosis in asymptomatic women remains
controversial. 545 
Given the reported 30-day, 1-year, and 3-year results in the high-surgical-risk
population, it remains uncertain whether this group of asymptomatic patients
should have any revascularization procedure. More data are needed to compare
long-term outcomes after CEA and CAS. Currently, the Centers for Medicare
& Medicaid Services cover CAS for asymptomatic stenosis only in patients
with >80% stenosis at high risk for CEA who are participating in
postmarket approval studies. 
For patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis who defer
revascularization, periodic reassessment of degree of stenosis may be helpful in
identifying patients at higher risk of stroke. A retrospective ultrasound-based
study of the deferred surgery arm of the ACST trial found that patients who had
carotid stenosis that worsened in 1 year by 1 stenosis category did not have an
increased risk of ipsilateral ischemic events, with categories being 0%
to 49%, 50% to 69%, 70% to 89%,
90% to 99%, and 100%. 546 Patients who had a progression of
≥2 categories in 1 year were at high risk of ipsilateral ischemic events
relative to nonprogressors. 
The recommendations below reflect current best evidence. However,
modern optimal medical therapy may obviate the need for carotid
revascularization. The balance of risks and benefits of revascularization in the
setting of modern optimal medical therapy is being assessed in ongoing
multicenter clinical trials in the United States and elsewhere. 
Asymptomatic Carotid Stenosis: Recommendations 
Patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis should be
prescribed daily aspirin and a statin. Patients should also be screened
for other treatable risk factors for stroke, and appropriate medical
therapies and lifestyle changes should be instituted ( Class I;
Level of Evidence C ). 
In patients who are to undergo CEA, aspirin is recommended
perioperatively and postoperatively unless contraindicated
( Class I; Level of Evidence C ). 
It is reasonable to consider performing CEA in asymptomatic
patients who have >70% stenosis of the internal carotid
artery if the risk of perioperative stroke, MI, and death is low
(<3%). However, its effectiveness compared with
contemporary best medical management alone is not well established
( Class IIa; Level of Evidence A ). 
It is reasonable to repeat duplex ultrasonography annually by a
qualified technologist in a certified laboratory to assess the
progression or regression of disease and response to therapeutic
interventions in patients with atherosclerotic stenosis
>50% ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Prophylactic CAS might be considered in highly selected
patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis (minimum, 60% by
angiography, 70% by validated Doppler ultrasound), but its
effectiveness compared with medical therapy alone in this situation is
not well established ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B ). 
In asymptomatic patients at high risk of complications for
carotid revascularization by either CEA or CAS, the effectiveness of
revascularization versus medical therapy alone is not well established
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
Screening low-risk populations for asymptomatic carotid artery
stenosis is not recommended ( Class III; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Sickle Cell Disease 
SCD, an autosomal-recessive disorder in which the abnormal gene product
is an altered hemoglobin β-chain, typically manifests very early in
life. Signs and symptoms associated with SCD are the result of chronic anemia or
acute vaso-occlusive crises, most commonly manifesting as painful episodes.
Complications of SCD include acute chest syndrome, pulmonary hypertension,
bacterial infections, and organ infarctions, especially stroke. Other effects
include cognitive deficits related to MRI-demonstrated strokes and otherwise
asymptomatic white matter hyperintensities. 547 , 548 
Stroke is a major complication of SCD, with the highest stroke rates
occurring in early childhood. The prevalence of stroke by 20 years of age is at
least 11%, 549 with a
substantial number of strokes being silent strokes on brain MRI. 548 Stroke prevention is most
important for patients with homozygous SCD because the majority of the
SCD-associated strokes occur in these patients. TCD ultrasound identifies those
at high risk of stroke, allowing evidence-based decisions about optimal primary
stroke prevention. 550 , 551 Although the exact mechanism
by which high blood flow velocities increase the risk for ischemic stroke is not
known, the association is well established. The risk of stroke during childhood
in those with SCD is 1%/y, but patients with TCD evidence of high
cerebral blood flow velocities (time-averaged mean velocity >200 cm/s)
have stroke rates >10%/y. 551 , 552 
Retrospective analysis of the Stroke Prevention Trial in Sickle Cell Anemia
(STOP) data suggested that velocity >170 cm/s in the anterior cerebral
artery is associated with increased stroke risk after controlling for the middle
cerebral artery/internal carotid artery velocities. 553 TCD surveillance of children with SCD
remains the gold standard for stroke risk prediction, and its increased use
coincides with a decrease in stroke among the pediatric SCD
population. 554 , 555 
The optimal frequency of screening to detect patients at high risk has
not been determined. The STOP study, which compared periodic blood transfusion
with standard care in 130 children with SCD, used time-averaged means of the
maximum velocity. Additionally, peak systolic velocity may be used, in which
case a measurement of 250 cm/s is used as a threshold for prophylactic
transfusion. 556 In
general, younger children and those with relatively high cerebral blood flow
velocities should be monitored more frequently because of a higher risk of
conversion to abnormal velocities in younger patients and in those with TCD
velocities closer to 200 cm/s. 557 Despite strong evidence of its value, overall TCD
screening rates continue to be suboptimal as a result of patient and provider
factors. 558 , 559 The National Institutes of
Health and the American Academy of Pediatrics recommend annual TCD screening
from 2 to 16 years of age. 560 , 561 
Few studies have been done to determine whether TCD also predicts
stroke in adults with SCD. One study comparing TCD velocities in SCD adults with
those of healthy control subjects found that velocities in SCD adults were lower
than those found in children, higher than in healthy control subjects, and
negatively correlated with the hematocrit in both SCD groups. 562 Another study found no
examples of high TCD (>200 cm/s) in adults with SCD. The mean velocity
was 110 cm/s, which is higher than in normal adults but lower than in children
with SCD. 563 At present,
there are no validated TCD criteria for predicting stroke in adults with
SCD. 
Although TCD remains the most extensively validated stroke prediction
tool, other clinical characteristics are also associated with increased risk of
stroke. One study found that nocturnal desaturation predicted neurological
events in 95 patients with SCD (median age, 7.7 years; range, 1 to 23 years)
followed up for a median of 6 years. 564 There were 7 strokes among 19 individuals with events.
Mean overnight oxygen saturation and TCD independently predicted
events. 564 Nocturnal
oxygen desaturation appears to place children at risk for developing executive
dysfunction, which was not associated with MRI-demonstrable infarcts. 565 There is no proven therapy
for the cognitive impairment associated with nocturnal desaturation. 
MRI has also been used to identify children with SCD who are at high
risk of stroke. The Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell Disease, which preceded the
use of TCD-based monitoring, found that 8.1% of children with an
asymptomatic MRI lesion versus 0.5% of those with a normal MRI had a
stroke during the ensuing 5 years. 566 The Silent Cerebral Infarct Multicenter Clinical Trial
(SIT), a randomized, controlled trial MRI-guided prophylactic transfusion, found
that regular blood transfusion significantly reduced the incidence of the
recurrence of cerebral infarction in children with sickle cell anemia. 567 In a cohort of 67 patients
with indication for cervical internal carotid artery MRA, 15% of
patients had occlusions or stenoses. 568 The role of cervical MRA in stroke risk prediction
remains undefined. 
Additional clinical features identify children at risk for developing
elevated TCD velocities and stroke. G6PD deficiency, absence of
α-thalassemia (OR, 6.45; 95% CI, 2.21–18.87;
P =0.001), hemoglobin levels (OR, 0.63 per 1 g/dL;
95% CI, 0.41–0.97; P =0.038), and
lactate dehydrogenase levels (OR, 1.001 per 1 IU/L; 95% CI,
1.000–1.002; P =0.047) are independent risk
factors for abnormally high velocities. 569 This confirmed a previously reported protective effect
of α-thalassemia 570 
and found for the first time that G6PD deficiency and hemolysis independently
increased the risk of abnormal TCD. 571 Another study found independent effects of hemoglobin
and aspartate transaminase levels on TCD velocities, whereas age had an unclear
association. 572 
Several recent studies of children with SCD identified increased lactate
dehydrogenase concentrations and baseline reticulocyte counts to be predictive
of stroke 573 , 574 and elevated plasma glial fibrillary
acidic protein concentrations to be predictive of cognitive impairment,
suggesting subclinical injury. 575 Markers of systemic inflammation such as
interleukin-1β also have been associated with stroke risk. 576 A future process that
integrates blood biomarkers and TCD blood flow findings may identify children at
greatest risk. 
Other genetic factors also affect stroke risk in patients with SCD. A
study evaluated 108 SNPs in 39 candidate genes in 1398 individuals with SCD
using bayesian networks and found that 31 SNPs in 12 genes interact with fetal
hemoglobin to modulate the risk of stroke. 577 This network of interactions includes 3 genes in the
transforming growth factor-β pathway and selectin P, which is associated
with stroke in the general population. The model was validated in a different
population, predicting the occurrence of stroke in 114 individuals with
98.2% accuracy. 577 
STOP data were used to confirm previous findings of associations between the
tumor necrosis factor (−308) G/A, IL4R 503 S/P, and ADRB2 27 Q/E
polymorphisms and risk of large-vessel stroke in SCD. 578 Consistent with prior findings, the
tumor necrosis factor (−308) GG genotype increased the risk of
large-vessel disease by >3-fold (OR, 3.27; 95% CI,
1.6–6.9; P =0.006). Unadjusted analyses also
showed a previously unidentified association between the leukotriene C4-synthase
(−444) A/C variant and risk of large-vessel stroke. 578 The Stroke With Transfusions Changing
to Hydroxyurea (SWiTCH) study found that of the 38 candidate SNPs in 22 genes
studied, 5 polymorphisms had significant influence on stroke risk; SNPs in the
ANXA2 , TGFBR3 , and TEK 
genes were associated with increased stroke risk, and α-thalassemia and
an SNP in the ADCY9 gene were linked to decreased stroke
risk. 579 The SIT
Trial found that 2 variations in the G6PD gene that are linked
to reduced enzymatic function, rs1050828 and rs1050829, were associated with
vasculopathy in male participants with SCD (OR, 2.78; 95% CI,
1.04–7.42; P =0.04). 580 Further validation of these findings is
required before these genetic variations can be used for stroke risk
prediction. 
Periodic red cell transfusion is the only intervention proven in
randomized trials to prevent stroke in patients with SCD. STOP randomized
children with SCD who had abnormal high-risk TCD profiles to either standard
care, which included episodic transfusion as needed for pain, or periodic red
cell transfusion an average of 14 times per year for >2 years with a
target reduction of hemoglobin S from a baseline of >90% to
<30%. The risk of stroke was reduced from 10%/y to
<1%/y. 552 Unless exchange methods in which blood is removed from the
patient with each transfusion are used, long-term transfusion results in iron
toxicity that requires treatment with chelation. 581 In STOP, there was no evidence of
transfusion-related infection, but iron overload and alloimmunization remain
important transfusion risks. 582 To address these risks, STOP II tested whether long-term
transfusions for primary stroke prevention could be safely discontinued after at
least 30 months (range, 30–91 months) in children who had not had an
overt stroke and who had reversion to low-risk TCD velocities (time-averaged
mean velocity in middle cerebral or internal carotid artery, <170 cm/s)
with long-term transfusion therapy. The study end point was the first occurrence
of reversion of TCD to abnormal confirmed by ≥2 TCDs with mean
velocities of ≥200 cm/s or stroke. The study was terminated earlier than
planned when an interim analysis showed worse outcomes with discontinuation of
transfusion therapy. Eight children (≈20%) tolerated removal
from long-term transfusion therapy, but there was a high TCD reversion rate and
a small risk of stroke despite frequent TCD surveillance. 583 , 584 Further analyses from STOP II also demonstrated increased
rates of silent infarcts on MRI in the discontinuation group (27.5%
versus 8.1%; P =0.03). 585 Primary stroke prevention for children
with SCD remains centered on red cell transfusions. 
Therapies other than transfusion such as hydroxyurea or bone marrow
transplantation that reduce the number of painful crises have an uncertain
effect on organ damage, including stroke. Of the 127 children with SCD enrolled
in the Belgian Hydroxyurea SCD registry, 72 patients were evaluated by TCD. Of
these 72, 34 were found at risk of stroke, and only 1 had a cerebrovascular
event after a follow-up of 96 patient-years, suggesting a benefit of hydroxyurea
in stroke prevention. 586 A
study of 291 children with SCD included clinical and imaging follow-up of 35
children with abnormal TCDs who were placed on transfusion therapy (median
follow-up, 4.4 years). Of 13 patients with normalized velocities on transfusion,
10 had normal MRAs, and transfusion therapy was replaced with hydroxyurea. Four
of these 10 patients redeveloped high velocities, so only 6 remained transfusion
free. 569 In another
study, the adjusted mean change in TCD velocities was −13.0 cm/s
(95% CI, −20.19 to −5.92) in a hydroxyurea-treated group
and 4.72 cm/s (95% CI, −3.24 to 12.69) in control subjects
( P <0.001). 587 In a study of 59 initiating hydroxyurea therapy for
severe vaso-occlusive complications who had pretreatment baseline TCD
measurements, 37 had increased time-averaged maximum velocities ≥140
cm/s and were enrolled in a trial with TCD velocities measured at maximum
tolerated dose and 1 year later. 588 At the hydroxyurea maximum tolerated dose
(mean±SD=27.9 ± 2.7 mg/kg per day), decreases were
observed in bilateral middle cerebral artery velocities. The magnitude of the
TCD velocity decline correlated with the maximal baseline TCD value. 588 Most recently, the phase III
Pediatric Hydroxyurea Clinical Trial (BABY HUG) demonstrated significantly lower
increases in TCD velocities in the hydroxyurea group, but neurocognitive testing
of the infants was not statistically different between groups. 589 The SWiTCH study, a phase
III noninferiority trial comparing standard treatment (transfusions/chelation)
with alternative treatment (hydroxyurea/phlebotomy) for children with SCA,
stroke, and iron overload, 579 
was stopped for safety reasons when adjudication documented no strokes in
patients on transfusions/chelation but a 10% stroke rate in patients on
hydroxyurea/phlebotomy. Hydroxyurea therapy for stroke prevention is promising
for primary stroke prevention but requires additional study. Results from the
ongoing Transcranial Doppler With Transfusions Changing to Hydroxyurea (TWiTCH)
trial may provide greater insight into the benefit of hydroxyurea in stroke
prevention. 
Bone marrow transplantation is usually entertained after stroke, but
TCD and other indexes of cerebral vasculopathy have also been used as an
indication for myeloablative stem-cell transplantation. One study of 55 patients
with a median follow-up of 6 years found overall and event-free survival rates
of 93% and 85%, respectively. No new ischemic lesions were
reported, and TCD velocities decreased. 590 In a study of 55 children who underwent bone marrow
transplantation for severe SCD, 16 patients without prior stroke and
unremarkable MRI before bone marrow transplantation had no clinical or silent
stroke on follow-up, and the 10 patients with prior silent ischemia had no
further events. 591 Bone
marrow transplantation is promising for primary stroke prevention but requires
additional study. 
No trial has been done on the primary prevention of stroke in adults
with SCD. Improvements in care have increased life expectancy in people with
SCD, and it is anticipated that stroke prophylaxis in older patients with SCD
will pose an increasing challenge in the future. 
SCD: Summary and Gaps 
Significant progress has been achieved in the primary prevention of
stroke in children with SCD. TCD can be used to identify children who are at
high risk of stroke and who benefit from transfusion therapy. Although the
optimal screening interval has not been established, TCD remains the most
extensively validated method for risk assessment. Improvements in prediction may
come from incorporating additional predictors such as anterior cerebral artery
velocity, blood biomarkers, variations in several genes, and nocturnal oxygen
saturation. On the basis of STOP II, even those whose risk of stroke decreases
with transfusion therapy on the basis of TCD criteria have an
≈50% probability of reverting to high risk or having a stroke if
transfusion therapy is discontinued. Alternative methods of maintenance therapy
that are safer than transfusion need to be developed because studies show the
need for ongoing active treatment despite TCD normalization and the risk of iron
toxicity with repeated transfusions. Predictive methods other than TCD (eg, MRI
techniques) need to be systematically compared and combined with TCD to further
refine the estimation of stroke risk in individuals. Hydroxyurea may be
beneficial when red cell transfusions are not feasible but should not be
considered as a substitute for transfusion. Data on risk of stroke and
prevention options in adults with SCD are needed, and a stroke prevention
strategy for adults needs to be developed. Future stroke prevention trials are
needed for adults with SCD. 
SCD: Recommendations 
TCD screening for children with SCD is indicated starting at 2
years of age and continuing annually to 16 years of age ( Class
I; Level of Evidence B ). 
Transfusion therapy (target reduction of hemoglobin S,
<30%) is effective for reducing stroke risk in those
children at elevated risk ( Class I; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Although the optimal screening interval has not been
established, it is reasonable for younger children and those with
borderline abnormal TCD velocities to be screened more frequently to
detect the development of high-risk TCD indications for intervention
( Class IIa; Level of Evidence B ). 
Pending further studies, continued transfusion, even in those
whose TCD velocities revert to normal, is probably indicated
( Class IIa; Level of Evidence B ). 
In children at high risk for stroke who are unable or unwilling
to be treated with periodic red cell transfusion, it might be reasonable
to consider hydroxyurea or bone marrow transplantation ( Class
IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
MRI and MRA criteria for selection of children for primary
stroke prevention with transfusion have not been established, and these
tests are not recommended in place of TCD for this purpose
( Class III; Level of Evidence B ). 
Less Well-Documented or Potentially Modifiable Risk Factors 
Migraine 
Migraine headache has been most consistently associated with stroke in
young women, especially those with migraine with aura. 592 A meta-analysis of 21 studies (13
case-control and 8 cohort) reported an overall pooled RR of 2.04 (95%
CI, 1.72–2.43). 593 
The risk was greater in migraine with aura (pooled adjusted OR for 7 studies,
2.51; 95% CI, 1.52–4.14) compared with the association of
ischemic stroke and migraine without aura (pooled adjusted OR for 6 studies,
1.29; 95% CI, 0.81–2.06). 593 A second meta-analysis of 9 studies (6 case-control
and 3 cohort) reported a pooled RR of 1.73 (95% CI, 1.31–2.29)
between any migraine and ischemic stroke. 594 This study also found a significantly higher risk of
stroke among individuals with migraine with aura (RR, 2.16; 95% CI,
1.53–3.03) compared with individuals with migraine without aura (RR,
1.23; 95% CI, 0.90–1.69; meta-regression for aura status,
P =0.02). 594 Furthermore, there was a significant risk among women
(RR, 2.08, 95% CI, 1.13–3.84) but not among men (RR, 1.37;
95% CI, 0.89–2.11). Age <45 years, especially in women
(RR, 3.65; 95% CI, 2.21–6.04), smoking (RR, 9.03; 95%
CI, 4.22–19.34), and OC use (RR, 7.02; 95% CI,
1.51–32.68) further increased the risk. 594 Both meta-analyses are in general
agreement with prior studies. 595 Counseling on possible alternative forms of birth control
other than OCs in women with migraine may lower the risk of stroke, but this
recommendation should be placed in the context of overall health implications of
such a change. 
The WHS, a primary prevention trial of women ≥45 years of age
and free of CVD at enrollment, continues to inform the association between women
with migraine and stroke. After a mean follow-up of 11.9 years,
multivariable-adjusted analysis found that high migraine frequency (more than
weekly) had an increased association with ischemic stroke (HR, 2.77; 95%
CI, 1.03–7.46) but not in lower frequencies. 596 When migraine aura status was taken
into account, a significant association of migraine frequency was found only in
the migraine with aura group (HR, 4.25; 95% CI,
1.36–13.29). 596 From this analysis, increased frequency of attacks in
migraine with aura appears to increase the risk for ischemic stroke. However,
caution in overly interpreting these results is needed because the incident
numbers for these subgroup analyses were small. In a separate analysis of the
WHS, the association of migraine with aura and ischemic stroke was found to be
more pronounced in the absence (HR, 3.27; 95% CI, 1.93–5.51)
than in the presence (HR, 0.91; 95% CI, 0.43–1.93) of
nausea/vomiting. 597 
Overall, the WHS found that increased frequency in patients with migraine with
aura increases ischemic stroke risk and that this increased risk is more
pronounced in the absence of typical migraine features. 
The WHS also investigated the association between migraines and ICH.
Although there was no increased risk of ICH in those who reported any history of
migraine compared with those without a history of migraine (HR, 0.98;
95% CI, 0.56–1.71), there was an increased risk for ICH in women
with active migraine with aura (HR, 2.25; 95% CI,
1.11–4.54). 598 The age-adjusted increased risk was stronger for ICH (HR,
2.78; 95% CI, 1.09–7.07) and for fatal events (HR, 3.56;
95% CI, 1.23–10.31). 598 From this study, it is estimated that 4 additional ICH
events are attributable to migraine with aura per 10 000 women per
year. 598 Women who
reported active migraine without aura had no increased risk for ICH. This
increase in risk for ICH for women with migraine with aura, but not for women
with migraine without aura, was similar to the increased risk found with
ischemic strokes. 
The association of migraine in middle-aged to late-life infarct-like
lesions on imaging was studied in a Reykjavik, Iceland, population-based
cohort. 599 After
multivariable adjustment, midlife migraine with aura had an increased risk of
late-life infarct-like lesions (OR, 1.4; 95% CI,
1.1–1.8). 599 
This was particularly reflected by an association with cerebellar lesions in
women (OR, 1.9; 95% CI, 1.4–2.6), but not in men, with migraine
with aura (OR, 1.0; 95% CI, 0.6–1.8). 599 Migraine without aura and nonmigraine
headache were not associated with an increased risk. 599 Therefore, similar to the risk for
ischemic stroke found in women with migraine with aura in the WHS, in this
Icelandic population, women with migraine with aura had an increased risk for
late-life ischemic lesions as seen on brain MRI; however, this association was
not appreciated in men or in those with migraine without aura or nonmigraine
headaches. Overall, the Icelandic study is in agreement with the previous
studies, including the Cerebral Abnormalities in Migraine, an Epidemiological
Risk Analysis (MRI CAMERA) study, which found that, on the basis of MRI,
migraineurs with aura had higher prevalence of subclinical infarcts in the
posterior circulation (OR, 13.7; 95% CI, 1.7–112), with female
migraineurs at an independent increased risk of white matter lesions (OR, 2.1;
95% CI, 1.0–4.1). 600 , 601 The
mechanism and relevance of the migraine–brain lesion association are
unclear. In 1 cohort study based on MRA, there was a significant association
between anatomical variants of the circle of Willis and both migraines without
aura (OR, 2.4; 95% CI, 1.5–3.9) and migraines with aura (OR,
3.2; 95% CI, 1.6–4.1). 602 Unilateral posterior variants with basilar hypoplasia
were statistically associated only with migraines with aura (OR, 9.2;
95% CI, 2.3–37.2). 602 However, there was no statistical association between
the presence of circle of Willis variants and ischemic lesions on MRI (OR, 1.5;
95% CI, 0.68–1.94), or with infratentorial lacunar lesions (OR,
1.58; 95% CI, 0.48–5.24). 602 The relationship between these vascular anatomical
variants in migraineurs to ischemic strokes is unclear. 
Once considered a disease of cerebral blood vessels, recent
experimental and clinical data have indicated that migraine results from a
complex interaction of several converging pathogenic factors. These include
disturbance of cortical excitability, cortical spreading depression, meningeal
inflammation, and activation of the trigeminovascular system. 603 However, factors
contributing to the increased risk of stroke with migraine remain elusive.
Clinical-epidemiological studies have suggested several mechanisms. In 1
prospective study of patients <55 years of age, hypercoagulable states
were more frequent in the migraine than the nonmigraine group (38.6%
versus 16.4%; P <0.01). 604 Multivariate analysis showed that
migraine without aura was associated with a 2.88-fold increased risk for
hypercoagulable diagnosis (95% CI, 1.14–7.28), but in the group
with brain infarcts who were <50 years of age, only migraine with aura
was independently associated with hypercoagulable states (OR, 6.81; 95%
CI, 1.01–45.79). 604 
The Stoke Prevention in Young Women Study (SPYW) reported a 50%
increased risk of ischemic stroke in those with probable migraine and visual
aura (OR, 1.5; 95% CI, 1.1–2.0). 605 Interrelationships among the ACE
deletion/insertion (D/I) polymorphism (rs1799752), migraine, and CVD, including
ischemic stroke, were investigated in the WHS cohort. 606 The increased risk for CVD among
migraineurs with aura was apparent only for carriers of the DD (RR, 2.10;
95% CI, 1.22–3.59; P =0.007) and DI (RR,
2.31; 95% CI, 1.52–3.51) genotypes, suggesting that the DD/DI
genotype may play a role in, or at least be a marker for, this complex
association. 606 
However, because of the small numbers, further studies are warranted. 
Perhaps the most heavily investigated potential mechanistic link
between migraine and stroke is the association of migraine and PFO. Initial
studies found that PFOs are more common in young patients with cryptogenic
stroke and those with migraine, 481 , 486 , 607 particularly migraine with
aura. 608 The
speculated relationship between PFO and migraine includes microemboli that flow
through the PFO, causing brain ischemia and thereby triggering
migraine. 609 The
Migraine Intervention with STARFlex Technology (MIST) trial, a randomized,
double-blind, sham-controlled trial, showed no benefit of PFO closure on the
cessation of migraine headaches (primary outcome; 3 of 74 versus 3 of 73;
P =0.51). 610 There is much controversy concerning the results of
this trial, 611 and it was not
designed to evaluate the primary prevention of stroke in patients with migraines
with aura. Furthermore, recent studies have found a lack of association between
migraine and PFO in a large population-based study among elderly
individuals, 612 in a
hospital-based case-control study, 613 and in a recent meta-analysis, 614 placing some doubt on whether PFO has a
causal role in migraines. 
In terms of primary prevention of stroke in patients with migraine,
aspirin reduced risk of ischemic stroke (RR, 0.76; 95% CI,
0.63–0.93) but not other clinical atherothrombotic end points in the WHS
group. 615 In subgroup
analyses, the protective effect of aspirin on ischemic stroke was similar among
women with or without migraines. 615 However, women with migraine with aura on aspirin had an
increased risk of MI (RR, 3.72; 95% CI, 1.39–9.95), primarily
women with history of smoking or hypertension. 615 The clinical significance of this
increased risk for this subgroup is unclear because of small numbers. 
Migraine: Summary and Gaps 
Migraine headache, particularly migraine with aura, appears to be
associated with stroke in women <55 years of age, but the mechanisms
linking these 2 conditions remain unclear. The stroke risk of migraine in men
appears to be less established. Randomized trial evidence that migraine
prophylaxis decreases stroke risk is lacking. The significance of deep white
matter lesions and other infarct-like lesions seen on MRI in patients with
migraine remains unclear. No proven primary prevention strategy exists for
patients with migraine. Closure of PFO for treatment of migraine and for primary
or secondary stroke prevention remains controversial, with no data from
well-controlled studies showing benefit. 
Migraine: Recommendations 
Smoking cessation should be strongly recommended in women with
migraine headaches with aura ( Class I; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Alternatives to OCs, especially those containing estrogen,
might be considered in women with active migraine headaches with aura
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
Treatments to reduce migraine frequency might be reasonable to
reduce the risk of stroke ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Closure of PFO is not indicated for preventing stroke in
patients with migraine ( Class III; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Metabolic Syndrome 
The National Cholesterol Education Program (Adult Treatment Panel III)
originally defined metabolic syndrome as the presence of ≥3 of the
following: (1) abdominal obesity as determined by waist circumference
>102 cm (>40 in) for men and >88 cm (>35 in) for
women; (2) triglycerides ≥150 mg/dL; (3) HDL cholesterol <40
mg/dL for men and <50 mg/dL for women; (4) BP ≥130/≥85
mm Hg; and (5) fasting glucose ≥110 mg/dL. 616 A modified criterion for fasting
glucose was published in 2004. 617 The International Diabetes Foundation (IDF) then modified
the definition by requiring inclusion of a waist circumference >88 cm
for men and >80 cm in women plus 2 of the other National Cholesterol
Education Program–Adult Treatment Panel III criteria. 618 In 2009, a harmonized
definition was proposed wherein an identical set of thresholds was used for all
components except waist circumference, an area in which further evidence for the
relationship to CVD events was felt to be required. 619 In the interim, the Harmonized
Definition Work Group suggested that national or regional cut points for waist
circumference should be used. Thus, because the waist circumference and risk for
CVD and diabetes mellitus vary around the world, the National Cholesterol
Education Program–Adult Treatment Panel III, IDF, and harmonized
definitions all make a provision for an ethnic/racial/geographic modification of
waist circumference. 620 
Obesity and sedentary lifestyle, in addition to other genetic or acquired
factors, seem to interact to produce the metabolic syndrome. 621 Screening for the syndrome
requires no more than a routine physical examination and routine blood
tests. 622 
Obesity, discussed separately, is an important component of the
metabolic syndrome and is associated with major health risk factors (such as
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and dyslipidemia), poor health status, and,
when extreme, lower life expectancy. 623 – 625 
The visceral adiposity characteristic of the metabolic syndrome is associated
with insulin resistance, inflammation, diabetes mellitus, and other metabolic
and cardiovascular derangements. 626 Visceral adipocytes provoke insulin resistance by
promoting extensive lipolysis and release of fatty acids into the splanchnic
circulation. Leptin, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, tumor necrosis
factor-α, and other proinflammatory cytokines, in addition to reduced
production and release of adiponectin by adipocytes, have all been implicated in
this pathophysiological process. 626 
The metabolic syndrome is highly prevalent in the United
States. 626 Applying
the harmonized definition of the metabolic syndrome to data from the National
Health and Nutrition Examination (2003 through 2006) in up to 3461 participants
≥20 years of age with a waist circumference threshold of ≥102 cm
for men and ≥88 cm for women, the age-adjusted prevalence of metabolic
syndrome was 34.3% among all adults, 36.1% among men, and
32.4% among women. 627 
With the use of race-or ethnicity-specific IDF criteria for waist circumference,
the age-adjusted prevalence was 38.5% for all participants,
41.9% for men, and 35.0% for women. Prevalence increased with
age, with the highest prevalence in subjects between 60 to 69 years of age.
Prevalence was lower among black men than white or Mexican American men and
lower among white women than among black or Mexican American women. Mostly
attributable to the obligatory use of a lower waist circumference for the IDF,
the IDF definition led to higher estimates of prevalence in all demographic
groups, especially among Mexican American men. 
Hyperinsulinemia/insulin resistance is an important marker of the
metabolic syndrome; however, results concerning a relationship between glucose
intolerance and stroke risk are conflicting. 628 – 639 In 18 990 men and women who were screened for entry
into the Diabetes Reduction Assessment with Ramipril and Rosiglitazone
Medication (DREAM) trial from 21 different countries, 8000 subjects were
normoglycemic, 8427 had impaired fasting glucose or impaired glucose tolerance,
and 2563 had newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus. 640 Among all subjects, an 18-mg/dL
increase in fasting plasma glucose or a 45-mg/dL increase in the 2-hour glucose
after an oral glucose tolerance test was associated with an increase in
cardiovascular events, including stroke or death (HR, 1.17; 95% CI,
1.13–1.22). The relationships between other individual components of the
metabolic syndrome and stroke risk, including elevated BP, are reviewed in other
sections of this guideline. 
The metabolic syndrome is a predictor of CVD and vascular death;
however, this risk does not appear to be any larger than the sum of the
components of the syndrome. 626 , 641 A similar
lack of greater predictability is true for the metabolic syndrome and
stroke. 642 This lack
of relationship may be because of sample size or a small number of stroke
events. The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, among 10 357
subjects, 643 the
prevalence of metabolic syndrome was higher in people with self-reported history
of stroke (43.5%) than in those with no history of stroke or myocardial
infarct (22.8%; P ≤0.001). The metabolic
syndrome was independently associated with stroke history in all ethnic groups
and in both sexes (OR, 2.16; 95% CI, 0.48–3.16). The association
between metabolic syndrome and stroke has been confirmed in other populations,
including those enriched with elderly subjects, and the frequency of the
metabolic syndrome was notably higher in patients with a history of
nonhemorrhagic stroke 269 , 643 – 646 but also in Korean patients with
spontaneous ICH. 645 The
adjusted RRs for ischemic stroke associated with the metabolic syndrome in
prospective studies has ranged between 2.10 and 2.47, and an HR as high as 5.15
has been reported. 647 – 653 This predictive capacity
does not appear to be influenced by the definition used for the metabolic
syndrome and showed no significant variation across sex, age, or ethnic groups.
Yet, in the Stroke Prevention by Aggressive Reduction in Cholesterol Levels
(SPARCL) trial, the 642 subjects with the metabolic syndrome and a previous
stroke or TIA did not experience an increased risk of stroke. 654 Although many studies have
used >1 definition of the metabolic syndrome to assess the risk for
stroke, the harmonized definition may prove to be superior in establishing the
relationship. 655 , 656 
There are essentially no trial data that have addressed the effects of
treatment on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in patients with the
metabolic syndrome. In the JUPITER Trial, 17 802 healthy men and women with LDL
cholesterol levels <130 mg/dL and hs-CRP levels ≥2.0 mg/L were
randomized to receive rosuvastatin 20 mg daily or placebo and followed up for
the occurrence of the combined primary end point of MI, stroke, arterial
revascularization, hospitalization for unstable angina, or death resulting from
cardiovascular causes. 657 The
rates were reduced by a hazard ratio of 0.56 (95% CI, 0.46–0.69)
for the primary end point, 0.46 (95% CI, 0.30–0.70) for MI, and
0.52 (95% CI, 0.34–0.79) for stroke. Patients with or without
the metabolic syndrome had similar reductions in CVD events. The TNT study
included 10 001 patients with clinically evident coronary heart
disease. 658 Treating
to an LDL cholesterol substantially <100 mg/dL with a high dose of a
high-potency statin reduced both stroke and cardiovascular events by an
additional 20% to 25% compared with a lower dose. Of these
subjects, 5584 patients with the metabolic syndrome were randomly assigned to
high- or low-dose statin. 659 
As expected, the higher dose led to greater reductions in LDL cholesterol (73
versus 99 mg/dL at 3 months). Regardless of treatment assignment, more patients
with the metabolic syndrome (11.3%) had a major cardiovascular event
than those without the metabolic syndrome (8.0%, HR, 1.44; 95%
CI, 1.26–1.64; P <0.0001). At a median follow-up
of 4.9 years, major cardiovascular events occurred in 13% patients
receiving the low-dose statin compared with 9.5% receiving the higher
dose (HR, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.61–0.84;
P <0.0001), and cardiovascular events were reduced by
26% (HR, 0.74; 95% CI, 0.59–0.93;
P =0.011). 
Metabolic Syndrome: Summary and Gaps 
Individual components of the metabolic syndrome are associated with an
increased risk of ischemic stroke and should be treated as appropriate. The
specific risk of stroke in people with the metabolic syndrome appears to be
higher but remains uncertain, as is the effect of treatment of the syndrome. 
Metabolic Syndrome: Recommendations 
Management of individual components of the metabolic syndrome
is recommended, including lifestyle measures (ie, exercise, appropriate
weight loss, proper diet) and pharmacotherapy (ie, medications for BP
lowering, lipid lowering, glycemic control, and antiplatelet therapy),
as endorsed in other sections of this guideline. (Refer to relevant
sections for Class and Levels of Evidence for each recommendation.) 
Alcohol Consumption 
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism defines heavy
drinking for a man as >4 drinks in any single day or >14 drinks
per week and defines heavy drinking for a woman as >3 drinks any single
day and >7 drinks per week. 660 A standard drink is defined as 12 fl oz of regular
beer, 5 fl oz of table wine, or a 1.5–fl oz shot of 80-proof spirits.
Heavy alcohol consumption can lead to multiple medical complications, including
stroke. Heavy alcohol consumption is a risk factor for all types of
stroke. 661 – 665 Most studies suggest a
J-shaped association between alcohol consumption and the risk of total and
ischemic stroke, with a protective effect in light (<151 g/wk) or
moderate (151 to 300 g/wk) drinkers and an elevated risk with heavy
(>300 g/wk) alcohol consumption. 661 , 662 , 666 – 676 In contrast, a linear association exists between
alcohol consumption and the risk of ICH. 330 , 334 , 677 , 678 In a prospective cohort study of 540 patients with
spontaneous ICH, 679 heavy
alcohol intake was associated with ICH at a young age (median age, 60 versus 74
years in nonabusers; P <0.001). 
Light-to-moderate alcohol consumption is associated with higher levels
of HDL cholesterol, 680 , 681 reduced platelet
aggregation, 682 , 683 lower fibrinogen
concentrations, 684 
and increased insulin sensitivity and glucose metabolism. 685 , 686 Heavy alcohol consumption can result in
hypertension, 687 – 693 
hypercoagulability, reduced cerebral blood flow, 694 and an increased risk of AF. 662 , 668 , 695 – 698 Studies show an increased
risk for stroke in hypertensive patients who consume alcohol, as well as poor BP
control in heavy drinkers with hypertension. 
A study of 43 685 men from the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study and
71 243 women from the Nurses’ Health Study showed that alcohol intake
had a J-shaped association for risk of stroke. 667 A lower risk for stroke was found in
women who were light drinkers, but women who drank ≥ 30 g alcohol per
day had a 40% increased risk for stroke (RR, 1.41; 95% CI,
1.07–1.88 for ischemic stroke; RR, 1.40; 95% CI,
0.86–2.28 for ICH). There was a similar but nonsignificant pattern for
men. In the WHS, 699 alcohol
consumption was not associated with risk for stroke, even for ≥10.5
drinks per week. However, a recent meta-analysis showed a higher mortality risk
for women compared with men who drank >3 drinks per day. 700 
A prospective study of Chinese men 701 supports the association between heavy alcohol and
risk for stroke. A 22% increase in stroke occurred for those consuming
at least 21 drinks per week, whereas consumption of 1 to 6 drinks per week was
associated with the lowest risk. In a meta-analysis of 35 observational
studies, 678 
consumption of 60 g alcohol per day was associated with a 64% increased
risk for all stroke (RR, 1.64; 95% CI, 1.39–1.93), a 69%
increase for ischemic stroke (RR, 1.69; 95% CI, 1.34–2.15), and
more than doubling for hemorrhagic stroke (RR, 2.18; 95% CI,
1.48–3.20). Consumption of <12 g/d was associated with a reduced
risk of total (RR, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.75–0.91) and ischemic (RR,
0.80; 95% CI, 0.67–0.96) stroke, with consumption of 12 to 24
g/d associated with a lower risk of ischemic stroke (RR, 0.72; 95% CI,
0.57–0.91). A systematic review of triggers of ischemic stroke showed a
significant association between ischemic stroke and alcohol abuse of >40
to 60 g within the preceding 24 hours (OR, 2.66; 95% CI,
1.54–4.61) or >150 g within the previous week (OR, 2.47;
95% CI, 1.52–4.02). 702 
Alcohol Consumption: Summary and Gaps 
In observational studies, light to moderate alcohol consumption is
associated with reduced risk of total and ischemic stroke, whereas heavier
alcohol consumption increases stroke risk. Prospective, randomized, clinical
trials showing that reduction of heavy alcohol consumption reduces risk or that
light alcohol consumption is beneficial are lacking and are ethically untenable
because it is well established that alcohol dependence is a major health
problem. 
Alcohol Consumption: Recommendations 
Reduction or elimination of alcohol consumption in heavy
drinkers through established screening and counseling strategies as
described in the 2004 US Preventive Services Task Force update is
recommended 703 ( Class I; Level of Evidence
A ). 
For individuals who choose to drink alcohol, consumption of
≤2 drinks per day for men and ≤1 drink per day for
nonpregnant women might be reasonable 704 , 705 ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Drug Abuse 
Drug addiction is often a chronic, relapsing condition associated with
societal and health-related problems. 706 Drugs of abuse, including khat, cocaine, amphetamines,
3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine (also known as MDMA or ecstasy), and
heroin, are associated with an increased risk of stroke. 707 – 709 Use of these drugs can produce acute severe BP
elevations, cerebral vasospasm, vasculitis, embolization resulting from
infective endocarditis, endothelial dysfunction, hemostatic and hematological
abnormalities resulting in increased blood viscosity and platelet aggregation,
and ICH. 710 – 716 In a recent Middle Eastern
cohort study of patients with acute coronary syndrome, 717 khat chewing was prevalent and was
associated with an increased risk of stroke and death. Cathinone, the major
ingredient of the khat plant, has sympathomimetic and central nervous
system–stimulating effects. The literature also includes case series of
stroke associated with cannabis use; however, the mechanism remains
unclear. 718 , 719 In a prospective study of 48
young patients with ischemic stroke, 21% had multifocal intracranial
stenosis associated with cannabis use. 720 
Information about stroke-related drug abuse is limited mainly to
epidemiological studies of urban populations. There is an increase in the risk
of both ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke. 721 – 726 In
a cross-sectional study of hospitalized patients, 726 amphetamine abuse was associated with
ICH (adjusted OR, 4.95; 95% CI, 3.24–7.55) but not with ischemic
stroke; cocaine abuse was associated with ICH (OR, 2.33; 95% CI,
1.74–3.11) and ischemic stroke (OR, 2.03; 95% CI,
1.48–2.79). Amphetamine abuse was associated with a higher risk of fatal
ICH (OR, 2.63; 95% CI, 1.07–6.50). In a retrospective analysis
of patients with ICH, patients with cocaine-associated ICH had worse functional
outcomes and an almost 3-fold greater risk of death during the acute
hospitalization than patients with cocaine-negative ICH. 727 
Long-term treatment strategies, including medication, psychological
counseling, and community-based programs, are effective in the management of
drug dependency. 706 , 728 According to the US
Preventive Services Task Force, there is insufficient evidence to assess the
balance of benefits and harms of screening adolescents, adults, and pregnant
women for illicit drug use. Although standardized questionnaires to screen
individuals for drug use/misuse have been shown to be valid and reliable, there
is insufficient evidence to assess the clinical utility of these instruments
when applied widely in primary care settings. 729 
Drug Abuse: Summary and Gaps 
Several drugs of abuse are associated with ischemic and hemorrhagic
stroke. There are no controlled trials demonstrating a reduction in stroke risk
with abstinence. 
Drug Abuse: Recommendation 
Referral to an appropriate therapeutic program is reasonable
for patients who abuse drugs that have been associated with stroke,
including cocaine, khat, and amphetamines ( Class IIa; Level of
Evidence C ). 
Sleep-Disordered Breathing 
Approximately 4% of adults in the United States have sleep
apnea. 730 , 731 The diagnosis of sleep apnea is based
on the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI), which describes the number of respiratory
events (cessations or reductions in air flow) observed during sleep. Sleep apnea
is defined as present if the AHI is ≥5 events per hour, and an
increasing AHI indicates increasing severity. 730 
Several longitudinal studies have identified sleep apnea as an
independent risk factor for stroke. The first prospective data demonstrating an
association between sleep apnea and stroke risk came from the Wisconsin Sleep
Cohort Study. 732 This cohort
included 1189 subjects followed up for 4 years. There was a 3-fold increase in
the risk of stroke (OR, 3.09; 95% CI, 0.74–12.81) for subjects
with an AHI ≥20 events per hour. The Sleep Heart Health Study followed
up 5422 adults who were ≥40 years of age without a history of stroke but
with untreated sleep apnea for a median of 8.7 years. 733 The unadjusted stroke risk associated
with sleep apnea was somewhat higher in men than in women; the OR for ischemic
stroke per 10 years was 2.26 (95% CI, 1.45–3.52) for men and
1.65 (95% CI, 1.45–3.52) for women. After adjustment for age,
BMI, race, smoking, SBP, antihypertensive medications, and diabetes mellitus,
sleep apnea was associated with stroke risk in men but not women. Among men,
there was a progressive increase in ischemic stroke risk with increasing sleep
apnea severity: AHI 9.5 to 19.1 events per hour, adjusted OR, 1.86 (95%
CI, 0.70–4.95); AHI >19.1 events per hour, adjusted OR, 2.86
(95% CI, 1.10–7.39). A meta-analysis of 5 prospective studies
that included 8435 participants identified an OR for incident stroke risk of
2.24 (95% CI, 1.57–3.19). 734 This meta-analysis also found that increased stroke
risk is associated with increasing sleep apnea severity with an OR of 1.35
(95% CI, 1.25–1.45) for every 10-unit increase in AHI. A study
of 50 men with sleep apnea and 15 obese male control subjects found that silent
brain infarctions on MRI were more common among patients with moderate to severe
sleep apnea than among control subjects or patients with mild sleep apnea
(25% versus 7.7% versus 6.7%, respectively;
P <0.05). 735 
Although alternative therapeutic strategies exist, the mainstay of
sleep apnea treatment is continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), which
improves a variety of clinical outcomes (eg, daytime sleepiness). 730 , 736 No randomized trial has evaluated the effectiveness of
CPAP on primary stroke prevention. The existing longitudinal cohort data
indicate that CPAP treatment is associated with a reduction in cardiovascular
risk among patients with sleep apnea compared with patients who are not treated
with CPAP even after adjustment for vascular risk factors and that this finding
is most robust for patients with the most severe sleep apnea. 737 – 739 For example, a study of 264 healthy
subjects, 403 untreated patients with sleep apnea, and 372 patients with CPAP
treatment for 10 years 739 had
a combined vascular event end point that included fatal or nonfatal stroke or MI
or acute coronary syndrome requiring cardiac intervention. In this cohort,
severe untreated sleep apnea was associated with a 3-fold increased risk of
vascular events (adjusted OR, 2.87; 95% CI, 1.17–7.51 for
cardiovascular death; OR, 3.17; 95% CI, 1.12–7.52 for nonfatal
cardiovascular events), but patients with treated sleep apnea had vascular event
risks that were similar to those of patients with mild untreated sleep apnea and
healthy subjects. A cardiovascular end-point benefit was observed with CPAP
treatment among 364 patients receiving CPAP compared with 85 untreated
patients. 738 The
adjusted HR was 0.34 (95% CI, 0.20–0.58) for CPAP treatment. 
Although no randomized, controlled trials have been published on
primary prevention, several randomized, controlled trials and cohort studies
have evaluated the effectiveness of CPAP among patients with stroke and TIA
(These data are reviewed in detail in the AHA secondary stroke prevention
guidelines). 740 Among
these secondary prevention studies, the one with the longest follow-up studied
189 patients after stroke with sleep apnea for 7 years, finding that patients
who did not use CPAP had a much higher recurrent stroke rate than patients who
used CPAP (32% versus 14%; P =0.021) and
a higher adjusted incidence of nonfatal vascular events (HR, 2.87; 95%
CI, 1.11–7.71). 741 
The number needed to treat to prevent 1 new vascular event was 4.9 patients
(95% CI, 2–19). 
Adherence to CPAP can be measured directly by CPAP machines in hours
per night used and proportion of nights used. The reported CPAP adherence has
varied considerably across studies and across populations, with mixed data about
differences in adherence related to differences in CPAP mode (eg, autotitrating
versus fixed pressure) or humidification use. 742 – 746 Cognitive-behavioral interventions appear to improve
CPAP adherence. 747 Several
studies have sought to identify predictors of CPAP adherence, and results have
varied across studies. In general, however, patients who are most symptomatic
(eg, excessive daytime sleepiness) are most likely to adhere to treatment in the
long term. 745 A CPAP use
study among 1155 patients with sleep apnea found that 68% were
continuing to use the CPAP after 5 years of follow-up. 748 
Patients with sleep apnea often have concomitant stroke risk factors,
including hypertension, AF, diabetes mellitus, obesity, and hyperlipidemia, and
several studies have demonstrated the importance of adjusting for these factors
when examining the relationship between sleep apnea and risk of
stroke. 733 , 734 Given the robust relationship between
sleep apnea and hypertension, 749 – 751 
numerous studies have specifically examined the degree to which CPAP treatment
is associated with improvements in BP. Several meta-analyses suggest that the
difference in SBP that can be expected with CPAP ranges from a decrease of 1.4
to 7.2 mm Hg, 736 , 752 – 754 with most of the estimates closer to the lower end of
this range. 
Despite being highly prevalent, as many as 70% to 80%
of patients with sleep apnea are neither diagnosed nor treated. 755 The American Academy of
Sleep Medicine 730 advocates
screening high-risk patients for symptoms of sleep apnea. High-risk populations
include those with risk factors for stroke (eg, AF, refractory hypertension) and
patients with stroke. The recommended screening includes a sleep history (eg,
snoring, witnessed apneas, daytime sleepiness), an evaluation of conditions that
may occur as a consequence of sleep apnea (eg, motor vehicle accidents, stroke),
and physical examination (eg, BMI ≥35 kg/m 2 , neck
circumference >17 in for men or 16 in for women). The Epworth Sleepiness
Scale 756 and Berlin
Questionnaire 757 are
tools for screening for sleep apnea. However, most clinical screening tests miss
a significant proportion of patients. 758 Patients who are considered to be high risk on the
basis of this screening should be referred for polysomnography. 730 
Sleep-Disordered Breathing: Summary and Gaps 
Sleep apnea independently contributes to risk of stroke, and increasing
sleep apnea severity is associated with increasing risk. No prospective,
randomized trial has evaluated the effectiveness of sleep apnea treatment for
primary stroke prevention. 
Sleep-Disordered Breathing: Recommendations 
Because of its association with stroke risk, screening for
sleep apnea through a detailed history, including structured
questionnaires such as the Epworth Sleepiness Scale and Berlin
Questionnaire, physical examination, and, if indicated, polysomnography
may be considered ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence C ). 
Treatment of sleep apnea to reduce the risk of stroke may be
reasonable, although its effectiveness for primary prevention of stroke
is unknown ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence C ). 
Hyperhomocysteinemia 
Homocysteine is an amino acid derived from the metabolism of the
essential amino acid methionine. Increased plasma levels of homocysteine are
often a consequence of reduced enzymatic activity in its metabolic pathways.
This may be caused by genetic defects in the enzymes involved in homocysteine
metabolism such as deficiencies of cystathionine β-synthase and
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), involved in the transsulfuration
and remethylation pathways, respectively, or by a thermolabile variant of MTHFR
that results from a point mutation in which cytosine is replaced by thymidine at
position 677 ( MTHFR C677T). 759 Hyperhomocysteinemia also is caused by
nutritional deficiencies of pyridoxine (vitamin B 6 ), a cofactor of
cystathionine β-synthase, and of folic acid and cobalamin (vitamin
B 12 ), cofactors of MTHFR. 760 Decreased renal clearance of homocysteine in patients
with chronic renal failure may contribute to hyperhomocysteinemia. 
Elevated levels of plasma homocysteine are associated with 2- to 3-fold
increased risk for atherosclerotic vascular disease, including stroke. 761 – 767 Carotid IMT and carotid artery stenosis
are increased in people with elevated homocysteine levels. 768 – 770 In the Study of Health Assessment and Risk in Ethnic
Groups (SHARE), a cross-sectional study of South Asian Chinese and white
Canadians, plasma homocysteine >11.7 μmol/L, but not
MTHFR C677T, was associated with increased carotid
IMT. 771 Several
recent investigations found that the relationship between homocysteine levels
and carotid IMT was eliminated after adjustment for other cardiovascular risk
factors or renal function. 772 , 773 One meta-analysis of
epidemiological studies found a 19% (95% CI, 5–31)
reduction in odds of stroke per 25% lower homocysteine concentration
after adjustment for smoking, SBP, and cholesterol. 774 Another meta-analysis found that for
each 5-μmol/L increase in homocysteine, the odds of stroke increased by
59% (95% CI, 29–96), and for each 3-μmol/L
decrease in homocysteine, the odds of stroke decreased by 24%
(95% CI, 15–33). 775 A further line of evidence supporting a causal role for
homocysteine in a stroke is a meta-analysis of 29 studies comparing the MTHFR
C677T genotype between 4454 stroke patients and 7586 control subjects. This
“mendelian randomization” approach found increased stroke in
those with the TT genotype (OR for stroke, 1.26; 95% CI,
1.11–1.43) without significant between-study heterogeneity or evidence
of publication bias. 776 
The B complex vitamins pyridoxine (B 6 ), cobalamin
(B 12 ), and folic acid lower homocysteine levels. Folic acid
intake is associated with reduced risk of ischemic stroke in some
epidemiological studies but not in others. 777 – 780 In
a clinical trial of healthy adults without diabetes mellitus and CVD, B complex
vitamin supplementation compared with placebo decreased carotid IMT in the group
of participants whose baseline plasma homocysteine was ≥9.1
μmol/L but not in those whose homo-cysteine levels were lower. 781 A meta-analysis of 10
randomized trials of folic acid similarly found that treatment decreased IMT but
with substantial heterogeneity resulting from larger effects at higher baseline
IMTs or with greater reductions in homocysteine. 782 A substudy of the Vitamins to Prevent
Stroke (VITATOPS) trial, however, reported that B complex vitamins did not slow
the progression of carotid IMT. 783 
Most trials of patients with established atherosclerotic vascular
disease have found no benefit of homocysteine lowering by B complex vitamin
therapy on clinical cardiovascular end points. In the Vitamin Intervention for
Stroke Prevention (VISP) trial, therapy with high doses of vitamin
B 6 , vitamin B 12 , and folic acid did not affect the risk of
recurrent ischemic stroke compared with a low-dose formulation of these B
complex vitamins. In 2 Norwegian trials, 1 trial of patients with MI and the
other of patients with coronary artery disease or aortic stenosis, B complex
vitamins did not reduce mortality or cardiovascular events, including
stroke. 784 , 785 Similarly, in the Women’s
Antioxidant and Folic Acid Cardiovascular Study (WAFACS), these B complex
vitamins did not alter the risk of stroke in women with established CVD or
≥3 risk factors. 786 
Most recently, the VITATOPS trial, 787 in which 8164 subjects with recent stroke or TIA were
randomized to vitamin B 6 , vitamin B 12 , and folic acid
versus placebo and followed up for a median of 3.4 years, found no effect of B
vitamin supplementation on risk of stroke (HR, 0.92; 95% CI,
0.81–1.06). Interestingly, a post hoc analysis restricted to the 1463
subjects in VITATOPS not taking antiplatelet medication 788 found a reduced risk of stroke in the B
vitamin group (HR, 0.6; 95% CI, 0.50–0.95) and a significant
interaction between antiplatelet use and assignment to B vitamins. It remains
unclear whether the effectiveness of B vitamin treatment within the
no-antiplatelet subgroup represents biological modification of the effects of
homocysteine by antiplatelet drugs, intergroup differences between patients on
and off antiplatelet therapy (such as the greater proportion of patients with
hemorrhagic or cardioembolic strokes among those not taking antiplatelets), or a
spurious result of secondary analysis. A meta-analysis of folic acid
supplementation in 26 randomized, controlled trials enrolling 58 804
participants 789 found
no effect on the risk of CVD (RR, 0.98; 95% CI, 0.95–1.02) but a
trend toward reduced stroke risk (RR, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.86–1.00).
A somewhat stronger reduction in stroke (RR, 0.89; 95% CI,
0.79–0.99) was noted in a different subgroup analysis 790 restricted to 35325
participants who did not have stroke as a qualifying event for inclusion in the
trial. 
The effect of folic acid therapy has also been studied in patients with
chronic renal disease and hyperhomocysteinemia, but the results of these studies
are inconsistent. 791 – 793 In the Atherosclerosis and
Folic Acid Supplementation Trial, a placebo-controlled study of 315 patients
with chronic renal failure, folic acid supplementation did not reduce the
composite risk of cardiovascular events, with fewer treated patients having
strokes (RR reduction, 0.55; 95% CI, 0.01–0.80). 793 , 794 Similarly, in the HOPE 2 study of patients with
established vascular disease or diabetes mellitus, combination therapy with
vitamin B 6 , vitamin B 12 , and folic acid lowered plasma
homocysteine levels; did not affect the composite end point of cardiovascular
death, MI, or stroke; but did reduce the risk of stroke by 25% (RR,
0.75, 95% CI, 0.59–0.97). 795 A subsequent exploratory analysis found no
heterogeneity in the effect on stroke based on whether or not the subjects had a
prior history of stroke or TIA ( P for
interaction=0.88). 796 
Hyperhomocysteinemia: Summary and Gaps 
Hyperhomocysteinemia is associated with an increased risk of stroke.
Trials that have examined the effect of homocysteine-lowering therapy with B
complex vitamins on the risk of stroke are inconsistent. Stroke reduction
generally was found in trials in which the duration of treatment exceeded 3
years, the decrease in plasma homocysteine concentration was
>20%, the region where patients were recruited did not fortify
diet with folate, and the participants had no prior history of stroke. Better
understanding of the mechanisms through which homocysteine causes
atherosclerosis may enable identification of more targeted and effective
therapies to reduce the risk of stroke in patients with elevated homocysteine
levels. 
Hyperhomocysteinemia: Recommendation 
The use of the B complex vitamins, cobalamin (B 12 ),
pyridoxine (B 6 ), and folic acid might be considered for the
prevention of ischemic stroke in patients with hyperhomocysteinemia, but
its effectiveness is not well established ( Class IIb; Level of
Evidence B ). 
Elevated Lp(a) 
Lp(a) is an LDL particle in which apolipoprotein B-100 is covalently
linked to the glycoprotein apoprotein(a). The structure and chemical properties
of this lipoprotein particle are similar to those of LDL. Lp(a) contributes to
atherogenesis in experimental models 797 and is associated with an increased risk for coronary
artery disease. 798 , 799 Apoprotein(a) also has structural
homology to plasminogen but does not possess its enzymatic activity. Thus, it
may inhibit fibrinolysis, binding to the catalytic complex of plasminogen,
tissue plasminogen activator, and fibrin, thereby contributing to
thrombosis. 797 , 800 
Some, but not all, population-based epidemiological studies have found
that Lp(a) is associated with an increased risk of stroke. 801 – 803 In the Physicians’ Health Study, which
comprised primarily healthy, white, middle-aged men, there was no association
between baseline plasma concentration of Lp(a) and future risk of
stroke. 804 In the
CHS, the risk of stroke was increased 3-fold (RR, 3.00; 95% CI,
1.59–5.65) in older men whose Lp(a) levels were in the highest quintile
compared with men with levels in the lowest quintile but not older
women. 801 In the ARIC
study, the incidence of ischemic stroke was significantly increased in
individuals with higher Lp(a) levels after adjustment for age, sex, and CVD risk
factors, and this association was stronger in blacks than in whites. Compared
with those with Lp(a) <10 mg/dL, the incidence of ischemic stroke was
2.12-fold greater (RR, 2.12; 95% CI, 1.48–3.03) in blacks with
Lp(a) >30 mg/dL. In whites, it was 1.65-fold greater (RR 1.65;
95% CI, 1.04–2.61). 805 Several studies have found Lp(a) level to be
associated with the severity of carotid artery stenosis and occlusion. 806 , 807 One study found that Lp(a) levels were higher in
patients with strokes related to large-vessel atherothrombotic disease than in
patients with lacunar strokes. 808 A meta-analysis of 31 studies comprising 56 010 subjects
found that Lp(a) was higher in stroke patients and that incident stroke was
22% (RR, 1.22; 95% CI, 1.04–1.43) more frequent in
patients in the highest compared with the lowest tertile of Lp(a). 809 
A recent study assessing the value of emerging circulating lipid
markers such as Lp(a) for the prediction of first cardiovascular events showed
that the addition of information on Lp(a) to that on conventional risk factors
such as total and HDL cholesterol slightly improved the prediction of
cardiovascular events and would reclassify ≈4% of individuals to
a ≥20% predicted risk of having a cardiovascular event within 10
years and therefore needing statin treatment according to Adult Treatment Panel
III guidelines. 810 
A meta-analysis of observational studies reported an association of
elevated Lp(a) with first childhood arterial ischemic stroke (OR, 6.53;
95% CI, 4.46–9.55). 811 More recently, elevated Lp(a) was also associated with
recurrent arterial ischemic stroke in children. 812 
Niacin decreases Lp(a) levels. 813 In a meta-analysis of secondary prevention trials
including a total of 9959 subjects, niacin treatment yielded relative odds
reductions of 34% of any CVD event
( P =0.007). 173 However, no significant effect of niacin on stroke was
observed. 
Lp(a): Summary and Gaps 
Elevated Lp(a) is associated with a higher risk of stroke. Although
niacin lowers Lp(a), randomized trials have not showed that niacin
supplementation lowers the risk of stroke. 
Elevated Lp(a): Recommendations 
The use of niacin, which lowers Lp(a), might be reasonable for
the prevention of ischemic stroke in patients with high Lp(a), but its
effectiveness is not well established ( Class IIb; Level of
Evidence B ). 
The clinical benefit of using Lp(a) in stroke risk prediction
is not well established ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Hypercoagulability 
The acquired and hereditary hypercoagulable states (thrombophilias) are
associated with venous thrombosis, but a relationship with arterial cerebral
infarction is based largely on case series or case-control studies. Of these,
the presence of aPLs, generally an acquired condition, is most strongly
associated with arterial thrombosis. aCL (more prevalent but less specific) and
lupus anticoagulant (less prevalent but more specific) are most frequently used
to detect aPLs. Retrospective and prospective studies suggested an association
between aCL and first ischemic stroke. 814 , 815 From
limited, often uncontrolled data that include predominantly patients with SLE
and potentially other vascular risk factors that are poorly detailed,
asymptomatic patients with aPL are estimated to have a 0% to
3.8% annual thrombosis risk. 816 
Acquired Hypercoagulable State: Relationship to Ischemic Stroke 
Case-control studies of aPL in young stroke patients have uniformly
demonstrated an association, as have most studies of unselected stroke
populations. However, this is not the case for case-control studies among
older adults with ischemic stroke. The Sneddon syndrome was formerly thought
to be a manifestation of aPL syndrome, but it may be present in patients
with or without aPLs, 817 
and the risk of ischemic stroke is increased only in those patients with
increased aPLs. 
Several prospective cohort studies have assessed the relationship
between aPL and ischemic stroke. Stored frozen plasma from the
Physicians’ Health Study was used to determine whether aCL was a
risk factor for ischemic stroke and venous thrombosis in healthy adult
men. 818 This was
a nested, case-control study in a prospective cohort with 60.2 months of
follow-up. At entry into the study, 68% of 22 071 participants
submitted plasma samples. A control was matched by age, smoking history, and
length of follow-up to each of the 100 patients with ischemic stroke and the
90 patients with deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolus. The aCL titers
were higher in cases with deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolus than in
matched controls ( P =0.01). People with aCL titers
above the 95th percentile had an RR for developing deep vein thrombosis or
pulmonary embolus of 5.3 (95% CI, 1.55–18.3;
P =0.01). Although an aCL level above the 95th
percentile was an important risk factor for deep vein thrombosis or
pulmonary embolus, there was no effect on stroke (an RR of 2 for ischemic
stroke could not, however, be excluded because of low power). 
The Honolulu Heart Study was a nested case-control study examining
aCL as a risk factor for ischemic stroke and MI. 819 The study used stored frozen sera
obtained from subjects in the Honolulu Heart Program who were followed for
up to 20 years. aCL (β 2 glycoprotein-I
[β 2 GPI] dependent) was tested in 259
men who developed ischemic stroke, 374 men who developed MI, and a control
group of 1360 men who remained free of both conditions. aCL was
significantly associated with both incident ischemic stroke and MI. Men with
a positive aCL had higher risk of stroke relative to men with negative aCL
(OR, 2.2 [95% CI, 1.5–3.4] at 15 years and
OR, 1.5 [95% CI, 1.0–2.3] at 20 years).
These data suggest that aCL is an important predictor of future stroke and
MI in men. 
The Framingham Offspring Cohort Study, a longitudinal observational
study, used an ELISA to measure aCL from stored frozen sera. This study
found an association between aCL titers and ischemic stroke or TIA, but only
in women. 820 Overall,
although elevated aCL titers may be commonly found in ischemic stroke
patients, the strength of the association between elevated aCL titers and
stroke origin or risk is uncertain. 
The shortcoming of many studies evaluating aCL in stroke patients
such as the Framingham Offspring Cohort study has been the use of the aCL
ELISA, a test with low sensitivity. The assay for
anti-β 2 GPI antibodies, a cofactor for antiphospholipid
binding, may be more specific for thrombosis, including stroke and
MI. 819 , 821 Only a few studies have
investigated β 2 GPI in the absence of SLE. 819 , 821 , 822 Because most studies involved patients with SLE,
lupus anticoagulant, or aCL, it is difficult to establish the value of
anti-β 2 GPI as an independent risk factor. Therefore,
the clinical significance of these antibodies requires further
investigation. 821 
A prospective, observational study was performed to establish the incidence
of first-time thromboembolic events in subjects with a high-risk aPL profile
(positive lupus anticoagulant, positive aCL, and positive
β 2 GPI). 823 The incidence of first thromboembolus was
5.3% annually compared with an annual rate of 1.9% in a
study from the same group looking at subjects with only a single positive
aPL test. 824 Forty
percent of thromboembolic events were stroke or TIA, and aspirin did not
affect the incidence. 
Acquired Hypercoagulable State: Treatment for Primary Prevention of
Stroke 
Adequately powered, controlled studies evaluating treatment of
elevated aCL to prevent a first stroke are not available. In a subgroup
analysis of the Physicians’ Health Study, 818 325 mg aspirin every other day did
not protect against venous thromboembolism in 40- to 84-year-old men with
moderate to high aCL titers. There is an ongoing primary prevention trial of
warfarin therapy (INR, 2.0–2.5) to decrease thromboembolic events in
patients with lupus and aPL. 825 
The Antiphospholipid Antibody Acetylsalicylic Acid (APLASA) study
was a small, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial for the
primary prevention of thrombosis in asymptomatic patients who were
persistently aPL positive that compared low-dose aspirin (81 mg/d;
n=48) with placebo (n=50) over an average follow-up of
2.30±0.95 years. 816 The rates of acute thrombosis were 2.75 per 100
patient-years for the aspirin-treated subjects and 0 per 100 patient-years
for placebo-treated subjects (HR, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.69–1.56;
P =0.83). The sample size was relatively small;
thus, the study insufficiently powered. A parallel and separate
observational study published within the APLASA study 816 found no reduction in the rate of
first thrombotic events with low-dose (81 mg/d) aspirin over placebo in
persistently aPL-positive asymptomatic individuals. These individuals also
appeared to have a low overall annual incidence rate of acute thrombosis and
often developed vascular events in the setting of additional thrombotic risk
factors. 
Inherited Hypercoagulable State: Relationship to Ischemic Stroke 
Inherited hypercoagulable states that have been associated with
stroke include fibrinogen level, the β-chain–455 G/A
fibrinogen, factor VIII levels, factor XIII Val34Leu, von Willebrand factor
small polymorphism in intron 2, tissue-type plasminogen activator
−7351 C/T, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, and heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia. 826 The majority of case-control studies have not found an
association between arterial stroke and other hereditary hypercoagulable
states such as factor V Leiden or prothrombin 20210 mutations or
deficiencies of protein C, protein S, or antithrombin III. 98 , 99 One study suggests that hypercoagulable states may
be more frequent in stroke patients with PFO compared with those without
PFO. That study found no difference in the prevalence of either the factor V
Leiden mutation or the prothrombin 20210 mutation in patients with
cryptogenic strokes compared with control subjects. The prevalence of the
prothrombin 20210 mutation alone (OR, 10.09; 95% CI,
1.09–109) was higher in those with cryptogenic stroke and PFO versus
those without PFO, 827 
suggesting a greater thrombotic risk in the setting of PFO than in either
condition alone. The presumed stroke mechanism is paradoxical embolism
related to venous rather than arterial thrombosis. Similarly, a familial
cohort study found that the prothrombin 20210 mutation was a mild risk
factor for venous thromboembolism but was not found to increase the risk of
arterial thromboembolic events. 828 
Prothrombotic abnormalities have been identified in 20% to
50% of children with acute ischemic stroke and 33% to
99% of children with cerebral sinus venous thrombosis. 829 In children with
arterial ischemic stroke, emerging associations include an increased
frequency of factor V Leiden mutation, elevated Lp(a), protein C deficiency,
and aPL. 
The 2 most common genetic causes of thrombophilia are the factor V
Leiden mutation and the G20210A mutation of prothrombin. 830 Although their
association with adult stroke is unclear, there is evidence of an
association with ischemic stroke in children and young adults. A combination
of multiple case-control studies demonstrated an 4.3-fold increased
incidence of factor V Leiden in children with acute ischemic
stroke. 829 A
meta-analysis of the association of factor V Leiden with ischemic stroke in
adults ≤50 years of age showed a fixed-effect OR of 2.00 for the
mutation. This association was even stronger (OR, 2.73; 95% CI,
1.98–3.75) in those patients with cryptogenic stroke in whom there
is an increased suspicion of hypercoagulability; however, the estimated
effect carries the risk of inflation by case selection bias. 831 
A combined retrospective and prospective multicenter study of
cerebral venous thrombosis found that a hypercoagulable state was the most
common predisposing factor, followed by pregnancy, malignancy, and
homocysteinemia. 832 These coagulopathies may therefore predispose to
venous thromboembolism, including cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, but may
only rarely be associated with ischemic stroke. 
A systematic review assessed the risk of thrombosis associated with
thrombophilia in 3 high-risk groups: women using oral estrogen preparations,
women during pregnancy, and patients undergoing major orthopedic
surgery. 833 This
is relevant for the primary prevention of cerebral venous thrombosis and
ischemic stroke from paradoxical cerebral embolism in the setting of a PFO.
The effectiveness of prophylactic treatments in preventing venous
thromboembolism in these groups and the relative cost-effectiveness of
universal and selective venous thromboembolism history–based
screening for thrombophilia compared with no screening were evaluated.
Selective screening based on prior venous thromboembolism history was more
cost-effective than universal screening. 
Inherited Hypercoagulable State: Treatment for Primary Prevention of
Stroke 
There is very little evidence to guide the management of
asymptomatic people with thrombophilia. A systematic review of prospective
observational studies indicated that most venous thromboembolic events
occurred during periods of high risk such as surgery, trauma, or
pregnancy. 834 
These studies and expert opinion suggest that antithrombotic prophylaxis
during these periods would be likely to be effective. 829 , 834 However, the effect of prophylaxis on the
incidence of stroke or TIA in these subjects is not known. 
Hypercoagulability: Summary and Gaps 
Inherited and acquired hypercoagulable states are associated with
venous thrombosis, but their association with arterial cerebral infarction is
uncertain. Young women with ischemic stroke have a higher prevalence of aPL. The
majority of case-control studies have not found an association between acquired
or hereditary hypercoagulable states and stroke in other patient populations.
The relationship between the presence of PFO and thrombophilia deserves further
study because it may affect primary and secondary stroke prevention strategies.
Large prospective studies should be undertaken to refine the risks and to
establish the associations of thrombophilias with venous thromboembolism and
first ischemic stroke. Although the pathogenic role of prothrombotic
abnormalities in childhood and young adult ischemic stroke is increasingly
becoming evident, the lack of any clinical trial data precludes definitive
recommendations for screening or treatment. 
Hypercoagulability: Recommendations 
The usefulness of genetic screening to detect inherited
hypercoagulable states for the prevention of first stroke is not well
established ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence C ). 
The usefulness of specific treatments for primary stroke
prevention in asymptomatic patients with a hereditary or acquired
thrombophilia is not well established ( Class IIb; Level of
Evidence C ). 
Low-dose aspirin (81 mg/d) is not indicated for primary stroke
prevention in individuals who are persistently aPL positive
( Class III; Level of Evidence B ). 
Inflammation and Infection 
Inflammation affects the initiation, growth, and stability of
atherosclerotic lesions. 835 
Furthermore, inflammation has prothrombotic effects and plays a role in major
stroke risk factors such as AF, which could increase the risk of
stroke. 836 
Nevertheless, the value of assessing inflammation in assessing risk to optimize
the primary prevention of stroke remains controversial. A number of serum
markers of inflammation, including fibrinogen, serum amyloid A,
lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2, and interleukin-6, have been proposed
as risk markers. Several studies suggest a relationship between hs-CRP and
lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 and stroke risk. 837 – 840 In addition to numerous epidemiological studies and
randomized, clinical trials with coronary disease end points, several
epidemiological studies have identified associations between hs-CRP and stroke,
including the Physician’s Health Study, 841 the WHS, 842 and the Framingham Heart
Study. 843 The RRs
between the highest tertiles/quartiles and the lowest tertile/quartiles range
from 1.5 to 2.0. The association persists after adjustment for multiple risk
factors. However, hs-CRP is also associated with similar increases in mortality
from several cancers and lung diseases, 844 indicating that its association with cardiovascular
risk is not specific. On the basis of multiple prospective studies, hs-CRP was
recommended for measurement limited to people with moderate risk for coronary
disease (10% to 20% 10-year risk using the Framingham Risk
Score) as an adjunct to global risk assessment to help guide the aggressiveness
of risk factor interventions. 835 Recent evidence indicates that elevated plasma levels of
YKL-40, a product of lipid-laden macrophages, are associated with an increased
risk of ischemic stroke independently of hs-CRP levels. 845 The JUPITER study, a randomized trial
of a statin versus placebo, was performed in people free of CVD with otherwise
normal LDL cholesterol levels (≤130 mg/dL) but with hs-CRP levels
>2 mg/dL. The trial found a reduction in cardiovascular end points,
including stroke (RR, 0.52; 95% CI, 0.34–0.79), in the
statin-treated patients. 160 
The study design did not include similarly treated subjects with lower levels of
hs-CRP. No data are available to determine the potential effects of other
treatments such as aspirin in this population. Monitoring of hs-CRP has not been
evaluated in randomized trials to determine whether it is useful in adjusting
statin dose in patients who might be considered for treatment, nor has its
cost-effectiveness for population screening been assessed. This is also true of
the other markers of inflammation. 
Another way to evaluate the role of inflammation as a risk factor for
stroke is to examine the incidence of vascular disease in people with systemic
chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and SLE. A large
number of prospective cohort studies have identified increased risks for CVD
(including stroke) in people with RA, with ORs consistently in the range of 1.4
to 2.0 compared with people without RA. 846 – 850 At
least 50% of premature deaths in patients with RA have been attributed
to CVDs. 851 Excess risk was
especially apparent in 35- to 55-year-old women with RA. 846 This association remained after
adjustment for other cardiovascular risk factors. Furthermore, data from the
Danish Nationwide Cohort Study indicate that RA increases the rates of both AF
(incidence rate ratio, 1.42) and stroke (1.32), 852 but a causal relationship between AF
and stroke in RA has not been established. Patients with SLE had very elevated
RRs for CVD in the 2- to 52-fold range. 853 Although stroke rates were not assessed, several
studies have identified higher prevalence rates of atherosclerotic plaques in
the carotid arteries in RA or SLE patients compared with control
subjects. 854 – 856 Patients with RA and SLE
might be considered a subgroup at high risk for CVD worthy of enhanced risk
factor measurement and control. 857 
Chronic infections such as periodontitis, chronic bronchitis, and
infection with Helicobacter pylori , Chlamydia
pneumoniae , or cytomegalovirus might promote atherosclerosis and
increase the risk of stroke. 858 There is evidence that the cumulative effect of multiple
infections, or infectious burden, rather than single organisms, may be
associated with risk of stroke and carotid atherosclerosis. 859 , 860 Unfortunately, several randomized trials of antibiotic
therapy have failed to find any benefit in the prevention of cardiovascular end
points, including stroke. 861 , 862 
A final issue in the role of infection and inflammation in stroke
relates to acute infectious diseases (such as influenza). Possible mechanisms
include the induction of procoagulant acute-phase reactants (such as fibrinogen)
or destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques. Hospitalization for infection
appears to be a short-term risk factor for stroke, 863 although it is unclear what, if any,
management implications this has for patients. An increase in cardiovascular
deaths has long been observed in association with influenza. 864 , 865 A retrospective study found that treatment with an
antiviral agent within 2 days of an influenza diagnosis was associated with a
28% reduction (HR, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.62–0.82) in the risk
of stroke or TIA over the ensuing 6 months. 866 One case-control study 867 and 1 cohort study 868 of influenza vaccination demonstrate a
reduced risk of stroke associated with vaccination. A prospective study in
Taiwan found that influenza vaccination of people >65 years of age was
associated with lower all-cause mortality, including a 65% reduction in
stroke (HR, 0.35; 95% CI, 0.27–0.45). 869 However, because of the risk of bias,
randomized trials have been advocated. 870 Although all people at increased risk of complications
from influenza should receive influenza vaccinations on the basis of evidence
including randomized trials, influenza vaccination is recommended by the AHA/ACC
for the secondary prevention of CVD. There have been no recommendations for
influenza vaccination in the primary prevention of stroke. No studies have
identified any increase in the risk of stroke after influenza
vaccinations. 871 
Inflammation and Infection: Recommendations 
Patients with chronic inflammatory disease such as RA or SLE
should be considered at increased risk of stroke ( Class I; Level
of Evidence B ). 
Annual influenza vaccination can be useful in lowering stroke
risk in patients at risk of stroke ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Measurement of inflammatory markers such as hs-CRP or
lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 in patients without CVD may be
considered to identify patients who may be at increased risk of stroke,
although their usefulness in routine clinical practice is not well
established ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
Treatment of patients with hs-CRP >2.0 mg/dL with a
statin to decrease stroke risk might be considered ( Class IIb;
Level of Evidence B ). 
Treatment with antibiotics for chronic infections as a means to
prevent stroke is not recommended ( Class III; Level of Evidence
A ). 
Antiplatelet Agents for Primary Prevention of Stroke 
Aspirin use is associated with an increased risk of gastrointestinal
bleeding. For example, 1 observational study found that the overall hemorrhagic
event incidence was 5.58 (95% CI, 5.39–5.77) per 1000
person-years for aspirin users compared with 3.60 (95% CI,
3.48–3.72) per 1000 person-years for nonusers (incidence rate ratio,
1.55; 95% CI, 1.48–1.63). 872 A meta-analysis of 9 clinical trials including 50 868
subjects found no overall benefit of aspirin for the primary prevention of
stroke (OR, 0.919; 95% CI, 0.828–1.021;
P =0.116), with no heterogeneity among trials. 873 Similarly, a second
meta-analysis of 9 trials with 100 076 subjects found that aspirin reduced the
risk of ischemic stroke (RR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.75–0.98), but this
benefit was offset by an increase in hemorrhagic stroke (RR, 1.36; 95%
CI, 1.01–1.82), again with no heterogeneity among trials. 874 A third meta-analysis had
similar results (risk of stroke, 0.20%/y versus 0.21%/y,
P =0.4; hemorrhagic stroke, 0.04%/y versus
0.03%/y, P =0.05; other stroke, 0.16%/y
versus 0.18%/y, P =0.08, aspirin versus control,
respectively). 875 
Taken together, these results reflect risk but no benefit of aspirin for the
prevention of a first stroke in the general population. The US Preventive
Services Task Force recommends aspirin at a dose of 75 mg/d to prevent MI (but
not stroke) in men 45 to 79 years of age and to prevent stroke in women 55 to 79
years of age on the basis of their vascular risk and the chances of serious
gastrointestinal hemorrhage. 876 The US Preventive Services Task Force further notes that
the 10-year level of cardiovascular risk for which the benefit exceeds bleeding
risk varies from 3% to 11%, depending on age and sex. The most
recent AHA guideline for the primary prevention of CVD and stroke also
recommends aspirin for primary cardiovascular prevention in those with a 10-year
coronary heart risk ≥10%. 877 There is no evidence that antiplatelet medications
reduce the risk of stroke in the general population at low risk. 878 – 880 Although stroke was not analyzed as a
separate end point, lack of aspirin use was independently associated with a
16% higher risk of cardiovascular events (HR, 1.16; 95% CI,
1.03–1.31) among healthy male physicians ≥65 years of
age. 881 The benefit
of aspirin for primary prevention of stroke is therefore limited to selected
subgroups of patients. Several relevant trials further inform the use of aspirin
and other antiplatelet agents for the prevention of a first stroke. 
The Japanese Primary Prevention of Atherosclerosis With Aspirin for
Diabetes (JPAD) Trial randomized 2539 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus but
without a history of atherosclerotic disease (including stroke) to either
low-dose aspirin (81 or 100 mg/d) or no aspirin. 321 The primary outcome was the occurrence
of atherosclerotic events (fatal or nonfatal ischemic heart disease, fatal or
nonfatal stroke, and peripheral arterial disease). There was no effect of
aspirin on the primary end point (HR, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.58–1.10;
P =0.16) and no effect on cerebrovascular events
(2.2% with aspirin versus 2.5% with no aspirin; HR, 0.84;
95% CI, 0.53–1.32; P =0.44). There was
no difference in the combined rates of hemorrhagic stroke and severe
gastrointestinal bleeding. A subgroup analysis of the JPAD trial noted that
aspirin therapy lowered the rate of cerebrovascular events in patients with
diabetes mellitus with uncontrolled hypertension (SBP ≥140 mm Hg and/or
DBP ≥90 mm Hg) compared with those with controlled BP (HR, 1.64;
95% CI, 0.83–3.29), although the 95% CI includes the
possibility of no benefit. 882 
The Prevention of Progression of Arterial Disease and Diabetes
(POPADAD) trial was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
including 1276 adults with type 1 or 2 diabetes mellitus and an ankle-brachial
index of ≤0.99 but no symptomatic CVD who were randomized in a 2-by-2
factorial design to 100 mg aspirin or placebo plus antioxidants or placebo
daily. 883 The study
had 2 primary end points: (1) death resulting from coronary heart disease or
stroke, nonfatal MI or stroke, or amputation above the ankle for critical limb
ischemia and (2) death resulting from coronary heart disease or stroke. There
was no interaction between aspirin and antioxidant. There was no effect of
aspirin on the composite primary end points (HR, 0.98; 95% CI,
0.76–1.26; P =0.86) or on death resulting from
coronary heart disease or stroke (HR, 1.23; 95% CI, 0.79–1.93;
P =0.36). There was no effect of aspirin on fatal
stroke (HR, 0.89; 95% CI, 0.34–2.30;
P =0.80) or nonfatal stroke (HR, 0.71; 95% CI,
0.44–1.14; P =0.15). There was no difference in
the risk of gastrointestinal hemorrhage (HR, 0.90; 95% CI,
0.53–1.52; P =0.69). The lack of increased
bleeding risk with aspirin in those with diabetes mellitus was also found in the
observational study cited above (incidence rate ratio for aspirin users versus
nonusers, 1.09; 95% CI, 0.97–1.22). 872 Diabetes mellitus was independently
associated with an increased risk of major bleeding regardless of aspirin use
(RR, 1.36; 95% CI, 1.28–1.44). A meta-analysis of 7 trials (11
618 subjects) of the effects of aspirin in patients with diabetes mellitus found
a treatment-associated 9% reduction in major cardiovascular events (RR,
0.91; 95% CI, 0.82–1.00) but found no significant reduction in
stroke (RR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.64–1.11). 323 Four additional meta-analyses also
found no reduction in stroke with aspirin in subjects with diabetes
mellitus. 884 – 887 
A focused, multisociety position paper on the primary prevention of
cardiovascular events in people with diabetes mellitus considered these and
other studies and recommended low-dose aspirin for adults with diabetes mellitus
who have a 10-year cardiovascular risk >10% (men >50
years of age and women >60 years of age who have at least 1 additional
major risk factor such as smoking, hypertension, dyslipidemia, a family history
of premature CVD, or albuminuria) and who are not at high risk of
aspirin-related bleeding complications. 888 It was further recommended that aspirin not be used
for cardiovascular prevention among those with diabetes mellitus at low risk and
that aspirin might be considered for those at intermediate (10-year risk in the
5%–10% range) risk. 
Relatively few women were enrolled in the primary prevention trials
that showed a benefit of aspirin in the prevention of coronary heart events but
no reduction in stroke. The WHS randomized 39 876 initially asymptomatic women
≥45 years of age to receive 100 mg aspirin on alternate days or placebo
and followed them up for 10 years for a first major vascular event (nonfatal MI,
nonfatal stroke, or cardiovascular death). 889 Unlike data from earlier studies that included mainly
men, this study found a nonsignificant 9% reduction (RR, 0.91;
95% CI, 0.80–1.03; P =0.13) for the
combined primary end point among women but a 17% reduction in the risk
of stroke (RR, 0.83; 95% CI 0.69–0.99;
P =0.04). This was based on a 24% reduction in
the risk of ischemic stroke (RR, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.63–0.93;
P =0.009) and a nonsignificant increase in the risk
of hemorrhagic stroke (RR, 1.24; 95% CI, 0.82–1.87;
P =0.31). The overall average stroke rates were
0.11%/y in aspirin-treated women and 0.13%/y in placebo-treated
women (RR, 0.02%/y; number needed to treat, 5000). Gastrointestinal
hemorrhage requiring transfusion was more frequent in the aspirin group (RR,
1.40; 95% CI, 1.07–1.83; P =0.02). The
average gastrointestinal hemorrhage rates were 0.06%/y for aspirin and
0.05%/y for placebo (absolute risk increase, 0.01%/y; number
needed to harm, 10 000). The most consistent benefit for aspirin was in women
≥65 years of age at study entry, among whom the risk of major
cardiovascular events was reduced by 26% (RR, 0.74; 95% CI,
0.59–0.92; P =0.008), including a 30%
reduction in the risk of ischemic stroke (RR, 0.70; 95% CI,
0.49–1.00; P =0.05); however, there was only a
trend in the reduction of the overall risk of all types of stroke (RR, 0.78;
95% CI, 0.57–1.08; P =0.13), likely
related to an increase in the risk of brain hemorrhages. Subgroup analyses
showed a reduction in stroke for those women with a history of hypertension (RR,
0.76; 95% CI, 0.59–0.98; P =0.04),
hyperlipidemia (RR, 0.62; 95% CI, 0.47–0.83;
P =0.001), or diabetes mellitus (RR, 0.46; 95%
CI, 0.25–0.85; P =0.01) or having a 10-year
cardiovascular risk ≥10% (RR, 0.54; 95% CI,
0.30–0.98; P =0.04). A further post hoc subgroup
WHS analysis found that the overall effect of aspirin was not modified in women
with migraine (with or without aura), but aspirin use was associated with an
increased risk of MI in those with migraine with aura (RR, 3.72; 95% CI,
1.39–9.95), an unexpected finding that may have been attributable to
chance. 615 The AHA
evidence-based guidelines for CVD prevention in women also endorse the use of
aspirin in high-risk women, unless contraindicated, in women ≥65 years
of age if BP is controlled and benefit for ischemic stroke and MI prevention
outweighs the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and hemorrhagic stroke, as well
as in women <65 years of age when benefit for ischemic stroke prevention
is likely to outweigh complications. 890 
There are several other subpopulations for whom aspirin might be
helpful in reducing risk of stroke. Patients with a reduced ankle-brachial index
are at higher risk of vascular events. One trial evaluated the benefit of
aspirin in a screened general population cohort with a low ankle-brachial
index. 891 There was
no benefit of aspirin in reducing the rate of fatal or nonfatal coronary events,
stroke, or revascularization procedures (HR, 1.03; 95% CI,
0.84–1.27). One meta-analysis evaluated cilostazol versus placebo in
3782, 1187, and 705 patients with peripheral artery disease, cerebrovascular
disease, and coronary stenting, respectively. 892 The incidence of vascular events was
lower in the cilostazol group compared with the placebo group (RR, 0.86;
95% CI, 0.74–0.99; P =0.038), including
a lower incidence of cerebrovascular events (RR, 0.58; 95% CI,
0.43–0.78; P <0.001), with no increase in
serious bleeding complications (RR, 1.00; 95% CI, 0.66–1.51;
P =0.996). The primary and secondary prevention
populations were not analyzed separately; however, there was no statistical
heterogeneity among the trials. 
In a subgroup analysis of the Hypertension Optimal Treatment (HOT)
trial, subjects with renal failure (estimated glomerular filtration rate
<45 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) had a reduction in stroke risk with
aspirin (HR, 0.21; 95% CI, 0.06–0.75). 893 In addition, total mortality was
reduced by half (HR, 0.51; 95% CI, 0.27–0.94) and cardiovascular
mortality by 64% (HR, 0.36; 95% CI, 0.14–0.90). These
results, however, were based on a post hoc analysis. Given the small number of
participants with stage 4 or 5 chronic kidney disease (estimated glomerular
filtration rate <30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) in the HOT trial, the RRs
and benefits of aspirin in this population are not known. 
Antiplatelet Agents and Aspirin: Summary and Gaps 
Previous guideline statements endorse the use of aspirin for cardiac
but not stroke prophylaxis among asymptomatic men whose risk is sufficiently
high for the benefits to outweigh the risks associated with treatment. 876 These recommendations were
based on a reduction of coronary events in men and reduction of stroke in
women. 
There remains little evidence (aside from cilostazol in those with
peripheral artery disease) supporting the use of antiplatelet therapy other than
aspirin and cilostazol for primary stroke prevention because of the lack of
relevant trials. 
Antiplatelet Agents and Aspirin: Recommendations 
The use of aspirin for cardiovascular (including but not
specific to stroke) prophylaxis is reasonable for people whose risk is
sufficiently high (10-year risk >10%) for the benefits
to outweigh the risks associated with treatment. A cardiovascular risk
calculator to assist in estimating 10-year risk can be found online at
http://my.americanheart.org/cvriskcalculator 
( Class IIa; Level of Evidence A ). 
Aspirin (81 mg daily or 100 mg every other day) can be useful
for the prevention of a first stroke among women, including those with
diabetes mellitus, whose risk is sufficiently high for the benefits to
outweigh the risks associated with treatment ( Class IIa; Level
of Evidence B ). 
Aspirin might be considered for the prevention of a first
stroke in people with chronic kidney disease (ie, estimated glomerular
filtration rate <45 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) ( Class
IIb; Level of Evidence C ). This recommendation does not
apply to severe kidney disease (stage 4 or 5; estimated glomerular
filtration rate <30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ). 
Cilostazol may be reasonable for the prevention of a first
stroke in people with peripheral arterial disease ( Class IIb;
Level of Evidence B ). 
Aspirin is not useful for preventing a first stroke in low-risk
individuals ( Class III; Level of Evidence A ). 
Aspirin is not useful for preventing a first stroke in people
with diabetes mellitus in the absence of other high-risk conditions
( Class III; Level of Evidence A ). 
Aspirin is not useful for preventing a first stroke in people
with diabetes mellitus and asymptomatic peripheral artery disease
(defined as asymptomatic in the presence of an ankle brachial index
≤0.99) ( Class III; Level of Evidence B ). 
The use of aspirin for other specific situations (eg, AF,
carotid artery stenosis) is discussed in the relevant sections of this
statement. 
As a result of a lack of relevant clinical trials, antiplatelet
regimens other than aspirin and cilostazol are not recommended for the
prevention of a first stroke ( Class III; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Primary Prevention in the Emergency Department 
Emergency departments (EDs) in the United States are the default safety net
for millions of Americans, 894 yet
at a time when more and more Americans use EDs for emergency and primary care, the
number of EDs across the United States continues to decline. 895 By definition, EDs provide immediate access
to healthcare providers trained in emergency care and allow access to advanced
technologies and medical specialists for patients with diverse medical conditions.
EDs are equipped to evaluate and manage acute life-threatening illness yet are
increasingly called on to provide services typically associated with primary care.
For many patients who use the ED for the majority of their healthcare services, the
ED may serve as an important location to provide health promotion and disease
prevention services, including stroke. 
In addition to addressing the primary reason for the ED visit, the ED
encounter may serve to reinforce healthy living, to perform primary disease
identification and prevention, to provide early disease detection (secondary
prevention), to encourage and facilitate compliance with disease management, and to
refer patients to primary care providers for continued management of existing
disease (tertiary prevention). 896 , 897 With the growing numbers of
Americans using the ED for primary care, especially socioeconomically at-risk
populations, the ED may present a unique opportunity to reduce cerebrovascular
disease and CVD. 898 
Enthusiasm to use the ED as a site for initiating primary and secondary
preventative services, however, must be tempered by the higher cost of providing
care in this setting and performance pressures on the ED personnel to decrease
length of stay, rates of patients who leave without treatment, overall wait times,
and resource use. 896 , 899 Although the list of potentially modifiable
stroke risk factors as reviewed in this guideline is extensive, not all are amenable
to assessment and initiation of preventive strategies in the ED. 896 Aside from resource
availability, to effectively initiate primary preventive strategies, ED personnel
must know the risk factors for various diseases, in this case stroke; must
understand the appropriate diagnostic evaluations and definitions for the risk
factors; must be aware of recommendations for appropriate interventions; and must be
able to arrange primary care follow-up to assess the effect of initiated preventive
interventions. Adding delivery of primary care and primary prevention to the growing
list of mandated interventions delivered in the ED setting will require engaging and
enabling already largely receptive ED professionals. 900 
ED visits serve as opportunities to screen and potentially treat patients
with asymptomatic hypertension. The prevalence of asymptomatic hypertension in
patients presenting to the ED may be as high as 1 in 20. 901 Although patients are asymptomatic, many
have target-organ injury; an ED cohort of blacks with elevated BP in the ED found
that 90% had subclinical hypertensive heart disease. 902 In ED patients with newly identified
hypertension or chronically untreated hypertension, performing screening tests in
the ED for target-organ damage and tests for identifiable causes of hypertension in
selected patents is appropriate. Most asymptomatic patients will not require acute
BP reduction or long-term antihypertensive medication initiation in the ED. For most
newly diagnosed hypertensive patients, the ED encounter can serve as a means of
arranging appropriate referral to outpatient primary care, coupled with counseling
on lifestyle modifications, although this is inconsistently performed. 221 , 903 ED personnel can identify patients with a history of
hypertension but nonadherence to their medication regimen who need to resume their
previous medications. ED screening for hypertension is feasible and cost-effective.
Once hypertensive patients are identified, ED personnel can educate on and encourage
healthy lifestyles to address their hypertension and the importance of outpatient
follow-up, in accordance with the current Joint National Committee 8 outpatient
guidelines. 219 , 896 , 904 
The incidence of diabetes mellitus has more than doubled over the last 2
decades, and millions with the condition remain undiagnosed. On the basis of
screening hemoglobin A 1c and fasting plasma glucose, the National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey estimated the prevalence of undiagnosed diabetes
mellitus in the US population to be 2.8%. 905 Similar to hypertension, there is an even
higher prevalence of undiagnosed diabetes mellitus in the ED patient
population. 905 Although
point-of-care glucose and hemoglobin A 1c testing of ED patients may be
feasible, it remains to be determined whether such screening is
cost-effective. 906 
Unselected screening by capillary blood glucose or hemoglobin A 1c 
measurement is not currently recommended by emergency medicine societies or other
healthcare agencies, but emergency physicians support improved recognition and
referral for hyperglycemia. 896 , 905 , 907 , 908 Patients with
known diabetes mellitus commonly use EDs for acute care of complications related to
diabetes mellitus, and many present with poor glycemic control. These encounters
provide another opportunity to encourage medication compliance, dietary management,
lifestyle modification, and outpatient follow-up. 
Despite decades of public health interventions, cigarette smoking remains a
leading cause of preventable deaths in the United States, accounting for 1 of every
5 deaths each year. 909 
Recognizing this continuing problem, the American College of Emergency Physicians
recommends ED interventions aimed at smoking cessation. 910 Numerous studies have demonstrated that the
ED represents a promising site for smoking cessation interventions through
self-service kiosks and culturally appropriate literature, brief interventions, and
referrals to outpatient treatment. 911 , 912 With the high
prevalence of smoking-related illnesses leading to ED visits, these episodes provide
outstanding “teachable moments” to encourage cessation. 
The use of oral antithrombotic agents for the prevention of stroke in
patients with nonvalvular AF remains a cornerstone of stroke prevention. 390 , 913 The US National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey
revealed an 88% increase in US ED visits for AF, and visits for AF are
likely to increase. 914 Despite
ample evidence supporting anticoagulation in selected patients with AF,
≈12% to 34% of patients with AF presenting in the ED are
eligible for warfarin but are either undertreated or untreated. 915 , 916 
The ED represents an important location to identify patients with new-onset AF, to
initiate anticoagulation depending on comorbidities, and to plan for the initial
management. Similar to patients with known hypertension and diabetes mellitus, for
patients with known AF, their ED encounters provide opportunities to promote
behaviors to improve compliance with medication and to ensure access to outpatient
care. 917 
Alcohol consumption is a major contributor to many ED visits. In response
to the epidemic of alcohol-related injuries and illnesses, numerous ED-based
interventions have been investigated. 918 , 919 The American
College of Emergency Physicians developed a brief alcohol use intervention brochure
that does not require significant resources to produce or distribute but, by itself,
was found to be only marginally effective in the absence of referral for cessation
counseling. 920 More
interactive ED interventions require more resources but are more likely to produce
enduring benefits. 921 Integrating
health promotion into the curriculum of emergency medicine training programs will
help overcome existing nihilism of many practicing emergency physicians related to
the benefit of alcohol interventions. 922 
Nutrition, physical activity, and drug abuse are potential lifestyle
targets for behavioral interventions aimed at primary stroke prevention. Of these
issues, only the feasibility and efficacy of substance abuse screening and
intervention have been studied in the adult ED setting, although an obesity
screening study in a pediatric ED was recently reported, with more than half of the
children being overweight or obese. 923 Obesity contributes to medical conditions frequently seen in
the ED and may complicate medical interventions. Many physicians are reluctant to
discuss issues related to a patient’s weight, and patients are not always
receptive to the discussion. 924 
No study has investigated the use of the ED as a site for nutritional and dietary
counseling. Overall, although emergency physicians recognize the need for health
promotion, few actually practice routine screening and counseling of emergency
patients, and many are skeptical of the effect of ED health promotion. 924 
Aside from education on individual risk factors and overall healthy
lifestyle promotion, the ED can serve as an effective location to educate patients
about stroke signs and symptoms and the need to seek immediate medical attention. A
pilot study of stroke education using educational videos was performed using printed
stroke education materials and one-on-one counseling. 925 Compared with a control group that did not
receive any intervention, the intervention group demonstrated better stroke
awareness immediately after the program, but by 3 months after intervention,
although statistically still more knowledgeable than the control group, test scores
had declined, highlighting the need for reinforcement. The intervention did not
affect rates of smoking or positive changes in diet and physical activity. The ED
can be part of a broader system to educate and reinforce these key messages. 
Health care, in particular emergency care, is undergoing dramatic changes.
The increasing demands for emergent and primary care will strain the capacity of
many EDs to provide even basic emergency care to acutely ill patients. To
effectively incorporate preventive services into routine ED practice, a careful
review of feasibility and cost-effectiveness is required of each intervention, again
assuming that sufficient resources are available. 896 Effective primary, secondary, and tertiary
stroke prevention can occur in EDs, but significant healthcare organizational
changes are required. 926 These
changes must address current limitations of health promotion training for healthcare
providers, program funding, resource availability, and opportunities for timely
referral for longitudinal care. 
Primary Prevention in the ED: Summary and Gaps 
The ED may serve as an important location to provide health promotion
and disease prevention services, especially during these unique teachable
moments, through screening, brief intervention, and referral for treatment. This
opportunity to identify risk factors for stroke and to begin primary prevention
requires further study into resource use, efficacy, effectiveness, and cost. 
Primary Prevention in the ED: Recommendations 
ED-based smoking cessation programs and interventions are
recommended ( Class I; Level of Evidence B ). 
Identification of AF and evaluation for anticoagulation in the
ED are recommended ( Class I; Level of Evidence B ). 
ED population screening for hypertension is reasonable
( Class IIa; Level of Evidence C ). 
When a patient is identified as having a drug or alcohol abuse
problem, ED referral to an appropriate therapeutic program is reasonable
( Class IIa; Level of Evidence C ). 
The effectiveness of screening, brief intervention, and
referral for treatment of diabetes mellitus and lifestyle stroke risk
factors (obesity, alcohol/substance abuse, sedentary lifestyle) in the
ED setting is not established ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Strategies to Improve Preventive Vascular Health Services 
Evidence-based guidelines are useful only if the recommendations translate
into clinical practice. Primary vascular prevention approaches are underused in
general practice. 1 , 927 For example, in the United States,
≈6% of adults have undiagnosed hypertension, and although the number
of patients with BP treated to recommended targets has improved from 27% (in
1988 through 1994) to 50% (in 2007 through 2008), substantial gaps in
quality remain. 224 , 928 Opportunities to improve preventive
services exist across the range of vascular risk factors. 1 In the United States, vascular health varies
substantially across the 50 states, but overall, only 3% of the adult
population has ideal vascular health defined across 7 domains: hypertension,
hyperlipidemia, smoking, BMI, diabetes mellitus, physical activity, and consumption
of fruits and vegetables. 929 
Although preventive vascular services are a core activity of primary care
physicians, specialists also have the opportunity and responsibility to identify
stroke risk factors, to ensure that patients receive recommended treatments, and to
encourage adherence to therapeutic interventions. 930 Strategies to help clinicians implement
guideline recommendations are often aimed at changing physician behavior related to
risk factor prevention. 931 – 933 A
combination of techniques is usually necessary to improve stroke preventive care,
including physician education, audit and feedback of quality data, and use of
checklists. 931 – 939 Some strategies to improve
stroke prevention care, although relatively costly, are more consistently effective,
including electronic medical records; computer-based clinical reminder systems; and
tailored, multifaceted programs. 940 – 944 Other
strategies focus on changing the organization or context in which the care is
delivered, including delegation of preventive services to nonphysician staff (eg,
nurses or pharmacists), the use of group visits, or the implementation of clinics
devoted to screening and preventive services. 943 , 945 – 948 Quality improvement efforts that
include activities that focus on the system, the provider, and the patient, as well
as the coordination of services across these domains, are often the most
effective. 949 Studies
examining the effectiveness of stroke education programs have generally identified a
modest effect on patient knowledge, risk perception, or health beliefs. 944 – 947 However, studies have demonstrated the
effectiveness of tailored patient self-management programs to improve vascular risk
factor control. 950 , 951 Integrated healthcare systems that have
focused on improving the quality of vascular prevention have demonstrated
improvements in a variety of stroke risk factors at the facility or system
level. 952 , 953 Achieving sustained improvements in the
quality of vascular prevention care at the system level may require multidimensional
interventions, including implementation of electronic medical record systems,
ongoing performance measurement, change in the culture, and alignment of economic
incentives. 953 , 954 Stroke prevention services are most
cost-effective for populations at increased risk (eg, patients >50 years of
age). 955 
Preventive Health Services: Summary and Gaps 
Although stroke risk factor quality of care is improving, substantial
gaps in primary stroke prevention care exist. The existing literature includes
prospective trials and observational cohorts that demonstrate the effectiveness
of a variety of approaches to delivering vascular prevention services. These
studies have been designed to evaluate the effect of primary prevention services
on the control of risk factors such as hypertension, not on incident stroke
rates. Quality improvement strategies that are multifaceted and tailored appear
to be the most effective. Future research should identify the implementation
strategies that are associated with the greatest sustained improvements in
preventing stroke. 
Preventive Health Services: Recommendation 
It is reasonable to implement programs to systematically
identify and treat risk factors in all patients at risk for stroke
( Class IIa; Level of Evidence A ). 
Summary/Conclusions 
In this latest iteration of the guidelines, physicians and scientists
should take pride in the advances that continue to be made in preventing stroke.
Medications to control BP and lipids, anticoagulants for at-risk individuals with
AF, revascularization, cigarette smoking cessation, diet, and exercise are among the
interventions broadly applicable to the general public. With so many interventions,
optimization of stroke prevention for individuals requires systems of care that
identify risk factors as they emerge and that gain control of emerging risk factors
safely, expeditiously, and cost-effectively. Access to care is necessary but not
sufficient to guarantee optimal stroke prevention. Integration of inpatient and
outpatient services and incentivizing efforts directed at preventing stroke must
also be considered. New recommendations and important revisions are summarized in
Table 5 . 
Table 5. 
New and Revised Recommendations for 2014 * 
Section 
2014 Recommendation 
Description of Change from 2011 
Assessing the risk of first stroke 
The use of a risk assessment tool such as the
AHA/ACC CV Risk Calculator ( http://my.americanheart.org/cvriskcalculator ) is
reasonable because these tools can help identify individuals who could
benefit from therapeutic interventions and who may not be treated on the
basis of any single risk factor. These calculators are useful to alert
clinicians and patients of possible risk, but basing treatment decisions
on the results needs to be considered in the context of the overall risk
profile of the patient ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Reworded to add AHA/ACC CV Risk Calculator and
link 
Genetic factors 
Treatment of Fabry disease with enzyme
replacement therapy might be considered but has not been shown to reduce
the risk of stroke, and its effectiveness is unknown ( Class IIb;
Level of Evidence C ). 
Slightly reworded; no change in class or level
of evidence 
Screening for intracranial aneurysms in every
carrier of autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney disease or Ehlers-Danlos
type 4 mutations is not recommended ( Class III; Level of
Evidence C ). 
Previous statement was worded with less
specificity, referring to “mendelian disorders associated with
aneurysms” 
Pharmacogenetic dosing of vitamin K
antagonists may be considered when therapy is initiated ( Class
IIb; Level of Evidence C ). 
Changed from Class III (is not recommended) to
Class IIb (may be considered) 
Physical inactivity 
Healthy adults should perform at least
moderate- to vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity at least 40
min a day 3 to 4 d/wk ( Class I; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Changed wording to match new AHA lifestyle
guideline 
Dyslipidemia 
In addition to therapeutic lifestyle changes,
treatment with an HMG coenzyme-A reductase inhibitor (statin) medication
is recommended for primary prevention of ischemic stroke in patients
estimated to have a high 10-y risk for cardiovascular events as
recommended in the 2013 “ACC/AHA Guideline on the Treatment of
Blood Cholesterol to Reduce Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Risk in
Adults” ( Class I; Level of Evidence A ). 
Reworded to incorporate ACC/AHA guidelines
(instead of NCEP); no change in class/LOE. Focusing on estimated
cardiovascular risk as the determinant for initiating therapy is
new. 
Niacin may be considered for patients with low
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol or elevated lipoprotein(a), but its
efficacy in preventing ischemic stroke in patients with these conditions
is not established. Caution should be used with niacin because it
increases the risk of myopathy ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Changed from LOE C to LOE B; the risk of
myopathy is highlighted 
Treatment with nonstatin lipid-lowering
therapies such as fibric acid derivatives, bile acid sequestrants,
niacin, and ezetimibe may be considered in patients who cannot tolerate
statins, but their efficacy in preventing stroke is not established
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence C ). 
Reworded from “other” to
“nonstatin” (no change in class or LOE). Reference is no
longer made to an low-density lipoprotein target for statin therapy
because the decision to use moderate or intensive statin therapy depends
on estimated risk of future cardiovascular events. 
Diet and nutrition 
A Mediterranean diet supplemented with nuts
may be considered in lowering the risk of stroke ( Class IIb;
Level of Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
Hypertension 
Regular blood pressure screening and
appropriate treatment of patients with hypertension, including lifestyle
modification and pharmacological therapy, are recommended ( Class
I; Level of Evidence A ). 
Annual blood pressure
screening for high blood pressure and health-promoting lifestyle
modification are recommended for patients with prehypertension (systolic
blood pressure of 120–139 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure of
80–89 mm Hg) ( Class I; Level of Evidence
A ). 
New recommendations 
Annual blood pressure screening for high blood
pressure and health-promoting lifestyle modification are recommended for
patients with prehypertension (systolic blood pressure of
120–139 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure of 80–89 mm
Hg) ( Class I; Level of Evidence A ). 
Successful reduction of blood pressure is more
important in reducing stroke risk than the choice of a specific agent,
and treatment should be individualized on the basis of other patient
characteristics and medication tolerance ( Class I; Level of
Evidence A ). 
New recommendation 
Self-measured blood pressure monitoring is
recommended to improve blood pressure control ( Class I; Level of
Evidence A ) 
New recommendation 
Obesity and body fat distribution 
Among overweight (body mass index=25
to 29 kg/m 2 ) and obese (body mass index >30
kg/m 2 ) individuals, weight reduction is recommended for
lowering blood pressure ( Class I; Level of Evidence
A ). 
Overweight and obesity have now been defined
on the basis of body mass index 
Obesity and body fat distribution
cont’d 
Among overweight (body mass index=25
to 29 kg/m 2 ) and obese (body mass index >30
kg/m 2 ) individuals, weight reduction is recommended for
reducing the risk of stroke ( Class I; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Overweight and obesity have now been defined
on the basis of body mass index, and the recommendation has been
upgraded from IIa to I 
Diabetes mellitus 
Control of blood pressure in accordance with
an AHA/ACC/CDC advisory to a target of <140/90 mm Hg is
recommended in patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus
( Class I; Level of Evidence A ). 
Reworded to reference AHA/ACC/CDC
advisory 
The usefulness of aspirin for primary stroke
prevention for patients with diabetes mellitus but low 10-y risk of
cardiovascular disease is unclear ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Deleted the phrase “however,
administering aspirin may be reasonable” 
Cigarette smoking 
Counseling in combination with drug therapy
using nicotine replacement, bupropion, or varenicline is recommended for
active smokers to assist in quitting smoking ( Class I; Level of
Evidence A ). 
Reworded and LOE changed from B to A 
Community-wide or statewide bans on smoking in
public spaces are reasonable for reducing the risk of stroke and
myocardial infarction ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
B ). 
New recommendation 
Atrial fibrillation 
For patients with valvular atrial fibrillation
at high risk for stroke, defined as a CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc
score of ≥2, and acceptably low risk for hemorrhagic
complications, chronic oral anticoagulant therapy with warfarin at a
target INR of 2.0 to 3.0 is recommended ( Class I; Level of
Evidence A ). 
New recommendation 
For patients with nonvalvular atrial
fibrillation, a CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc score of ≥2,
and acceptably low risk for hemorrhagic complications, oral
anticoagulants are recommended ( Class I ). Options
include warfarin (INR, 2.0 to 3.0) ( Level of Evidence
A ), dabigatran ( Level of Evidence B ), apixaban
( Level of Evidence B ), and rivaroxaban
( Level of Evidence B ). The selection of
antithrombotic agent should be individualized on the basis of patient
risk factors (particularly risk for intracranial hemorrhage), cost,
tolerability, patient preference, potential for drug interactions, and
other clinical characteristics, including time INR is in therapeutic
range for patients taking warfarin. 
New recommendation 
For patients with nonvalvular atrial
fibrillation and CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc score of 0, it is
reasonable to omit antithrombotic therapy ( Class IIa; Level of
Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
For patients with nonvalvular atrial
fibrillation, a CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc score of 1, and
acceptably low risk for hemorrhagic complication, no antithrombotic
therapy, anticoagulant therapy, or aspirin therapy may be considered
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence C ). The selection of
antithrombotic agent should be individualized on the basis of patient
risk factors (particularly risk for intracranial hemorrhage), cost,
tolerability, patient preference, potential for drug interactions, and
other clinical characteristics, including time INR is in therapeutic
range for patients taking warfarin. 
New recommendation 
Closure of the left atrial appendage may be
considered for high-risk patients with atrial fibrillation who are
deemed unsuitable for anticoagulation if performed at a center with low
rates of periprocedural complications and the patient can tolerate the
risk of at least 45 d of postprocedural anticoagulation ( Class
IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
Other cardiac conditions 
Anticoagulation is indicated in patients with
mitral stenosis and a prior embolic event, even in sinus rhythm
( Class I; Level of Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
Anticoagulation is indicated in patients with
mitral stenosis and left atrial thrombus ( Class I; Level of
Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
Warfarin (target INR, 2.0–3.0) and
low-dose aspirin are indicated after aortic valve replacement with
bileaflet mechanical or current-generation, single-tilting-disk
prostheses in patients with no risk factors * ( Class I; Level of
Evidence B ); warfarin (target INR, 2.5–3.5) and
low-dose aspirin are indicated in patients with mechanical aortic valve
replacement and risk factors * ( Class I; Level of Evidence B );
and warfarin (target INR, 2.5–3.5) and low-dose aspirin are
indicated after mitral valve replacement with any mechanical valve
( Class I; Level of Evidence B ). 
New recommendations 
Surgical excision is recommended for treatment
of atrial myxomas ( Class I; Level of Evidence C ). 
New recommendation 
Other cardiac conditions cont’d 
Surgical intervention is recommended for
symptomatic fibroelastomas and for fibroelastomas that are >1 cm
or appear mobile, even if asymptomatic ( Class I; Level of
Evidence C ) 
New recommendation 
Aspirin is reasonable after aortic or mitral
valve replacement with a bioprosthesis ( Class IIa; Level of
Evidence C ). 
New recommendation 
It is reasonable to give warfarin to achieve
an INR of 2.0–3.0 during the first 3 mo after aortic or mitral
valve replacement with a bioprosthesis ( Class IIa; Level of
Evidence C ). 
New recommendation 
Anticoagulants or antiplatelet agents are
reasonable for patients with heart failure who do not have atrial
fibrillation or a previous thromboembolic event ( Class IIa;
Level of Evidence A ). 
New recommendation 
Vitamin K antagonist therapy is reasonable for
patients with ST-segment–elevation myocardial infarction and
asymptomatic left ventricular mural thrombi ( Class IIa; Level of
Evidence C ). 
The level of evidence has been downgraded from
A to C, but the recommendation grade is the same 
Anticoagulation may be considered for
asymptomatic patients with severe mitral stenosis and left atrial
dimension ≥55 mm by echocardiography ( Class IIb; Level
of Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
Anticoagulation may be considered for patients
with severe mitral stenosis, an enlarged left atrium, and spontaneous
contrast on echocardiography ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
C ). 
New recommendation 
Anticoagulant therapy may be considered for
patients with ST-segment–elevation myocardial infarction and
anterior apical akinesis or dyskinesis ( Class IIb; Level of
Evidence C ). 
New recommendation 
Antithrombotic treatment and catheter-based
closure are not recommended in patients with patent foramen ovale for
primary prevention of stroke ( Class III; Level of Evidence
C ). 
New recommendation 
Asymptomatic carotid stenosis 
Patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis
should be prescribed daily aspirin and a statin. Patients should also be
screened for other treatable risk factors for stroke, and appropriate
medical therapies and lifestyle changes should be instituted
( Class I; Level of Evidence C ). 
New recommendation. The use of aspirin and
statin therapy was implied but not explicitly stated except in the
perioperative and postoperative context in the prior guidelines. 
It is reasonable to consider performing
carotid endarterectomy in asymptomatic patients who have
>70% stenosis of the internal carotid artery if the risk
of perioperative stroke, myocardial infarction, and death is low
(<3%). However, its effectiveness compared with
contemporary best medical management alone is not well established
( Class IIa; Level of Evidence A ). 
New recommendation 
It is reasonable to repeat duplex
ultrasonography annually by a qualified technologist in a certified
laboratory to assess the progression or regression of disease and
response to therapeutic interventions in patients with atherosclerotic
stenosis >50% ( Class IIa; Level of Evidence
C ). 
New recommendation 
Prophylactic carotid angioplasty and stenting
might be considered in highly selected patients with asymptomatic
carotid stenosis (minimum, 60% by angiography, 70% by
validated Doppler ultrasound), but its effectiveness compared with
medical therapy alone in this situation is not well established
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
In asymptomatic patients at high risk of
complications for carotid revascularization by either carotid
endarterectomy or carotid angioplasty and stenting, the effectiveness of
revascularization versus medical therapy alone is not well established
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
Sickle cell disease 
Transcranial Doppler screening for children
with sickle cell disease is indicated starting at 2 y of age and
continuing annually to 16 y of age ( Class I; Level of Evidence
B ). 
Slightly reworded to include up to 16 y (no
change in class or LOE) 
In children at high risk for stroke who are
unable or unwilling to be treated with periodic red cell transfusion, it
might be reasonable to consider hydroxyurea or bone marrow
transplantation ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
Changed from LOE C to LOE B 
Migraine 
Smoking cessation should be strongly
recommended in women with migraine headaches with aura ( Class I;
Level of Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
Alternatives to oral contraceptives,
especially those containing estrogen, might be considered in women with
active migraine headaches with aura ( Class IIb; Level of
Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
Migraine cont’d 
Closure of patent foramen ovale is not
indicated for preventing stroke in patients with migraine ( Class
III; Level of Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
Drug abuse 
Referral to an appropriate therapeutic program
is reasonable for patients who abuse drugs that have been associated
with stroke, including cocaine, khat, and amphetamines ( Class
IIa; Level of Evidence C ). 
Wording slightly revised to specifically list
drugs associated with stroke 
Sleep-disordered breathing 
Because of its association with stroke risk,
screening for sleep apnea through a detailed history, including
structured questionnaires such as the Epworth Sleepiness Scale and
Berlin Questionnaire, physical examination, and, if indicated,
polysomnography may be considered ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
C ). 
Wording slightly revised to include
polysomnography and use of specific questionnaires. Recommendation class
and LOE have been downgraded. 
Elevated lipoprotein(a) 
The clinical benefit of using lipoprotein(a)
in stroke risk prediction is not well established ( Class IIb;
Level of Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
Inflammation and infection 
Treatment of patients with high-sensitivity
C-reactive protein >2.0 mg/dL with a statin to decrease stroke
risk might be considered ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
B ). 
The revised recommendation now defines
elevated high-sensitivity C-reactive protein as >2.0 mg/dL in
the context of considering statin initiation 
Antiplatelet agents and aspirin 
The use of aspirin for cardiovascular
(including but not specific to stroke) prophylaxis is reasonable for
people whose risk is sufficiently high (10-y risk >10%)
for the benefits to outweigh the risks associated with treatment. A
cardiovascular risk calculator to assist in estimating 10-y risk can be
found online at http://my.americanheart.org/cvriskcalculator 
( Class IIa; Level of Evidence A ). 
Reworded to include cardiovascular risk
calculator and link; changed from Class I to IIa 
Aspirin might be considered for the prevention
of a first stroke in people with chronic kidney disease (ie, estimated
glomerular filtration rate <45
mL·min −1 ·1.73
m −2 ) ( Class IIb; Level of Evidence
C ). This recommendation does not apply to severe kidney
disease (stage 4 or 5; estimated glomerular filtration rate <30
mL·min −1 ·1.73
m −2 ). 
New recommendation 
Cilostazol may be reasonable for the
prevention of a first stroke in people with peripheral arterial disease
( Class IIb; Level of Evidence B ). 
New recommendation 
As a result of a lack of relevant clinical
trials, antiplatelet regimens other than aspirin and cilostazol are not
recommended for the prevention of a first stroke ( Class III;
Level of Evidence C ). 
New recommendation 
Open in a new tab 
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart
Association; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; CV,
cardiovascular; INR, international normalized ratio; LOE, level of evidence;
and NCEP, National Cholesterol Education Program. 
* 
This table does not include recommendations that have been removed. 
As health professionals, we must ensure that progress in preventing stroke
does not lead to complacency. We must acknowledge that several recommendations
remain vague because of suboptimal clinical trial evidence or, even more concerning,
may be out of date and therefore irrelevant. Diet and exercise are notoriously
challenging to study with the same rigor as drugs or devices. It is easier to
convince a patient to take a pill than to radically change his or her lifestyle.
Nonetheless, we must expect the same standards of evidence for lifestyle
interventions. Devices such as stents for carotid stenosis and occluders for PFO
should be required to demonstrate favorable effects on patient-centered outcomes
such as preventing stroke and not merely demonstrate favorable effects on surrogates
such as expanding lumens or closing holes. The control groups of old that showed the
benefits of CEA for asymptomatic stenosis would be seen as grossly undertreated
medically by contemporary standards. It would be important to see if
revascularization remains relevant in a modern context. 
Supplementary Material 
supplement 
NIHMS808056-supplement-supplement.pdf (695.3KB, pdf) 
Acknowledgments 
We thank medical librarians Ann Farrell at Mayo Clinic Rochester and Tara Brigham at
Mayo Clinic Florida for assistance with a systematic review of the medical
literature. 
Disclosures 
Writing Group Disclosures. 
Writing Group 
Member 
Employment 
Research 
Grant 
Other 
Research 
Support 
Speakers’ 
Bureau/ 
Honoraria 
Expert Witness 
Ownership 
Interest 
Consultant/Advisory Board 
Other 
James F. Meschia 
Mayo Clinic 
NINDS † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Cheryl Bushnell 
Wake Forest University Baptist
Medical Center 
World Federation of Neurology † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Bernadette Boden-Albala 
New York University, Global
Institute of Public Health 
NIH † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Lynne T. Braun 
Rush University Medical Center 
NIH † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Nurse Practitioner Advisory
Board * ;
UpToDate * 
None 
Dawn M. Bravata 
Department of Veteran Affairs 
Department of Veteran Affairs † ;
NIH/NHLBI † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Seemant Chaturvedi 
University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Abbott Vascular * ;
Boehringer-Ingelheim * ; Thornhill Research * W.L. Gore * 
None 
Mark A. Creager 
Brigham and Women’s
Hospital 
Medtronic † ; NIH † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
AstraZeneca † ; Baxter Healthcare * ; Merck (via
TIMI Group) * ; Novartis * ; Takeda * 
None 
Robert H. Eckel 
University of Colorado at
Denver 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Amarin * ; Amylin * ;
Genetech * ; Janssen, Johnson & Johnson * ; Lilly * ; Novo
Nordisk * ; Regulus * ; Sanofi-Aventis * 
None 
Mitchell S.V. Elkind 
Columbia University 
BMS/Sanofi † ; diaDexus, Inc † NIH † 
None 
None 
Merck Organon (Nuvaring and
stroke) † ; Novartis (aliskiren and stroke) * 
None 
BMS-Pfizer Pharmaceutical
Partnership * ; Janssen * ; Daiichi Sankyo * ; Biogen
IDEC * 
None 
Myriam Fornage 
University of Texas Health Science
Center at Houston 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Larry B. Goldstein 
Duke University 
None 
None 
Pfizer * 
None 
None 
Daiichi Sankyo * 
None 
Steven M. Greenberg 
Massachusetts General Hospital 
NIH/NINDS † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Susanna E. Horvath 
Columbia University 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Costantino Iadecola 
Weill Cornell Medical College 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Edward C. Jauch 
Medical University of South
Carolina 
NIH/NINDS † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Wesley S. Moore 
University of California at Los
Angeles 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
John A. Wilson 
Wake Forest School of Medicine 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Open in a new tab 
This table represents the relationships of writing group
members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived
conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire,
which all members of the writing group are required to complete and
submit. A relationship is considered to be
“significant” if (a) the person receives $10
000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the
person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or
more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10
000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship
is considered to be “modest” if it is less than
“significant” under the preceding definition. 
* 
Modest. 
† 
Significant. 
Reviewer Disclosures. 
Reviewer 
Employment 
Research Grant 
Other 
Research 
Support 
Speakers’
Bureau/ 
Honoraria 
Expert 
Witness 
Ownership 
Interest 
Consultant/Advisory 
Board 
Other 
Kevin M. Cockroft 
Penn State Hershey Medical
Center 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Covidien Neurovascular * 
None 
Karen L. Furie 
Rhode Island Hospital 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
David M Greer 
Yale University 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Millie Hepburn-Smith 
NYU Langone Medical Center 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
American Association of NeuroScience
Nurses (member of the Board of Directors) * ; National Aphasia
Association (Board of Directors) * 
None 
Steven J. Kittner 
University of Maryland 
1U01NS069208 The Stroke Genetics
Network (SiGN) Study is an NINDS-funded international consortium
to study the genetics of ischemic stroke and ischemic stroke
subtypes † ; R01NS069763 Ethnic/Racial Variations of
Intracerebral Hemorrhage (ERICH) is an NINDS-funded study of the
risk factors for intracerebral hemorrhage occurrence and
outcome * 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Tatjana Rundek 
University of Miami 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Open in a new tab 
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that
may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of
interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all
reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is
considered to be “significant” if (a) the person
receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or
5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the
person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the
entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of
the entity. A relationship is considered to be
“modest” if it is less than
“significant” under the preceding definition. 
* 
Modest. 
† 
Significant. 
Footnotes 
The American Academy of Neurology affirms the value of these guidelines as an
educational tool for neurologists. 
Endorsed by the American Association of Neurological Surgeons, the Congress of
Neurological Surgeons, and the Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association 
* 
Risk factors include AF, previous thromboembolism, left ventricular dysfunction,
and hypercoagulable condition. 
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or
potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside
relationship or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of
the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required
to complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships
that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest. 
This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory
and Coordinating Committee on July 15, 2014. A copy of the document is available
at http://my.americanheart.org/statements by selecting either the
“By Topic” link or the “By Publication Date”
link. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail
kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com . 
The Executive Summary is available as an online-only Data Supplement with this
article at http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STR.0000000000000046/-/DC1 . 
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted by the AHA Office of
Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines development, visit
http://my.americanheart.org/statements and select the
“Policies and Development” link. 
References 
1. Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Blaha MJ, Dai S, Ford ES, Fox CS, Franco S, Fullerton HJ, Gillespie C, Hailpern SM, Heit JA, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, Judd SE, Kissela BM, Kittner SJ, Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Mackey RH, Magid DJ, Marcus GM, Marelli A, Matchar DB, McGuire DK, Mohler ER, 3rd, Moy CS, Mussolino ME, Neumar RW, Nichol G, Pandey DK, Paynter NP, Reeves MJ, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A, Turan TN, Virani SS, Wong ND, Woo D, Turner MB, American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke
Statistics Subcommittee Heart disease and stroke statistics–2014 update: a report
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;129:e28–e292. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000441139.02102.80. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Heron M. Deaths: leading causes for 2007. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2011;59:1–95. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Feigin VL, Lawes CM, Bennett DA, Barker-Collo SL, Parag V. Worldwide stroke incidence and early case fatality reported in 56
population-based studies: a systematic review. Lancet Neurol. 2009;8:355–369. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(09)70025-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Samsa GP, Matchar DB, Goldstein L, Bonito A, Duncan PW, Lipscomb J, Enarson C, Witter D, Venus P, Paul JE, Weinberger M. Utilities for major stroke: results from a survey of preferences
among persons at increased risk for stroke. Am Heart J. 1998;136(pt 1):703–713. doi: 10.1016/s0002-8703(98)70019-5. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP, Jr, Bruno A, Connors JJ, Demaerschalk BM, Khatri P, McMullan PW, Jr, Qureshi AI, Rosenfield K, Scott PA, Summers DR, Wang DZ, Wintermark M, Yonas H, on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council
on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease;
Council on Clinical Cardiology Guidelines for the early management of patients with acute
ischemic stroke: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American
Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2013;44:870–947. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e318284056a. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Gorelick PB. Stroke prevention. Arch Neurol. 1995;52:347–355. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1995.00540280029015. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Sacco RL, Benjamin EJ, Broderick JP, Dyken M, Easton JD, Feinberg WM, Goldstein LB, Gorelick PB, Howard G, Kittner SJ, Manolio TA, Whisnant JP, Wolf PA. American Heart Association Prevention Conference, IV: prevention
and rehabilitation of stroke: risk factors. Stroke. 1997;28:1507–1517. doi: 10.1161/01.str.28.7.1507. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. O’Donnell MJ, Xavier D, Liu L, Zhang H, Chin SL, Rao-Melacini P, Rangarajan S, Islam S, Pais P, McQueen MJ, Mondo C, Damasceno A, Lopez-Jaramillo P, Hankey GJ, Dans AL, Yusoff K, Truelsen T, Diener HC, Sacco RL, Ryglewicz D, Czlonkowska A, Weimar C, Wang X, Yusuf S, INTERSTROKE Investigators Risk factors for ischaemic and intracerebral haemorrhagic stroke
in 22 countries (the INTERSTROKE study): a case-control
study. Lancet. 2010;376:112–123. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60834-3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. Goldstein LB, Bushnell CD, Adams RJ, Appel LJ, Braun LT, Chaturvedi S, Creager MA, Culebras A, Eckel RH, Hart RG, Hinchey JA, Howard VJ, Jauch EC, Levine SR, Meschia JF, Moore WS, Nixon JV, Pearson TA, on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council
on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Epidemiology and Prevention;
Council for High Blood Pressure Research; Council on Peripheral Vascular
Disease, and Interdisciplinary Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes
Research Guidelines for the primary prevention of stroke: a guideline for
healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association. Stroke. 2011;42:517–584. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3181fcb238. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. Sacco RL. The new American Heart Association 2020 goal: achieving ideal
cardiovascular health. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown) 2011;12:255–257. doi: 10.2459/JCM.0b013e328343e986. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. Easton JD, Saver JL, Albers GW, Alberts MJ, Chaturvedi S, Feldmann E, Hatsukami TS, Higashida RT, Johnston SC, Kidwell CS, Lutsep HL, Miller E, Sacco RL. Definition and evaluation of transient ischemic attack: a
scientific statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association Stroke Council; Council on
Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia; Council on Cardiovascular Radiology
and Intervention; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; and the
Interdisciplinary Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. Stroke. 2009;40:2276–2293. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.192218. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11a. Bushnell C, McCullough LD, Awad IA, Chireau MV, Fedder WN, Furie KL, Howard VJ, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Pina IL, Reeves MJ, Rexrode KM, Saposnik G, Singh V, Towfighi A, Vaccarino V, Walters MR. Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in women: a statement for
healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association. Stroke. 2014;45:1545–1588. doi: 10.1161/01.str.0000442009.06663.48. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Burt BA. Definitions of risk. J Dent Educ. 2001;65:1007–1008. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. Powers BJ, Danus S, Grubber JM, Olsen MK, Oddone EZ, Bosworth HB. The effectiveness of personalized coronary heart disease and
stroke risk communication. Am Heart J. 2011;161:673–680. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2010.12.021. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. Grundy SM, Pasternak R, Greenland P, Smith S, Jr, Fuster V. AHA/ACC scientific statement: assessment of cardiovascular risk
by use of multiple-risk-factor assessment equations: a statement for
healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association and the
American College of Cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;34:1348–1359. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(99)00387-3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Pocock SJ, McCormack V, Gueyffier F, Boutitie F, Fagard RH, Boissel JP. A score for predicting risk of death from cardiovascular disease
in adults with raised blood pressure, based on individual patient data from
randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2001;323:75–81. doi: 10.1136/bmj.323.7304.75. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. Wolf PA, D’Agostino RB, Belanger AJ, Kannel WB. Probability of stroke: a risk profile from the Framingham
Study. Stroke. 1991;22:312–318. doi: 10.1161/01.str.22.3.312. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. Den Ruijter HM, Peters SA, Anderson TJ, Britton AR, Dekker JM, Eijkemans MJ, Engstrom G, Evans GW, de Graaf J, Grobbee DE, Hedblad B, Hofman A, Holewijn S, Ikeda A, Kavousi M, Kitagawa K, Kitamura A, Koffijberg H, Lonn EM, Lorenz MW, Mathiesen EB, Nijpels G, Okazaki S, O’Leary DH, Polak JF, Price JF, Robertson C, Rembold CM, Rosvall M, Rundek T, Salonen JT, Sitzer M, Stehouwer CD, Witteman JC, Moons KG, Bots ML. Common carotid intima-media thickness measurements in
cardiovascular risk prediction: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2012;308:796–803. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.9630. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
18. D’Agostino RB, Wolf PA, Belanger AJ, Kannel WB. Stroke risk profile: adjustment for antihypertensive medication:
the Framingham study. Stroke. 1994;25:40–43. doi: 10.1161/01.str.25.1.40. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
19. Wang TJ, Massaro JM, Levy D, Vasan RS, Wolf PA, D’Agostino RB, Larson MG, Kannel WB, Benjamin EJ. A risk score for predicting stroke or death in individuals with
new-onset atrial fibrillation in the community: the Framingham Heart
Study. JAMA. 2003;290:1049–1056. doi: 10.1001/jama.290.8.1049. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
20. Cappuccio FP, Oakeshott P, Strazzullo P, Kerry SM. Application of Framingham risk estimates to ethnic minorities in
United Kingdom and implications for primary prevention of heart disease in
general practice: cross sectional population based study. BMJ. 2002;325:1271. doi: 10.1136/bmj.325.7375.1271. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
21. Lumley T, Kronmal RA, Cushman M, Manolio TA, Goldstein S. A stroke prediction score in the elderly: validation and
Web-based application. J Clin Epidemiol. 2002;55:129–136. doi: 10.1016/s0895-4356(01)00434-6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
22. Simons LA, McCallum J, Friedlander Y, Simons J. Risk factors for ischemic stroke: Dubbo Study of the
elderly. Stroke. 1998;29:1341–1346. doi: 10.1161/01.str.29.7.1341. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
23. Chien KL, Su TC, Hsu HC, Chang WT, Chen PC, Sung FC, Chen MF, Lee YT. Constructing the prediction model for the risk of stroke in a
Chinese population: report from a cohort study in Taiwan. Stroke. 2010;41:1858–1864. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.586222. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
24. Lackland DT, Elkind MS, D’Agostino R, Sr, Dhamoon MS, Goff DC, Jr, Higashida RT, McClure LA, Mitchell PH, Sacco RL, Sila CA, Smith SC, Jr, Tanne D, Tirschwell DL, Touze E, Wechsler LR, on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council
on Epidemiology and Prevention; Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and
Intervention; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Peripheral
Vascular Disease; Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes
Research Inclusion of stroke in cardiovascular risk prediction
instruments: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American
Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2012;43:1998–2027. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e31825bcdac. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
25. Grundy SM, D’Agostino RB, Sr, Mosca L, Burke GL, Wilson PW, Rader DJ, Cleeman JI, Roccella EJ, Cutler JA, Friedman LM. Cardiovascular risk assessment based on US cohort studies:
findings from a National Heart, Lung, and Blood institute
workshop. Circulation. 2001;104:491–496. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.104.4.491. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
26. Asplund K, Karvanen J, Giampaoli S, Jousilahti P, Niemela M, Broda G, Cesana G, Dallongeville J, Ducimetriere P, Evans A, Ferrieres J, Haas B, Jorgensen T, Tamosiunas A, Vanuzzo D, Wiklund PG, Yarnell J, Kuulasmaa K, Kulathinal S, MORGAM Project Relative risks for stroke by age, sex, and population based on
follow-up of 18 European populations in the MORGAM Project. Stroke. 2009;40:2319–2326. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.547869. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
27. van Asch CJ, Luitse MJ, Rinkel GJ, van der Tweel I, Algra A, Klijn CJ. Incidence, case fatality, and functional outcome of intracerebral
haemorrhage over time, according to age, sex, and ethnic origin: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9:167–176. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(09)70340-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
28. Kissela BM, Khoury JC, Alwell K, Moomaw CJ, Woo D, Adeoye O, Flaherty ML, Khatri P, Ferioli S, De Los Rios La Rosa F, Broderick JP, Kleindorfer DO. Age at stroke: temporal trends in stroke incidence in a large,
biracial population. Neurology. 2012;79:1781–1787. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318270401d. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
29. Lee LK, Bateman BT, Wang S, Schumacher HC, Pile-Spellman J, Saposnik G. Trends in the hospitalization of ischemic stroke in the United
States, 1998–2007. Int J Stroke. 2012;7:195–201. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-4949.2011.00700.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
30. Seshadri S, Beiser A, Kelly-Hayes M, Kase CS, Au R, Kannel WB, Wolf PA. The lifetime risk of stroke: estimates from the Framingham
Study. Stroke. 2006;37:345–350. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000199613.38911.b2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
31. Barker DJ, Lackland DT. Prenatal influences on stroke mortality in England and
Wales. Stroke. 2003;34:1598–1602. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000077257.27430.7E. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
32. Lackland DT, Egan BM, Ferguson PL. Low birth weight as a risk factor for
hypertension. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 2003;5:133–136. doi: 10.1111/j.1524-6175.2003.01353.x. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
33. Johnson RC, Schoeni RF. Early-life origins of adult disease: national longitudinal
population-based study of the United States. Am J Public Health. 2011;101:2317–2324. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2011.300252. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
34. Lackland DT, Egan BM, Jones PJ. Impact of nativity and race on “Stroke Belt”
mortality. Hypertension. 1999;34:57–62. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.34.1.57. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
35. Cruz-Flores S, Rabinstein A, Biller J, Elkind MS, Griffith P, Gorelick PB, Howard G, Leira EC, Morgenstern LB, Ovbiagele B, Peterson E, Rosamond W, Trimble B, Valderrama AL, on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council
on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Epidemiology and Prevention;
Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Racial-ethnic disparities in stroke care: the American
experience: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2011;42:2091–2116. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3182213e24. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
36. Kissela B, Schneider A, Kleindorfer D, Khoury J, Miller R, Alwell K, Woo D, Szaflarski J, Gebel J, Moomaw C, Pancioli A, Jauch E, Shukla R, Broderick J. Stroke in a biracial population: the excess burden of stroke
among blacks. Stroke. 2004;35:426–431. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000110982.74967.39. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
37. Kleindorfer D, Broderick J, Khoury J, Flaherty M, Woo D, Alwell K, Moomaw CJ, Schneider A, Miller R, Shukla R, Kissela B. The unchanging incidence and case-fatality of stroke in the
1990s: a population-based study. Stroke. 2006;37:2473–2478. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000242766.65550.92. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
38. Sacco RL, Boden-Albala B, Gan R, Chen X, Kargman DE, Shea S, Paik MC, Hauser WA. Stroke incidence among white, black, and Hispanic residents of an
urban community: the Northern Manhattan Stroke Study. Am J Epidemiol. 1998;147:259–268. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a009445. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
39. Howard G, Anderson R, Sorlie P, Andrews V, Backlund E, Burke GL. Ethnic differences in stroke mortality between non-Hispanic
whites, Hispanic whites, and blacks. The National Longitudinal Mortality
Study. Stroke. 1994;25:2120–2125. doi: 10.1161/01.str.25.11.2120. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
40. Morgenstern LB, Smith MA, Lisabeth LD, Risser JM, Uchino K, Garcia N, Longwell PJ, McFarling DA, Akuwumi O, Al-Wabil A, Al-Senani F, Brown DL, Moye LA. Excess stroke in Mexican Americans compared with non-Hispanic
Whites: the Brain Attack Surveillance in Corpus Christi
Project. Am J Epidemiol. 2004;160:376–383. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwh225. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
41. Zahuranec DB, Brown DL, Lisabeth LD, Gonzales NR, Longwell PJ, Eden SV, Smith MA, Garcia NM, Morgenstern LB. Differences in intracerebral hemorrhage between Mexican Americans
and non-Hispanic whites. Neurology. 2006;66:30–34. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000191402.41914.d2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
42. Rosamond WD, Folsom AR, Chambless LE, Wang CH, McGovern PG, Howard G, Copper LS, Shahar E. Stroke incidence and survival among middle-aged adults: 9-year
follow-up of the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC)
cohort. Stroke. 1999;30:736–743. doi: 10.1161/01.str.30.4.736. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
43. Zhang Y, Galloway JM, Welty TK, Wiebers DO, Whisnant JP, Devereux RB, Kizer JR, Howard BV, Cowan LD, Yeh J, Howard WJ, Wang W, Best L, Lee ET. Incidence and risk factors for stroke in American Indians: the
Strong Heart Study. Circulation. 2008;118:1577–1584. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.772285. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
44. Giles WH, Kittner SJ, Hebel JR, Losonczy KG, Sherwin RW. Determinants of black-white differences in the risk of cerebral
infarction: the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
Epidemiologic Follow-up Study. Arch Intern Med. 1995;155:1319–1324. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
45. Gillum RF. Risk factors for stroke in blacks: a critical
review. Am J Epidemiol. 1999;150:1266–1274. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a009957. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
46. Kittner SJ, White LR, Losonczy KG, Wolf PA, Hebel JR. Black-white differences in stroke incidence in a national sample:
the contribution of hypertension and diabetes mellitus. JAMA. 1990;264:1267–1270. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
47. Liao Y, Greenlund KJ, Croft JB, Keenan NL, Giles WH. Factors explaining excess stroke prevalence in the US Stroke
Belt. Stroke. 2009;40:3336–3341. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.561688. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
48. Feinstein M, Ning H, Kang J, Bertoni A, Carnethon M, Lloyd-Jones DM. Racial differences in risks for first cardiovascular events and
noncardiovascular death: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study, the
Cardiovascular Health Study, and the Multi-Ethnic Study of
Atherosclerosis. Circulation. 2012;126:50–59. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.057232. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
49. Glasser SP, Judd S, Basile J, Lackland D, Halanych J, Cushman M, Prineas R, Howard V, Howard G. Prehypertension, racial prevalence and its association with risk
factors: analysis of the REasons for Geographic And Racial Differences in
Stroke (REGARDS) study. Am J Hypertens. 2011;24:194–199. doi: 10.1038/ajh.2010.204. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
50. Howard VJ, Kleindorfer DO, Judd SE, McClure LA, Safford MM, Rhodes JD, Cushman M, Moy CS, Soliman EZ, Kissela BM, Howard G. Disparities in stroke incidence contributing to disparities in
stroke mortality. Ann Neurol. 2011;69:619–627. doi: 10.1002/ana.22385. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
51. Boden-Albala B, Roberts ET, Moats H, Arif H, Sacco RL, Paik MC. Community level disadvantage and the likelihood of first ischemic
stroke. Epidemiol Res Int. doi: 10.1155/2012/481282. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2012/481282 . Accessed October 4,
2014. [ DOI ] 
52. Greer S, Casper M, Kramer M, Schwartz G, Hallisey E, Holt J, Clarkson L, Zhou Y, Freymann G. Racial residential segregation and stroke mortality in
Atlanta. Ethn Dis. 2011;21:437–443. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
53. Kleindorfer D, Lindsell C, Alwell KA, Moomaw CJ, Woo D, Flaherty ML, Khatri P, Adeoye O, Ferioli S, Kissela BM. Patients living in impoverished areas have more severe ischemic
strokes. Stroke. 2012;43:2055–2059. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.649608. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
54. Moon JR, Capistrant BD, Kawachi I, Avendano M, Subramanian SV, Bates LM, Glymour MM. Stroke incidence in older US Hispanics: is foreign birth
protective? Stroke. 2012;43:1224–1229. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.643700. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
55. Flossmann E, Schulz UG, Rothwell PM. Systematic review of methods and results of studies of the
genetic epidemiology of ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2004;35:212–227. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000107187.84390.AA. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
56. Seshadri S, Beiser A, Pikula A, Himali JJ, Kelly-Hayes M, Debette S, DeStefano AL, Romero JR, Kase CS, Wolf PA. Parental occurrence of stroke and risk of stroke in their
children: the Framingham study. Circulation. 2010;121:1304–1312. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.854240. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
57. Schulz UG, Flossmann E, Rothwell PM. Heritability of ischemic stroke in relation to age, vascular risk
factors, and subtypes of incident stroke in population-based
studies. Stroke. 2004;35:819–824. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000121646.23955.0f. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
58. Touze E, Rothwell PM. Sex differences in heritability of ischemic stroke: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Stroke. 2008;39:16–23. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.484618. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
59. Bevan S, Traylor M, Adib-Samii P, Malik R, Paul NL, Jackson C, Farrall M, Rothwell PM, Sudlow C, Dichgans M, Markus HS. Genetic heritability of ischemic stroke and the contribution of
previously reported candidate gene and genomewide
associations. Stroke. 2012;43:3161–3167. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.665760. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
60. Rubattu S, Stanzione R, Gigante B, Bagalino A, Musumeci B, Volpe M. Genetic susceptibility to cerebrovascular
accidents. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2001;38(suppl 2):S71–S74. doi: 10.1097/00005344-200111002-00017. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
61. Nicolaou M, DeStefano AL, Gavras I, Cupples LA, Manolis AJ, Baldwin CT, Gavras H, Farrer LA. Genetic predisposition to stroke in relatives of
hypertensives. Stroke. 2000;31:487–492. doi: 10.1161/01.str.31.2.487. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
62. Turner ST, Boerwinkle E. Genetics of blood pressure, hypertensive complications, and
antihypertensive drug responses. Pharmacogenomics. 2003;4:53–65. doi: 10.1517/phgs.4.1.53.22587. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
63. Falcone GJ, Biffi A, Devan WJ, Jagiella JM, Schmidt H, Kissela B, Hansen BM, Jimenez-Conde J, Giralt-Steinhauer E, Elosua R, Cuadrado-Godia E, Soriano C, Ayres AM, Schwab K, Pera J, Urbanik A, Rost NS, Goldstein JN, Viswanathan A, Pichler A, Enzinger C, Norrving B, Tirschwell DL, Selim M, Brown DL, Silliman SL, Worrall BB, Meschia JF, Kidwell CS, Montaner J, Fernandez-Cadenas I, Delgado P, Broderick JP, Greenberg SM, Roquer J, Lindgren A, Slowik A, Schmidt R, Flaherty ML, Kleindorfer DO, Langefeld CD, Woo D, Rosand J, International Stroke Genetics Consortium Burden of risk alleles for hypertension increases risk of
intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2012;43:2877–2883. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.659755. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
64. Helgadottir A, Thorleifsson G, Manolescu A, Gretarsdottir S, Blondal T, Jonasdottir A, Sigurdsson A, Baker A, Palsson A, Masson G, Gudbjartsson DF, Magnusson KP, Andersen K, Levey AI, Backman VM, Matthiasdottir S, Jonsdottir T, Palsson S, Einarsdottir H, Gunnarsdottir S, Gylfason A, Vaccarino V, Hooper WC, Reilly MP, Granger CB, Austin H, Rader DJ, Shah SH, Quyyumi AA, Gulcher JR, Thorgeirsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U, Kong A, Stefansson K. A common variant on chromosome 9p21 affects the risk of
myocardial infarction. Science. 2007;316:1491–1493. doi: 10.1126/science.1142842. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
65. McPherson R, Pertsemlidis A, Kavaslar N, Stewart A, Roberts R, Cox DR, Hinds DA, Pennacchio LA, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Folsom AR, Boerwinkle E, Hobbs HH, Cohen JC. A common allele on chromosome 9 associated with coronary heart
disease. Science. 2007;316:1488–1491. doi: 10.1126/science.1142447. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
66. Samani NJ, Erdmann J, Hall AS, Hengstenberg C, Mangino M, Mayer B, Dixon RJ, Meitinger T, Braund P, Wichmann HE, Barrett JH, Konig IR, Stevens SE, Szymczak S, Tregouet DA, Iles MM, Pahlke F, Pollard H, Lieb W, Cambien F, Fischer M, Ouwehand W, Blankenberg S, Balmforth AJ, Baessler A, Ball SG, Strom TM, Braenne I, Gieger C, Deloukas P, Tobin MD, Ziegler A, Thompson JR, Schunkert H, WTCC and the Cardiogenics Consortium Genomewide association analysis of coronary artery
disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:443–453. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa072366. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
67. Gschwendtner A, Bevan S, Cole JW, Plourde A, Matarin M, Ross-Adams H, Meitinger T, Wichmann E, Mitchell BD, Furie K, Slowik A, Rich SS, Syme PD, MacLeod MJ, Meschia JF, Rosand J, Kittner SJ, Markus HS, Muller-Myhsok B, Dichgans M, International Stroke Genetics Consortium Sequence variants on chromosome 9p21.3 confer risk for
atherosclerotic stroke. Ann Neurol. 2009;65:531–539. doi: 10.1002/ana.21590. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
68. Gudbjartsson DF, Arnar DO, Helgadottir A, Gretarsdottir S, Holm H, Sigurdsson A, Jonasdottir A, Baker A, Thorleifsson G, Kristjansson K, Palsson A, Blondal T, Sulem P, Backman VM, Hardarson GA, Palsdottir E, Helgason A, Sigurjonsdottir R, Sverrisson JT, Kostulas K, Ng MC, Baum L, So WY, Wong KS, Chan JC, Furie KL, Greenberg SM, Sale M, Kelly P, MacRae CA, Smith EE, Rosand J, Hillert J, Ma RC, Ellinor PT, Thorgeirsson G, Gulcher JR, Kong A, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K. Variants conferring risk of atrial fibrillation on chromosome
4q25. Nature. 2007;448:353–357. doi: 10.1038/nature06007. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
69. Gudbjartsson DF, Holm H, Gretarsdottir S, Thorleifsson G, Walters GB, Thorgeirsson G, Gulcher J, Mathiesen EB, Njolstad I, Nyrnes A, Wilsgaard T, Hald EM, Hveem K, Stoltenberg C, Kucera G, Stubblefield T, Carter S, Roden D, Ng MC, Baum L, So WY, Wong KS, Chan JC, Gieger C, Wichmann HE, Gschwendtner A, Dichgans M, Kuhlenbaumer G, Berger K, Ringelstein EB, Bevan S, Markus HS, Kostulas K, Hillert J, Sveinbjornsdottir S, Valdimarsson EM, Lochen ML, Ma RC, Darbar D, Kong A, Arnar DO, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K. A sequence variant in ZFHX3 on 16q22 associates with atrial
fibrillation and ischemic stroke. Nat Genet. 2009;41:876–878. doi: 10.1038/ng.417. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
70. Gretarsdottir S, Thorleifsson G, Manolescu A, Styrkarsdottir U, Helgadottir A, Gschwendtner A, Kostulas K, Kuhlenbaumer G, Bevan S, Jonsdottir T, Bjarnason H, Saemundsdottir J, Palsson S, Arnar DO, Holm H, Thorgeirsson G, Valdimarsson EM, Sveinbjornsdottir S, Gieger C, Berger K, Wichmann HE, Hillert J, Markus H, Gulcher JR, Ringelstein EB, Kong A, Dichgans M, Gudbjartsson DF, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K. Risk variants for atrial fibrillation on chromosome 4q25
associate with ischemic stroke. Ann Neurol. 2008;64:402–409. doi: 10.1002/ana.21480. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
71. Ikram MA, Seshadri S, Bis JC, Fornage M, DeStefano AL, Aulchenko YS, Debette S, Lumley T, Folsom AR, van den Herik EG, Bos MJ, Beiser A, Cushman M, Launer LJ, Shahar E, Struchalin M, Du Y, Glazer NL, Rosamond WD, Rivadeneira F, Kelly-Hayes M, Lopez OL, Coresh J, Hofman A, DeCarli C, Heckbert SR, Koudstaal PJ, Yang Q, Smith NL, Kase CS, Rice K, Haritunians T, Roks G, de Kort PL, Taylor KD, de Lau LM, Oostra BA, Uitterlinden AG, Rotter JI, Boerwinkle E, Psaty BM, Mosley TH, van Duijn CM, Breteler MM, Longstreth WT, Jr, Wolf PA. Genomewide association studies of stroke. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:1718–1728. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0900094. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
72. International Stroke Genetics Consortium; Wellcome Trust Case-Control
Consortium 2. Failure to validate association between 12p13 variants and
ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1547–1550. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc0910050. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
73. Olsson S, Melander O, Jood K, Smith JG, Lovkvist H, Sjogren M, Engstrom G, Norrving B, Lindgren A, Jern C, International Stroke Genetics Consortium (ISGC) Genetic variant on chromosome 12p13 does not show association to
ischemic stroke in 3 Swedish case-control studies. Stroke. 2011;42:214–216. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.594010. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
74. Hsieh YC, Seshadri S, Chung WT, Hsieh FI, Hsu YH, Lin HJ, Tseng HP, Lien LM, Bai CH, Hu CJ, Jeng JS, Tang SC, Chen CI, Yu CC, Chiou HY, Formosa Stroke Genetic Consortium (FSGC) Association between genetic variant on chromosome 12p13 and
stroke survival and recurrence: a one year prospective study in
Taiwan. J Biomed Sci. 2012;19:1. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-19-1. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
75. Holliday EG, Maguire JM, Evans TJ, Koblar SA, Jannes J, Sturm JW, Hankey GJ, Baker R, Golledge J, Parsons MW, Malik R, McEvoy M, Biros E, Lewis MD, Lincz LF, Peel R, Oldmeadow C, Smith W, Moscato P, Barlera S, Bevan S, Bis JC, Boerwinkle E, Boncoraglio GB, Brott TG, Brown RD, Jr, Cheng YC, Cole JW, Cotlarciuc I, Devan WJ, Fornage M, Furie KL, Gretarsdottir S, Gschwendtner A, Ikram MA, Longstreth WT, Jr, Meschia JF, Mitchell BD, Mosley TH, Nalls MA, Parati EA, Psaty BM, Sharma P, Stefansson K, Thorleifsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U, Traylor M, Verhaaren BF, Wiggins KL, Worrall BB, Sudlow C, Rothwell PM, Farrall M, Dichgans M, Rosand J, Markus HS, Scott RJ, Levi C, Attia J, Australian Stroke Genetics Collaborative; International Stroke
Genetics Consortium; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2 Common variants at 6p21.1 are associated with large artery
atherosclerotic stroke. Nat Genet. 2012;44:1147–1151. doi: 10.1038/ng.2397. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
76. International Stroke Genetics Consortium (ISGC); Wellcome Trust Case
Control Consortium 2 (WTCCC2) Bellenguez C, Bevan S, Gschwendtner A, Spencer CC, Burgess AI, Pirinen M, Jackson CA, Traylor M, Strange A, Su Z, Band G, Syme PD, Malik R, Pera J, Norrving B, Lemmens R, Freeman C, Schanz R, James T, Poole D, Murphy L, Segal H, Cortellini L, Cheng YC, Woo D, Nalls MA, Muller-Myhsok B, Meisinger C, Seedorf U, Ross-Adams H, Boonen S, Wloch-Kopec D, Valant V, Slark J, Furie K, Delavaran H, Langford C, Deloukas P, Edkins S, Hunt S, Gray E, Dronov S, Peltonen L, Gretarsdottir S, Thorleifsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K, Boncoraglio GB, Parati EA, Attia J, Holliday E, Levi C, Franzosi MG, Goel A, Helgadottir A, Blackwell JM, Bramon E, Brown MA, Casas JP, Corvin A, Duncanson A, Jankowski J, Mathew CG, Palmer CN, Plomin R, Rautanen A, Sawcer SJ, Trembath RC, Viswanathan AC, Wood NW, Worrall BB, Kittner SJ, Mitchell BD, Kissela B, Meschia JF, Thijs V, Lindgren A, Macleod MJ, Slowik A, Walters M, Rosand J, Sharma P, Farrall M, Sudlow CL, Rothwell PM, Dichgans M, Donnelly P, Markus HS. Genome-wide association study identifies a variant in HDAC9
associated with large vessel ischemic stroke. Nat Genet. 2012;44:328–333. doi: 10.1038/ng.1081. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
77. Traylor M, Farrall M, Holliday EG, Sudlow C, Hopewell JC, Cheng YC, Fornage M, Ikram MA, Malik R, Bevan S, Thorsteinsdottir U, Nalls MA, Longstreth W, Wiggins KL, Yadav S, Parati EA, Destefano AL, Worrall BB, Kittner SJ, Khan MS, Reiner AP, Helgadottir A, Achterberg S, Fernandez-Cadenas I, Abboud S, Schmidt R, Walters M, Chen WM, Ringelstein EB, O’Donnell M, Ho WK, Pera J, Lemmens R, Norrving B, Higgins P, Benn M, Sale M, Kuhlenbaumer G, Doney AS, Vicente AM, Delavaran H, Algra A, Davies G, Oliveira SA, Palmer CN, Deary I, Schmidt H, Pandolfo M, Montaner J, Carty C, de Bakker PI, Kostulas K, Ferro JM, van Zuydam NR, Valdimarsson E, Nordestgaard BG, Lindgren A, Thijs V, Slowik A, Saleheen D, Pare G, Berger K, Thorleifsson G, Australian Stroke Genetics Collaborative, Wellcome Trust Case
Control Consortium 2 (WTCCC2) Hofman A, Mosley TH, Mitchell BD, Furie K, Clarke R, Levi C, Seshadri S, Gschwendtner A, Boncoraglio GB, Sharma P, Bis JC, Gretarsdottir S, Psaty BM, Rothwell PM, Rosand J, Meschia JF, Stefansson K, Dichgans M, Markus HS, International Stroke Genetics Consortium Genetic risk factors for ischaemic stroke and its subtypes (the
METASTROKE collaboration): a meta-analysis of genome-wide association
studies. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11:951–962. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70234-X. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
78. Li J, Luo M, Xu X, Sheng W. Association between 1425G/A SNP in PRKCH and ischemic stroke
among Chinese and Japanese populations: a meta-analysis including 3686 cases
and 4589 controls. Neurosci Lett. 2012;506:55–58. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.10.047. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
79. Pirmohamed M, Burnside G, Eriksson N, Jorgensen AL, Toh CH, Nicholson T, Kesteven P, Christersson C, Wahlstrom B, Stafberg C, Zhang JE, Leathart JB, Kohnke H, Maitland-van der Zee AH, Williamson PR, Daly AK, Avery P, Kamali F, Wadelius M, EU-PACT Group A randomized trial of genotype-guided dosing of
warfarin. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:2294–2303. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1311386. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
80. Kimmel SE, French B, Kasner SE, Johnson JA, Anderson JL, Gage BF, Rosenberg YD, Eby CS, Madigan RA, McBane RB, Abdel-Rahman SZ, Stevens SM, Yale S, Mohler ER, 3rd, Fang MC, Shah V, Horenstein RB, Limdi NA, Muldowney JA, 3rd, Gujral J, Delafontaine P, Desnick RJ, Ortel TL, Billett HH, Pendleton RC, Geller NL, Halperin JL, Goldhaber SZ, Caldwell MD, Califf RM, Ellenberg JH, COAG Investigators A pharmacogenetic versus a clinical algorithm for warfarin
dosing. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:2283–2293. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1310669. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
81. Verhoef TI, Ragia G, de Boer A, Barallon R, Kolovou G, Kolovou V, Konstantinides S, Le Cessie S, Maltezos E, van der Meer FJ, Redekop WK, Remkes M, Rosendaal FR, van Schie RM, Tavridou A, Tziakas D, Wadelius M, Manolopoulos VG, Maitland-van der Zee AH, EU-PACT Group A randomized trial of genotype-guided dosing of acenocoumarol and
phenprocoumon. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:2304–2312. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1311388. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
82. SEARCH Collaborative Group. Link E, Parish S, Armitage J, Bowman L, Heath S, Matsuda F, Gut I, Lathrop M, Collins R. SLCO1B1 variants and statin-induced myopathy: a genomewide
study. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:789–799. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0801936. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
83. Tournier-Lasserve E, Joutel A, Chabriat H, Vahedi K, Nagy T, Ducros A, Nibbio A, Verin M, Mas JL, Davous P, Ducrocq X, Levasseur M, Dubois B, Lyoncaen O, Ragno M, Hutchinson M, Burkhard P, Julien J, Viader F, Burgunder JM, Iba-Zizen MT, Bousser MG. CADASIL Clinical phenotypes and genetic data in 15 unrelated
families. Neurology. 1995;45(4 Suppl 4):A273. [ Google Scholar ] 
84. Kalimo H, Viitanen M, Amberla K, Juvonen V, Marttila R, Poyhonen M, Rinne JO, Savontaus M, Tuisku S, Winblad B. CADASIL: hereditary disease of arteries causing brain infarcts
and dementia. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 1999;25:257–265. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2990.1999.00198.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
85. Richards A, van den Maagdenberg AM, Jen JC, Kavanagh D, Bertram P, Spitzer D, Liszewski MK, Barilla-Labarca ML, Terwindt GM, Kasai Y, McLellan M, Grand MG, Vanmolkot KR, de Vries B, Wan J, Kane MJ, Mamsa H, Schafer R, Stam AH, Haan J, de Jong PT, Storimans CW, van Schooneveld MJ, Oosterhuis JA, Gschwendter A, Dichgans M, Kotschet KE, Hodgkinson S, Hardy TA, Delatycki MB, Hajj-Ali RA, Kothari PH, Nelson SF, Frants RR, Baloh RW, Ferrari MD, Atkinson JP. C-terminal truncations in human 3′–5′ DNA
exonuclease TREX1 cause autosomal dominant retinal vasculopathy with
cerebral leukodystrophy. Nat Genet. 2007;39:1068–1070. doi: 10.1038/ng2082. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
86. Lanfranconi S, Markus HS. COL4A1 mutations as a monogenic cause of cerebral small vessel
disease: a systematic review. Stroke. 2010;41:e513–e518. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.581918. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
87. Alamowitch S, Plaisier E, Favrole P, Prost C, Chen Z, Van Agtmael T, Marro B, Ronco P. Cerebrovascular disease related to COL4A1 mutations in HANAC
syndrome. Neurology. 2009;73:1873–1882. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c3fd12. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
88. Desnick R, Ioannou Y, Eng C. Alpha-galactosidase A deficiency: Fabry disease. In: Scriver CR, Beauder AL, Sly WS, Childs B, Valle D, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, editors. The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2001. pp. 3733–3774. [ Google Scholar ] 
89. De Schoenmakere G, Chauveau D, Grunfeld JP. Enzyme replacement therapy in Anderson-Fabry’s disease:
beneficial clinical effect on vital organ function. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2003;18:33–35. doi: 10.1093/ndt/18.1.33. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
90. Eng CM, Guffon N, Wilcox WR, Germain DP, Lee P, Waldek S, Caplan L, Linthorst GE, Desnick RJ, International Collaborative Fabry Disease Study Group Safety and efficacy of recombinant human alpha-galactosidase
A–replacement therapy in Fabry’s disease. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:9–16. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200107053450102. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
91. Schiffmann R, Kopp JB, Austin HA, 3rd, Sabnis S, Moore DF, Weibel T, Balow JE, Brady RO. Enzyme replacement therapy in Fabry disease: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2001;285:2743–2749. doi: 10.1001/jama.285.21.2743. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
92. Vedder AC, Linthorst GE, Houge G, Groener JE, Ormel EE, Bouma BJ, Aerts JM, Hirth A, Hollak CE. Treatment of Fabry disease: outcome of a comparative trial with
agalsidase alfa or beta at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg. PLoS ONE. 2007;2:e598. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000598. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
93. Ortel T. Genetics of coagulation disorders. In: Alberts M, editor. Genetics of Cerebrovascular Disease. Armonk, NY: Futura Publishing; 1999. pp. 129–156. [ Google Scholar ] 
94. Bertina RM, Koeleman BP, Koster T, Rosendaal FR, Dirven RJ, de Ronde H, van der Velden PA, Reitsma PH. Mutation in blood coagulation factor V associated with resistance
to activated protein C. Nature. 1994;369:64–67. doi: 10.1038/369064a0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
95. Deschiens MA, Conard J, Horellou MH, Ameri A, Preter M, Chedru F, Samama MM, Bousser MG. Coagulation studies, factor V Leiden, and anticardiolipin
antibodies in 40 cases of cerebral venous thrombosis. Stroke. 1996;27:1724–1730. doi: 10.1161/01.str.27.10.1724. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
96. Hillier CE, Collins PW, Bowen DJ, Bowley S, Wiles CM. Inherited prothrombotic risk factors and cerebral venous
thrombosis. QJM. 1998;91:677–680. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/91.10.677. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
97. Kuwahara S, Abe T, Uga S, Mori K. Superior sagittal sinus and cerebral cortical venous thrombosis
caused by congenital protein C deficiency: case report. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo) 2000;40:645–649. doi: 10.2176/nmc.40.645. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
98. Hankey GJ, Eikelboom JW, van Bockxmeer FM, Lofthouse E, Staples N, Baker RI. Inherited thrombophilia in ischemic stroke and its pathogenic
subtypes. Stroke. 2001;32:1793–1799. doi: 10.1161/01.str.32.8.1793. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
99. Juul K, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Steffensen R, Kofoed S, Jensen G, Nordestgaard BG. Factor V Leiden: the Copenhagen City Heart Study and 2
meta-analyses. Blood. 2002;100:3–10. doi: 10.1182/blood-2002-01-0111. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
100. Weber M, Hayem G, DeBandt M, Palazzo E, Roux S, Kahn MF, Meyer O. The family history of patients with primary or secondary
antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) Lupus. 2000;9:258–263. doi: 10.1191/096120300680198971. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
101. Goldberg SN, Conti-Kelly AM, Greco TP. A family study of anticardiolipin antibodies and associated
clinical conditions. Am J Med. 1995;99:473–479. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9343(99)80222-8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
102. Acharya SS. Rare bleeding disorders in children: identification and primary
care management. Pediatrics. 2013;132:882–892. doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-3662. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
103. Begelman SM, Olin JW. Fibromuscular dysplasia. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2000;12:41–47. doi: 10.1097/00002281-200001000-00007. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
104. Shetty-Alva N, Alva S. Familial moyamoya disease in Caucasians. Pediatr Neurol. 2000;23:445–447. doi: 10.1016/s0887-8994(00)00215-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
105. Grantham JJ. Clinical practice: autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1477–1485. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcp0804458. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
106. Cloft HJ, Kallmes DF, Kallmes MH, Goldstein JH, Jensen ME, Dion JE. Prevalence of cerebral aneurysms in patients with fibromuscular
dysplasia: a reassessment. J Neurosurg. 1998;88:436–440. doi: 10.3171/jns.1998.88.3.0436. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
107. Germain DP. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007;2:32. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-2-32. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
108. Fischer A, Zalvide J, Faurobert E, Albiges-Rizo C, Tournier-Lasserve E. Cerebral cavernous malformations: from CCM genes to endothelial
cell homeostasis. Trends Mol Med. 2013;19:302–308. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2013.02.004. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
109. Revesz T, Holton JL, Lashley T, Plant G, Rostagno A, Ghiso J, Frangione B. Sporadic and familial cerebral amyloid
angiopathies. Brain Pathol. 2002;12:343–357. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2002.tb00449.x. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
110. Bederson JB, Awad IA, Wiebers DO, Piepgras D, Haley EC, Jr, Brott T, Hademenos G, Chyatte D, Rosenwasser R, Caroselli C. Recommendations for the management of patients with unruptured
intracranial aneurysms: a statement for healthcare professionals from the
Stroke Council of the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2000;102:2300–2308. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.102.18.2300. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
111. US Department of Health and Human Services. Physical activity guidelines for Americans. 2008 http://www.health.gov/paguidelines/ . Accessed February 27,
2013. 
112. Lee CD, Folsom AR, Blair SN. Physical activity and stroke risk: a
meta-analysis. Stroke. 2003;34:2475–2481. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000091843.02517.9D. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
113. Wendel-Vos GC, Schuit AJ, Feskens EJ, Boshuizen HC, Verschuren WM, Saris WH, Kromhout D. Physical activity and stroke: a meta-analysis of observational
data. Int J Epidemiol. 2004;33:787–798. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyh168. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
114. Gillum RF, Mussolino ME, Ingram DD. Physical activity and stroke incidence in women and men: the
NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow-up Study. Am J Epidemiol. 1996;143:860–869. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a008829. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
115. Sacco RL, Gan R, Boden-Albala B, Lin IF, Kargman DE, Hauser WA, Shea S, Paik MC. Leisure-time physical activity and ischemic stroke risk: the
Northern Manhattan Stroke Study. Stroke. 1998;29:380–387. doi: 10.1161/01.str.29.2.380. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
116. Grau AJ, Ling P, Palm F, Urbanek C, Becher H, Buggle F. Childhood and adult social conditions and risk of
stroke. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2012;33:385–391. doi: 10.1159/000336331. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
117. Willey JZ, Moon YP, Paik MC, Boden-Albala B, Sacco RL, Elkind MS. Physical activity and risk of ischemic stroke in the Northern
Manhattan Study. Neurology. 2009;73:1774–1779. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c34b58. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
118. Willey JZ, Moon YP, Paik MC, Yoshita M, Decarli C, Sacco RL, Elkind MS, Wright CB. Lower prevalence of silent brain infarcts in the physically
active: the Northern Manhattan Study. Neurology. 2011;76:2112–2118. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31821f4472. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
119. Williams PT. Reduction in incident stroke risk with vigorous physical
activity: evidence from 7.7-year follow-up of the National Runners’
Health Study. Stroke. 2009;40:1921–1923. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.535427. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
120. Manson JE, Colditz GA, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC, Krolewski AS, Rosner B, Arky RA, Speizer FE, Hennekens CH. A prospective study of maturity-onset diabetes mellitus and risk
of coronary heart disease and stroke in women. Arch Intern Med. 1991;151:1141–1147. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
121. Blair SN, Kampert JB, Kohl HW, 3rd, Barlow CE, Macera CA, Paffenbarger RS, Jr, Gibbons LW. Influences of cardiorespiratory fitness and other precursors on
cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality in men and
women. JAMA. 1996;276:205–210. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
122. Kokkinos PF, Holland JC, Pittaras AE, Narayan P, Dotson CO, Papademetriou V. Cardiorespiratory fitness and coronary heart disease risk factor
association in women. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995;26:358–364. doi: 10.1016/0735-1097(95)80007-4. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
123. Lakka TA, Salonen JT. Moderate to high intensity conditioning leisure time physical
activity and high cardiorespiratory fitness are associated with reduced
plasma fibrinogen in eastern Finnish men. J Clin Epidemiol. 1993;46:1119–1127. doi: 10.1016/0895-4356(93)90111-d. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
124. Wang HY, Bashore TR, Friedman E. Exercise reduces age-dependent decrease in platelet protein
kinase C activity and translocation. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 1995;50A:M12–M16. doi: 10.1093/gerona/50a.1.m12. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
125. Williams PT. High-density lipoprotein cholesterol and other risk factors for
coronary heart disease in female runners. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:1298–1303. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199605163342004. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
126. Walsh NP, Gleeson M, Shephard RJ, Gleeson M, Woods JA, Bishop NC, Fleshner M, Green C, Pedersen BK, Hoffman-Goetz L, Rogers CJ, Northoff H, Abbasi A, Simon P. Position statement, part one: immune function and
exercise. Exerc Immunol Rev. 2011;17:6–63. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
127. Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, de Jesus JM, Houston Miller N, Hubbard VS, Lee IM, Lichtenstein AH, Loria CM, Millen BE, Nonas CA, Sacks FM, Smith SC, Jr, Svetkey LP, Wadden TW, Yanovski SZ. 2013 AHA/ACC guideline on lifestyle management to reduce
cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129(suppl 2):S76–S99. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000437740.48606.d1. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
128. Sacco RL, Khatri M, Rundek T, Xu Q, Gardener H, Boden-Albala B, Di Tullio MR, Homma S, Elkind MS, Paik MC. Improving global vascular risk prediction with behavioral and
anthropometric factors: the multiethnic NOMAS (Northern Manhattan Cohort
Study) J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:2303–2311. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.07.047. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
129. Iso H, Jacobs DR, Jr, Wentworth D, Neaton JD, Cohen JD. Serum cholesterol levels and six-year mortality from stroke in
350,977 men screened for the multiple risk factor intervention
trial. N Engl J Med. 1989;320:904–910. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198904063201405. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
130. Leppala JM, Virtamo J, Fogelholm R, Albanes D, Heinonen OP. Different risk factors for different stroke subtypes: association
of blood pressure, cholesterol, and antioxidants. Stroke. 1999;30:2535–2540. doi: 10.1161/01.str.30.12.2535. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
131. Zhang X, Patel A, Horibe H, Wu Z, Barzi F, Rodgers A, MacMahon S, Woodward M, Asia Pacific Cohort Studies Collaboration Cholesterol, coronary heart disease, and stroke in the Asia
Pacific region. Int J Epidemiol. 2003;32:563–572. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyg106. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
132. Horenstein RB, Smith DE, Mosca L. Cholesterol predicts stroke mortality in the Women’s
Pooling Project. Stroke. 2002;33:1863–1868. doi: 10.1161/01.str.0000020093.67593.0b. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
133. Kurth T, Everett BM, Buring JE, Kase CS, Ridker PM, Gaziano JM. Lipid levels and the risk of ischemic stroke in
women. Neurology. 2007;68:556–562. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000254472.41810.0d. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
134. Shahar E, Chambless LE, Rosamond WD, Boland LL, Ballantyne CM, McGovern PG, Sharrett AR, Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study Plasma lipid profile and incident ischemic stroke: the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Stroke. 2003;34:623–631. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000057812.51734.FF. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
135. Sturgeon JD, Folsom AR, Longstreth WT, Jr, Shahar E, Rosamond WD, Cushman M. Risk factors for intracerebral hemorrhage in a pooled prospective
study. Stroke. 2007;38:2718–2725. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.487090. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
136. Noda H, Iso H, Irie F, Sairenchi T, Ohtaka E, Doi M, Izumi Y, Ohta H. Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations and death due
to intraparenchymal hemorrhage: the Ibaraki Prefectural Health
Study. Circulation. 2009;119:2136–2145. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.795666. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
137. Iribarren C, Jacobs DR, Sadler M, Claxton AJ, Sidney S. Low total serum cholesterol and intracerebral hemorrhagic stroke:
is the association confined to elderly men? The Kaiser Permanente Medical
Care Program. Stroke. 1996;27:1993–1998. doi: 10.1161/01.str.27.11.1993. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
138. Cui R, Iso H, Toyoshima H, Date C, Yamamoto A, Kikuchi S, Kondo T, Watanabe Y, Koizumi A, Inaba Y, Tamakoshi A, JACC Study Group Serum total cholesterol levels and risk of mortality from stroke
and coronary heart disease in Japanese: the JACC study. Atherosclerosis. 2007;194:415–420. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2006.08.022. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
139. Suh I, Jee SH, Kim HC, Nam CM, Kim IS, Appel LJ. Low serum cholesterol and haemorrhagic stroke in men: Korea
Medical Insurance Corporation Study. Lancet. 2001;357:922–925. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(00)04213-6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
140. Prospective Studies Collaboration. Lewington S, Whitlock G, Clarke R, Sherliker P, Emberson J, Halsey J, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R. Blood cholesterol and vascular mortality by age, sex, and blood
pressure: a meta-analysis of individual data from 61 prospective studies
with 55,000 vascular deaths. Lancet. 2007;370:1829–1839. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61778-4. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
141. Lindenstrom E, Boysen G, Nyboe J. Influence of total cholesterol, high density lipoprotein
cholesterol, and triglycerides on risk of cerebrovascular disease: the
Copenhagen City Heart Study. BMJ. 1994;309:11–15. doi: 10.1136/bmj.309.6946.11. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
142. Soyama Y, Miura K, Morikawa Y, Nishijo M, Nakanishi Y, Naruse Y, Kagamimori S, Nakagawa H, Oyabe Study High-density lipoprotein cholesterol and risk of stroke in
Japanese men and women: the Oyabe Study. Stroke. 2003;34:863–868. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000060869.34009.38. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
143. Tanne D, Yaari S, Goldbourt U. High-density lipoprotein cholesterol and risk of ischemic stroke
mortality: a 21-year follow-up of 8586 men from the Israeli Ischemic Heart
Disease Study. Stroke. 1997;28:83–87. doi: 10.1161/01.str.28.1.83. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
144. Wannamethee SG, Shaper AG, Ebrahim S. HDL-cholesterol, total cholesterol, and the risk of stroke in
middle-aged British men. Stroke. 2000;31:1882–1888. doi: 10.1161/01.str.31.8.1882. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
145. Sacco RL, Benson RT, Kargman DE, Boden-Albala B, Tuck C, Lin IF, Cheng JF, Paik MC, Shea S, Berglund L. High-density lipoprotein cholesterol and ischemic stroke in the
elderly: the Northern Manhattan Stroke Study. JAMA. 2001;285:2729–2735. doi: 10.1001/jama.285.21.2729. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
146. Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration. Di Angelantonio E, Sarwar N, Perry P, Kaptoge S, Ray KK, Thompson A, Wood AM, Lewington S, Sattar N, Packard CJ, Collins R, Thompson SG, Danesh J. Major lipids, apolipoproteins, and risk of vascular
disease. JAMA. 2009;302:1993–2000. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.1619. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
147. Bowman TS, Sesso HD, Ma J, Kurth T, Kase CS, Stampfer MJ, Gaziano JM. Cholesterol and the risk of ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2003;34:2930–2934. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000102171.91292.DC. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
148. Haheim LL, Holme I, Hjermann I, Leren P. Risk factors of stroke incidence and mortality: a 12-year
follow-up of the Oslo Study. Stroke. 1993;24:1484–1489. doi: 10.1161/01.str.24.10.1484. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
149. Patel A, Barzi F, Jamrozik K, Lam TH, Ueshima H, Whitlock G, Woodward M, Asia Pacific Cohort Studies Collaboration Serum triglycerides as a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases
in the Asia-Pacific region. Circulation. 2004;110:2678–2686. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000145615.33955.83. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
150. Freiberg JJ, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Jensen JS, Nordestgaard BG. Nonfasting triglycerides and risk of ischemic stroke in the
general population. JAMA. 2008;300:2142–2152. doi: 10.1001/jama.2008.621. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
151. Bansal S, Buring JE, Rifai N, Mora S, Sacks FM, Ridker PM. Fasting compared with nonfasting triglycerides and risk of
cardiovascular events in women. JAMA. 2007;298:309–316. doi: 10.1001/jama.298.3.309. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
152. Labreuche J, Deplanque D, Touboul PJ, Bruckert E, Amarenco P. Association between change in plasma triglyceride levels and risk
of stroke and carotid atherosclerosis: systematic review and meta-regression
analysis. Atherosclerosis. 2010;212:9–15. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.02.011. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
153. Amarenco P, Labreuche J, Lavallee P, Touboul PJ. Statins in stroke prevention and carotid atherosclerosis:
systematic review and up-to-date meta-analysis. Stroke. 2004;35:2902–2909. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000147965.52712.fa. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
154. Baigent C, Keech A, Kearney PM, Blackwell L, Buck G, Pollicino C, Kirby A, Sourjina T, Peto R, Collins R, Simes R, Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT)
Collaborators Efficacy and safety of cholesterol-lowering treatment:
prospective meta-analysis of data from 90,056 participants in 14 randomised
trials of statins. Lancet. 2005;366:1267–1278. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67394-1. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
155. Amarenco P, Labreuche J. Lipid management in the prevention of stroke: review and updated
meta-analysis of statins for stroke prevention. Lancet Neurol. 2009;8:453–463. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(09)70058-4. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
156. Chan DK, O’Rourke F, Shen Q, Mak JC, Hung WT. Meta-analysis of the cardiovascular benefits of intensive lipid
lowering with statins. Acta Neurol Scand. 2011;124:188–195. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2010.01450.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
157. Mills EJ, O’Regan C, Eyawo O, Wu P, Mills F, Berwanger O, Briel M. Intensive statin therapy compared with moderate dosing for
prevention of cardiovascular events: a meta-analysis of >40 000
patients. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:1409–1415. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr035. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
158. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT)
Collaborators. Mihaylova B, Emberson J, Blackwell L, Keech A, Simes J, Barnes EH, Voysey M, Gray A, Collins R, Baigent C. The effects of lowering LDL cholesterol with statin therapy in
people at low risk of vascular disease: meta-analysis of individual data
from 27 randomised trials. Lancet. 2012;380:581–590. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60367-5. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
159. Tonelli M, Lloyd A, Clement F, Conly J, Husereau D, Hemmelgarn B, Klarenbach S, McAlister FA, Wiebe N, Manns B, Alberta Kidney Disease Network Efficacy of statins for primary prevention in people at low
cardiovascular risk: a meta-analysis. CMAJ. 2011;183:E1189–1202. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.101280. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
160. Everett BM, Glynn RJ, MacFadyen JG, Ridker PM. Rosuvastatin in the prevention of stroke among men and women with
elevated levels of C-reactive protein: Justification for the Use of Statins
in Prevention: an Intervention Trial Evaluating Rosuvastatin
(JUPITER) Circulation. 2010;121:143–150. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.874834. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
161. McKinney JS, Kostis WJ. Statin therapy and the risk of intracerebral hemorrhage: a
meta-analysis of 31 randomized controlled trials. Stroke. 2012;43:2149–2156. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.655894. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
162. Hackam DG, Woodward M, Newby LK, Bhatt DL, Shao M, Smith EE, Donner A, Mamdani M, Douketis JD, Arima H, Chalmers J, MacMahon S, Tirschwell DL, Psaty BM, Bushnell CD, Aguilar MI, Capampangan DJ, Werring DJ, De Rango P, Viswanathan A, Danchin N, Cheng CL, Yang YH, Verdel BM, Lai MS, Kennedy J, Uchiyama S, Yamaguchi T, Ikeda Y, Mrkobrada M. Statins and intracerebral hemorrhage: collaborative systematic
review and meta-analysis. Circulation. 2011;124:2233–2242. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.055269. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
163. Bedi US, Singh M, Singh PP, Bhuriya R, Bahekar A, Molnar J, Khosla S, Arora R. Effects of statins on progression of carotid atherosclerosis as
measured by carotid intimal-medial thickness: a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2010;15:268–273. doi: 10.1177/1074248410369110. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
164. Crouse JR, 3rd, Raichlen JS, Riley WA, Evans GW, Palmer MK, O’Leary DH, Grobbee DE, Bots ML, METEOR Study Group Effect of rosuvastatin on progression of carotid intima-media
thickness in low-risk individuals with subclinical atherosclerosis: the
METEOR Trial. JAMA. 2007;297:1344–1353. doi: 10.1001/jama.297.12.1344. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
165. Smilde TJ, van Wissen S, Wollersheim H, Trip MD, Kastelein JJ, Stalenhoef AF. Effect of aggressive versus conventional lipid lowering on
atherosclerosis progression in familial hypercholesterolaemia (ASAP): a
prospective, randomised, double-blind trial. Lancet. 2001;357:577–581. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)04053-8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
166. Taylor AJ, Kent SM, Flaherty PJ, Coyle LC, Markwood TT, Vernalis MN. ARBITER: Arterial Biology for the Investigation of the Treatment
Effects of Reducing Cholesterol: a randomized trial comparing the effects of
atorvastatin and pravastatin on carotid intima medial
thickness. Circulation. 2002;106:2055–2060. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000034508.55617.65. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
167. Zhao XQ, Dong L, Hatsukami T, Phan BA, Chu B, Moore A, Lane T, Neradilek MB, Polissar N, Monick D, Lee C, Underhill H, Yuan C. MR imaging of carotid plaque composition during lipid-lowering
therapy a prospective assessment of effect and time course. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2011;4:977–986. doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2011.06.013. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
168. Tang TY, Howarth SP, Miller SR, Graves MJ, Patterson AJ, U-King-Im JM, Li ZY, Walsh SR, Brown AP, Kirkpatrick PJ, Warburton EA, Hayes PD, Varty K, Boyle JR, Gaunt ME, Zalewski A, Gillard JH. The ATHEROMA (Atorvastatin Therapy: Effects on Reduction of
Macrophage Activity) Study: evaluation using ultrasmall superparamagnetic
iron oxide-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging in carotid
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53:2039–2050. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.03.018. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
169. Stone NJ, Robinson J, Lichtenstein AH, Bairey Merz CN, Blum CB, Eckel RH, Goldberg AC, Gordon D, Levy D, Lloyd-Jones DM, McBride P, Schwartz JS, Shero ST, Smith SC, Jr, Watson K, Wilson PW. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood cholesterol to
reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129(suppl 2):S1–S45. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000437738.63853.7a. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
170. De Caterina R, Scarano M, Marfisi R, Lucisano G, Palma F, Tatasciore A, Marchioli R. Cholesterol-lowering interventions and stroke: insights from a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:198–211. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.07.062. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
171. Canner PL, Berge KG, Wenger NK, Stamler J, Friedman L, Prineas RJ, Friedewald W. Fifteen year mortality in Coronary Drug Project patients:
long-term benefit with niacin. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1986;8:1245–1255. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(86)80293-5. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
172. AIM-HIGH Investigators. Boden WE, Probstfield JL, Anderson T, Chaitman BR, Desvignes-Nickens P, Koprowicz K, McBride R, Teo K, Weintraub W. Niacin in patients with low HDL cholesterol levels receiving
intensive statin therapy. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2255–2267. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1107579. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
173. Lavigne PM, Karas RH. The current state of niacin in cardiovascular disease prevention:
a systematic review and meta-regression. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:440–446. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.10.030. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
174. HPS2-THRIVE Collaborative Group. HPS2-THRIVE randomized placebo-controlled trial in 25 673
high-risk patients of ER niacin/laropiprant: trial design, pre-specified
muscle, and liver outcomes, and reasons for stopping study
treatment. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:1279–1291. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht055. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
175. Bezafibrate Infarction Prevention (BIP) Study. Secondary prevention by raising HDL cholesterol and reducing
triglycerides in patients with coronary artery disease. Circulation. 2000;102:21–27. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.102.1.21. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
176. Bloomfield Rubins H, Davenport J, Babikian V, Brass LM, Collins D, Wexler L, Wagner S, Papademetriou V, Rutan G, Robins SJ, VA-HIT Study Group Reduction in stroke with gemfibrozil in men with coronary heart
disease and low HDL cholesterol: the Veterans Affairs HDL Intervention Trial
(VA-HIT) Circulation. 2001;103:2828–2833. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.103.23.2828. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
177. ACCORD Study Group. Ginsberg HN, Elam MB, Lovato LC, Crouse JR, 3rd, Leiter LA, Linz P, Friedewald WT, Buse JB, Gerstein HC, Probstfield J, Grimm RH, Ismail-Beigi F, Bigger JT, Goff DC, Jr, Cushman WC, Simons-Morton DG, Byington RP. Effects of combination lipid therapy in type 2 diabetes
mellitus. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1563–1574. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1001282. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
178. Jun M, Foote C, Lv J, Neal B, Patel A, Nicholls SJ, Grobbee DE, Cass A, Chalmers J, Perkovic V. Effects of fibrates on cardiovascular outcomes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2010;375:1875–1884. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60656-3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
179. Kastelein JJ, Akdim F, Stroes ES, Zwinderman AH, Bots ML, Stalenhoef AF, Visseren FL, Sijbrands EJ, Trip MD, Stein EA, Gaudet D, Duivenvoorden R, Veltri EP, Marais AD, de Groot E, ENHANCE Investigators Simvastatin with or without ezetimibe in familial
hypercholesterolemia. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:1431–1443. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0800742. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
180. Taylor AJ, Villines TC, Stanek EJ, Devine PJ, Griffen L, Miller M, Weissman NJ, Turco M. Extended-release niacin or ezetimibe and carotid intima-media
thickness. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:2113–2122. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0907569. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
181. Cannon CP, Giugliano RP, Blazing MA, Harrington RA, Peterson JL, Sisk CM, Strony J, Musliner TA, McCabe CH, Veltri E, Braunwald E, Califf RM, IMPROVE-IT Investigators Rationale and design of IMPROVE-IT (IMProved Reduction of
Outcomes: Vytorin Efficacy International Trial): comparison of
ezetimbe/simvastatin versus simvastatin monotherapy on cardiovascular
outcomes in patients with acute coronary syndromes. Am Heart J. 2008;156:826–832. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2008.07.023. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
182. Appel LJ, Brands MW, Daniels SR, Karanja N, Elmer PJ, Sacks FM, American Heart Association Dietary approaches to prevent and treat hypertension: a
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2006;47:296–308. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000202568.01167.B6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
183. Appel LJ, Angell SY, Cobb LK, Limper HM, Nelson DE, Samet JM, Brownson RC. Population-wide sodium reduction: the bumpy road from evidence to
policy. Ann Epidemiol. 2012;22:417–425. doi: 10.1016/j.annepidem.2012.04.003. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
184. Kamangar F, Karimi P. The state of nutritional epidemiology: why we are still unsure of
what we should eat? Arch Iran Med. 2013;16:483–486. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
185. He FJ, Nowson CA, MacGregor GA. Fruit and vegetable consumption and stroke: meta-analysis of
cohort studies. Lancet. 2006;367:320–326. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68069-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
186. Joshipura KJ, Ascherio A, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ, Rimm EB, Speizer FE, Hennekens CH, Spiegelman D, Willett WC. Fruit and vegetable intake in relation to risk of ischemic
stroke. JAMA. 1999;282:1233–1239. doi: 10.1001/jama.282.13.1233. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
187. Cassidy A, Rimm EB, O’Reilly EJ, Logroscino G, Kay C, Chiuve SE, Rexrode KM. Dietary flavonoids and risk of stroke in women. Stroke. 2012;43:946–951. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.637835. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
188. US Department of Agriculture and US Department of Health and Human
Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2010. 7th. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office; Dec, 2010. [ Google Scholar ] 
189. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvado J, Covas MI, Corella D, Aros F, Gomez-Gracia E, Ruiz-Gutierrez V, Fiol M, Lapetra J, Lamuela-Raventos RM, Serra-Majem L, Pinto X, Basora J, Munoz MA, Sorli JV, Martinez JA, Martinez-Gonzalez MA, PREDIMED Study Investigators Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease with a Mediterranean
diet. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1279–1290. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1806491. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
190. Perry IJ, Beevers DG. Salt intake and stroke: a possible direct effect. J Hum Hypertens. 1992;6:23–25. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
191. He J, Ogden LG, Vupputuri S, Bazzano LA, Loria C, Whelton PK. Dietary sodium intake and subsequent risk of cardiovascular
disease in overweight adults. JAMA. 1999;282:2027–2034. doi: 10.1001/jama.282.21.2027. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
192. Nagata C, Takatsuka N, Shimizu N, Shimizu H. Sodium intake and risk of death from stroke in Japanese men and
women. Stroke. 2004;35:1543–1547. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000130425.50441.b0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
193. Li XY, Cai XL, Bian PD, Hu LR. High salt intake and stroke: meta-analysis of the epidemiologic
evidence. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2012;18:691–701. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-5949.2012.00355.x. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
194. Strazzullo P, D’Elia L, Kandala NB, Cappuccio FP. Salt intake, stroke, and cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of
prospective studies. BMJ. 2009;339:b4567. doi: 10.1136/bmj.b4567. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
195. Ascherio A, Rimm EB, Hernan MA, Giovannucci EL, Kawachi I, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC. Intake of potassium, magnesium, calcium, and fiber and risk of
stroke among US men. Circulation. 1998;98:1198–1204. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.98.12.1198. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
196. Khaw KT, Barrett-Connor E. Dietary potassium and stroke-associated mortality: a 12-year
prospective population study. N Engl J Med. 1987;316:235–240. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198701293160502. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
197. D’Elia L, Barba G, Cappuccio FP, Strazzullo P. Potassium intake, stroke, and cardiovascular disease a
meta-analysis of prospective studies. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:1210–1219. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.09.070. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
198. Larsson SC, Orsini N, Wolk A. Dietary potassium intake and risk of stroke: a dose-response
meta-analysis of prospective studies. Stroke. 2011;42:2746–2750. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.622142. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
199. Chang HY, Hu YW, Yue CS, Wen YW, Yeh WT, Hsu LS, Tsai SY, Pan WH. Effect of potassium-enriched salt on cardiovascular mortality and
medical expenses of elderly men. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;83:1289–1296. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/83.6.1289. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
200. Howard BV, Van Horn L, Hsia J, Manson JE, Stefanick ML, Wassertheil-Smoller S, Kuller LH, LaCroix AZ, Langer RD, Lasser NL, Lewis CE, Limacher MC, Margolis KL, Mysiw WJ, Ockene JK, Parker LM, Perri MG, Phillips L, Prentice RL, Robbins J, Rossouw JE, Sarto GE, Schatz IJ, Snetselaar LG, Stevens VJ, Tinker LF, Trevisan M, Vitolins MZ, Anderson GL, Assaf AR, Bassford T, Beresford SA, Black HR, Brunner RL, Brzyski RG, Caan B, Chlebowski RT, Gass M, Granek I, Greenland P, Hays J, Heber D, Heiss G, Hendrix SL, Hubbell FA, Johnson KC, Kotchen JM. Low-fat dietary pattern and risk of cardiovascular disease: the
Women’s Health Initiative Randomized Controlled Dietary Modification
Trial. JAMA. 2006;295:655–666. doi: 10.1001/jama.295.6.655. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
201. Tobian L, Lange JM, Ulm KM, Wold LJ, Iwai J. Potassium prevents death from strokes in hypertensive rats
without lowering blood pressure. J Hypertens Suppl. 1984;2:S363–S366. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
202. Johnson AG, Nguyen TV, Davis D. Blood pressure is linked to salt intake and modulated by the
angiotensinogen gene in normotensive and hypertensive elderly
subjects. J Hypertens. 2001;19:1053–1060. doi: 10.1097/00004872-200106000-00009. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
203. MacGregor GA, Markandu ND, Sagnella GA, Singer DR, Cappuccio FP. Double-blind study of three sodium intakes and long-term effects
of sodium restriction in essential hypertension. Lancet. 1989;2:1244–1247. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(89)91852-7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
204. Sacks FM, Svetkey LP, Vollmer WM, Appel LJ, Bray GA, Harsha D, Obarzanek E, Conlin PR, Miller ER, 3rd, Simons-Morton DG, Karanja N, Lin PH, DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group Effects on blood pressure of reduced dietary sodium and the
Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet: DASH-Sodium
Collaborative Research Group. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:3–10. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200101043440101. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
205. Vollmer WM, Sacks FM, Ard J, Appel LJ, Bray GA, Simons-Morton DG, Conlin PR, Svetkey LP, Erlinger TP, Moore TJ, Karanja N, DASH-Sodium Trial Collaborative Research Group Effects of diet and sodium intake on blood pressure: subgroup
analysis of the DASH-sodium trial. Ann Intern Med. 2001;135:1019–1028. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-135-12-200112180-00005. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
206. Whelton PK, He J, Cutler JA, Brancati FL, Appel LJ, Follmann D, Klag MJ. Effects of oral potassium on blood pressure: meta-analysis of
randomized controlled clinical trials. JAMA. 1997;277:1624–1632. doi: 10.1001/jama.1997.03540440058033. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
207. Morris RC, Jr, Sebastian A, Forman A, Tanaka M, Schmidlin O. Normotensive salt sensitivity: effects of race and dietary
potassium. Hypertension. 1999;33:18–23. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.33.1.18. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
208. Appel LJ, Moore TJ, Obarzanek E, Vollmer WM, Svetkey LP, Sacks FM, Bray GA, Vogt TM, Cutler JA, Windhauser MM, Lin PH, Karanja N. A clinical trial of the effects of dietary patterns on blood
pressure: DASH Collaborative Research Group. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:1117–1124. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199704173361601. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
209. Appel LJ, Sacks FM, Carey VJ, Obarzanek E, Swain JF, Miller ER, 3rd, Conlin PR, Erlinger TP, Rosner BA, Laranjo NM, Charleston J, McCarron P, Bishop LM, OmniHeart Collaborative Research Group Effects of protein, monounsaturated fat, and carbohydrate intake
on blood pressure and serum lipids: results of the OmniHeart randomized
trial. JAMA. 2005;294:2455–2464. doi: 10.1001/jama.294.19.2455. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
210. John JH, Ziebland S, Yudkin P, Roe LS, Neil HA, Oxford Fruit and Vegetable Study Group Effects of fruit and vegetable consumption on plasma antioxidant
concentrations and blood pressure: a randomised controlled
trial. Lancet. 2002;359:1969–1974. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(02)98858-6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
211. Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes: Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and
Sulfate. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2004. [ Google Scholar ] 
212. Sauvaget C, Nagano J, Hayashi M, Yamada M. Animal protein, animal fat, and cholesterol intakes and risk of
cerebral infarction mortality in the Adult Health Study. Stroke. 2004;35:1531–1537. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000130426.52064.09. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
213. He K, Merchant A, Rimm EB, Rosner BA, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC, Ascherio A. Dietary fat intake and risk of stroke in male US healthcare
professionals: 14 year prospective cohort study. BMJ. 2003;327:777–782. doi: 10.1136/bmj.327.7418.777. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
214. Bernstein AM, Pan A, Rexrode KM, Stampfer M, Hu FB, Mozaffarian D, Willett WC. Dietary protein sources and the risk of stroke in men and
women. Stroke. 2012;43:637–644. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.633404. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
215. Kaluza J, Wolk A, Larsson SC. Red meat consumption and risk of stroke: a meta-analysis of
prospective studies. Stroke. 2012;43:2556–2560. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.663286. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
216. Lloyd-Jones DM, Hong Y, Labarthe D, Mozaffarian D, Appel LJ, Van Horn L, Greenlund K, Daniels S, Nichol G, Tomaselli GF, Arnett DK, Fonarow GC, Ho PM, Lauer MS, Masoudi FA, Robertson RM, Roger V, Schwamm LH, Sorlie P, Yancy CW, Rosamond WD, American Heart Association Strategic Planning Task Force and
Statistics Committee Defining and setting national goals for cardiovascular health
promotion and disease reduction: the American Heart Association’s
Strategic Impact Goal through 2020 and beyond. Circulation. 2010;121:586–613. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192703. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
217. Kotchen TA, Cowley AW, Jr, Frohlich ED. Salt in health and disease: a delicate balance. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1229–1237. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1212606. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
218. Go AS, Bauman MA, Coleman King SM, Fonarow GC, Lawrence W, Williams KA, Sanchez E, American Heart Association; American College of Cardiology; Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention An effective approach to high blood pressure control: a science
advisory from the American Heart Association, the American College of
Cardiology, and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Hypertension. 2014;63:878–885. doi: 10.1161/HYP.0000000000000003. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
219. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL, Jr, Jones DW, Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT, Jr, Roccella EJ, Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and
Treatment of High Blood Pressure; National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute; National High Blood Pressure Education Program Coordinating
Committee Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention,
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. Hypertension. 2003;42:1206–1252. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000107251.49515.c2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
220. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, Cushman WC, Dennison-Himmelfarb C, Handler J, Lackland DT, LeFevre ML, MacKenzie TD, Ogedegbe O, Smith SC, Jr, Svetkey LP, Taler SJ, Townsend RR, Wright JT, Jr, Narva AS, Ortiz E. 2014 Evidence-based guideline for the management of high blood
pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth
Joint National Committee (JNC 8) JAMA. 2014;311:507–520. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.284427. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
221. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL, Jr, Jones DW, Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT, Jr, Roccella EJ, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Joint National Committee
on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Pressure; National High Blood Pressure Education Program Coordinating
Committee The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention,
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: the JNC 7
report. JAMA. 2003;289:2560–2572. doi: 10.1001/jama.289.19.2560. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
222. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R, Prospective Studies Collaboration Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular
mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61
prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903–1913. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(02)11911-8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
223. Fields LE, Burt VL, Cutler JA, Hughes J, Roccella EJ, Sorlie P. The burden of adult hypertension in the United States 1999 to
2000: a rising tide. Hypertension. 2004;44:398–404. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000142248.54761.56. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
224. Egan BM, Zhao Y, Axon RN. US trends in prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control of
hypertension, 1988–2008. JAMA. 2010;303:2043–2050. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.650. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
225. National High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group on High
Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. The fourth report on the diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of
high blood pressure in children, and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114(suppl 4th Report):555–576. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
226. Burt VL, Whelton P, Roccella EJ, Brown C, Cutler JA, Higgins M, Horan MJ, Labarthe D. Prevalence of hypertension in the US adult population: results
from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey,
1988–1991. Hypertension. 1995;25:305–313. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.25.3.305. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
227. Vasan RS, Beiser A, Seshadri S, Larson MG, Kannel WB, D’Agostino RB, Levy D. Residual lifetime risk for developing hypertension in middle-aged
women and men: the Framingham Heart Study. JAMA. 2002;287:1003–1010. doi: 10.1001/jama.287.8.1003. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
228. Whelton PK, He J, Appel LJ, Cutler JA, Havas S, Kotchen TA, Roccella EJ, Stout R, Vallbona C, Winston MC, Karimbakas J, National High Blood Pressure Education Program Coordinating
Committee Primary prevention of hypertension: clinical and public health
advisory from the National High Blood Pressure Education
Program. JAMA. 2002;288:1882–1888. doi: 10.1001/jama.288.15.1882. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
229. Sipahi I, Swaminathan A, Natesan V, Debanne SM, Simon DI, Fang JC. Effect of antihypertensive therapy on incident stroke in cohorts
with prehypertensive blood pressure levels: a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Stroke. 2012;43:432–440. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.636829. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
230. Psaty BM, Lumley T, Furberg CD, Schellenbaum G, Pahor M, Alderman MH, Weiss NS. Health outcomes associated with various antihypertensive
therapies used as first-line agents: a network meta-analysis. JAMA. 2003;289:2534–2544. doi: 10.1001/jama.289.19.2534. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
231. Diao D, Wright JM, Cundiff DK, Gueyffier F. Pharmacotherapy for mild hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;8:CD006742. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006742.pub2. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
232. Thompson AM, Hu T, Eshelbrenner CL, Reynolds K, He J, Bazzano LA. Antihypertensive treatment and secondary prevention of
cardiovascular disease events among persons without hypertension: a
meta-analysis. JAMA. 2011;305:913–922. doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.250. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
233. McAlister F, Renin Angiotensin System Modulator Meta-Analysis
Investigators Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor
blockers are beneficial in normotensive atherosclerotic patients: a
collaborative meta-analysis of randomized trials. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:505–514. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr400. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
234. Turnbull F, Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists’
Collaboration Effects of different blood-pressure-lowering regimens on major
cardiovascular events: results of prospectively-designed overviews of
randomised trials. Lancet. 2003;362:1527–1535. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(03)14739-3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
235. Law MR, Morris JK, Wald NJ. Use of blood pressure lowering drugs in the prevention of
cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of 147 randomised trials in the
context of expectations from prospective epidemiological
studies. BMJ. 2009;338:b1665. doi: 10.1136/bmj.b1665. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
236. Wright JM, Musini VM. First-line drugs for hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009:CD001841. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001841.pub2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
237. Fretheim A, Odgaard-Jensen J, Brors O, Madsen S, Njolstad I, Norheim OF, Svilaas A, Kristiansen IS, Thurmer H, Flottorp S. Comparative effectiveness of antihypertensive medication for
primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: systematic review and multiple
treatments meta-analysis. BMC Med. 2012;10:33. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-10-33. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
238. Wiysonge CS, Bradley HA, Volmink J, Mayosi BM, Mbewu A, Opie LH. Beta-blockers for hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;8:CD002003. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD002003.pub3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
239. ALLHAT Officers and Coordinators for the ALLHAT Collaborative Research
Group; Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack
Trial. Major outcomes in high-risk hypertensive patients randomized to
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel blocker vs
diuretic: the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart
Attack Trial (ALLHAT) JAMA. 2002;288:2981–2997. doi: 10.1001/jama.288.23.2981. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
240. Ogihara T, Matsuzaki M, Umemoto S, Rakugi H, Matsuoka H, Shimada K, Higaki J, Ito S, Kamiya A, Suzuki H, Ohashi Y, Shimamoto K, Saruta T, Combination Therapy of Hypertension to Prevent Cardiovascular Events
Trial Group Combination therapy for hypertension in the elderly: a
sub-analysis of the Combination Therapy of Hypertension to Prevent
Cardiovascular Events (COPE) Trial. Hypertens Res. 2012;35:441–448. doi: 10.1038/hr.2011.216. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
241. Parving HH, Brenner BM, McMurray JJ, de Zeeuw D, Haffner SM, Solomon SD, Chaturvedi N, Persson F, Desai AS, Nicolaides M, Richard A, Xiang Z, Brunel P, Pfeffer MA, ALTITUDE Investigators Cardiorenal end points in a trial of aliskiren for type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2204–2213. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1208799. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
242. Black HR, Elliott WJ, Neaton JD, Grandits G, Grambsch P, Grimm RH, Jr, Hansson L, Lacouciere Y, Muller J, Sleight P, Weber MA, White WB, Williams G, Wittes J, Zanchetti A, Fakouhi TD, Anders RJ. Baseline characteristics and early blood pressure control in the
CONVINCE Trial. Hypertension. 2001;37:12–18. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.37.1.12. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
243. Cushman WC, Ford CE, Cutler JA, Margolis KL, Davis BR, Grimm RH, Black HR, Hamilton BP, Holland J, Nwachuku C, Papademetriou V, Probstfield J, Wright JT, Jr, Alderman MH, Weiss RJ, Piller L, Bettencourt J, Walsh SM, ALLHAT Collaborative Research Group Success and predictors of blood pressure control in diverse North
American settings: the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to
Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT) J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 2002;4:393–404. doi: 10.1111/j.1524-6175.2002.02045.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
244. Matsuzaki M, Ogihara T, Umemoto S, Rakugi H, Matsuoka H, Shimada K, Abe K, Suzuki N, Eto T, Higaki J, Ito S, Kamiya A, Kikuchi K, Suzuki H, Tei C, Ohashi Y, Saruta T, Combination Therapy of Hypertension to Prevent Cardiovascular Events
Trial Group Prevention of cardiovascular events with calcium channel
blocker-based combination therapies in patients with hypertension: a
randomized controlled trial. J Hypertens. 2011;29:1649–1659. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e328348345d. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
245. Lee M, Saver JL, Hong KS, Hao Q, Ovbiagele B. Does achieving an intensive versus usual blood pressure level
prevent stroke? Ann Neurol. 2012;71:133–140. doi: 10.1002/ana.22496. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
246. Barzilay JI, Howard AG, Evans GW, Fleg JL, Cohen RM, Booth GL, Kimel AR, Pedley CF, Cushman WC. Intensive blood pressure treatment does not improve
cardiovascular outcomes in centrally obese hypertensive individuals with
diabetes: the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD)
Blood Pressure Trial. Diabetes Care. 2012;35:1401–1405. doi: 10.2337/dc11-1827. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
247. ACCORD Study Group. Cushman WC, Evans GW, Byington RP, Goff DC, Jr, Grimm RH, Jr, Cutler JA, Simons-Morton DG, Basile JN, Corson MA, Probstfield JL, Katz L, Peterson KA, Friedewald WT, Buse JB, Bigger JT, Gerstein HC, Ismail-Beigi F. Effects of intensive blood-pressure control in type 2 diabetes
mellitus. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1575–1585. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1001286. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
248. Reboldi G, Gentile G, Angeli F, Ambrosio G, Mancia G, Verdecchia P. Effects of intensive blood pressure reduction on myocardial
infarction and stroke in diabetes: a meta-analysis in 73,913
patients. J Hypertens. 2011;29:1253–1269. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283469976. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
249. Okin PM, Hille DA, Kjeldsen SE, Dahlof B, Devereux RB. Impact of lower achieved blood pressure on outcomes in
hypertensive patients. J Hypertens. 2012;30:802–810. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283516499. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
250. Sherva R, Ford CE, Eckfeldt JH, Davis BR, Boerwinkle E, Arnett DK. Pharmacogenetic effect of the stromelysin (MMP3) polymorphism on
stroke risk in relation to antihypertensive treatment: the genetics of
hypertension associated treatment study. Stroke. 2011;42:330–335. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.593798. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
251. Lynch AI, Boerwinkle E, Davis BR, Ford CE, Eckfeldt JH, Leiendecker-Foster C, Arnett DK. Antihypertensive pharmacogenetic effect of fibrinogen-beta
variant -455G>A on cardiovascular disease, end-stage renal disease,
and mortality: the GenHAT study. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2009;19:415–421. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e32832a8e81. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
252. Rothwell PM, Howard SC, Dolan E, O’Brien E, Dobson JE, Dahlof B, Sever PS, Poulter NR. Prognostic significance of visit-to-visit variability, maximum
systolic blood pressure, and episodic hypertension. Lancet. 2010;375:895–905. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60308-X. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
253. Webb AJ, Fischer U, Mehta Z, Rothwell PM. Effects of antihypertensive-drug class on interindividual
variation in blood pressure and risk of stroke: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet. 2010;375:906–915. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60235-8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
254. Rothwell PM, Howard SC, Dolan E, O’Brien E, Dobson JE, Dahlof B, Poulter NR, Sever PS, ASCOT-BPLA and MRC Trial Investigators Effects of beta blockers and calcium-channel blockers on
within-individual variability in blood pressure and risk of
stroke. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9:469–480. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70066-1. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
255. Fagard RH, Thijs L, Staessen JA, Clement DL, De Buyzere ML, De Bacquer DA. Night-day blood pressure ratio and dipping pattern as predictors
of death and cardiovascular events in hypertension. J Hum Hypertens. 2009;23:645–653. doi: 10.1038/jhh.2009.9. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
256. Kario K, Pickering TG, Matsuo T, Hoshide S, Schwartz JE, Shimada K. Stroke prognosis and abnormal nocturnal blood pressure falls in
older hypertensives. Hypertension. 2001;38:852–857. doi: 10.1161/hy1001.092640. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
257. Beckett NS, Peters R, Fletcher AE, Staessen JA, Liu L, Dumitrascu D, Stoyanovsky V, Antikainen RL, Nikitin Y, Anderson C, Belhani A, Forette F, Rajkumar C, Thijs L, Banya W, Bulpitt CJ, HYVET Study Group Treatment of hypertension in patients 80 years of age or
older. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:1887–1898. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0801369. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
258. Prevention of stroke by antihypertensive drug treatment in older
persons with isolated systolic hypertension: final results of the Systolic
Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP): SHEP Cooperative Research
Group. JAMA. 1991;265:3255–3264. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
259. Flack JM, Sica DA, Bakris G, Brown AL, Ferdinand KC, Grimm RH, Jr, Hall WD, Jones WE, Kountz DS, Lea JP, Nasser S, Nesbitt SD, Saunders E, Scisney-Matlock M, Jamerson KA, International Society on Hypertension in Blacks Management of high blood pressure in blacks: an update of the
International Society on Hypertension in Blacks consensus
statement. Hypertension. 2010;56:780–800. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.110.152892. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
260. Wald DS, Wald NJ. Implementation of a simple age-based strategy in the prevention
of cardiovascular disease: the Polypill approach. J Eval Clin Pract. 2012;18:612–615. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2753.2011.01637.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
261. Uhlig K, Patel K, Ip S, Kitsios GD, Balk EM. Self-measured blood pressure monitoring in the management of
hypertension: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:185–194. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-159-3-201308060-00008. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
262. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Chronic disease prevention and health promotion, obesity: halting the
epidemic by making health easier at a glance. 2011 http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/resources/publications/AAG/obesity.htm .
Accessed February 27, 2013. 
263. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of Obesity in the United States 2009–2010. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics; 2012. (NCHS Data Brief, No. 82). [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
264. Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Ogden CL. Prevalence of obesity and trends in the distribution of body mass
index among US adults, 1999–2010. JAMA. 2012;307:491–497. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.39. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
265. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of obesity and trends in body mass index among US
children and adolescents, 1999–2010. JAMA. 2012;307:483–490. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.40. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
266. Clinical guidelines on the identification, evaluation, and
treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: the evidence report: National
Institutes of Health. Obes Res. 1998;6(suppl 2):51S–209S. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
267. Wildman RP, McGinn AP, Lin J, Wang D, Muntner P, Cohen HW, Reynolds K, Fonseca V, Sowers MR. Cardiovascular disease risk of abdominal obesity vs. metabolic
abnormalities. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2011;19:853–860. doi: 10.1038/oby.2010.168. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
268. de Koning L, Merchant AT, Pogue J, Anand SS. Waist circumference and waist-to-hip ratio as predictors of
cardiovascular events: meta-regression analysis of prospective
studies. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:850–856. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehm026. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
269. Suk SH, Sacco RL, Boden-Albala B, Cheun JF, Pittman JG, Elkind MS, Paik MC, Northern Manhattan Stroke Study Abdominal obesity and risk of ischemic stroke: the Northern
Manhattan Stroke Study. Stroke. 2003;34:1586–1592. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000075294.98582.2F. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
270. Walker SP, Rimm EB, Ascherio A, Kawachi I, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC. Body size and fat distribution as predictors of stroke among US
men. Am J Epidemiol. 1996;144:1143–1150. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a008892. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
271. Kizer JR, Biggs ML, Ix JH, Mukamal KJ, Zieman SJ, de Boer IH, Mozaffarian D, Barzilay JI, Strotmeyer ES, Luchsinger JA, Elkind MS, Longstreth WT, Jr, Kuller LH, Siscovick DS. Measures of adiposity and future risk of ischemic stroke and
coronary heart disease in older men and women. Am J Epidemiol. 2011;173:10–25. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwq311. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
272. Toss F, Wiklund P, Franks PW, Eriksson M, Gustafson Y, Hallmans G, Nordstrom P, Nordstrom A. Abdominal and gynoid adiposity and the risk of
stroke. Int J Obes (Lond) 2011;35:1427–1432. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2011.9. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
273. Prospective Studies Collaboration. Whitlock G, Lewington S, Sherliker P, Clarke R, Emberson J, Halsey J, Qizilbash N, Collins R, Peto R. Body-mass index and cause-specific mortality in 900 000 adults:
collaborative analyses of 57 prospective studies. Lancet. 2009;373:1083–1096. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60318-4. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
274. Strazzullo P, D’Elia L, Cairella G, Garbagnati F, Cappuccio FP, Scalfi L. Excess body weight and incidence of stroke: meta-analysis of
prospective studies with 2 million participants. Stroke. 2010;41:e418–e426. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.576967. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
275. Wang C, Liu Y, Yang Q, Dai X, Wu S, Wang W, Ji X, Li L, Fang X. Body mass index and risk of total and type-specific stroke in
Chinese adults: results from a longitudinal study in China. Int J Stroke. 2013;8:245–250. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-4949.2012.00830.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
276. Yatsuya H, Toyoshima H, Yamagishi K, Tamakoshi K, Taguri M, Harada A, Ohashi Y, Kita Y, Naito Y, Yamada M, Tanabe N, Iso H, Ueshima H, Japan Arteriosclerosis Longitudinal Study (JALS) Group Body mass index and risk of stroke and myocardial infarction in a
relatively lean population: meta-analysis of 16 Japanese cohorts using
individual data. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2010;3:498–505. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.109.908517. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
277. Yatsuya H, Folsom AR, Yamagishi K, North KE, Brancati FL, Stevens J, Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study Investigators Race- and sex-specific associations of obesity measures with
ischemic stroke incidence in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC)
study. Stroke. 2010;41:417–425. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.566299. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
278. Sjostrom L. Review of the key results from the Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS)
trial: a prospective controlled intervention study of bariatric
surgery. J Intern Med. 2013;273:219–234. doi: 10.1111/joim.12012. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
279. Zhang Y, Tuomilehto J, Jousilahti P, Wang Y, Antikainen R, Hu G. Lifestyle factors and antihypertensive treatment on the risks of
ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke. Hypertension. 2012;60:906–912. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.193961. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
280. Caterson ID, Finer N, Coutinho W, Van Gaal LF, Maggioni AP, Torp-Pedersen C, Sharma AM, Legler UF, Shepherd GM, Rode RA, Perdok RJ, Renz CL, James WP, SCOUT Investigators Maintained intentional weight loss reduces cardiovascular
outcomes: results from the Sibutramine Cardiovascular OUTcomes (SCOUT)
trial. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2012;14:523–530. doi: 10.1111/j.1463-1326.2011.01554.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
281. Neter JE, Stam BE, Kok FJ, Grobbee DE, Geleijnse JM. Influence of weight reduction on blood pressure: a meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Hypertension. 2003;42:878–884. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000094221.86888.AE. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
282. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for and management of obesity in adults, topic page. http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspsobes.htm .
Accessed December 7, 2013. 
283. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Fact Sheet: National Estimates and General Information
on Diabetes and Prediabetes in the United States, 2011. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention; 2011. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/pdf/ndfs_2011.pdf . Accessed
October 4, 2014. [ Google Scholar ] 
284. Banerjee C, Moon YP, Paik MC, Rundek T, Mora-McLaughlin C, Vieira JR, Sacco RL, Elkind MS. Duration of diabetes and risk of ischemic stroke: the Northern
Manhattan Study. Stroke. 2012;43:1212–1217. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.641381. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
285. Sui X, Lavie CJ, Hooker SP, Lee DC, Colabianchi N, Lee CD, Blair SN. A prospective study of fasting plasma glucose and risk of stroke
in asymptomatic men. Mayo Clin Proc. 2011;86:1042–1049. doi: 10.4065/mcp.2011.0267. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
286. Kissela BM, Khoury J, Kleindorfer D, Woo D, Schneider A, Alwell K, Miller R, Ewing I, Moomaw CJ, Szaflarski JP, Gebel J, Shukla R, Broderick JP. Epidemiology of ischemic stroke in patients with diabetes: the
greater Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky Stroke Study. Diabetes Care. 2005;28:355–359. doi: 10.2337/diacare.28.2.355. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
287. Boden-Albala B, Cammack S, Chong J, Wang C, Wright C, Rundek T, Elkind MS, Paik MC, Sacco RL. Diabetes, fasting glucose levels, and risk of ischemic stroke and
vascular events: findings from the Northern Manhattan Study
(NOMAS) Diabetes Care. 2008;31:1132–1137. doi: 10.2337/dc07-0797. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
288. Gaede P, Lund-Andersen H, Parving HH, Pedersen O. Effect of a multifactorial intervention on mortality in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:580–591. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0706245. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
289. Anselmino M, Malmberg K, Ohrvik J, Ryden L, Euro Heart Survey Investigators Evidence-based medication and revascularization: powerful tools
in the management of patients with diabetes and coronary artery disease: a
report from the Euro Heart Survey on diabetes and the heart. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2008;15:216–223. doi: 10.1097/HJR.0b013e3282f335d0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
290. Effect of intensive blood-glucose control with metformin on
complications in overweight patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34): UK
Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Lancet. 1998;352:854–865. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
291. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Matthews DR, Neil HA. 10-Year follow-up of intensive glucose control in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1577–1589. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0806470. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
292. Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study
Group. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP, Goff DC, Jr, Bigger JT, Buse JB, Cushman WC, Genuth S, Ismail-Beigi F, Grimm RH, Jr, Probstfield JL, Simons-Morton DG, Friedewald WT. Effects of intensive glucose lowering in type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2545–2559. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0802743. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
293. ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, Neal B, Billot L, Woodward M, Marre M, Cooper M, Glasziou P, Grobbee D, Hamet P, Harrap S, Heller S, Liu L, Mancia G, Mogensen CE, Pan C, Poulter N, Rodgers A, Williams B, Bompoint S, de Galan BE, Joshi R, Travert F. Intensive blood glucose control and vascular outcomes in patients
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2560–2572. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0802987. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
294. Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, Reda D, Emanuele N, Reaven PD, Zieve FJ, Marks J, Davis SN, Hayward R, Warren SR, Goldman S, McCarren M, Vitek ME, Henderson WG, Huang GD, VADT Investigators Glucose control and vascular complications in veterans with type
2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:129–139. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0808431. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
295. Gray CS, Hildreth AJ, Sandercock PA, O’Connell JE, Johnston DE, Cartlidge NE, Bamford JM, James OF, Alberti KG, GIST Trialists Glucose-potassium-insulin infusions in the
management of post-stroke hyperglycaemia: the UK Glucose Insulin in Stroke
Trial (GIST-UK) Lancet Neurol. 2007;6:397–406. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70080-7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
296. Skyler JS, Bergenstal R, Bonow RO, Buse J, Deedwania P, Gale EA, Howard BV, Kirkman MS, Kosiborod M, Reaven P, Sherwin RS, American Diabetes Association; American College of Cardiology
Foundation; American Heart Association Intensive glycemic control and the prevention of cardiovascular
events: implications of the ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VA diabetes trials: a
position statement of the American Diabetes Association and a scientific
statement of the American College of Cardiology Foundation and the American
Heart Association. Circulation. 2009;119:351–357. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.191305. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
297. Implementation of treatment protocols in the Diabetes Control and
Complications Trial. Diabetes Care. 1995;18:361–376. doi: 10.2337/diacare.18.3.361. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
298. Nathan DM, Cleary PA, Backlund JY, Genuth SM, Lachin JM, Orchard TJ, Raskin P, Zinman B, Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes
Interventions and Complications (DCCT/EDIC) Study Research
Group Intensive diabetes treatment and cardiovascular disease in
patients with type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:2643–2653. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa052187. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
299. Zhang C, Zhou YH, Xu CL, Chi FL, Ju HN. Efficacy of intensive control of glucose in stroke prevention: a
meta-analysis of data from 59197 participants in 9 randomized controlled
trials. PLoS One. 2013;8:e54465. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054465. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
300. Tuomilehto J, Rastenyte D. Diabetes and glucose intolerance as risk factors for
stroke. J Cardiovasc Risk. 1999;6:241–249. doi: 10.1177/204748739900600409. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
301. Tight blood pressure control and risk of macrovascular and
microvascular complications in type 2 diabetes: UKPDS 38. UK Prospective
Diabetes Study Group. BMJ. 1998;317:703–713. [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
302. Curb JD, Pressel SL, Cutler JA, Savage PJ, Applegate WB, Black H, Camel G, Davis BR, Frost PH, Gonzalez N, Guthrie G, Oberman A, Rutan GH, Stamler J. Effect of diuretic-based antihypertensive treatment on
cardiovascular disease risk in older diabetic patients with isolated
systolic hypertension: Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program
Cooperative Research Group. JAMA. 1996;276:1886–1892. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
303. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Neil HA, Matthews DR. Long-term follow-up after tight control of blood pressure in type
2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1565–1576. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0806359. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
304. Effects of ramipril on cardiovascular and microvascular outcomes
in people with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE study, and MICRO-HOPE
substudy: Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study
Investigators. Lancet. 2000;355:253–259. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
305. Dahlof B, Devereux RB, Kjeldsen SE, Julius S, Beevers G, de Faire U, Fyhrquist F, Ibsen H, Kristiansson K, Lederballe-Pedersen O, Lindholm LH, Nieminen MS, Omvik P, Oparil S, Wedel H, LIFE Study Group Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the Losartan
Intervention For Endpoint reduction in hypertension study (LIFE): a
randomised trial against atenolol. Lancet. 2002;359:995–1003. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08089-3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
306. Wachtell K, Hornestam B, Lehto M, Slotwiner DJ, Gerdts E, Olsen MH, Aurup P, Dahlof B, Ibsen H, Julius S, Kjeldsen SE, Lindholm LH, Nieminen MS, Rokkedal J, Devereux RB. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in hypertensive patients
with a history of atrial fibrillation: the Losartan Intervention For End
Point Reduction in Hypertension (LIFE) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:705–711. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.06.080. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
307. Patel A, ADVANCE Collaborative Group. MacMahon S, Chalmers J, Neal B, Woodward M, Billot L, Harrap S, Poulter N, Marre M, Cooper M, Glasziou P, Grobbee DE, Hamet P, Heller S, Liu LS, Mancia G, Mogensen CE, Pan CY, Rodgers A, Williams B. Effects of a fixed combination of perindopril and indapamide on
macrovascular and microvascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus (the ADVANCE trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;370:829–840. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61303-8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
308. Ostergren J, Poulter NR, Sever PS, Dahlof B, Wedel H, Beevers G, Caulfield M, Collins R, Kjeldsen SE, Kristinsson A, McInnes GT, Mehlsen J, Nieminen M, O’Brien E, ASCOT Investigators The Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial: blood
pressure-lowering limb: effects in patients with type II
diabetes. J Hypertens. 2008;26:2103–2111. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e328310e0d9. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
309. Jamerson K, Weber MA, Bakris GL, Dahlof B, Pitt B, Shi V, Hester A, Gupte J, Gatlin M, Velazquez EJ, ACCOMPLISH Trial Investigators Benazepril plus amlodipine or hydrochlorothiazide for
hypertension in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:2417–2428. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0806182. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
310. Bangalore S, Kumar S, Lobach I, Messerli FH. Blood pressure targets in subjects with type 2 diabetes
mellitus/impaired fasting glucose: observations from traditional and
bayesian random-effects meta-analyses of randomized trials. Circulation. 2011;123:2799–2810. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.016337. 9 p following 2810. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
311. Goldberg RB, Mellies MJ, Sacks FM, Moye LA, Howard BV, Howard WJ, Davis BR, Cole TG, Pfeffer MA, Braunwald E. Cardiovascular events and their reduction with pravastatin in
diabetic and glucose-intolerant myocardial infarction survivors with average
cholesterol levels: subgroup analyses in the cholesterol and recurrent
events (CARE) trial: the Care Investigators. Circulation. 1998;98:2513–2519. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.98.23.2513. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
312. Sever PS, Dahlof B, Poulter NR, Wedel H, Beevers G, Caulfield M, Collins R, Kjeldsen SE, Kristinsson A, McInnes GT, Mehlsen J, Nieminen M, O’Brien E, Ostergren J, ASCOT Investigators Prevention of coronary and stroke events with atorvastatin in
hypertensive patients who have average or lower-than-average cholesterol
concentrations, in the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes
Trial–Lipid Lowering Arm (ASCOT-LLA): a multicentre randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2003;361:1149–1158. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12948-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
313. Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of cholesterol lowering with
simvastatin in 20,536 high-risk individuals: a randomised placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet. 2002;360:7–22. [ Google Scholar ] 
314. Collins R, Armitage J, Parish S, Sleigh P, Peto R, Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of cholesterol-lowering with
simvastatin in 5963 people with diabetes: a randomised placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet. 2003;361:2005–2016. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(03)13636-7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
315. Colhoun HM, Betteridge DJ, Durrington PN, Hitman GA, Neil HA, Livingstone SJ, Thomason MJ, Mackness MI, Charlton-Menys V, Fuller JH, CARDS Investigators Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease with atorvastatin in
type 2 diabetes in the Collaborative Atorvastatin Diabetes Study (CARDS):
multicentre randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;364:685–696. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16895-5. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
316. Shepherd J, Barter P, Carmena R, Deedwania P, Fruchart JC, Haffner S, Hsia J, Breazna A, LaRosa J, Grundy S, Waters D. Effect of lowering LDL cholesterol substantially below currently
recommended levels in patients with coronary heart disease and diabetes: the
Treating to New Targets (TNT) study. Diabetes Care. 2006;29:1220–1226. doi: 10.2337/dc05-2465. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
317. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT)
Collaborators. Kearney PM, Blackwell L, Collins R, Keech A, Simes J, Peto R, Armitage J, Baigent C. Efficacy of cholesterol-lowering therapy in 18,686 people with
diabetes in 14 randomised trials of statins: a meta-analysis. Lancet. 2008;371:117–125. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60104-X. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
318. Rubins HB, Robins SJ, Collins D, Nelson DB, Elam MB, Schaefer EJ, Faas FH, Anderson JW. Diabetes, plasma insulin, and cardiovascular disease: subgroup
analysis from the Department of Veterans Affairs High-Density Lipoprotein
Intervention Trial (VA-HIT) Arch Intern Med. 2002;162:2597–2604. doi: 10.1001/archinte.162.22.2597. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
319. Keech A, Simes RJ, Barter P, Best J, Scott R, Taskinen MR, Forder P, Pillai A, Davis T, Glasziou P, Drury P, Kesaniemi YA, Sullivan D, Hunt D, Colman P, d’Emden M, Whiting M, Ehnholm C, Laakso M, FIELD Study Investigators Effects of long-term fenofibrate therapy on cardiovascular events
in 9795 people with type 2 diabetes mellitus (the FIELD study): randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;366:1849–1861. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67667-2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
320. Zhou YH, Ye XF, Yu FF, Zhang X, Qin YY, Lu J, He J. Lipid management in the prevention of stroke: a meta-analysis of
fibrates for stroke prevention. BMC Neurol. 2013;13:1. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-13-1. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
321. Ogawa H, Nakayama M, Morimoto T, Uemura S, Kanauchi M, Doi N, Jinnouchi H, Sugiyama S, Saito Y, Japanese Primary Prevention of Atherosclerosis With Aspirin for
Diabetes (JPAD) Trial Investigators Low-dose aspirin for primary prevention of atherosclerotic events
in patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled
trial. JAMA. 2008;300:2134–2141. doi: 10.1001/jama.2008.623. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
322. Antithrombotic Trialists’ Collaboration. Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelet
therapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high
risk patients. BMJ. 2002;324:71–86. doi: 10.1136/bmj.324.7329.71. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
323. Butalia S, Leung AA, Ghali WA, Rabi DM. Aspirin effect on the incidence of major adverse cardiovascular
events in patients with diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2011;10:25. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-10-25. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
324. Kobzar G, Mardla V, Samel N. Short-term exposure of platelets to glucose impairs inhibition of
platelet aggregation by cyclooxygenase inhibitors. Platelets. 2011;22:338–344. doi: 10.3109/09537104.2010.535931. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
325. Simpson SH, Gamble JM, Mereu L, Chambers T. Effect of aspirin dose on mortality and cardiovascular events in
people with diabetes: a meta-analysis. J Gen Intern Med. 2011;26:1336–1344. doi: 10.1007/s11606-011-1757-y. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
326. Manolio TA, Kronmal RA, Burke GL, O’Leary DH, Price TR. Short-term predictors of incident stroke in older adults: the
Cardiovascular Health Study. Stroke. 1996;27:1479–1486. doi: 10.1161/01.str.27.9.1479. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
327. Rodriguez BL, D’Agostino R, Abbott RD, Kagan A, Burchfiel CM, Yano K, Ross GW, Silbershatz H, Higgins MW, Popper J, Wolf PA, Curb JD. Risk of hospitalized stroke in men enrolled in the Honolulu Heart
Program and the Framingham Study: A comparison of incidence and risk factor
effects. Stroke. 2002;33:230–236. doi: 10.1161/hs0102.101081. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
328. Bhat VM, Cole JW, Sorkin JD, Wozniak MA, Malarcher AM, Giles WH, Stern BJ, Kittner SJ. Dose-response relationship between cigarette smoking and risk of
ischemic stroke in young women. Stroke. 2008;39:2439–2443. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.510073. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
329. Feigin V, Parag V, Lawes CM, Rodgers A, Suh I, Woodward M, Jamrozik K, Ueshima H, Asia Pacific Cohort Studies Collaboration Smoking and elevated blood pressure are the most important risk
factors for subarachnoid hemorrhage in the Asia-Pacific region: an overview
of 26 cohorts involving 306,620 participants. Stroke. 2005;36:1360–1365. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000170710.95689.41. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
330. Feigin VL, Rinkel GJ, Lawes CM, Algra A, Bennett DA, van Gijn J, Anderson CS. Risk factors for subarachnoid hemorrhage: an updated systematic
review of epidemiological studies. Stroke. 2005;36:2773–2780. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000190838.02954.e8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
331. Kurth T, Kase CS, Berger K, Gaziano JM, Cook NR, Buring JE. Smoking and risk of hemorrhagic stroke in women. Stroke. 2003;34:2792–2795. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000100165.36466.95. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
332. Kurth T, Kase CS, Berger K, Schaeffner ES, Buring JE, Gaziano JM. Smoking and the risk of hemorrhagic stroke in men. Stroke. 2003;34:1151–1155. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000065200.93070.32. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
333. Feldmann E, Broderick JP, Kernan WN, Viscoli CM, Brass LM, Brott T, Morgenstern LB, Wilterdink JL, Horwitz RI. Major risk factors for intracerebral hemorrhage in the young are
modifiable. Stroke. 2005;36:1881–1885. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000177480.62341.6b. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
334. Ariesen MJ, Claus SP, Rinkel GJ, Algra A. Risk factors for intracerebral hemorrhage in the general
population: a systematic review. Stroke. 2003;34:2060–2065. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000080678.09344.8D. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
335. Shinton R, Beevers G. Meta-analysis of relation between cigarette smoking and
stroke. BMJ. 1989;298:789–794. doi: 10.1136/bmj.298.6676.789. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
336. Thrift AG, McNeil JJ, Donnan GA. The risk of intracerebral haemorrhage with smoking: the Melbourne
Risk Factor Study Group. Cerebrovasc Dis. 1999;9:34–39. doi: 10.1159/000015893. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
337. Thun MJ, Apicella LF, Henley SJ. Smoking vs other risk factors as the cause of
smoking-attributable deaths: confounding in the courtroom. JAMA. 2000;284:706–712. doi: 10.1001/jama.284.6.706. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
338. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Smoking-attributable mortality, years of potential life lost, and
productivity losses–United States, 2000–2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2008;57:1226–1228. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
339. Nakamura K, Barzi F, Lam TH, Huxley R, Feigin VL, Ueshima H, Woo J, Gu D, Ohkubo T, Lawes CM, Suh I, Woodward M, Asia Pacific Cohort Studies Investigators Cigarette smoking, systolic blood pressure, and cardiovascular
diseases in the Asia-Pacific region. Stroke. 2008;39:1694–1702. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.496752. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
340. Ischaemic stroke and combined oral contraceptives: results of an
international, multicentre, case-control study: WHO Collaborative Study of
Cardiovascular Disease and Steroid Hormone Contraception. Lancet. 1996;348:498–505. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
341. Haemorrhagic stroke, overall stroke risk, and combined oral
contraceptives: results of an international, multicentre, case-control
study: WHO Collaborative Study of Cardiovascular Disease and Steroid Hormone
Contraception. Lancet. 1996;348:505–510. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
342. US Department of Health, and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: A
Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Coordinating Center for Health Promotion, National
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on
Smoking and Health; 2006. [ Google Scholar ] 
343. Barnoya J, Glantz SA. Cardiovascular effects of secondhand smoke: nearly as large as
smoking. Circulation. 2005;111:2684–2698. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.104.492215. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
344. Bonita R, Duncan J, Truelsen T, Jackson RT, Beaglehole R. Passive smoking as well as active smoking increases the risk of
acute stroke. Tob Control. 1999;8:156–160. doi: 10.1136/tc.8.2.156. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
345. He Y, Lam TH, Jiang B, Wang J, Sai X, Fan L, Li X, Qin Y, Hu FB. Passive smoking and risk of peripheral arterial disease and
ischemic stroke in Chinese women who never smoked. Circulation. 2008;118:1535–1540. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.784801. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
346. Iribarren C, Darbinian J, Klatsky AL, Friedman GD. Cohort study of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and risk
of first ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack. Neuroepidemiology. 2004;23:38–44. doi: 10.1159/000073973. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
347. Qureshi AI, Suri MF, Kirmani JF, Divani AA. Cigarette smoking among spouses: another risk factor for stroke
in women. Stroke. 2005;36:e74–e76. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000177475.30281.7f. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
348. You RX, Thrift AG, McNeil JJ, Davis SM, Donnan GA. Ischemic stroke risk and passive exposure to spouses’
cigarette smoking: Melbourne Stroke Risk Factor Study (MERFS)
Group. Am J Public Health. 1999;89:572–575. doi: 10.2105/ajph.89.4.572. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
349. Zhang X, Shu XO, Yang G, Li HL, Xiang YB, Gao YT, Li Q, Zheng W. Association of passive smoking by husbands with prevalence of
stroke among Chinese women nonsmokers. Am J Epidemiol. 2005;161:213–218. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwi028. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
350. Whincup PH, Gilg JA, Emberson JR, Jarvis MJ, Feyerabend C, Bryant A, Walker M, Cook DG. Passive smoking and risk of coronary heart disease and stroke:
prospective study with cotinine measurement. BMJ. 2004;329:200–205. doi: 10.1136/bmj.38146.427188.55. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
351. Howard G, Thun MJ. Why is environmental tobacco smoke more strongly associated with
coronary heart disease than expected? A review of potential biases and
experimental data. Environ Health Perspect. 1999;107(suppl 6):853–858. doi: 10.1289/ehp.99107s6853. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
352. Herman PM, Walsh ME. Hospital admissions for acute myocardial infarction, angina,
stroke, and asthma after implementation of Arizona’s comprehensive
statewide smoking ban. Am J Public Health. 2011;101:491–496. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2009.179572. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
353. Juster HR, Loomis BR, Hinman TM, Farrelly MC, Hyland A, Bauer UE, Birkhead GS. Declines in hospital admissions for acute myocardial infarction
in New York state after implementation of a comprehensive smoking
ban. Am J Public Health. 2007;97:2035–2039. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2006.099994. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
354. Burns DM. Epidemiology of smoking-induced cardiovascular
disease. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2003;46:11–29. doi: 10.1016/s0033-0620(03)00079-3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
355. Kool MJ, Hoeks AP, Struijker Boudier HA, Reneman RS, Van Bortel LM. Short- and long-term effects of smoking on arterial wall
properties in habitual smokers. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;22:1881–1886. doi: 10.1016/0735-1097(93)90773-t. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
356. Silvestrini M, Troisi E, Matteis M, Cupini LM, Bernardi G. Effect of smoking on cerebrovascular reactivity. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1996;16:746–749. doi: 10.1097/00004647-199607000-00027. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
357. Howard G, Wagenknecht LE, Burke GL, Diez-Roux A, Evans GW, McGovern P, Nieto FJ, Tell GS. Cigarette smoking and progression of atherosclerosis: the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study. JAMA. 1998;279:119–124. doi: 10.1001/jama.279.2.119. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
358. Karttunen V, Alfthan G, Hiltunen L, Rasi V, Kervinen K, Kesaniemi YA, Hillbom M. Risk factors for cryptogenic ischaemic stroke. Eur J Neurol. 2002;9:625–632. doi: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.2002.00464.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
359. Ohira T, Shahar E, Chambless LE, Rosamond WD, Mosley TH, Jr, Folsom AR. Risk factors for ischemic stroke subtypes: the Atherosclerosis
Risk in Communities study. Stroke. 2006;37:2493–2498. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000239694.19359.88. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
360. Fagerstrom K. The epidemiology of smoking: health consequences and benefits of
cessation. Drugs. 2002;62(suppl 2):1–9. doi: 10.2165/00003495-200262002-00001. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
361. Robbins AS, Manson JE, Lee IM, Satterfeld S, Hennekens CH. Cigarette smoking and stroke in a cohort of U.S. male
physicians. Ann Intern Med. 1994;120:458–462. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-120-6-199403150-00002. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
362. Song YM, Cho HJ. Risk of stroke and myocardial infarction after reduction or
cessation of cigarette smoking: a cohort study in Korean men. Stroke. 2008;39:2432–2438. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.512632. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
363. US Department of Health, and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Smoking: A Report of the Surgeon
General. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2004. [ Google Scholar ] 
364. Cahill K, Stead LF, Lancaster T. Nicotine receptor partial agonists for smoking
cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD006103. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006103.pub2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
365. Stead LF, Perera R, Bullen C, Mant D, Lancaster T. Nicotine replacement therapy for smoking
cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD000146. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000146.pub3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
366. Fiore MC, Jean CR, Baker TB, Bailey WC, Benowitz N, Curry SJ, Dorfman SF, Froelicher ES, Goldstein MG, Healton CG, Henderson PN, Heyman RB, Koh HK, Kottke TE, Lando HA, Mecklenburg RE, Mermeistein RJ, Mullen PD, Orleans CT, Robinson L, Stitzer ML, Tommasello AC, Villejo L, Wewers ME. Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Update. Quick
Reference Guide for Clinicians. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service; Apr, 2009. [ Google Scholar ] 
367. US Preventive Services Task Force. Counseling, and interventions to prevent tobacco use, and
tobacco-caused disease in adults, and pregnant women: U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:551–555. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-150-8-200904210-00009. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
368. Mills EJ, Wu P, Lockhart I, Thorlund K, Puhan M, Ebbert JO. Comparisons of high-dose and combination nicotine replacement
therapy, varenicline, and bupropion for smoking cessation: a systematic
review and multiple treatment meta-analysis. Ann Med. 2012;44:588–597. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2012.705016. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
369. Bolin K, Wilson K, Benhaddi H, de Nigris E, Marbaix S, Mork AC, Aubin HJ. Cost-effectiveness of varenicline compared with nicotine patches
for smoking cessation: results from four European countries. Eur J Public Health. 2009;19:650–654. doi: 10.1093/eurpub/ckp075. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
370. Kannel WB, Benjamin EJ. Status of the epidemiology of atrial fibrillation. Med Clin North Am. 2008;92:17–40. ix. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2007.09.002. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
371. Wolf PA, Abbott RD, Kannel WB. Atrial fibrillation as an independent risk factor for stroke: the
Framingham study. Stroke. 1991;22:983–988. doi: 10.1161/01.str.22.8.983. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
372. Stroke Risk in Atrial Fibrillation Working Group. Independent predictors of stroke in patients with atrial
fibrillation: a systematic review. Neurology. 2007;69:546–554. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000267275.68538.8d. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
373. Stroke Risk in Atrial Fibrillation Working Group. Comparison of 12 risk stratification schemes to predict stroke in
patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Stroke. 2008;39:1901–1910. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.501825. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
374. Benjamin EJ, Wolf PA, D’Agostino RB, Silbershatz H, Kannel WB, Levy D. Impact of atrial fibrillation on the risk of death: the
Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 1998;98:946–952. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.98.10.946. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
375. Marini C, De Santis F, Sacco S, Russo T, Olivieri L, Totaro R, Carolei A. Contribution of atrial fibrillation to incidence and outcome of
ischemic stroke: results from a population-based study. Stroke. 2005;36:1115–1119. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000166053.83476.4a. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
376. Fitzmaurice DA, Hobbs FD, Jowett S, Mant J, Murray ET, Holder R, Raftery JP, Bryan S, Davies M, Lip GY, Allan TF. Screening versus routine practice in detection of atrial
fibrillation in patients aged 65 or over: cluster randomised controlled
trial. BMJ. 2007;335:383. doi: 10.1136/bmj.39280.660567.55. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
377. Hobbs FD, Fitzmaurice DA, Mant J, Murray E, Jowett S, Bryan S, Raftery J, Davies M, Lip G. A randomised controlled trial and cost-effectiveness study of
systematic screening (targeted and total population screening) versus
routine practice for the detection of atrial fibrillation in people aged 65
and over: the SAFE study. Health Technol Assess. 2005;9:iii–iv. ix–x, 1–74. doi: 10.3310/hta9400. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
378. Gage BF, Waterman AD, Shannon W, Boechler M, Rich MW, Radford MJ. Validation of clinical classification schemes for predicting
stroke: results from the National Registry of Atrial
Fibrillation. JAMA. 2001;285:2864–2870. doi: 10.1001/jama.285.22.2864. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
379. Lip GY, Nieuwlaat R, Pisters R, Lane DA, Crijns HJ. Refining clinical risk stratification for predicting stroke and
thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation using a novel risk factor-based
approach: the Euro Heart Survey on atrial fibrillation. Chest. 2010;137:263–272. doi: 10.1378/chest.09-1584. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
380. You JJ, Singer DE, Howard PA, Lane DA, Eckman MH, Fang MC, Hylek EM, Schulman S, Go AS, Hughes M, Spencer FA, Manning WJ, Halperin JL, Lip GY, American College of Chest Physicians Antithrombotic therapy for atrial fibrillation: Antithrombotic
Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest
Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest. 2012;141:e531S–575S. doi: 10.1378/chest.11-2304. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
381. Pisters R, Lane DA, Nieuwlaat R, de Vos CB, Crijns HJ, Lip GY. A novel user-friendly score (HAS-BLED) to assess 1-year risk of
major bleeding in patients with atrial fibrillation: the Euro Heart
Survey. Chest. 2010;138:1093–1100. doi: 10.1378/chest.10-0134. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
382. Apostolakis S, Lane DA, Guo Y, Buller H, Lip GY. Performance of the HEMORR(2)HAGES, ATRIA, and HAS-BLED bleeding
risk-prediction scores in patients with atrial fibrillation undergoing
anticoagulation: the AMADEUS (Evaluating the Use of SR34006 Compared to
Warfarin or Acenocoumarol in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation)
study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:861–867. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.06.019. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
383. Taillandier S, Olesen JB, Clementy N, Lagrenade I, Babuty D, Lip GY, Fauchier L. Prognosis in patients with atrial fibrillation and CHA2DS2-VASc
Score=0 in a community-based cohort study. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2012;23:708–713. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-8167.2011.02257.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
384. Fang MC, Go AS, Chang Y, Borowsky LH, Pomernacki NK, Udaltsova N, Singer DE. A new risk scheme to predict warfarin-associated hemorrhage: the
ATRIA (Anticoagulation and Risk Factors in Atrial Fibrillation)
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:395–401. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.03.031. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
385. Hart RG, Pearce LA, Aguilar MI. Meta-analysis: antithrombotic therapy to prevent stroke in
patients who have nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:857–867. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-146-12-200706190-00007. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
386. Andersen KK, Olsen TS. Reduced poststroke mortality in patients with stroke and atrial
fibrillation treated with anticoagulants: results from a Danish
quality-control registry of 22,179 patients with ischemic
stroke. Stroke. 2007;38:259–263. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000254622.52483.03. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
387. Hylek EM, Go AS, Chang Y, Jensvold NG, Henault LE, Selby JV, Singer DE. Effect of intensity of oral anticoagulation on stroke severity
and mortality in atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1019–1026. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa022913. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
388. O’Donnell M, Oczkowski W, Fang J, Kearon C, Silva J, Bradley C, Guyatt G, Gould L, D’Uva C, Kapral M, Silver F, Investigators of the Registry of the Canadian Stroke
Network Preadmission antithrombotic treatment and stroke severity in
patients with atrial fibrillation and acute ischaemic stroke: an
observational study. Lancet Neurol. 2006;5:749–754. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70536-1. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
389. Mant J, Hobbs FD, Fletcher K, Roalfe A, Fitzmaurice D, Lip GY, Murray E, BAFTA Investigators; Midland Research Practices Network
(MidReC) Warfarin versus aspirin for stroke prevention in an elderly
community population with atrial fibrillation (the Birmingham Atrial
Fibrillation Treatment of the Aged Study, BAFTA): a randomised controlled
trial. Lancet. 2007;370:493–503. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61233-1. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
390. Furie KL, Goldstein LB, Albers GW, Khatri P, Neyens R, Turakhia MP, Turan TN, Wood KA, on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council
on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; Council on Cardiovascular
Nursing; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Peripheral Vascular
Disease Oral antithrombotic agents for the prevention of stroke in
nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: a science advisory for healthcare
professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association. Stroke. 2012;43:3442–3453. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e318266722a. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
391. Hohnloser SH, Oldgren J, Yang S, Wallentin L, Ezekowitz M, Reilly P, Eikelboom J, Brueckmann M, Yusuf S, Connolly SJ. Myocardial ischemic events in patients with atrial fibrillation
treated with dabigatran or warfarin in the RE-LY (Randomized Evaluation of
Long-Term Anticoagulation Therapy) trial. Circulation. 2012;125:669–676. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.055970. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
392. Connolly SJ, Ezekowitz MD, Yusuf S, Eikelboom J, Oldgren J, Parekh A, Pogue J, Reilly PA, Themeles E, Varrone J, Wang S, Alings M, Xavier D, Zhu J, Diaz R, Lewis BS, Darius H, Diener HC, Joyner CD, Wallentin L, RE-LY Steering Committee and Investigators Dabigatran versus warfarin in patients with atrial
fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1139–1151. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0905561. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
393. Uchino K, Hernandez AV. Dabigatran association with higher risk of acute coronary events:
meta-analysis of noninferiority randomized controlled trials. Arch Intern Med. 2012;172:397–402. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2011.1666. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
394. Hori M, Connolly SJ, Ezekowitz MD, Reilly PA, Yusuf S, Wallentin L, RE-LY Investigators Efficacy and safety of dabigatran vs. warfarin in patients with
atrial fibrillation: sub-analysis in Japanese population in RE-LY
trial. Circ J. 2011;75:800–805. doi: 10.1253/circj.cj-11-0191. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
395. Oldgren J, Alings M, Darius H, Diener HC, Eikelboom J, Ezekowitz MD, Kamensky G, Reilly PA, Yang S, Yusuf S, Wallentin L, Connolly SJ, RE-LY Investigators Risks for stroke, bleeding, and death in patients with atrial
fibrillation receiving dabigatran or warfarin in relation to the CHADS2
score: a subgroup analysis of the RE-LY trial. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155:660–667. W204. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-155-10-201111150-00004. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
396. Eikelboom JW, Wallentin L, Connolly SJ, Ezekowitz M, Healey JS, Oldgren J, Yang S, Alings M, Kaatz S, Hohnloser SH, Diener HC, Franzosi MG, Huber K, Reilly P, Varrone J, Yusuf S. Risk of bleeding with 2 doses of dabigatran compared with
warfarin in older and younger patients with atrial fibrillation: an analysis
of the randomized evaluation of long-term anticoagulant therapy (RE-LY)
trial. Circulation. 2011;123:2363–2372. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.004747. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
397. Patel MR, Mahaffey KW, Garg J, Pan G, Singer DE, Hacke W, Breithardt G, Halperin JL, Hankey GJ, Piccini JP, Becker RC, Nessel CC, Paolini JF, Berkowitz SD, Fox KA, Califf RM, ROCKET AF Investigators Rivaroxaban versus warfarin in nonvalvular atrial
fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:883–891. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1009638. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
398. Hankey GJ, Patel MR, Stevens SR, Becker RC, Breithardt G, Carolei A, Diener HC, Donnan GA, Halperin JL, Mahaffey KW, Mas JL, Massaro A, Norrving B, Nessel CC, Paolini JF, Roine RO, Singer DE, Wong L, Califf RM, Fox KA, Hacke W, ROCKET AF Steering Committee Investigators Rivaroxaban compared with warfarin in patients with atrial
fibrillation and previous stroke or transient ischaemic attack: a subgroup
analysis of ROCKET AF. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11:315–322. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70042-X. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
399. Fox KA, Piccini JP, Wojdyla D, Becker RC, Halperin JL, Nessel CC, Paolini JF, Hankey GJ, Mahaffey KW, Patel MR, Singer DE, Califf RM. Prevention of stroke and systemic embolism with rivaroxaban
compared with warfarin in patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation and
moderate renal impairment. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:2387–2394. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr342. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
400. Fleming TR, Emerson SS. Evaluating rivaroxaban for nonvalvular atrial fibrillation:
regulatory considerations. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1557–1559. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp1110639. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
401. Connolly SJ, Eikelboom J, Joyner C, Diener HC, Hart R, Golitsyn S, Flaker G, Avezum A, Hohnloser SH, Diaz R, Talajic M, Zhu J, Pais P, Budaj A, Parkhomenko A, Jansky P, Commerford P, Tan RS, Sim KH, Lewis BS, Van Mieghem W, Lip GY, Kim JH, Lanas-Zanetti F, Gonzalez-Hermosillo A, Dans AL, Munawar M, O’Donnell M, Lawrence J, Lewis G, Afzal R, Yusuf S, AVERROES Steering Committee and Investigators Apixaban in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:806–817. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1007432. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
402. Granger CB, Alexander JH, McMurray JJ, Lopes RD, Hylek EM, Hanna M, Al-Khalidi HR, Ansell J, Atar D, Avezum A, Bahit MC, Diaz R, Easton JD, Ezekowitz JA, Flaker G, Garcia D, Geraldes M, Gersh BJ, Golitsyn S, Goto S, Hermosillo AG, Hohnloser SH, Horowitz J, Mohan P, Jansky P, Lewis BS, Lopez-Sendon JL, Pais P, Parkhomenko A, Verheugt FW, Zhu J, Wallentin L, ARISTOTLE Committees and Investigators Apixaban versus warfarin in patients with atrial
fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:981–992. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1107039. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
403. Diener HC, Eikelboom J, Connolly SJ, Joyner CD, Hart RG, Lip GY, O’Donnell M, Hohnloser SH, Hankey GJ, Shestakovska O, Yusuf S, AVERROES Steering Committee and Investigators Apixaban versus aspirin in patients with atrial fibrillation and
previous stroke or transient ischaemic attack: a predefined subgroup
analysis from AVERROES, a randomised trial. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11:225–231. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70017-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
404. Easton JD, Lopes RD, Bahit MC, Wojdyla DM, Granger CB, Wallentin L, Alings M, Goto S, Lewis BS, Rosenqvist M, Hanna M, Mohan P, Alexander JH, Diener HC, ARISTOTLE Committees and Investigators Apixaban compared with warfarin in patients with atrial
fibrillation and previous stroke or transient ischaemic attack: a subgroup
analysis of the ARISTOTLE trial. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11:503–511. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70092-3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
405. Hohnloser SH, Hijazi Z, Thomas L, Alexander JH, Amerena J, Hanna M, Keltai M, Lanas F, Lopes RD, Lopez-Sendon J, Granger CB, Wallentin L. Efficacy of apixaban when compared with warfarin in relation to
renal function in patients with atrial fibrillation: insights from the
ARISTOTLE trial. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2821–2830. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs274. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
406. Freeman JV, Zhu RP, Owens DK, Garber AM, Hutton DW, Go AS, Wang PJ, Turakhia MP. Cost-effectiveness of dabigatran compared with warfarin for
stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:1–11. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-154-1-201101040-00289. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
407. Kamel H, Johnston SC, Easton JD, Kim AS. Cost-effectiveness of dabigatran compared with warfarin for
stroke prevention in patients with atrial fibrillation and prior stroke or
transient ischemic attack. Stroke. 2012;43:881–883. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.641027. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
408. Kansal AR, Sorensen SV, Gani R, Robinson P, Pan F, Plumb JM, Cowie MR. Cost-effectiveness of dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of
stroke and systemic embolism in UK patients with atrial
fibrillation. Heart. 2012;98:573–578. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2011-300646. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
409. Shah SV, Gage BF. Cost-effectiveness of dabigatran for stroke prophylaxis in atrial
fibrillation. Circulation. 2011;123:2562–2570. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.985655. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
410. Krauel K, Hackbarth C, Furll B, Greinacher A. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: in vitro studies on the
interaction of dabigatran, rivaroxaban, and low-sulfated heparin, with
platelet factor 4 and anti-PF4/heparin antibodies. Blood. 2012;119:1248–1255. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-353391. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
411. Chatterjee S, Sardar P, Biondi-Zoccai G, Kumbhani DJ. New oral anticoagulants and the risk of intracranial hemorrhage:
traditional and bayesian meta-analysis and mixed treatment comparison of
randomized trials of new oral anticoagulants in atrial
fibrillation. JAMA Neurol. 2013;70:1486–1490. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.4021. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
412. Kaatz S, Kouides PA, Garcia DA, Spyropolous AC, Crowther M, Douketis JD, Chan AK, James A, Moll S, Ortel TL, Van Cott EM, Ansell J. Guidance on the emergent reversal of oral thrombin and factor Xa
inhibitors. Am J Hematol. 2012;87(suppl 1):S141–S145. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23202. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
413. Dowlatshahi D, Butcher KS, Asdaghi N, Nahirniak S, Bernbaum ML, Giulivi A, Wasserman JK, Poon MC, Coutts SB, Canadian PCC Registry (CanPro) Investigators Poor prognosis in warfarin-associated intracranial hemorrhage
despite anticoagulation reversal. Stroke. 2012;43:1812–1817. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.652065. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
414. ACTIVE Writing Group of the ACTIVE Investigators. Connolly S, Pogue J, Hart R, Pfeffer M, Hohnloser S, Chrolavicius S, Yusuf S. Clopidogrel plus aspirin versus oral anticoagulation for atrial
fibrillation in the Atrial fibrillation Clopidogrel Trial with Irbesartan
for prevention of Vascular Events (ACTIVE W): a randomised controlled
trial. Lancet. 2006;367:1903–1912. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68845-4. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
415. ACTIVE Investigators. Connolly SJ, Pogue J, Hart RG, Hohnloser SH, Pfeffer M, Chrolavicius S, Yusuf S. Effect of clopidogrel added to aspirin in patients with atrial
fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:2066–2078. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0901301. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
416. Connolly SJ, Eikelboom JW, Ng J, Hirsh J, Yusuf S, Pogue J, de Caterina R, Hohnloser S, Hart RG, ACTIVE (Atrial Fibrillation Clopidogrel Trial with Irbesartan for
Prevention of Vascular Events) Steering Committee and
Investigators Net clinical benefit of adding clopidogrel to aspirin therapy in
patients with atrial fibrillation for whom vitamin K antagonists are
unsuitable. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155:579–586. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-155-9-201111010-00004. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
417. Singer DE, Chang Y, Fang MC, Borowsky LH, Pomernacki NK, Udaltsova N, Go AS. The net clinical benefit of warfarin anticoagulation in atrial
fibrillation. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:297–305. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-151-5-200909010-00003. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
418. Eckman MH, Singer DE, Rosand J, Greenberg SM. Moving the tipping point: the decision to anticoagulate patients
with atrial fibrillation. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2011;4:14–21. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.110.958108. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
419. Eckman MH, Rosand J, Knudsen KA, Singer DE, Greenberg SM. Can patients be anticoagulated after intracerebral hemorrhage? A
decision analysis. Stroke. 2003;34:1710–1716. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000078311.18928.16. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
420. Eckman MH, Wong LK, Soo YO, Lam W, Yang SR, Greenberg SM, Rosand J. Patient-specific decision-making for warfarin therapy in
nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: how will screening with genetics and
imaging help? Stroke. 2008;39:3308–3315. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.523159. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
421. Hylek EM, Evans-Molina C, Shea C, Henault LE, Regan S. Major hemorrhage and tolerability of warfarin in the first year
of therapy among elderly patients with atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2007;115:2689–2696. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.653048. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
422. Arima H, Hart RG, Colman S, Chalmers J, Anderson C, Rodgers A, Woodward M, MacMahon S, Neal B, PROGRESS Collaborative Group Perindopril-based blood pressure-lowering reduces major vascular
events in patients with atrial fibrillation and prior stroke or transient
ischemic attack. Stroke. 2005;36:2164–2169. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000181115.59173.42. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
423. Chapman N, Huxley R, Anderson C, Bousser MG, Chalmers J, Colman S, Davis S, Donnan G, MacMahon S, Neal B, Warlow C, Woodward M, Writing Committee of the PROGRESS Collaborative Group Effects of a perindopril-based blood pressure-lowering regimen on
the risk of recurrent stroke according to stroke subtype and medical
history: the PROGRESS Trial. Stroke. 2004;35:116–121. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000106480.76217.6F. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
424. Lip GY, Frison L, Grind M, SPORTIF Investigators Effect of hypertension on anticoagulated patients with atrial
fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:752–759. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehl504. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
425. Garcia DA, Witt DM, Hylek E, Wittkowsky AK, Nutescu EA, Jacobson A, Moll S, Merli GJ, Crowther M, Earl L, Becker RC, Oertel L, Jaffer A, Ansell JE, Anticoagulation Forum Delivery of optimized anticoagulant therapy: consensus statement
from the Anticoagulation Forum. Ann Pharmacother. 2008;42:979–988. doi: 10.1345/aph.1L098. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
426. Shireman TI, Howard PA, Kresowik TF, Ellerbeck EF. Combined anticoagulant-antiplatelet use and major bleeding events
in elderly atrial fibrillation patients. Stroke. 2004;35:2362–2367. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000141933.75462.c2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
427. van Walraven C, Hart RG, Singer DE, Laupacis A, Connolly S, Petersen P, Koudstaal PJ, Chang Y, Hellemons B. Oral anticoagulants vs aspirin in nonvalvular atrial
fibrillation: an individual patient meta-analysis. JAMA. 2002;288:2441–2448. doi: 10.1001/jama.288.19.2441. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
428. Fuster V, Ryden LE, Cannom DS, Crijns HJ, Curtis AB, Ellenbogen KA, Halperin JL, Le Heuzey JY, Kay GN, Lowe JE, Olsson SB, Prystowsky EN, Tamargo JL, Wann S, Smith SC, Jr, Jacobs AK, Adams CD, Anderson JL, Antman EM, Hunt SA, Nishimura R, Ornato JP, Page RL, Riegel B, Priori SG, Blanc JJ, Budaj A, Camm AJ, Dean V, Deckers JW, Despres C, Dickstein K, Lekakis J, McGregor K, Metra M, Morais J, Osterspey A, Zamorano JL, American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines; European Society of Cardiology Committee for
Practice Guidelines; European Heart Rhythm Association; Heart Rhythm
Society ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for the management of patients with
atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the European Society
of Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise
the 2001 Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Atrial
Fibrillation): developed in collaboration with the European Heart Rhythm
Association and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2006;114:e257–e354. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.177292. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
429. Singer DE, Albers GW, Dalen JE, Fang MC, Go AS, Halperin JL, Lip GY, Manning WJ, American College of Chest Physicians Antithrombotic therapy in atrial fibrillation: American College
of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th
edition) Chest. 2008;133:546S–592S. doi: 10.1378/chest.08-0678. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
430. Karjalainen PP, Porela P, Ylitalo A, Vikman S, Nyman K, Vaittinen MA, Airaksinen TJ, Niemela M, Vahlberg T, Airaksinen KE. Safety and efficacy of combined antiplatelet-warfarin therapy
after coronary stenting. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:726–732. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehl488. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
431. Ruiz-Nodar JM, Marin F, Hurtado JA, Valencia J, Pinar E, Pineda J, Gimeno JR, Sogorb F, Valdes M, Lip GY. Anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy use in 426 patients with
atrial fibrillation undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention and stent
implantation implications for bleeding risk and prognosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;51:818–825. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.11.035. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
432. Camm AJ, Lip GY, De Caterina R, Savelieva I, Atar D, Hohnloser SH, Hindricks G, Kirchhof P, ESC Committee for Practice Guidelines (CPG) 2012 Focused update of the ESC guidelines for the management of
atrial fibrillation: an update of the 2010 ESC guidelines for the management
of atrial fibrillation: developed with the special contribution of the
European Heart Rhythm Association. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2719–2747. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs253. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
433. Francescone S, Halperin JL. “Triple therapy” or triple threat? Balancing the
risks of antithrombotic therapy for patients with atrial fibrillation and
coronary stents. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;51:826–827. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.11.034. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
434. Rubboli A, Halperin JL, Juhani Airaksinen KE, Buerke M, Eeckhout E, Freedman SB, Gershlick AH, Schlitt A, Fat Tse H, Verheugt FW, Lip GY. Antithrombotic therapy in patients treated with oral
anticoagulation undergoing coronary artery stenting: an expert consensus
document with focus on atrial fibrillation. Ann Med. 2008;40:428–436. doi: 10.1080/07853890802089786. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
435. King SB, 3rd, Smith SC, Jr, Hirshfeld JW, Jr, Jacobs AK, Morrison DA, Williams DO, Feldman TE, Kern MJ, O’Neill WW, Schaff HV, Whitlow PL, ACC/AHA/SCAI. Adams CD, Anderson JL, Buller CE, Creager MA, Ettinger SM, Halperin JL, Hunt SA, Krumholz HM, Kushner FG, Lytle BW, Nishimura R, Page RL, Riegel B, Tarkington LG, Yancy CW. 2007 Focused update of the ACC/AHA/SCAI 2005 guideline update for
percutaneous coronary intervention: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;51:172–209. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.10.002. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
436. Holmes DR, Reddy VY, Turi ZG, Doshi SK, Sievert H, Buchbinder M, Mullin CM, Sick P, PROTECT AF Investigators Percutaneous closure of the left atrial appendage versus warfarin
therapy for prevention of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation: a
randomised non-inferiority trial. Lancet. 2009;374:534–542. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61343-X. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
437. Reddy VY, Doshi SK, Sievert H, Buchbinder M, Neuzil P, Huber K, Halperin JL, Holmes D, PROTECT AF Investigators Percutaneous left atrial appendage closure for stroke prophylaxis
in patients with atrial fibrillation: 2.3-year follow-up of the PROTECT AF
(Watchman Left Atrial Appendage System for Embolic Protection in Patients
with Atrial Fibrillation) Trial. Circulation. 2013;127:720–729. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.114389. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
438. Wyse DG, Waldo AL, DiMarco JP, Domanski MJ, Rosenberg Y, Schron EB, Kellen JC, Greene HL, Mickel MC, Dalquist JE, Corley SD, Atrial Fibrillation Follow-up Investigation of Rhythm Management
(AFFIRM) Investigators A comparison of rate control and rhythm control in patients with
atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1825–1833. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa021328. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
439. Verma A, Champagne J, Sapp J, Essebag V, Novak P, Skanes A, Morillo CA, Khaykin Y, Birnie D. Discerning the incidence of symptomatic and asymptomatic episodes
of atrial fibrillation before and after catheter ablation (DISCERN AF): a
prospective, multicenter study. JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173:149–156. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.1561. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
440. Carlsson J, Miketic S, Windeler J, Cuneo A, Haun S, Micus S, Walter S, Tebbe U, STAF Investigators Randomized trial of rate-control versus rhythm-control in
persistent atrial fibrillation: the Strategies of Treatment of Atrial
Fibrillation (STAF) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:1690–1696. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(03)00332-2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
441. Hohnloser SH, Kuck KH, Lilienthal J. Rhythm or rate control in atrial fibrillation: Pharmacological
Intervention in Atrial Fibrillation (PIAF): a randomised
trial. Lancet. 2000;356:1789–1794. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)03230-x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
442. Van Gelder IC, Hagens VE, Bosker HA, Kingma JH, Kamp O, Kingma T, Said SA, Darmanata JI, Timmermans AJ, Tijssen JG, Crijns HJ, Rate Control Versus Electrical Cardioversion for Persistent Atrial
Fibrillation Study Group A comparison of rate control and rhythm control in patients with
recurrent persistent atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1834–1840. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa021375. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
443. American College of Cardiology Foundation; American Heart
Association; European Society of Cardiology; Heart Rhythm
Society. Wann LS, Curtis AB, Ellenbogen KA, Estes NA, Ezekowitz MD, Jackman WM, January CT, Lowe JE, Page RL, Slotwiner DJ, Stevenson WG, Tracy CM, Fuster V, Ryden LE, Cannom DS, Crijns HJ, Halperin JL, Le Heuzey J, Kay GN, Olsson SB, Prystowsky EN, Tamargo JL. Management of patients with atrial fibrillation (compilation of
2006 ACCF/AHA/ESC and 2011 ACCF/AHA/HRS recommendations): a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
practice guidelines. Circulation. 2013;127:1916–1926. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e318290826d. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
444. Piccini JP, Stevens SR, Lokhnygina Y, Patel MR, Halperin JL, Singer DE, Hankey GJ, Hacke W, Becker RC, Nessel CC, Mahaffey KW, Fox KA, Califf RM, Breithardt G, ROCKET AF Steering Committee & Investigators Outcomes after cardioversion and atrial fibrillation ablation in
patients treated with rivaroxaban and warfarin in the ROCKET AF
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1998–2006. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.02.025. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
445. Nagarakanti R, Ezekowitz MD, Oldgren J, Yang S, Chernick M, Aikens TH, Flaker G, Brugada J, Kamensky G, Parekh A, Reilly PA, Yusuf S, Connolly SJ. Dabigatran versus warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation:
an analysis of patients undergoing cardioversion. Circulation. 2011;123:131–136. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.977546. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
446. Witt BJ, Ballman KV, Brown RD, Jr, Meverden RA, Jacobsen SJ, Roger VL. The incidence of stroke after myocardial infarction: a
meta-analysis. Am J Med. 2006;119:354.e1–354e.9. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2005.10.058. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
447. Osherov AB, Borovik-Raz M, Aronson D, Agmon Y, Kapeliovich M, Kerner A, Grenadier E, Hammerman H, Nikolsky E, Roguin A. Incidence of early left ventricular thrombus after acute anterior
wall myocardial infarction in the primary coronary intervention
era. Am Heart J. 2009;157:1074–1080. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2009.03.020. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
448. Solheim S, Seljeflot I, Lunde K, Bjornerheim R, Aakhus S, Forfang K, Arnesen H. Frequency of left ventricular thrombus in patients with anterior
wall acute myocardial infarction treated with percutaneous coronary
intervention and dual antiplatelet therapy. Am J Cardiol. 2010;106:1197–1200. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2010.06.043. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
449. Schwalm JD, Ahmad M, Salehian O, Eikelboom JW, Natarajan MK. Warfarin after anterior myocardial infarction in current era of
dual antiplatelet therapy: a randomized feasibility trial. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2010;30:127–132. doi: 10.1007/s11239-010-0448-6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
450. Vaitkus PT, Barnathan ES. Embolic potential, prevention and management of mural thrombus
complicating anterior myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;22:1004–1009. doi: 10.1016/0735-1097(93)90409-t. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
451. Hurlen M, Abdelnoor M, Smith P, Erikssen J, Arnesen H. Warfarin, aspirin, or both after myocardial
infarction. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:969–974. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa020496. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
452. Andreotti F, Testa L, Biondi-Zoccai GG, Crea F. Aspirin plus warfarin compared to aspirin alone after acute
coronary syndromes: an updated and comprehensive meta-analysis of 25,307
patients. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:519–526. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehi485. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
453. O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, Casey DE, Jr, Chung MK, de Lemos JA, Ettinger SM, Fang JC, Fesmire FM, Franklin BA, Granger CB, Krumholz HM, Linderbaum JA, Morrow DA, Newby LK, Ornato JP, Ou N, Radford MJ, Tamis-Holland JE, Tommaso CL, Tracy CM, Woo YJ, Zhao DX, Anderson JL, Jacobs AK, Halperin JL, Albert NM, Brindis RG, Creager MA, DeMets D, Guyton RA, Hochman JS, Kovacs RJ, Kushner FG, Ohman EM, Stevenson WG, Yancy CW, American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association
Task Force on Practice Guidelines 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation
myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;127:e362–e425. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3182742cf6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
454. Cleland JG, Findlay I, Jafri S, Sutton G, Falk R, Bulpitt C, Prentice C, Ford I, Trainer A, Poole-Wilson PA. The Warfarin/Aspirin Study in Heart failure (WASH): a randomized
trial comparing antithrombotic strategies for patients with heart
failure. Am Heart J. 2004;148:157–164. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2004.03.010. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
455. Massie BM, Collins JF, Ammon SE, Armstrong PW, Cleland JG, Ezekowitz M, Jafri SM, Krol WF, O’Connor CM, Schulman KA, Teo K, Warren SR, WATCH Trial Investigators Randomized trial of warfarin, aspirin, and clopidogrel in
patients with chronic heart failure: the Warfarin and Antiplatelet Therapy
in Chronic Heart Failure (WATCH) trial. Circulation. 2009;119:1616–1624. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.801753. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
456. Cokkinos DV, Haralabopoulos GC, Kostis JB, Toutouzas PK, HELAS Investigators Efficacy of antithrombotic therapy in chronic heart failure: the
HELAS study. Eur J Heart Fail. 2006;8:428–432. doi: 10.1016/j.ejheart.2006.02.012. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
457. Homma S, Thompson JL, Pullicino PM, Levin B, Freudenberger RS, Teerlink JR, Ammon SE, Graham S, Sacco RL, Mann DL, Mohr JP, Massie BM, Labovitz AJ, Anker SD, Lok DJ, Ponikowski P, Estol CJ, Lip GY, Di Tullio MR, Sanford AR, Mejia V, Gabriel AP, del Valle ML, Buchsbaum R, WARCEF Investigators Warfarin and aspirin in patients with heart failure and sinus
rhythm. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1859–1869. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1202299. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
458. Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH, Feldman AM, Francis GS, Ganiats TG, Jessup M, Konstam MA, Mancini DM, Michl K, Oates JA, Rahko PS, Silver MA, Stevenson LW, Yancy CW. 2009 Focused update incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2005 guidelines
for the diagnosis and management of heart failure in adults: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines: developed in collaboration with the
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. Circulation. 2009;119:e391–e479. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192065. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
459. Whitlock RP, Sun JC, Fremes SE, Rubens FD, Teoh KH, American College of Chest Physicians Antithrombotic and thrombolytic therapy for valvular disease:
Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American
College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice
Guidelines. Chest. 2012;141:e576S–e600S. doi: 10.1378/chest.11-2305. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
460. Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Chatterjee K, de Leon AC, Jr, Faxon DP, Freed MD, Gaasch WH, Lytle BW, Nishimura RA, O’Gara PT, O’Rourke RA, Otto CM, Shah PM, Shanewise JS. 2008 Focused update incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines
for the management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise the 1998 Guidelines for the
Management of Patients With Valvular Heart Disease) Circulation. 2008;118:e523–e661. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.190748. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
461. Barletta GA, Gagliardi R, Benvenuti L, Fantini F. Cerebral ischemic attacks as a complication of aortic and mitral
valve prolapse. Stroke. 1985;16:219–223. doi: 10.1161/01.str.16.2.219. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
462. Gilon D, Buonanno FS, Joffe MM, Leavitt M, Marshall JE, Kistler JP, Levine RA. Lack of evidence of an association between mitral-valve prolapse
and stroke in young patients. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:8–13. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199907013410102. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
463. Freed LA, Levy D, Levine RA, Larson MG, Evans JC, Fuller DL, Lehman B, Benjamin EJ. Prevalence and clinical outcome of mitral-valve
prolapse. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:1–7. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199907013410101. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
464. Avierinos JF, Brown RD, Foley DA, Nkomo V, Petty GW, Scott C, Enriquez-Sarano M. Cerebral ischemic events after diagnosis of mitral valve
prolapse: a community-based study of incidence and predictive
factors. Stroke. 2003;34:1339–1344. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000072274.12041.FF. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
465. Benjamin EJ, Plehn JF, D’Agostino RB, Belanger AJ, Comai K, Fuller DL, Wolf PA, Levy D. Mitral annular calcification and the risk of stroke in an elderly
cohort. N Engl J Med. 1992;327:374–379. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199208063270602. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
466. Kizer JR, Wiebers DO, Whisnant JP, Galloway JM, Welty TK, Lee ET, Best LG, Resnick HE, Roman MJ, Devereux RB. Mitral annular calcification, aortic valve sclerosis, and
incident stroke in adults free of clinical cardiovascular disease: the
Strong Heart Study. Stroke. 2005;36:2533–2537. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000190005.09442.ad. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
467. Kohsaka S, Jin Z, Rundek T, Boden-Albala B, Homma S, Sacco RL, Di Tullio MR. Impact of mitral annular calcification on cardiovascular events
in a multiethnic community: the Northern Manhattan Study. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2008;1:617–623. doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2008.07.006. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
468. Jilaihawi H, Chakravarty T, Weiss RE, Fontana GP, Forrester J, Makkar RR. Meta-analysis of complications in aortic valve replacement:
comparison of Medtronic-Corevalve, Edwards-Sapien and surgical aortic valve
replacement in 8,536 patients. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2012;80:128–138. doi: 10.1002/ccd.23368. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
469. Heras M, Chesebro JH, Fuster V, Penny WJ, Grill DE, Bailey KR, Danielson GK, Orszulak TA, Pluth JR, Puga FJ, Schaff HV, Larsonkeller JJ. High risk of thromboemboli early after bioprosthetic cardiac
valve replacement. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995;25:1111–1119. doi: 10.1016/0735-1097(94)00563-6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
470. Cannegieter SC, Rosendaal FR, Briet E. Thromboembolic and bleeding complications in patients with
mechanical heart valve prostheses. Circulation. 1994;89:635–641. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.89.2.635. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
471. Vahedi K, Amarenco P. Cardiac causes of stroke. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2000;2:305–318. doi: 10.1007/s11940-000-0048-4. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
472. Stein PD, Alpert JS, Dalen JE, Horstkotte D, Turpie AG. Antithrombotic therapy in patients with mechanical and biological
prosthetic heart valves. Chest. 1998;114(suppl):602S–610S. doi: 10.1378/chest.114.5_supplement.602s. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
473. Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Brueckmann M, Granger CB, Kappetein AP, Mack MJ, Blatchford J, Devenny K, Friedman J, Guiver K, Harper R, Khder Y, Lobmeyer MT, Maas H, Voigt JU, Simoons ML, Van de Werf F, RE-ALIGN Investigators Dabigatran versus warfarin in patients with mechanical heart
valves. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:1206–1214. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1300615. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
474. Mylonakis E, Calderwood SB. Infective endocarditis in adults. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1318–1330. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra010082. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
475. Thuny F, Di Salvo G, Belliard O, Avierinos JF, Pergola V, Rosenberg V, Casalta JP, Gouvernet J, Derumeaux G, Iarussi D, Ambrosi P, Calabro R, Riberi A, Collart F, Metras D, Lepidi H, Raoult D, Harle JR, Weiller PJ, Cohen A, Habib G. Risk of embolism and death in infective endocarditis: prognostic
value of echocardiography: a prospective multicenter study. Circulation. 2005;112:69–75. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.104.493155. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
476. Vilacosta I, Graupner C, San Roman JA, Sarria C, Ronderos R, Fernandez C, Mancini L, Sanz O, Sanmartin JV, Stoermann W. Risk of embolization after institution of antibiotic therapy for
infective endocarditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39:1489–1495. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(02)01790-4. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
477. Dickerman SA, Abrutyn E, Barsic B, Bouza E, Cecchi E, Moreno A, Doco-Lecompte T, Eisen DP, Fortes CQ, Fowler VG, Jr, Lerakis S, Miro JM, Pappas P, Peterson GE, Rubinstein E, Sexton DJ, Suter F, Tornos P, Verhagen DW, Cabell CH, ICE Investigators The relationship between the initiation of antimicrobial therapy
and the incidence of stroke in infective endocarditis: an analysis from the
ICE Prospective Cohort Study (ICE-PCS) Am Heart J. 2007;154:1086–1094. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2007.07.023. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
478. Heiro M, Nikoskelainen J, Engblom E, Kotilainen E, Marttila R, Kotilainen P. Neurologic manifestations of infective endocarditis: a 17-year
experience in a teaching hospital in Finland. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160:2781–2787. doi: 10.1001/archinte.160.18.2781. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
479. Cabell CH, Pond KK, Peterson GE, Durack DT, Corey GR, Anderson DJ, Ryan T, Lukes AS, Sexton DJ. The risk of stroke and death in patients with aortic and mitral
valve endocarditis. Am Heart J. 2001;142:75–80. doi: 10.1067/mhj.2001.115790. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
480. Dutta T, Karas MG, Segal AZ, Kizer JR. Yield of transesophageal echocardiography for nonbacterial
thrombotic endocarditis and other cardiac sources of embolism in cancer
patients with cerebral ischemia. Am J Cardiol. 2006;97:894–898. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.09.140. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
481. Lechat P, Mas J, Lascault G, Loron P, Theard M, Klimczac M, Drobinski G, Thomas D, Grosgogeat Y. Prevalence of patent foramen ovale in patients with
stroke. N Engl J Med. 1988;318:1148–1152. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198805053181802. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
482. Homma S, Sacco RL, Di Tullio MR, Sciacca RR, Mohr JP, Patent Foramen Ovale in Cryptogenic Stroke Study (PICSS)
Investigators Effect of medical treatment in stroke patients with patent
foramen ovale: Patent Foramen Ovale in Cryptogenic Stroke
Study. Circulation. 2002;105:2625–2631. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000017498.88393.44. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
483. Di Tullio MR, Sacco RL, Sciacca RR, Jin Z, Homma S. Patent foramen ovale and the risk of ischemic stroke in a
multiethnic population. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:797–802. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2006.08.063. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
484. Kizer JR, Devereux RB. Clinical practice: patent foramen ovale in young adults with
unexplained stroke. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:2361–2372. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcp043981. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
485. Gu X, He Y, Li Z, Kontos MC, Paulsen WH, Arrowood JA, Nixon JV. Comparison of frequencies of patent foramen ovale and thoracic
aortic atherosclerosis in patients with cryptogenic ischemic stroke
undergoing transesophageal echocardiography. Am J Cardiol. 2011;108:1815–1819. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2011.07.058. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
486. Overell J, Bone I, Lees K. Interatrial septal abnormalities and stroke: a meta-analysis of
case-control studies. Neurology. 2000;55:1172–1179. doi: 10.1212/wnl.55.8.1172. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
487. O’Gara PT, Messe SR, Tuzcu EM, Catha G, Ring JC, American Heart Association; American Stroke Association; American
College of Cardiology Foundation Percutaneous device closure of patent foramen ovale for secondary
stroke prevention: a call for completion of randomized clinical trials: a
science advisory from the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association and the American College of Cardiology
Foundation. Circulation. 2009;119:2743–2747. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192272. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
488. Handke M, Harloff A, Olschewski M, Hetzel A, Geibel A. Patent foramen ovale and cryptogenic stroke in older
patients. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:2262–2268. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa071422. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
489. Meissner I, Khandheria BK, Heit JA, Petty GW, Sheps SG, Schwartz GL, Whisnant JP, Wiebers DO, Covalt JL, Petterson TM, Christianson TJ, Agmon Y. Patent foramen ovale: innocent or guilty? Evidence from a
prospective population-based study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:440–445. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.10.044. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
490. Goel SS, Tuzcu EM, Shishehbor MH, de Oliveira EI, Borek PP, Krasuski RA, Rodriguez LL, Kapadia SR. Morphology of the patent foramen ovale in asymptomatic versus
symptomatic (stroke or transient ischemic attack) patients. Am J Cardiol. 2009;103:124–129. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.08.036. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
491. Mas JL, Arquizan C, Lamy C, Zuber M, Cabanes L, Derumeaux G, Coste J, Patent Foramen Ovale and Atrial Septal Aneurysm Study Group Recurrent cerebrovascular events associated with patent foramen
ovale, atrial septal aneurysm, or both. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1740–1746. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa011503. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
492. Di Tullio MR, Jin Z, Russo C, Elkind MS, Rundek T, Yoshita M, DeCarli C, Wright CB, Homma S, Sacco RL. Patent foramen ovale, subclinical cerebrovascular disease, and
ischemic stroke in a population-based cohort. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:35–41. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.03.064. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
493. Furlan AJ, Reisman M, Massaro J, Mauri L, Adams H, Albers GW, Felberg R, Herrmann H, Kar S, Landzberg M, Raizner A, Wechsler L, CLOSURE I Investigators Closure or medical therapy for cryptogenic stroke with patent
foramen ovale. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:991–999. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1009639. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
494. Meier B, Kalesan B, Mattle HP, Khattab AA, Hildick-Smith D, Dudek D, Andersen G, Ibrahim R, Schuler G, Walton AS, Wahl A, Windecker S, Juni P, PC Trial Investigators Percutaneous closure of patent foramen ovale in cryptogenic
embolism. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1083–1091. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1211716. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
495. Carroll JD, Saver JL, Thaler DE, Smalling RW, Berry S, MacDonald LA, Marks DS, Tirschwell DL, RESPECT Investigators Closure of patent foramen ovale versus medical therapy after
cryptogenic stroke. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1092–1100. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1301440. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
496. Acebo E, Val-Bernal JF, Gomez-Roman JJ, Revuelta JM. Clinicopathologic study and DNA analysis of 37 cardiac myxomas: a
28-year experience. Chest. 2003;123:1379–1385. doi: 10.1378/chest.123.5.1379. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
497. Gowda RM, Khan IA, Nair CK, Mehta NJ, Vasavada BC, Sacchi TJ. Cardiac papillary fibroelastoma: a comprehensive analysis of 725
cases. Am Heart J. 2003;146:404–410. doi: 10.1016/S0002-8703(03)00249-7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
498. Roberts WC. Primary and secondary neoplasms of the heart. Am J Cardiol. 1997;80:671–682. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9149(97)00587-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
499. Reynen K. Cardiac myxomas. N Engl J Med. 1995;333:1610–1617. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199512143332407. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
500. Howard RA, Aldea GS, Shapira OM, Kasznica JM, Davidoff R. Papillary fibroelastoma: increasing recognition of a surgical
disease. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999;68:1881–1885. doi: 10.1016/s0003-4975(99)00860-7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
501. Sun JP, Asher CR, Yang XS, Cheng GG, Scalia GM, Massed AG, Griffin BP, Ratliff NB, Stewart WJ, Thomas JD. Clinical and echocardiographic characteristics of papillary
fibroelastomas: a retrospective and prospective study in 162
patients. Circulation. 2001;103:2687–2693. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.103.22.2687. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
502. Ekmektzoglou KA, Samelis GF, Xanthos T. Heart and tumors: location, metastasis, clinical manifestations,
diagnostic approaches and therapeutic considerations. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown) 2008;9:769–777. doi: 10.2459/JCM.0b013e3282f88e49. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
503. Amarenco P, Cohen A, Tzourio C, Bertrand B, Hommel M, Besson G, Chauvel C, Touboul PJ, Bousser MG. Atherosclerotic disease of the aortic arch and the risk of
ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med. 1994;331:1474–1479. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199412013312202. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
504. Di Tullio MR, Russo C, Jin Z, Sacco RL, Mohr JP, Homma S, Patent Foramen Ovale in Cryptogenic Stroke Study
Investigators Aortic arch plaques and risk of recurrent stroke and
death. Circulation. 2009;119:2376–2382. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.811935. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
505. Mackensen GB, Ti LK, Phillips-Bute BG, Mathew JP, Newman MF, Grocott HP, Neurologic Outcome Research Group (NORG) Cerebral embolization during cardiac surgery: impact of aortic
atheroma burden. Br J Anaesth. 2003;91:656–661. doi: 10.1093/bja/aeg234. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
506. Kronzon I, Tunick PA. Aortic atherosclerotic disease and stroke. Circulation. 2006;114:63–75. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.593418. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
507. Atherosclerotic disease of the aortic arch as a risk factor for
recurrent ischemic stroke: the French Study of Aortic Plaques in Stroke
Group. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:1216–1221. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199605093341902. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
508. Doty JR, Wilentz RE, Salazar JD, Hruban RH, Cameron DE. Atheroembolism in cardiac surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;75:1221–1226. doi: 10.1016/s0003-4975(02)04712-4. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
509. Dressler FA, Craig WR, Castello R, Labovitz AJ. Mobile aortic atheroma and systemic emboli: efficacy of
anticoagulation and influence of plaque morphology on recurrent
stroke. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;31:134–138. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(97)00449-x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
510. Ferrari E, Vidal R, Chevallier T, Baudouy M. Atherosclerosis of the thoracic aorta and aortic debris as a
marker of poor prognosis: benefit of oral anticoagulants. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;33:1317–1322. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(99)00003-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
511. Tunick PA, Nayar AC, Goodkin GM, Mirchandani S, Francescone S, Rosenzweig BP, Freedberg RS, Katz ES, Applebaum RM, Kronzon I, NYU Atheroma Group Effect of treatment on the incidence of stroke and other emboli
in 519 patients with severe thoracic aortic plaque. Am J Cardiol. 2002;90:1320–1325. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02870-9. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
512. Brott TG, Halperin JL, Abbara S, Bacharach JM, Barr JD, Bush RL, Cates CU, Creager MA, Fowler SB, Friday G, Hertzberg VS, McIff EB, Moore WS, Panagos PD, Riles TS, Rosenwasser RH, Taylor AJ, American College of Cardiology Foundation; American Stroke
Association; American Association of Neurological Surgeons; American
College of Radiology; American Society of Neuroradiology; Congress of
Neurological Surgeons; Society of Atherosclerosis Imaging and
Prevention; Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions;
Society of Interventional Radiology; Society of NeuroInterventional
Surgery; Society for Vascular Medicine; Society for Vascular
Surgery 2011
ASA/ACCF/AHA/AANN/AANS/ACR/ASNR/CNS/SAIP/SCAI/SIR/SNIS/SVM/SVS guideline on
the management of patients with extracranial carotid and vertebral artery
disease: executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and
the American Stroke Association, American Association of Neuroscience
Nurses, American Association of Neurological Surgeons, American College of
Radiology, American Society of Neuroradiology, Congress of Neurological
Surgeons, Society of Atherosclerosis Imaging and Prevention, Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Interventional
Radiology, Society of NeuroInterventional Surgery, Society for Vascular
Medicine, and Society for Vascular Surgery. Circulation. 2011;124:489–532. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31820d8d78. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
513. Endarterectomy for asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis:
Executive Committee for the Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis
Study. JAMA. 1995;273:1421–1428. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
514. Halliday A, Mansfield A, Marro J, Peto C, Peto R, Potter J, Thomas D, MRC Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST) Collaborative
Group Prevention of disabling and fatal strokes by successful carotid
endarterectomy in patients without recent neurological symptoms: randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;363:1491–1502. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16146-1. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
515. Hobson RW, 2nd, Weiss DG, Fields WS, Goldstone J, Moore WS, Towne JB, Wright CB. Efficacy of carotid endarterectomy for asymptomatic carotid
stenosis: the Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:221–227. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199301283280401. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
516. Hass WK, Fields WS, North RR, Kircheff II, Chase NE, Bauer RB. Joint Study of Extracranial Arterial Occlusion, II:
arteriography, techniques, sites, and complications. JAMA. 1968;203:961–968. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
517. Moore WS, Young B, Baker WH, Robertson JT, Toole JF, Vescera CL, Howard VJ. Surgical results: a justification of the surgeon selection
process for the ACAS trial: the ACAS Investigators. J Vasc Surg. 1996;23:323–328. doi: 10.1016/s0741-5214(96)70277-x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
518. Thiex R, Norbash AM, Frerichs KU. The safety of dedicated-team catheter-based diagnostic cerebral
angiography in the era of advanced noninvasive imaging. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2010;31:230–234. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A1803. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
519. Kaufmann TJ, Huston J, 3rd, Mandrekar JN, Schleck CD, Thielen KR, Kallmes DF. Complications of diagnostic cerebral angiography: evaluation of
19,826 consecutive patients. Radiology. 2007;243:812–819. doi: 10.1148/radiol.2433060536. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
520. Howard G, Chambless LE, Baker WH, Ricotta JJ, Jones AM, O’Leary D, Howard VJ, Elliott TJ, Lefkowitz DS, Toole JF. A multicenter validation study of Doppler ultrasound versus
angiography. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 1991;1:166–173. doi: 10.1016/S1052-3057(10)80013-8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
521. Johnston DC, Goldstein LB. Clinical carotid endarterectomy decision making: noninvasive
vascular imaging versus angiography. Neurology. 2001;56:1009–1015. doi: 10.1212/wnl.56.8.1009. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
522. Koelemay MJ, Nederkoorn PJ, Reitsma JB, Majoie CB. Systematic review of computed tomographic angiography for
assessment of carotid artery disease. Stroke. 2004;35:2306–2312. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000141426.63959.cc. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
523. Fine-Edelstein JS, Wolf PA, O’Leary DH, Poehlman H, Belanger AJ, Kase CS, D’Agostino RB. Precursors of extracranial carotid atherosclerosis in the
Framingham study. Neurology. 1994;44:1046–1050. doi: 10.1212/wnl.44.6.1046. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
524. Weber F. Risk factors for subclinical carotid atherosclerosis in healthy
men. Neurology. 2002;59:524–528. doi: 10.1212/wnl.59.4.524. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
525. Ratchford EV, Jin Z, Di Tullio MR, Salameh MJ, Homma S, Gan R, Boden-Albala B, Sacco RL, Rundek T. Carotid bruit for detection of hemodynamically significant
carotid stenosis: the Northern Manhattan Study. Neurol Res. 2009;31:748–752. doi: 10.1179/174313209X382458. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
526. Rubin MN, Barrett KM, Brott TG, Meschia JF. Asymptomatic carotid stenosis: What we can learn from the next
generation of randomized clinical trials. J R Soc Med Cardiovasc Dis. doi: 10.117/2048004014529419. http://cvd.sagepub.com/content/3/2048004014529419 . Accessed May 1, 2014. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] 
527. McPhee JT, Hill JS, Ciocca RG, Messina LM, Eslami MH. Carotid endarterectomy was performed with lower stroke and death
rates than carotid artery stenting in the United States in 2003 and
2004. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46:1112–1118. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2007.08.030. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
528. Kresowik TF, Bratzler DW, Kresowik RA, Hendel ME, Grund SL, Brown KR, Nilasena DS. Multistate improvement in process and outcomes of carotid
endarterectomy. J Vasc Surg. 2004;39:372–380. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2003.09.023. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
529. Voeks JH, Howard G, Roubin GS, Malas MB, Cohen DJ, Sternbergh WC, 3rd, Aronow HD, Eskandari MK, Sheffet AJ, Lal BK, Meschia JF, Brott TG, CREST Investigators Age and outcomes after carotid stenting and endarterectomy: the
Carotid Revascularization Endarterectomy Versus Stenting
Trial. Stroke. 2011;42:3484–3490. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.624155. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
530. White RA, Sicard GA, Zwolak RM, Sidawy AN, Schermerhorn ML, Shackelton RJ, Siami FS. Society of Vascular Surgery Vascular Registry comparison of
carotid artery stenting outcomes for atherosclerotic vs nonatherosclerotic
carotid artery disease. J Vasc Surg. 2010;51:1116–1123. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2009.11.082. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
531. Goodney PP, Lucas FL, Likosky DS, Malenka DJ, Fisher ES. Changes in the use of carotid revascularization among the
Medicare population. Arch Surg. 2008;143:170–173. doi: 10.1001/archsurg.2007.43. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
532. Yadav JS, Wholey MH, Kuntz RE, Fayad P, Katzen BT, Mishkel GJ, Bajwa TK, Whitlow P, Strickman NE, Jaff MR, Popma JJ, Snead DB, Cutlip DE, Firth BG, Ouriel K, Stenting and Angioplasty With Protection in Patients at High Risk
for Endarterectomy Investigators Protected carotid-artery stenting versus endarterectomy in
high-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1493–1501. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa040127. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
533. Gurm HS, Yadav JS, Fayad P, Katzen BT, Mishkel GJ, Bajwa TK, Ansel G, Strickman NE, Wang H, Cohen SA, Massaro JM, Cutlip DE, SAPPHIRE Investigators Long-term results of carotid stenting versus endarterectomy in high-risk
patients. 2008;358:1572–1579. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0708028. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
534. Goldstein LB. New data about stenting versus endarterectomy for symptomatic
carotid artery stenosis. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 2009;11:232–240. doi: 10.1007/s11936-009-0024-6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
535. Brott TG, Hobson RW, 2nd, Howard G, Roubin GS, Clark WM, Brooks W, Mackey A, Hill MD, Leimgruber PP, Sheffet AJ, Howard VJ, Moore WS, Voeks JH, Hopkins LN, Cutlip DE, Cohen DJ, Popma JJ, Ferguson RD, Cohen SN, Blackshear JL, Silver FL, Mohr JP, Lal BK, Meschia JF, CREST Investigators Stenting versus endarterectomy for treatment of carotid-artery
stenosis. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:11–23. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0912321. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
536. Pawaskar M, Satiani B, Balkrishnan R, Starr JE. Economic evaluation of carotid artery stenting versus carotid
endarterectomy for the treatment of carotid artery stenosis. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;205:413–419. doi: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2007.04.007. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
537. McPhee JT, Schanzer A, Messina LM, Eslami MH. Carotid artery stenting has increased rates of postprocedure
stroke, death, and resource utilization than does carotid endarterectomy in
the United States, 2005. J Vasc Surg. 2008;48:1442–1450. 1450.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2008.07.017. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
538. Young KC, Holloway RG, Burgin WS, Benesch CG. A cost-effectiveness analysis of carotid artery stenting compared
with endarterectomy. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2010;19:404–409. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2009.08.003. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
539. Lal BK, Meschia JF, Brott TG. CREST-2: Guiding treatments for asymptomatic carotid
disease. Endovascular Today. 2013 Sep;:73–76. [ Google Scholar ] 
540. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for carotid artery stenosis: U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147:854–859. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-147-12-200712180-00005. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
541. Abbott AL. Medical (nonsurgical) intervention alone is now best for
prevention of stroke associated with asymptomatic severe carotid stenosis:
results of a systematic review and analysis. Stroke. 2009;40:e573–e583. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.556068. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
542. Marquardt L, Geraghty OC, Mehta Z, Rothwell PM. Low risk of ipsilateral stroke in patients with asymptomatic
carotid stenosis on best medical treatment: a prospective, population-based
study. Stroke. 2010;41:e11–e17. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.561837. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
543. Woo K, Garg J, Hye RJ, Dilley RB. Contemporary results of carotid endarterectomy for asymptomatic
carotid stenosis. Stroke. 2010;41:975–979. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.578856. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
544. Halliday A, Harrison M, Hayter E, Kong X, Mansfield A, Marro J, Pan H, Peto R, Potter J, Rahimi K, Rau A, Robertson S, Streifler J, Thomas D, Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST) Collaborative
Group 10-Year stroke prevention after successful carotid endarterectomy
for asymptomatic stenosis (ACST-1): a multicentre randomised
trial. Lancet. 2010;376:1074–1084. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61197-X. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
545. Rothwell PM, Goldstein LB. Carotid endarterectomy for asymptomatic carotid stenosis:
asymptomatic carotid surgery trial. Stroke. 2004;35:2425–2427. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000141706.50170.a7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
546. Hirt LS. Progression rate and ipsilateral neurological events in
asymptomatic carotid stenosis. Stroke. 2014;45:702–706. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.613711. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
547. Adams RJ. Neurologic complications. In: Embury SH, Hebbel RP, Mohandas N, Steinberg MH, editors. Sickle Cell Disease: Basic Principals and Clinical Practice. New York, NY: Raven Press; 1994. pp. 599–621. [ Google Scholar ] 
548. Armstrong FD, Thompson RJ, Jr, Wang W, Zimmerman R, Pegelow CH, Miller S, Moser F, Bello J, Hurtig A, Vass K. Cognitive functioning and brain magnetic resonance imaging in
children with sickle cell disease: Neuropsychology Committee of the
Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell Disease. Pediatrics. 1996;97(pt 1):864–870. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
549. Ohene-Frempong K, Weiner SJ, Sleeper LA, Miller ST, Embury S, Moohr JW, Wethers DL, Pegelow CH, Gill FM. Cerebrovascular accidents in sickle cell disease: rates and risk
factors. Blood. 1998;91:288–294. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
550. Adams R, McKie V, Nichols F, Carl E, Zhang DL, McKie K, Figueroa R, Litaker M, Thompson W, Hess D. The use of transcranial ultrasonography to predict stroke in
sickle cell disease. N Engl J Med. 1992;326:605–610. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199202273260905. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
551. Adams RJ, McKie VC, Carl EM, Nichols FT, Perry R, Brock K, McKie K, Figueroa R, Litaker M, Weiner S, Brambilla D. Long-term stroke risk in children with sickle cell disease
screened with transcranial Doppler. Ann Neurol. 1997;42:699–704. doi: 10.1002/ana.410420505. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
552. Adams RJ, McKie VC, Hsu L, Files B, Vichinsky E, Pegelow C, Abboud M, Gallagher D, Kutlar A, Nichols FT, Bonds DR, Brambilla D. Prevention of a first stroke by transfusions in children with
sickle cell anemia and abnormal results on transcranial Doppler
ultrasonography. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:5–11. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199807023390102. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
553. Kwiatkowski JL, Granger S, Brambilla DJ, Brown RC, Miller ST, Adams RJ, STOP Trial Investigators Elevated blood flow velocity in the anterior cerebral artery and
stroke risk in sickle cell disease: extended analysis from the STOP
trial. Br J Haematol. 2006;134:333–339. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2006.06193.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
554. Fullerton HJ, Adams RJ, Zhao S, Johnston SC. Declining stroke rates in Californian children with sickle cell
disease. Blood. 2004;104:336–339. doi: 10.1182/blood-2004-02-0636. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
555. Ovbiagele B, Adams RJ. Trends in comorbid sickle cell disease among stroke
patients. J Neurol Sci. 2012;313:86–91. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.09.023. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
556. Jones A, Granger S, Brambilla D, Gallagher D, Vichinsky E, Woods G, Berman B, Roach S, Nichols F, Adams RJ. Can peak systolic velocities be used for prediction of stroke in
sickle cell anemia? Pediatr Radiol. 2005;35:66–72. doi: 10.1007/s00247-004-1282-9. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
557. McCarville MB, Goodin GS, Fortner G, Li CS, Smeltzer MP, Adams R, Wang W. Evaluation of a comprehensive transcranial Doppler screening
program for children with sickle cell anemia. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008;50:818–821. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21430. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
558. Raphael JL, Shetty PB, Liu H, Mahoney DH, Mueller BU. A critical assessment of transcranial Doppler screening rates in
a large pediatric sickle cell center: opportunities to improve healthcare
quality. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008;51:647–651. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21677. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
559. Eckrich MJ, Wang WC, Yang E, Arbogast PG, Morrow A, Dudley JA, Ray WA, Cooper WO. Adherence to transcranial Doppler screening guidelines among
children with sickle cell disease. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2013;60:270–274. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24240. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
560. National Institutes of Health. Management of Sickle Cell Disease. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health; 2002. (Publication No. 02-2117). [ Google Scholar ] 
561. Section on Hematology/Oncology Committee on Genetics; American Academy
of Pediatrics. Health supervision for children with sickle cell
disease. Pediatrics. 2002;109:526–535. doi: 10.1542/peds.109.3.526. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
562. Sampaio Silva G, Vicari P, Figueiredo MS, Filho AC, Valadi N, Massaro AR. Transcranial Doppler in adult patients with sickle cell
disease. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2006;21:38–41. doi: 10.1159/000089592. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
563. Valadi N, Silva GS, Bowman LS, Ramsingh D, Vicari P, Filho AC, Massaro AR, Kutlar A, Nichols FT, Adams RJ. Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography in adults with sickle cell
disease. Neurology. 2006;67:572–574. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000230150.39429.8e. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
564. Kirkham FJ, Hewes DK, Prengler M, Wade A, Lane R, Evans JP. Nocturnal hypoxaemia and central-nervous-system events in
sickle-cell disease. Lancet. 2001;357:1656–1659. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)04821-2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
565. Hollocks MJ, Kok TB, Kirkham FJ, Gavlak J, Inusa BP, DeBaun MR, de Haan M. Nocturnal oxygen desaturation and disordered sleep as a potential
factor in executive dysfunction in sickle cell anemia. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2012;18:168–173. doi: 10.1017/S1355617711001469. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
566. Miller ST, Macklin EA, Pegelow CH, Kinney TR, Sleeper LA, Bello JA, DeWitt LD, Gallagher DM, Guarini L, Moser FG, Ohene-Frempong K, Sanchez N, Vichinsky EP, Wang WC, Wethers DL, Younkin DP, Zimmerman RA, DeBaun MR, Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell Disease Silent infarction as a risk factor for overt stroke in children
with sickle cell anemia: a report from the Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell
Disease. J Pediatr. 2001;139:385–390. doi: 10.1067/mpd.2001.117580. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
567. DeBaun MR, Gordon M, McKinstry RC, Noetzel DA, White SA, Sarnaik ER, Meier TH, Howard S, Majumdar S, Inusa BPD, Telfer PT, Kirby-Allen M, McCavit TL, Kamdem A, Airewele G, Woods GM, Berman B, Panepinto JA, Fuh BR, Kwiatkowski JL, King AA, Fixler JM, Rhodes MM, Thompson AA, Heiny ME, Redding-Lallinger RC, Kirkham FJ, Dixon N, Gonzalez CE, Kalinyak KA, Quinn CT, Strouse JJ, Miller JP, Lehmann H, Kraut MA, Ball WS, Jr, Hirtz D, Casella JF. Controlled trial of transfusions for silent cerebral infarcts in
sickle cell anemia. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:699–671. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1401731. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
568. Telfer PT, Evanson J, Butler P, Hemmaway C, Abdulla C, Gadong N, Whitmarsh S, Kaya B, Kirkham FJ. Cervical carotid artery disease in sickle cell anemia: clinical
and radiological features. Blood. 2011;118:6192–6199. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-03-337915. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
569. Bernaudin F, Verlhac S, Coic L, Lesprit E, Brugieres P, Reinert P. Long-term follow-up of pediatric sickle cell disease patients
with abnormal high velocities on transcranial Doppler. Pediatr Radiol. 2005;35:242–248. doi: 10.1007/s00247-005-1419-5. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
570. Hsu LL, Miller ST, Wright E, Kutlar A, McKie V, Wang W, Pegelow CH, Driscoll C, Hurlet A, Woods G, Elsas L, Embury S, Adams RJ, Stroke Prevention Trial (STOP) and the Cooperative Study of Sickle
Cell Disease (CSSCD) Alpha thalassemia is associated with decreased risk of abnormal
transcranial Doppler ultrasonography in children with sickle cell
anemia. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2003;25:622–628. doi: 10.1097/00043426-200308000-00007. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
571. Bernaudin F, Verlhac S, Chevret S, Torres M, Coic L, Arnaud C, Kamdem A, Hau I, Grazia Neonato M, Delacourt C. G6PD deficiency, absence of alpha-thalassemia, and hemolytic rate
at baseline are significant independent risk factors for abnormally high
cerebral velocities in patients with sickle cell anemia. Blood. 2008;112:4314–4317. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-143891. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
572. Rees DC, Dick MC, Height SE, O’Driscoll S, Pohl KR, Goss DE, Deane CR. A simple index using age, hemoglobin, and aspartate transaminase
predicts increased intracerebral blood velocity as measured by transcranial
Doppler scanning in children with sickle cell anemia. Pediatrics. 2008;121:e1628–e1632. doi: 10.1542/peds.2007-2771. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
573. Bernaudin F, Verlhac S, Arnaud C, Kamdem A, Chevret S, Hau I, Coic L, Leveille E, Lemarchand E, Lesprit E, Abadie I, Medejel N, Madhi F, Lemerle S, Biscardi S, Bardakdjian J, Galacteros F, Torres M, Kuentz M, Ferry C, Socie G, Reinert P, Delacourt C. Impact of early transcranial Doppler screening and intensive
therapy on cerebral vasculopathy outcome in a newborn sickle cell anemia
cohort. Blood. 2011;117:1130–1140. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-06-293514. quiz 1436. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
574. Silva CM, Giovani P, Viana MB. High reticulocyte count is an independent risk factor for
cerebrovascular disease in children with sickle cell anemia. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2011;56:116–121. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22680. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
575. Savage WJ, Barron-Casella E, Fu Z, Dulloor P, Williams L, Crain BJ, White DA, Jennings JM, Van Eyk JE, Debaun MR, Everett A, Casella JF. Plasma glial fibrillary acidic protein levels in children with
sickle cell disease. Am J Hematol. 2011;86:427–429. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21995. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
576. Asare K, Gee BE, Stiles JK, Wilson NO, Driss A, Quarshie A, Adams RJ, Kutlar A, Hibbert JM. Plasma interleukin-1beta concentration is associated with stroke
in sickle cell disease. Cytokine. 2010;49:39–44. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2009.10.002. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
577. Sebastiani P, Ramoni MF, Nolan V, Baldwin CT, Steinberg MH. Genetic dissection and prognostic modeling of overt stroke in
sickle cell anemia. Nat Genet. 2005;37:435–440. doi: 10.1038/ng1533. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
578. Hoppe C, Klitz W, D’Harlingue K, Cheng S, Grow M, Steiner L, Noble J, Adams R, Styles L, Stroke Prevention Trial in Sickle Cell Anemia (STOP)
Investigators Confirmation of an association between the TNF(-308) promoter
polymorphism and stroke risk in children with sickle cell
anemia. Stroke. 2007;38:2241–2246. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.483115. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
579. Flanagan JM, Frohlich DM, Howard TA, Schultz WH, Driscoll C, Nagasubramanian R, Mortier NA, Kimble AC, Aygun B, Adams RJ, Helms RW, Ware RE. Genetic predictors for stroke in children with sickle cell
anemia. Blood. 2011;117:6681–6684. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-332205. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
580. Thangarajh M, Yang G, Fuchs D, Ponisio MR, McKinstry RC, Jaju A, Noetzel MJ, Casella JF, Barron-Casella E, Hooper WC, Boulet SL, Bean CJ, Pyle ME, Payne AB, Driggers J, Trau HA, Vendt BA, Rodeghier M, DeBaun MR. Magnetic resonance angiography-defined intracranial vasculopathy
is associated with silent cerebral infarcts and glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase mutation in children with sickle cell anaemia. Br J Haematol. 2012;159:352–359. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12034. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
581. Wayne AS, Kevy SV, Nathan DG. Transfusion management of sickle cell disease. Blood. 1993;81:1109–1123. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
582. Vichinsky E, Luban N, Wright E, Olivieri N, Driscoll C, Pegelow C, Files B, Adams RJ. Prospective cell phenotype matching in STOP – a
multicenter transfusion trial. Paper presented at: 23rd Annual Meeting of the National Sickle Cell
Disease Program; March 1999; San Francisco, CA. [ Google Scholar ] 
583. National Heart Lung, and Blood Institute. Clinical Alert: NHLBI Stops Study Testing How Long Children with Sickle
Cell Anemia Should Have Blood Transfusions to Prevent Stroke. 2004 Dec 5; http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/news/press-releases/2004/nhlbi-stops-study-testing-how-long-children-with-sickle-cell-anemia-should-have-blood-transfusions-to-prevent-stroke.html .
Accessed March 19, 2013. 
584. Adams RJ, Brambilla D, Optimizing Primary Stroke Prevention in Sickle Cell Anemia (STOP 2)
Trial Investigators Discontinuing prophylactic transfusions used to prevent stroke in
sickle cell disease. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:2769–2778. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa050460. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
585. Abboud MR, Yim E, Musallam KM, Adams RJ, STOP II Study Investigators Discontinuing prophylactic transfusions increases the risk of
silent brain infarction in children with sickle cell disease: data from STOP
II. Blood. 2011;118:894–898. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-326298. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
586. Gulbis B, Haberman D, Dufour D, Christophe C, Vermylen C, Kagambega F, Corazza F, Devalck C, Dresse MF, Hunninck K, Klein A, Le PQ, Loop M, Maes P, Philippet P, Sariban E, Van Geet C, Ferster A. Hydroxyurea for sickle cell disease in children and for
prevention of cerebrovascular events: the Belgian experience. Blood. 2005;105:2685–2690. doi: 10.1182/blood-2004-07-2704. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
587. Kratovil T, Bulas D, Driscoll MC, Speller-Brown B, McCarter R, Minniti CP. Hydroxyurea therapy lowers TCD velocities in children with sickle
cell disease. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2006;47:894–900. doi: 10.1002/pbc.20819. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
588. Zimmerman SA, Schultz WH, Burgett S, Mortier NA, Ware RE. Hydroxyurea therapy lowers transcranial Doppler flow velocities
in children with sickle cell anemia. Blood. 2007;110:1043–1047. doi: 10.1182/blood-2006-11-057893. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
589. Lebensburger JD, Miller ST, Howard TH, Casella JF, Brown RC, Lu M, Iyer RV, Sarnaik S, Rogers ZR, Wang WC, BABY HUG Investigators Influence of severity of anemia on clinical findings in infants
with sickle cell anemia: analyses from the BABY HUG study. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012;59:675–678. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24037. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
590. Bernaudin F, Socie G, Kuentz M, Chevret S, Duval M, Bertrand Y, Vannier JP, Yakouben K, Thuret I, Bordigoni P, Fischer A, Lutz P, Stephan JL, Dhedin N, Plouvier E, Margueritte G, Bories D, Verlhac S, Esperou H, Coic L, Vernant JP, Gluckman E, SFGM-TC Long-term results of related myeloablative stem-cell
transplantation to cure sickle cell disease. Blood. 2007;110:2749–2756. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-03-079665. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
591. Walters MC, Hardy K, Edwards S, Adamkiewicz T, Barkovich J, Bernaudin F, Buchanan GR, Bunin N, Dickerhoff R, Giller R, Haut PR, Horan J, Hsu LL, Kamani N, Levine JE, Margolis D, Ohene-Frempong K, Patience M, Redding-Lallinger R, Roberts IA, Rogers ZR, Sanders JE, Scott JP, Sullivan KM, Multicenter Study of Bone Marrow Transplantation for Sickle Cell
Disease Pulmonary, gonadal, and central nervous system status after bone
marrow transplantation for sickle cell disease. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2010;16:263–272. doi: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2009.10.005. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
592. Tzourio C, Tehindrazanarivelo A, Iglesias S, Alperovitch A, Chedru F, d’Anglejan-Chatillon J, Bousser M-G. Case-control study of migraine and risk of ischaemic stroke in
young women. BMJ. 1995;310:830–833. doi: 10.1136/bmj.310.6983.830. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
593. Spector JT, Kahn SR, Jones MR, Jayakumar M, Dalal D, Nazarian S. Migraine headache and ischemic stroke risk: an updated
meta-analysis. Am J Med. 2010;123:612–624. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2009.12.021. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
594. Schurks M, Rist PM, Bigal ME, Buring JE, Lipton RB, Kurth T. Migraine and cardiovascular disease: systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMJ. 2009;339:b3914. doi: 10.1136/bmj.b3914. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
595. Etminan M, Takkouche B, Isorna FC, Samii A. Risk of ischaemic stroke in people with migraine: systematic
review and meta-analysis of observational studies. BMJ. 2005;330:63. doi: 10.1136/bmj.38302.504063.8F. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
596. Kurth T, Schurks M, Logroscino G, Buring JE. Migraine frequency and risk of cardiovascular disease in
women. Neurology. 2009;73:581–588. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181ab2c20. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
597. Schurks M, Buring JE, Kurth T. Migraine, migraine features, and cardiovascular
disease. Headache. 2010;50:1031–1040. doi: 10.1111/j.1526-4610.2009.01609.x. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
598. Kurth T, Kase CS, Schurks M, Tzourio C, Buring JE. Migraine and risk of haemorrhagic stroke in women: prospective
cohort study. BMJ. 2010;341:c3659. doi: 10.1136/bmj.c3659. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
599. Scher AI, Gudmundsson LS, Sigurdsson S, Ghambaryan A, Aspelund T, Eiriksdottir G, van Buchem MA, Gudnason V, Launer LJ. Migraine headache in middle age and late-life brain
infarcts. JAMA. 2009;301:2563–2570. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.932. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
600. Kruit MC, Launer LJ, Ferrari MD, van Buchem MA. Infarcts in the posterior circulation territory in migraine: the
population-based MRI CAMERA study. Brain. 2005;128:2068–2077. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh542. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
601. Kruit MC, van Buchem MA, Launer LJ, Terwindt GM, Ferrari MD. Migraine is associated with an increased risk of deep white
matter lesions, subclinical posterior circulation infarcts and brain iron
accumulation: the population-based MRI CAMERA study. Cephalalgia. 2010;30:129–136. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2982.2009.01904.x. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
602. Cavestro C, Richetta L, L’Episcopo MR, Pedemonte E, Duca S, Di Pietrantonj C. Anatomical variants of the circle of Willis and brain lesions in
migraineurs. Can J Neurol Sci. 2011;38:494–499. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100011926. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
603. Pietrobon D, Moskowitz MA. Pathophysiology of migraine. Annu Rev Physiol. 2013;75:365–391. doi: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-030212-183717. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
604. Martinez-Sanchez P, Martinez-Martinez M, Fuentes B, Cuesta MV, Cuellar-Gamboa L, Idrovo-Freire L, Fernandez-Dominguez J, Diez-Tejedor E. Migraine and hypercoagulable states in ischemic
stroke. Cephalalgia. 2011;31:1609–1617. doi: 10.1177/0333102411427599. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
605. MacClellan L, Giles WH, Cole JW, Wozniak MA, Stern BJ, Mitchell B, Kittner SJ. Probable migraine with visual aura and risk of ischemic stroke:
the Stroke Prevention in Young Women Study. Stroke. 2007;38:2438–2445. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.488395. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
606. Schurks M, Zee RY, Buring JE, Kurth T. ACE D/I polymorphism, migraine, and cardiovascular disease in
women. Neurology. 2009;72:650–656. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000342517.97178.f6. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
607. Webster M, Chancellor A, Smith H, Swift D, Sharpe D, Bass N, Glasgow G. Patent foramen ovale in young stroke patients. Lancet. 1988;2:11–12. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(88)92944-3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
608. Anzola G, Magoni M, Guindani M, Rozzini L, Dalla Volta G. Potential source of cerebral embolism in migraine with aura: a
transcranial Doppler study. Neurology. 1999;52:1622–1626. doi: 10.1212/wnl.52.8.1622. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
609. Olesen J, Friberg L, Olsen T, Andersen A, Lassen N, Hansen P, Karle A. Ischaemia-induced (symptomatic) migraine attacks may be more
frequent than migraine-induced ischaemic insults. Brain. 1993;116(pt 1):187–202. doi: 10.1093/brain/116.1.187. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
610. Dowson A, Mullen M, Peatfield R, Muir K, Khan A, Wells C, Lipscombe S, Rees T, De Giovanni J, Morrison W, Hildick-Smith D, Elrington G, Hillis W, Malik I, Rickards A. Migraine Intervention With STARFlex Technology (MIST) Trial: a
prospective, multicenter, double-blinded, sham-controlled trial to evaluate
the effectiveness of patent foramen ovale closure with STARFlex septal
repair implant to resolve refractory migraine headache. Circulation. 2008;117:1397–1404. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.727271. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
611. Tobis J. Management of patients with refractory migraine and PFO: is MIST
I relevant? Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2008;72:60–64. doi: 10.1002/ccd.21504. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
612. Rundek T, Elkind MS, Di Tullio MR, Carrera E, Jin Z, Sacco RL, Homma S. Patent foramen ovale and migraine: a cross-sectional study from
the Northern Manhattan Study (NOMAS) Circulation. 2008;118:1419–1424. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.771303. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
613. Garg P, Servoss SJ, Wu JC, Bajwa ZH, Selim MH, Dineen A, Kuntz RE, Cook EF, Mauri L. Lack of association between migraine headache and patent foramen
ovale: results of a case-control study. Circulation. 2010;121:1406–1412. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.895110. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
614. Davis D, Gregson J, Willeit P, Stephan B, Al-Shahi Salman R, Brayne C. Patent foramen ovale, ischemic stroke and migraine: systematic
review and stratified meta-analysis of association studies. Neuroepidemiology. 2013;40:56–67. doi: 10.1159/000341924. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
615. Kurth T, Diener HC, Buring JE. Migraine and cardiovascular disease in women and the role of
aspirin: subgroup analyses in the Women’s Health
Study. Cephalalgia. 2011;31:1106–1115. doi: 10.1177/0333102411412628. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
616. Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Cholesterol in Adults. Executive Summary of the Third Report of the National Cholesterol
Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and
Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel
III) JAMA. 2001;285:2486–2497. doi: 10.1001/jama.285.19.2486. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
617. Klein S, Burke LE, Bray GA, Blair S, Allison DB, Pi-Sunyer X, Hong Y, Eckel RH. Clinical implications of obesity with specific focus on
cardiovascular disease: a statement for professionals from the American
Heart Association Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and
Metabolism. Circulation. 2004;110:2952–2967. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000145546.97738.1E. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
618. Alberti KG, Zimmet P, Shaw J, IDF Epidemiology Task Force Consensus Group The metabolic syndrome: a new worldwide
definition. Lancet. 2005;366:1059–1062. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67402-8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
619. Alberti KG, Eckel RH, Grundy SM, Zimmet PZ, Cleeman JI, Donato KA, Fruchart JC, James WP, Loria CM, Smith SC, Jr, International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and
Prevention; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart
Association; World Heart Federation; International Atherosclerosis
Society; International Association for the Study of Obesity Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome: a joint interim statement of
the International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and
Prevention; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart
Association; World Heart Federation; International Atherosclerosis Society;
and International Association for the Study of Obesity. Circulation. 2009;120:1640–1645. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192644. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
620. Lakka HM, Laaksonen DE, Lakka TA, Niskanen LK, Kumpusalo E, Tuomilehto J, Salonen JT. The metabolic syndrome and total and cardiovascular disease
mortality in middle-aged men. JAMA. 2002;288:2709–2716. doi: 10.1001/jama.288.21.2709. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
621. Eckel RH, Grundy SM, Zimmet PZ. The metabolic syndrome. Lancet. 2005;365:1415–1428. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66378-7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
622. Jiamsripong P, Mookadam M, Alharthi MS, Khandheria BK, Mookadam F. The metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular disease: part
2. Prev Cardiol. 2008;11:223–229. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7141.2008.00002.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
623. Mokdad AH, Bowman BA, Ford ES, Vinicor F, Marks JS, Koplan JP. The continuing epidemics of obesity and diabetes in the United
States. JAMA. 2001;286:1195–1200. doi: 10.1001/jama.286.10.1195. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
624. Eckel RH. Clinical practice: nonsurgical management of obesity in
adults. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:1941–1950. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcp0801652. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
625. Flegal KM, Kit BK, Orpana H, Graubard BI. Association of all-cause mortality with overweight and obesity
using standard body mass index categories: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. JAMA. 2013;309:71–82. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.113905. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
626. Cornier MA, Dabelea D, Hernandez TL, Lindstrom RC, Steig AJ, Stob NR, Van Pelt RE, Wang H, Eckel RH. The metabolic syndrome. Endocr Rev. 2008;29:777–822. doi: 10.1210/er.2008-0024. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
627. Ford ES, Li C, Zhao G. Prevalence and correlates of metabolic syndrome based on a
harmonious definition among adults in the US. J Diabetes. 2010;2:180–193. doi: 10.1111/j.1753-0407.2010.00078.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
628. Bonora E, Willeit J, Kiechl S, Oberhollenzer F, Egger G, Bonadonna R, Muggeo M. Relationship between insulin and carotid atherosclerosis in the
general population: the Bruneck Study. Stroke. 1997;28:1147–1152. doi: 10.1161/01.str.28.6.1147. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
629. Haffner SM, D’Agostino R, Mykkanen L, Hales CN, Savage PJ, Bergman RN, O’Leary D, Rewers M, Selby J, Tracy R, Saad MF. Proinsulin and insulin concentrations in relation to carotid wall
thickness: Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study. Stroke. 1998;29:1498–1503. doi: 10.1161/01.str.29.8.1498. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
630. Kuusisto J, Mykkanen L, Pyorala K, Laakso M. Non-insulin-dependent diabetes and its metabolic control are
important predictors of stroke in elderly subjects. Stroke. 1994;25:1157–1164. doi: 10.1161/01.str.25.6.1157. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
631. Kaarisalo MM, Raiha I, Arve S, Lehtonen A. Impaired glucose tolerance as a risk factor for stroke in a
cohort of non-institutionalised people aged 70 years. Age Ageing. 2006;35:592–596. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afl094. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
632. Lindahl B, Dinesen B, Eliasson M, Roder M, Hallmans G, Stegmayr B. High proinsulin levels precede first-ever stroke in a nondiabetic
population. Stroke. 2000;31:2936–2941. doi: 10.1161/01.str.31.12.2936. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
633. Oizumi T, Daimon M, Jimbu Y, Wada K, Kameda W, Susa S, Yamaguchi H, Ohnuma H, Tominaga M, Kato T. Impaired glucose tolerance is a risk factor for stroke in a
Japanese sample: the Funagata study. Metabolism. 2008;57:333–338. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2007.10.007. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
634. Pyorala M, Miettinen H, Laakso M, Pyorala K. Hyperinsulinemia and the risk of stroke in healthy middle-aged
men: the 22-year follow-up results of the Helsinki Policemen
Study. Stroke. 1998;29:1860–1866. doi: 10.1161/01.str.29.9.1860. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
635. Qureshi AI, Giles WH, Croft JB. Impaired glucose tolerance and the likelihood of nonfatal stroke
and myocardial infarction: the Third National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey. Stroke. 1998;29:1329–1332. doi: 10.1161/01.str.29.7.1329. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
636. Vermeer SE, Sandee W, Algra A, Koudstaal PJ, Kappelle LJ, Dippel DW, Dutch TIA Trial Study Group Impaired glucose tolerance increases stroke risk in nondiabetic
patients with transient ischemic attack or minor ischemic
stroke. Stroke. 2006;37:1413–1417. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000221766.73692.0b. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
637. Wang J, Ruotsalainen S, Moilanen L, Lepisto P, Laakso M, Kuusisto J. The metabolic syndrome predicts incident stroke: a 14-year
follow-up study in elderly people in Finland. Stroke. 2008;39:1078–1083. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.499830. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
638. Wannamethee SG, Perry IJ, Shaper AG. Nonfasting serum glucose and insulin concentrations and the risk
of stroke. Stroke. 1999;30:1780–1786. doi: 10.1161/01.str.30.9.1780. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
639. Urabe T, Watada H, Okuma Y, Tanaka R, Ueno Y, Miyamoto N, Tanaka Y, Hattori N, Kawamori R. Prevalence of abnormal glucose metabolism and insulin resistance
among subtypes of ischemic stroke in Japanese patients. Stroke. 2009;40:1289–1295. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.522557. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
640. Anand SS, Dagenais GR, Mohan V, Diaz R, Probstfield J, Freeman R, Shaw J, Lanas F, Avezum A, Budaj A, Jung H, Desai D, Bosch J, Yusuf S, Gerstein HC, EpiDREAM Investigators Glucose levels are associated with cardiovascular disease and
death in an international cohort of normal glycaemic and dysglycaemic men
and women: the EpiDREAM cohort study. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2012;19:755–764. doi: 10.1177/1741826711409327. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
641. Eckel RH, Alberti KG, Grundy SM, Zimmet PZ. The metabolic syndrome. Lancet. 2010;375:181–183. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61794-3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
642. Hanchaiphiboolkul S, Suwanwela NC, Poungvarin N, Nidhinandana S, Puthkhao P, Towanabut S, Tantirittisak T, Suwantamee J, Samsen M. Risk of metabolic syndrome for stroke is not greater than the sum
of its components: Thai Epidemiologic Stroke (TES) Study. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2013;22:e264–e270. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2012.05.013. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
643. Ninomiya JK, L’Italien G, Criqui MH, Whyte JL, Gamst A, Chen RS. Association of the metabolic syndrome with history of myocardial
infarction and stroke in the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey. Circulation. 2004;109:42–46. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000108926.04022.0C. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
644. Milionis HJ, Rizos E, Goudevenos J, Seferiadis K, Mikhailidis DP, Elisaf MS. Components of the metabolic syndrome and risk for first-ever
acute ischemic nonembolic stroke in elderly subjects. Stroke. 2005;36:1372–1376. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000169935.35394.38. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
645. Park YK, Yi HJ, Lee YJ, Cho H, Chun HJ, Oh SJ. The relationship between metabolic syndrome (MetS) and
spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) Neurol Sci. 2013;34:1523–1528. doi: 10.1007/s10072-012-1272-x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
646. Novo S, Peritore A, Guarneri FP, Corrado E, Macaione F, Evola S, Novo G. Metabolic syndrome (MetS) predicts cardio and cerebrovascular
events in a twenty years follow-up: a prospective study. Atherosclerosis. 2012;223:468–472. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.05.018. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
647. Chen HJ, Bai CH, Yeh WT, Chiu HC, Pan WH. Influence of metabolic syndrome and general obesity on the risk
of ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2006;37:1060–1064. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000206458.58142.f3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
648. Koren-Morag N, Goldbourt U, Tanne D. Relation between the metabolic syndrome and ischemic stroke or
transient ischemic attack: a prospective cohort study in patients with
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Stroke. 2005;36:1366–1371. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000169945.75911.33. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
649. Kurl S, Laukkanen JA, Niskanen L, Laaksonen D, Sivenius J, Nyyssonen K, Salonen JT. Metabolic syndrome and the risk of stroke in middle-aged
men. Stroke. 2006;37:806–811. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000204354.06965.44. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
650. Najarian RM, Sullivan LM, Kannel WB, Wilson PW, D’Agostino RB, Wolf PA. Metabolic syndrome compared with type 2 diabetes mellitus as a
risk factor for stroke: the Framingham Offspring Study. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:106–111. doi: 10.1001/archinte.166.1.106. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
651. Mottillo S, Filion KB, Genest J, Joseph L, Pilote L, Poirier P, Rinfret S, Schiffrin EL, Eisenberg MJ. The metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular risk a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:1113–1132. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.05.034. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
652. Okamura T, Kokubo Y, Watanabe M, Higashiyama A, Ono Y, Nishimura K, Okayama A, Miyamoto Y. A revised definition of the metabolic syndrome predicts coronary
artery disease and ischemic stroke after adjusting for low density
lipoprotein cholesterol in a 13-year cohort study of Japanese: the Suita
study. Atherosclerosis. 2011;217:201–206. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2011.03.010. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
653. Yun JE, Won S, Sung J, Jee SH. Impact of metabolic syndrome independent of insulin resistance on
the development of cardiovascular disease. Circ J. 2012;76:2443–2448. doi: 10.1253/circj.cj-12-0125. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
654. Callahan A, Amarenco P, Goldstein LB, Sillesen H, Messig M, Samsa GP, Altafullah I, Ledbetter LY, MacLeod MJ, Scott R, Hennerici M, Zivin JA, Welch KM, SPARCL Investigators Risk of stroke and cardiovascular events after ischemic stroke or
transient ischemic attack in patients with type 2 diabetes or metabolic
syndrome: secondary analysis of the Stroke Prevention by Aggressive
Reduction in Cholesterol Levels (SPARCL) trial. Arch Neurol. 2011;68:1245–1251. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.146. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
655. Khang YH, Cho SI, Kim HR. Risks for cardiovascular disease, stroke, ischaemic heart
disease, and diabetes mellitus associated with the metabolic syndrome using
the new harmonised definition: findings from nationally representative
longitudinal data from an Asian population. Atherosclerosis. 2010;213:579–585. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.09.009. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
656. Cortez-Dias N, Martins S, Belo A, Fiuza M, Investigadores do estudo VALSIM Comparison of definitions of metabolic syndrome in relation to
risk for coronary artery disease and stroke. Rev Port Cardiol. 2011;30:139–169. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
657. Ridker PM, Danielson E, Fonseca FA, Genest J, Gotto AM, Jr, Kastelein JJ, Koenig W, Libby P, Lorenzatti AJ, MacFadyen JG, Nordestgaard BG, Shepherd J, Willerson JT, Glynn RJ, JUPITER Study Group Rosuvastatin to prevent vascular events in men and women with
elevated C-reactive protein. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:2195–2207. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0807646. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
658. Waters DD, LaRosa JC, Barter P, Fruchart JC, Gotto AM, Jr, Carter R, Breazna A, Kastelein JJ, Grundy SM. Effects of high-dose atorvastatin on cerebrovascular events in
patients with stable coronary disease in the TNT (Treating to New Targets)
study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:1793–1799. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2006.07.041. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
659. Deedwania P, Barter P, Carmena R, Fruchart JC, Grundy SM, Haffner S, Kastelein JJ, LaRosa JC, Schachner H, Shepherd J, Waters DD, Treating to New Targets Investigators Reduction of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in patients with
coronary heart disease and metabolic syndrome: analysis of the Treating to
New Targets study. Lancet. 2006;368:919–928. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69292-1. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
660. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Web site. http://www.niaaa.nih.gov . Accessed December 23,
2013. 
661. Gill JS, Zezulka AV, Shipley MJ, Gill SK, Beevers DG. Stroke and alcohol consumption. N Engl J Med. 1986;315:1041–1046. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198610233151701. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
662. Hillbom M, Numminen H, Juvela S. Recent heavy drinking of alcohol and embolic
stroke. Stroke. 1999;30:2307–2312. doi: 10.1161/01.str.30.11.2307. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
663. Klatsky AL, Armstrong MA, Friedman GD, Sidney S. Alcohol drinking and risk of hospitalization for ischemic
stroke. Am J Cardiol. 2001;88:703–706. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9149(01)01824-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
664. Mazzaglia G, Britton AR, Altmann DR, Chenet L. Exploring the relationship between alcohol consumption and
non-fatal or fatal stroke: a systematic review. Addiction. 2001;96:1743–1756. doi: 10.1046/j.1360-0443.2001.961217434.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
665. Wannamethee SG, Shaper AG. Patterns of alcohol intake and risk of stroke in middle-aged
British men. Stroke. 1996;27:1033–1039. doi: 10.1161/01.str.27.6.1033. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
666. Berger K, Ajani UA, Kase CS, Gaziano JM, Buring JE, Glynn RJ, Hennekens CH. Light-to-moderate alcohol consumption and risk of stroke among
U.S. male physicians. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:1557–1564. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199911183412101. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
667. Chiuve SE, Rexrode KM, Spiegelman D, Logroscino G, Manson JE, Rimm EB. Primary prevention of stroke by healthy lifestyle. Circulation. 2008;118:947–954. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.781062. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
668. Djousse L, Levy D, Benjamin EJ, Blease SJ, Russ A, Larson MG, Massaro JM, D’Agostino RB, Wolf PA, Ellison RC. Long-term alcohol consumption and the risk of atrial fibrillation
in the Framingham study. Am J Cardiol. 2004;93:710–713. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2003.12.004. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
669. Elkind MS, Sciacca R, Boden-Albala B, Rundek T, Paik MC, Sacco RL. Moderate alcohol consumption reduces risk of ischemic stroke: the
Northern Manhattan Study. Stroke. 2006;37:13–19. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000195048.86810.5b. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
670. Gorelick PB, Rodin MB, Langenberg P, Hier DB, Costigan J. Weekly alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking, and the risk of
ischemic stroke: results of a case-control study at three urban medical
centers in Chicago, Illinois. Neurology. 1989;39:339–343. doi: 10.1212/wnl.39.3.339. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
671. Iso H, Baba S, Mannami T, Sasaki S, Okada K, Konishi M, Tsugane S, JPHC Study Group Alcohol consumption and risk of stroke among middle-aged men: the
JPHC Study Cohort I. Stroke. 2004;35:1124–1129. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000124459.33597.00. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
672. Malarcher AM, Giles WH, Croft JB, Wozniak MA, Wityk RJ, Stolley PD, Stern BJ, Sloan MA, Sherwin R, Price TR, Macko RF, Johnson CJ, Earley CJ, Buchholz DW, Kittner SJ. Alcohol intake, type of beverage, and the risk of cerebral
infarction in young women. Stroke. 2001;32:77–83. doi: 10.1161/01.str.32.1.77. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
673. Sacco RL, Elkind M, Boden-Albala B, Lin IF, Kargman DE, Hauser WA, Shea S, Paik MC. The protective effect of moderate alcohol consumption on ischemic
stroke. JAMA. 1999;281:53–60. doi: 10.1001/jama.281.1.53. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
674. Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Willett WC, Speizer FE, Hennekens CH. A prospective study of moderate alcohol consumption and the risk
of coronary disease and stroke in women. N Engl J Med. 1988;319:267–273. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198808043190503. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
675. Jimenez M, Chiuve SE, Glynn RJ, Stampfer MJ, Camargo CA, Jr, Willett WC, Manson JE, Rexrode KM. Alcohol consumption and risk of stroke in women. Stroke. 2012;43:939–945. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.639435. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
676. Bos S, Grobbee DE, Boer JM, Verschuren WM, Beulens JW. Alcohol consumption and risk of cardiovascular disease among
hypertensive women. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2010;17:119–126. doi: 10.1097/HJR.0b013e328335f2fa. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
677. Klatsky AL, Armstrong MA, Friedman GD, Sidney S. Alcohol drinking and risk of hemorrhagic stroke. Neuroepidemiology. 2002;21:115–122. doi: 10.1159/000054808. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
678. Reynolds K, Lewis B, Nolen JD, Kinney GL, Sathya B, He J. Alcohol consumption and risk of stroke: a
meta-analysis. JAMA. 2003;289:579–588. doi: 10.1001/jama.289.5.579. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
679. Casolla B, Dequatre-Ponchelle N, Rossi C, Henon H, Leys D, Cordonnier C. Heavy alcohol intake and intracerebral hemorrhage:
characteristics and effect on outcome. Neurology. 2012;79:1109–1115. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182698d00. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
680. Mukamal KJ, Jensen MK, Gronbaek M, Stampfer MJ, Manson JE, Pischon T, Rimm EB. Drinking frequency, mediating biomarkers, and risk of myocardial
infarction in women and men. Circulation. 2005;112:1406–1413. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.537704. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
681. Volcik KA, Ballantyne CM, Fuchs FD, Sharrett AR, Boerwinkle E. Relationship of alcohol consumption and type of alcoholic
beverage consumed with plasma lipid levels: differences between Whites and
African Americans of the ARIC study. Ann Epidemiol. 2008;18:101–107. doi: 10.1016/j.annepidem.2007.07.103. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
682. Miceli M, Alberti L, Bennardini F, Di Simplicio P, Seghieri G, Rao GH, Franconi F. Effect of low doses of ethanol on platelet function in long-life
abstainers and moderate-wine drinkers. Life Sci. 2003;73:1557–1566. doi: 10.1016/s0024-3205(03)00473-9. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
683. Mukamal KJ, Massaro JM, Ault KA, Mittleman MA, Sutherland PA, Lipinska I, Levy D, D’Agostino RB, Tofler GH. Alcohol consumption and platelet activation and aggregation among
women and men: the Framingham Offspring Study. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2005;29:1906–1912. doi: 10.1097/01.alc.0000183011.86768.61. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
684. McKenzie CR, Abendschein DR, Eisenberg PR. Sustained inhibition of whole-blood clot procoagulant activity by
inhibition of thrombus-associated factor Xa. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1996;16:1285–1291. doi: 10.1161/01.atv.16.10.1285. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
685. Greenfield JR, Samaras K, Hayward CS, Chisholm DJ, Campbell LV. Beneficial postprandial effect of a small amount of alcohol on
diabetes and cardiovascular risk factors: modification by insulin
resistance. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90:661–672. doi: 10.1210/jc.2004-1511. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
686. Joosten MM, Beulens JW, Kersten S, Hendriks HF. Moderate alcohol consumption increases insulin sensitivity and
ADIPOQ expression in postmenopausal women: a randomised, crossover
trial. Diabetologia. 2008;51:1375–1381. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1031-y. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
687. Rantakomi SH, Laukkanen JA, Sivenius J, Kauhanen J, Kurl S. Alcohol consumption and the risk of stroke among hypertensive and
overweight men. J Neurol. 2013;260:534–539. doi: 10.1007/s00415-012-6672-6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
688. Hillbom M, Saloheimo P, Juvela S. Alcohol consumption, blood pressure, and the risk of
stroke. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2011;13:208–213. doi: 10.1007/s11906-011-0194-y. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
689. Judd SE, McClure LA, Howard VJ, Lackland DT, Halanych JH, Kabagambe EK. Heavy drinking is associated with poor blood pressure control in
the REasons for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke (REGARDS)
study. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2011;8:1601–1612. doi: 10.3390/ijerph8051601. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
690. Wakabayashi I, Araki Y. Influences of gender and age on relationships between alcohol
drinking and atherosclerotic risk factors. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2010;34(suppl 1):S54–S60. doi: 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2008.00758.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
691. Foerster M, Marques-Vidal P, Gmel G, Daeppen JB, Cornuz J, Hayoz D, Pecoud A, Mooser V, Waeber G, Vollenweider P, Paccaud F, Rodondi N. Alcohol drinking and cardiovascular risk in a population with
high mean alcohol consumption. Am J Cardiol. 2009;103:361–368. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.09.089. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
692. Ohira T, Tanigawa T, Tabata M, Imano H, Kitamura A, Kiyama M, Sato S, Okamura T, Cui R, Koike KA, Shimamoto T, Iso H. Effects of habitual alcohol intake on ambulatory blood pressure,
heart rate, and its variability among Japanese men. Hypertension. 2009;53:13–19. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.108.114835. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
693. Taylor B, Irving HM, Baliunas D, Roerecke M, Patra J, Mohapatra S, Rehm J. Alcohol and hypertension: gender differences in dose-response
relationships determined through systematic review and
meta-analysis. Addiction. 2009;104:1981–1990. doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.2009.02694.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
694. Christie IC, Price J, Edwards L, Muldoon M, Meltzer CC, Jennings JR. Alcohol consumption and cerebral blood flow among older
adults. Alcohol. 2008;42:269–275. doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2008.03.132. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
695. Mukamal KJ, Tolstrup JS, Friberg J, Jensen G, Gronbaek M. Alcohol consumption and risk of atrial fibrillation in men and
women: the Copenhagen City Heart Study. Circulation. 2005;112:1736–1742. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.547844. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
696. Liang Y, Mente A, Yusuf S, Gao P, Sleight P, Zhu J, Fagard R, Lonn E, Teo KK, ONTARGET and TRANSCEND Investigators Alcohol consumption and the risk of incident atrial fibrillation
among people with cardiovascular disease. CMAJ. 2012;184:E857–E866. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.120412. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
697. Kodama S, Saito K, Tanaka S, Horikawa C, Saito A, Heianza Y, Anasako Y, Nishigaki Y, Yachi Y, Iida KT, Ohashi Y, Yamada N, Sone H. Alcohol consumption and risk of atrial fibrillation: a
meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:427–436. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.08.641. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
698. Samokhvalov AV, Irving HM, Rehm J. Alcohol consumption as a risk factor for atrial fibrillation: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2010;17:706–712. doi: 10.1097/HJR.0b013e32833a1947. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
699. Kurth T, Moore SC, Gaziano JM, Kase CS, Stampfer MJ, Berger K, Buring JE. Healthy lifestyle and the risk of stroke in women. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:1403–1409. doi: 10.1001/archinte.166.13.1403. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
700. Patra J, Taylor B, Irving H, Roerecke M, Baliunas D, Mohapatra S, Rehm J. Alcohol consumption and the risk of morbidity and mortality for
different stroke types: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMC Public Health. 2010;10:258. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-10-258. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
701. Bazzano LA, Gu D, Reynolds K, Wu X, Chen CS, Duan X, Chen J, Wildman RP, Klag MJ, He J. Alcohol consumption and risk for stroke among Chinese
men. Ann Neurol. 2007;62:569–578. doi: 10.1002/ana.21194. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
702. Guiraud V, Amor MB, Mas JL, Touze E. Triggers of ischemic stroke: a systematic review. Stroke. 2010;41:2669–2677. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.597443. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
703. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening and behavioral counseling interventions in primary care to
reduce alcohol misuse. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-159-3-201308060-00652. http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/uspsdrin.htm .
Accessed January 18, 2013. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] 
704. US Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary guidelines for Americans–2010. http://www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2010.asp . Accessed
March 11, 2013. 
705. American Heart Association Nutrition Committee. Lichtenstein AH, Appel LJ, Brands M, Carnethon M, Daniels S, Franch HA, Franklin B, Kris-Etherton P, Harris WS, Howard B, Karanja N, Lefevre M, Rudel L, Sacks F, Van Horn L, Winston M, Wylie-Rosett J. Diet and lifestyle recommendations revision 2006: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association Nutrition
Committee. Circulation. 2006;114:82–96. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.176158. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
706. Cami J, Farre M. Drug addiction. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:975–986. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra023160. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
707. Brust JC. Neurological Aspects of Substance Abuse. 2nd. Philadelphia, PA: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2004. [ Google Scholar ] 
708. Esse K, Fossati-Bellani M, Traylor A, Martin-Schild S. Epidemic of illicit drug use, mechanisms of action/addiction and
stroke as a health hazard. Brain Behav. 2011;1:44–54. doi: 10.1002/brb3.7. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
709. Ho EL, Josephson SA, Lee HS, Smith WS. Cerebrovascular complications of methamphetamine
abuse. Neurocrit Care. 2009;10:295–305. doi: 10.1007/s12028-008-9177-5. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
710. Kaufman MJ, Levin JM, Ross MH, Lange N, Rose SL, Kukes TJ, Mendelson JH, Lukas SE, Cohen BM, Renshaw PF. Cocaine-induced cerebral vasoconstriction detected in humans with
magnetic resonance angiography. JAMA. 1998;279:376–380. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
711. McEvoy AW, Kitchen ND, Thomas DG. Intracerebral haemorrhage and drug abuse in young
adults. Br J Neurosurg. 2000;14:449–454. doi: 10.1080/02688690050175247. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
712. McGee SM, McGee DN, McGee MB. Spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage related to methamphetamine
abuse: autopsy findings and clinical correlation. Am J Forensic Med Pathol. 2004;25:334–337. doi: 10.1097/01.paf.0000137206.16785.2f. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
713. Neiman J, Haapaniemi HM, Hillbom M. Neurological complications of drug abuse: pathophysiological
mechanisms. Eur J Neurol. 2000;7:595–606. doi: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.2000.00045.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
714. Perez JA, Jr, Arsura EL, Strategos S. Methamphetamine-related stroke: four cases. J Emerg Med. 1999;17:469–471. doi: 10.1016/s0736-4679(99)00009-8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
715. Siegel AJ, Sholar MB, Mendelson JH, Lukas SE, Kaufman MJ, Renshaw PF, McDonald JC, Lewandrowski KB, Apple FS, Stec JJ, Lipinska I, Tofler GH, Ridker PM. Cocaine-induced erythrocytosis and increase in von Willebrand
factor: evidence for drug-related blood doping and prothrombotic
effects. Arch Intern Med. 1999;159:1925–1929. doi: 10.1001/archinte.159.16.1925. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
716. Saez CG, Olivares P, Pallavicini J, Panes O, Moreno N, Massardo T, Mezzano D, Pereira J. Increased number of circulating endothelial cells and plasma
markers of endothelial damage in chronic cocaine users. Thromb Res. 2011;128:e18–e23. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2011.04.019. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
717. Ali WM, Zubaid M, Al-Motarreb A, Singh R, Al-Shereiqi SZ, Shehab A, Rashed W, Al-Sagheer NQ, Saleh AH, Al Suwaidi J. Association of khat chewing with increased risk of stroke and
death in patients presenting with acute coronary syndrome. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010;85:974–980. doi: 10.4065/mcp.2010.0398. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
718. Renard D, Taieb G, Gras-Combe G, Labauge P. Cannabis-related myocardial infarction and cardioembolic
stroke. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2012;21:82–83. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2010.04.002. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
719. Singh NN, Pan Y, Muengtaweeponsa S, Geller TJ, Cruz-Flores S. Cannabis-related stroke: case series and review of
literature. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2012;21:555–560. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2010.12.010. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
720. Wolff V, Lauer V, Rouyer O, Sellal F, Meyer N, Raul JS, Sabourdy C, Boujan F, Jahn C, Beaujeux R, Marescaux C. Cannabis use, ischemic stroke, and multifocal intracranial
vasoconstriction: a prospective study in 48 consecutive young
patients. Stroke. 2011;42:1778–1780. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.610915. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
721. Kaku DA, Lowenstein DH. Emergence of recreational drug abuse as a major risk factor for
stroke in young adults. Ann Intern Med. 1990;113:821–827. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-113-11-821. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
722. Kittner SJ, Stern BJ, Wozniak M, Buchholz DW, Earley CJ, Feeser BR, Johnson CJ, Macko RF, McCarter RJ, Price TR, Sherwin R, Sloan MA, Wityk RJ. Cerebral infarction in young adults: the Baltimore-Washington
Cooperative Young Stroke Study. Neurology. 1998;50:890–894. doi: 10.1212/wnl.50.4.890. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
723. Levine SR, Brust JC, Futrell N, Ho KL, Blake D, Millikan CH, Brass LM, Fayad P, Schultz LR, Selwa JF, Welch KMA. Cerebrovascular complications of the use of the
“crack” form of alkaloidal cocaine. N Engl J Med. 1990;323:699–704. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199009133231102. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
724. Petitti DB, Sidney S, Quesenberry C, Bernstein A. Stroke and cocaine or amphetamine use. Epidemiology. 1998;9:596–600. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
725. Sloan MA, Kittner SJ, Feeser BR, Gardner J, Epstein A, Wozniak MA, Wityk RJ, Stern BJ, Price TR, Macko RF, Johnson CJ, Earley CJ, Buchholz D. Illicit drug-associated ischemic stroke in the
Baltimore-Washington Young Stroke Study. Neurology. 1998;50:1688–1693. doi: 10.1212/wnl.50.6.1688. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
726. Westover AN, McBride S, Haley RW. Stroke in young adults who abuse amphetamines or cocaine: a
population-based study of hospitalized patients. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64:495–502. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.4.495. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
727. Martin-Schild S, Albright KC, Hallevi H, Barreto AD, Philip M, Misra V, Grotta JC, Savitz SI. Intracerebral hemorrhage in cocaine users. Stroke. 2010;41:680–684. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.573147. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
728. Herbeck DM, Hser YI, Teruya C. Empirically supported substance abuse treatment approaches: a
survey of treatment providers’ perspectives and
practices. Addict Behav. 2008;33:699–712. doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2007.12.003. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
729. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for illicit drug use. http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/uspsdrug.htm .
Accessed January 9, 2013. 
730. Epstein LJ, Kristo D, Strollo PJ, Jr, Friedman N, Malhotra A, Patil SP, Ramar K, Rogers R, Schwab RJ, Weaver EM, Weinstein MD, Adult Obstructive Sleep Apnea Task Force of the American Academy of
Sleep Medicine Clinical guideline for the evaluation, management and long-term
care of obstructive sleep apnea in adults. J Clin Sleep Med. 2009;5:263–276. [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
731. Young T, Peppard PE, Gottlieb DJ. Epidemiology of obstructive sleep apnea: a population health
perspective. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002;165:1217–1239. doi: 10.1164/rccm.2109080. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
732. Arzt M, Young T, Finn L, Skatrud JB, Bradley TD. Association of sleep-disordered breathing and the occurrence of
stroke. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005;172:1447–1451. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200505-702OC. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
733. Redline S, Yenokyan G, Gottlieb DJ, Shahar E, O’Connor GT, Resnick HE, Diener-West M, Sanders MH, Wolf PA, Geraghty EM, Ali T, Lebowitz M, Punjabi NM. Obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea and incident stroke: the Sleep
Heart Health Study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010;182:269–277. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200911-1746OC. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
734. Loke YK, Brown JW, Kwok CS, Niruban A, Myint PK. Association of obstructive sleep apnea with risk of serious
cardiovascular events: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2012;5:720–728. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.111.964783. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
735. Minoguchi K, Yokoe T, Tazaki T, Minoguchi H, Oda N, Tanaka A, Yamamoto M, Ohta S, O’Donnell CP, Adachi M. Silent brain infarction and platelet activation in obstructive
sleep apnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007;175:612–617. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200608-1141OC. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
736. Giles TL, Lasserson TJ, Smith BH, White J, Wright J, Cates CJ. Continuous positive airways pressure for obstructive sleep apnoea
in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006:CD001106. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001106.pub3. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
737. Hudgel DW, Lamerato LE, Jacobsen GR, Drake CL. Assessment of multiple health risks in a single obstructive sleep
apnea population. J Clin Sleep Med. 2012;8:9–18. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.1648. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
738. Buchner NJ, Sanner BM, Borgel J, Rump LC. Continuous positive airway pressure treatment of mild to moderate
obstructive sleep apnea reduces cardiovascular risk. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007;176:1274–1280. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200611-1588OC. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
739. Marin JM, Carrizo SJ, Vicente E, Agusti AG. Long-term cardiovascular outcomes in men with obstructive sleep
apnoea-hypopnoea with or without treatment with continuous positive airway
pressure: an observational study. Lancet. 2005;365:1046–1053. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)71141-7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
740. Kernan WN, Ovbiagele B, Black HR, Bravata DM, Chimowitz MI, Ezekowitz MD, Fang MC, Fisher M, Furie KL, Heck DV, Johnston SC, Kasner SE, Kittner SJ, Mitchell PH, Rich MW, Richardson D, Schwamm LH, Wilson JA, on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council, Council
on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Clinical Cardiology,
and Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. Guidelines for the
prevention of stroke in patients with stroke and transient ischemic
attack: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association Stroke. 2014;45:2160–2236. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000024. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
741. Martinez-Garcia MA, Campos-Rodriguez F, Soler-Cataluna JJ, Catalan-Serra P, Roman-Sanchez P, Montserrat JM. Increased incidence of nonfatal cardiovascular events in stroke
patients with sleep apnoea: effect of CPAP treatment. Eur Respir J. 2012;39:906–912. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00011311. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
742. Ayas NT, Patel SR, Malhotra A, Schulzer M, Malhotra M, Jung D, Fleetham J, White DP. Auto-titrating versus standard continuous positive airway
pressure for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea: results of a
meta-analysis. Sleep. 2004;27:249–253. doi: 10.1093/sleep/27.2.249. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
743. Berry RB, Parish JM, Hartse KM. The use of auto-titrating continuous positive airway pressure for
treatment of adult obstructive sleep apnea: an American Academy of Sleep
Medicine review. Sleep. 2002;25:148–173. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
744. Haniffa M, Lasserson TJ, Smith I. Interventions to improve compliance with continuous positive
airway pressure for obstructive sleep apnoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004:CD003531. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003531.pub2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
745. Kakkar RK, Berry RB. Positive airway pressure treatment for obstructive sleep
apnea. Chest. 2007;132:1057–1072. doi: 10.1378/chest.06-2432. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
746. Smith I, Lasserson TJ. Pressure modification for improving usage of continuous positive
airway pressure machines in adults with obstructive sleep
apnoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009:CD003531. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003531.pub3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
747. Smith I, Nadig V, Lasserson TJ. Educational, supportive and behavioural interventions to improve
usage of continuous positive airway pressure machines for adults with
obstructive sleep apnoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009:CD007736. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD007736. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
748. McArdle N, Devereux G, Heidarnejad H, Engleman HM, Mackay TW, Douglas NJ. Long-term use of CPAP therapy for sleep apnea/hypopnea
syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1999;159(pt 1):1108–1114. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm.159.4.9807111. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
749. Peppard PE, Young T, Palta M, Skatrud J. Prospective study of the association between sleep-disordered
breathing and hypertension. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1378–1384. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200005113421901. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
750. Lavie P, Herer P, Hoffstein V. Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome as a risk factor for
hypertension: population study. BMJ. 2000;320:479–482. doi: 10.1136/bmj.320.7233.479. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
751. Logan AG, Perlikowski SM, Mente A, Tisler A, Tkacova R, Niroumand M, Leung RS, Bradley TD. High prevalence of unrecognized sleep apnoea in drug-resistant
hypertension. J Hypertens. 2001;19:2271–2277. doi: 10.1097/00004872-200112000-00022. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
752. Bazzano LA, Khan Z, Reynolds K, He J. Effect of nocturnal nasal continuous positive airway pressure on
blood pressure in obstructive sleep apnea. Hypertension. 2007;50:417–423. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.106.085175. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
753. Haentjens P, Van Meerhaeghe A, Moscariello A, De Weerdt S, Poppe K, Dupont A, Velkeniers B. The impact of continuous positive airway pressure on blood
pressure in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: evidence from a
meta-analysis of placebo-controlled randomized trials. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:757–764. doi: 10.1001/archinte.167.8.757. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
754. Alajmi M, Mulgrew AT, Fox J, Davidson W, Schulzer M, Mak E, Ryan CF, Fleetham J, Choi P, Ayas NT. Impact of continuous positive airway pressure therapy on blood
pressure in patients with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea: a meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. Lung. 2007;185:67–72. doi: 10.1007/s00408-006-0117-x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
755. Colten H, Abboud F, Block G. Sleep Disorders and Sleep Deprivation: An Unmet Public Health
Problem. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences; 2006. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
756. Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: the Epworth
sleepiness scale. Sleep. 1991;14:540–545. doi: 10.1093/sleep/14.6.540. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
757. Netzer NC, Stoohs RA, Netzer CM, Clark K, Strohl KP. Using the Berlin Questionnaire to identify patients at risk for
the sleep apnea syndrome. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131:485–491. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-131-7-199910050-00002. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
758. Ramachandran SK, Josephs LA. A meta-analysis of clinical screening tests for obstructive sleep
apnea. Anesthesiology. 2009;110:928–939. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e31819c47b6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
759. Welch GN, Loscalzo J. Homocysteine and atherothrombosis. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:1042–1050. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199804093381507. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
760. Selhub J, Jacques PF, Wilson PW, Rush D, Rosenberg IH. Vitamin status and intake as primary determinants of
homocysteinemia in an elderly population. JAMA. 1993;270:2693–2698. doi: 10.1001/jama.1993.03510220049033. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
761. Boushey CJ, Beresford SA, Omenn GS, Motulsky AG. A quantitative assessment of plasma homocysteine as a risk factor
for vascular disease: probable benefits of increasing folic acid
intakes. JAMA. 1995;274:1049–1057. doi: 10.1001/jama.1995.03530130055028. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
762. Graham IM, Daly LE, Refsum HM, Robinson K, Brattstrom LE, Ueland PM, Palma-Reis RJ, Boers GH, Sheahan RG, Israelsson B, Uiterwaal CS, Meleady R, McMaster D, Verhoef P, Witteman J, Rubba P, Bellet H, Wautrecht JC, de Valk HW, Sales Luis AC, Parrot-Rouland FM, Tan KS, Higgins I, Garcon D, Medrano MJ, Candito M, Evans AE, Andria G. Plasma homocysteine as a risk factor for vascular disease: the
European Concerted Action Project. JAMA. 1997;277:1775–1781. doi: 10.1001/jama.1997.03540460039030. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
763. Robinson K, Arheart K, Refsum H, Brattstrom L, Boers G, Ueland P, Rubba P, Palma-Reis R, Meleady R, Daly L, Witteman J, Graham I. Low circulating folate and vitamin B6 concentrations: risk
factors for stroke, peripheral vascular disease, and coronary artery
disease: European COMAC Group. Circulation. 1998;97:437–443. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.97.5.437. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
764. Bostom AG, Rosenberg IH, Silbershatz H, Jacques PF, Selhub J, D’Agostino RB, Wilson PW, Wolf PA. Nonfasting plasma total homocysteine levels and stroke incidence
in elderly persons: the Framingham Study. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131:352–355. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-131-5-199909070-00006. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
765. Das RR, Seshadri S, Beiser AS, Kelly-Hayes M, Au R, Himali JJ, Kase CS, Benjamin EJ, Polak JF, O’Donnell CJ, Yoshita M, D’Agostino RB, Sr, DeCarli C, Wolf PA. Prevalence and correlates of silent cerebral infarcts in the
Framingham Offspring Study. Stroke. 2008;39:2929–2935. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.516575. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
766. Giles WH, Croft JB, Greenlund KJ, Ford ES, Kittner SJ. Total homocyst(e)ine concentration and the likelihood of nonfatal
stroke: results from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey, 1988–1994. Stroke. 1998;29:2473–2477. doi: 10.1161/01.str.29.12.2473. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
767. Tanne D, Haim M, Goldbourt U, Boyko V, Doolman R, Adler Y, Brunner D, Behar S, Sela BA. Prospective study of serum homocysteine and risk of ischemic
stroke among patients with preexisting coronary heart
disease. Stroke. 2003;34:632–636. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000060203.58958.35. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
768. Malinow MR, Nieto FJ, Szklo M, Chambless LE, Bond G. Carotid artery intimal-medial wall thickening and plasma
homocyst(e)ine in asymptomatic adults: the Atherosclerosis Risk in
Communities Study. Circulation. 1993;87:1107–1113. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.87.4.1107. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
769. McQuillan BM, Beilby JP, Nidorf M, Thompson PL, Hung J. Hyperhomocysteinemia but not the C677T mutation of
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase is an independent risk determinant of
carotid wall thickening: the Perth Carotid Ultrasound Disease Assessment
Study (CUDAS) Circulation. 1999;99:2383–2388. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.99.18.2383. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
770. Selhub J, Jacques PF, Bostom AG, D’Agostino RB, Wilson PW, Belanger AJ, O’Leary DH, Wolf PA, Schaefer EJ, Rosenberg IH. Association between plasma homocysteine concentrations and
extracranial carotid-artery stenosis. N Engl J Med. 1995;332:286–291. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199502023320502. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
771. Kelemen LE, Anand SS, Hegele RA, Stampfer MJ, Rosner B, Willett WC, Montague PA, Lonn E, Vuksan V, Teo KK, Devanesen S, Yusuf S. Associations of plasma homocysteine and the
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T polymorphism with carotid intima
media thickness among South Asian, Chinese and European
Canadians. Atherosclerosis. 2004;176:361–370. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2004.06.003. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
772. Held C, Sumner G, Sheridan P, McQueen M, Smith S, Dagenais G, Yusuf S, Lonn E. Correlations between plasma homocysteine and folate
concentrations and carotid atherosclerosis in high-risk individuals:
baseline data from the Homocysteine and Atherosclerosis Reduction Trial
(HART) Vasc Med. 2008;13:245–253. doi: 10.1177/1358863X08092102. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
773. Potter K, Hankey GJ, Green DJ, Eikelboom JW, Arnolda LF. Homocysteine or renal impairment: which is the real
cardiovascular risk factor? Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008;28:1158–1164. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.162743. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
774. Homocysteine Studies Collaboration. Homocysteine and risk of ischemic heart disease and stroke: a
meta-analysis. JAMA. 2002;288:2015–2022. doi: 10.1001/jama.288.16.2015. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
775. Wald DS, Law M, Morris JK. Homocysteine and cardiovascular disease: evidence on causality
from a meta-analysis. BMJ. 2002;325:1202. doi: 10.1136/bmj.325.7374.1202. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
776. Bentley P, Peck G, Smeeth L, Whittaker J, Sharma P. Causal relationship of susceptibility genes to ischemic stroke:
comparison to ischemic heart disease and biochemical
determinants. PLoS One. 2010;5:e9136. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009136. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
777. Al-Delaimy WK, Rexrode KM, Hu FB, Albert CM, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC, Manson JE. Folate intake and risk of stroke among women. Stroke. 2004;35:1259–1263. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000127813.12854.9c. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
778. He K, Merchant A, Rimm EB, Rosner BA, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC, Ascherio A. Folate, vitamin B6, and B12 intakes in relation to risk of stroke
among men. Stroke. 2004;35:169–174. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000106762.55994.86. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
779. Van Guelpen B, Hultdin J, Johansson I, Stegmayr B, Hallmans G, Nilsson TK, Weinehall L, Witthoft C, Palmqvist R, Winkvist A. Folate, vitamin B12, and risk of ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke:
a prospective, nested case-referent study of plasma concentrations and
dietary intake. Stroke. 2005;36:1426–1431. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000169934.96354.3a. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
780. Weng LC, Yeh WT, Bai CH, Chen HJ, Chuang SY, Chang HY, Lin BF, Chen KJ, Pan WH. Is ischemic stroke risk related to folate status or other
nutrients correlated with folate intake? Stroke. 2008;39:3152–3158. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.524934. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
781. Hodis HN, Mack WJ, Dustin L, Mahrer PR, Azen SP, Detrano R, Selhub J, Alaupovic P, Liu CR, Liu CH, Hwang J, Wilcox AG, Selzer RH, BVAIT Research Group High-dose B vitamin supplementation and progression of
subclinical atherosclerosis: a randomized controlled trial. Stroke. 2009;40:730–736. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.526798. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
782. Qin X, Xu M, Zhang Y, Li J, Xu X, Wang X, Huo Y. Effect of folic acid supplementation on the progression of
carotid intima-media thickness: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Atherosclerosis. 2012;222:307–313. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2011.12.007. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
783. Potter K, Hankey GJ, Green DJ, Eikelboom J, Jamrozik K, Arnolda LF. The effect of long-term homocysteine-lowering on carotid
intima-media thickness and flow-mediated vasodilation in stroke patients: a
randomized controlled trial and meta-analysis. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2008;8:24. doi: 10.1186/1471-2261-8-24. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
784. Bonaa KH, Njolstad I, Ueland PM, Schirmer H, Tverdal A, Steigen T, Wang H, Nordrehaug JE, Arnesen E, Rasmussen K, NORVIT Trial Investigators Homocysteine lowering and cardiovascular events after acute
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1578–1588. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa055227. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
785. Ebbing M, Bleie O, Ueland PM, Nordrehaug JE, Nilsen DW, Vollset SE, Refsum H, Pedersen EK, Nygard O. Mortality and cardiovascular events in patients treated with
homocysteine-lowering B vitamins after coronary angiography: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2008;300:795–804. doi: 10.1001/jama.300.7.795. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
786. Albert CM, Cook NR, Gaziano JM, Zaharris E, MacFadyen J, Danielson E, Buring JE, Manson JE. Effect of folic acid and B vitamins on risk of cardiovascular
events and total mortality among women at high risk for cardiovascular
disease: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2008;299:2027–2036. doi: 10.1001/jama.299.17.2027. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
787. VITATOPS Study Group. B vitamins in patients with recent transient ischaemic attack or
stroke in the VITAmins TO Prevent Stroke (VITATOPS) trial: a randomised,
double-blind, parallel, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9:855–865. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70187-3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
788. Hankey GJ, Eikelboom JW, Yi Q, Lees KR, Chen C, Xavier D, Navarro JC, Ranawaka UK, Uddin W, Ricci S, Gommans J, Schmidt R, VITATOPS Trial Study Group Antiplatelet therapy and the effects of B vitamins in patients
with previous stroke or transient ischaemic attack: a post-hoc subanalysis
of VITATOPS, a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11:512–520. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70091-1. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
789. Yang HT, Lee M, Hong KS, Ovbiagele B, Saver JL. Efficacy of folic acid supplementation in cardiovascular disease
prevention: an updated meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Eur J Intern Med. 2012;23:745–754. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2012.07.004. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
790. Lee M, Hong KS, Chang SC, Saver JL. Efficacy of homocysteine-lowering therapy with folic acid in
stroke prevention: a meta-analysis. Stroke. 2010;41:1205–1212. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.573410. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
791. Righetti M, Serbelloni P, Milani S, Ferrario G. Homocysteine-lowering vitamin B treatment decreases
cardiovascular events in hemodialysis patients. Blood Purif. 2006;24:379–386. doi: 10.1159/000093680. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
792. Wrone EM, Hornberger JM, Zehnder JL, McCann LM, Coplon NS, Fortmann SP. Randomized trial of folic acid for prevention of cardiovascular
events in end-stage renal disease. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004;15:420–426. doi: 10.1097/01.asn.0000110181.64655.6c. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
793. Zoungas S, McGrath BP, Branley P, Kerr PG, Muske C, Wolfe R, Atkins RC, Nicholls K, Fraenkel M, Hutchison BG, Walker R, McNeil JJ. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the Atherosclerosis and
Folic Acid Supplementation Trial (ASFAST) in chronic renal failure: a
multicenter, randomized, controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:1108–1116. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.10.064. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
794. Toole JF, Malinow MR, Chambless LE, Spence JD, Pettigrew LC, Howard VJ, Sides EG, Wang CH, Stampfer M. Lowering homocysteine in patients with ischemic stroke to prevent
recurrent stroke, myocardial infarction, and death: the Vitamin Intervention
for Stroke Prevention (VISP) randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;291:565–575. doi: 10.1001/jama.291.5.565. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
795. Lonn E, Yusuf S, Arnold MJ, Sheridan P, Pogue J, Micks M, McQueen MJ, Probstfield J, Fodor G, Held C, Genest J, Jr, Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) 2 Investigators Homocysteine lowering with folic acid and B vitamins in vascular
disease. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1567–1577. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa060900. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
796. Saposnik G, Ray JG, Sheridan P, McQueen M, Lonn E, Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation 2 Investigators Homocysteine-lowering therapy and stroke risk, severity, and
disability: additional findings from the HOPE 2 trial. Stroke. 2009;40:1365–1372. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.529503. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
797. Marcovina SM, Koschinsky ML. Evaluation of lipoprotein(a) as a prothrombotic factor: progress
from bench to bedside. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2003;14:361–366. doi: 10.1097/00041433-200308000-00004. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
798. Danesh J, Collins R, Peto R. Lipoprotein(a) and coronary heart disease: meta-analysis of
prospective studies. Circulation. 2000;102:1082–1085. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.102.10.1082. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
799. Foody JM, Milberg JA, Pearce GL, Sprecher DL. Lipoprotein(a) associated with coronary artery disease in older
women: age and gender analysis. Atherosclerosis. 2000;153:445–451. doi: 10.1016/s0021-9150(00)00427-5. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
800. Hancock MA, Boffa MB, Marcovina SM, Nesheim ME, Koschinsky ML. Inhibition of plasminogen activation by lipoprotein(a): critical
domains in apolipoprotein(a) and mechanism of inhibition on fibrin and
degraded fibrin surfaces. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:23260–23269. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M302780200. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
801. Ariyo AA, Thach C, Tracy R, Cardiovascular Health Study Investigators Lp(a) lipoprotein, vascular disease, and mortality in the
elderly. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:2108–2115. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa001066. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
802. Milionis HJ, Filippatos TD, Loukas T, Bairaktari ET, Tselepis AD, Elisaf MS. Serum lipoprotein(a) levels and apolipoprotein(a) isoform size
and risk for first-ever acute ischaemic nonembolic stroke in elderly
individuals. Atherosclerosis. 2006;187:170–176. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2005.08.036. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
803. Ohira T, Schreiner PJ, Morrisett JD, Chambless LE, Rosamond WD, Folsom AR. Lipoprotein(a) and incident ischemic stroke: the Atherosclerosis
Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Stroke. 2006;37:1407–1412. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000222666.21482.b6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
804. Ridker PM, Stampfer MJ, Hennekens CH. Plasma concentration of lipoprotein(a) and the risk of future
stroke. JAMA. 1995;273:1269–1273. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
805. Virani SS, Brautbar A, Davis BC, Nambi V, Hoogeveen RC, Sharrett AR, Coresh J, Mosley TH, Morrisett JD, Catellier DJ, Folsom AR, Boerwinkle E, Ballantyne CM. Associations between lipoprotein(a) levels and cardiovascular
outcomes in black and white subjects: the Atherosclerosis Risk in
Communities (ARIC) Study. Circulation. 2012;125:241–249. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.045120. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
806. Klein JH, Hegele RA, Hackam DG, Koschinsky ML, Huff MW, Spence JD. Lipoprotein(a) is associated differentially with carotid
stenosis, occlusion, and total plaque area. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008;28:1851–1856. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.169292. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
807. Willeit J, Kiechl S, Santer P, Oberhollenzer F, Egger G, Jarosch E, Mair A. Lipoprotein(a) and asymptomatic carotid artery disease: evidence
of a prominent role in the evolution of advanced carotid plaques: the
Bruneck Study. Stroke. 1995;26:1582–1587. doi: 10.1161/01.str.26.9.1582. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
808. Cerrato P, Imperiale D, Fornengo P, Bruno G, Cassader M, Maffeis P, Cavallo Perin P, Pagano G, Bergamasco B. Higher lipoprotein (a) levels in atherothrombotic than lacunar
ischemic cerebrovascular disease. Neurology. 2002;58:653–655. doi: 10.1212/wnl.58.4.653. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
809. Smolders B, Lemmens R, Thijs V. Lipoprotein (a) and stroke: a meta-analysis of observational
studies. Stroke. 2007;38:1959–1966. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.106.480657. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
810. Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration. Di Angelantonio E, Gao P, Pennells L, Kaptoge S, Caslake M, Thompson A, Butterworth AS, Sarwar N, Wormser D, Saleheen D, Ballantyne CM, Psaty BM, Sundstrom J, Ridker PM, Nagel D, Gillum RF, Ford I, Ducimetiere P, Kiechl S, Koenig W, Dullaart RP, Assmann G, D’Agostino RB, Sr, Dagenais GR, Cooper JA, Kromhout D, Onat A, Tipping RW, Gomez-de-la-Camara A, Rosengren A, Sutherland SE, Gallacher J, Fowkes FG, Casiglia E, Hofman A, Salomaa V, Barrett-Connor E, Clarke R, Brunner E, Jukema JW, Simons LA, Sandhu M, Wareham NJ, Khaw KT, Kauhanen J, Salonen JT, Howard WJ, Nordestgaard BG, Wood AM, Thompson SG, Boekholdt SM, Sattar N, Packard C, Gudnason V, Danesh J. Lipid-related markers and cardiovascular disease
prediction. JAMA. 2012;307:2499–2506. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.6571. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
811. Kenet G, Lutkhoff LK, Albisetti M, Bernard T, Bonduel M, Brandao L, Chabrier S, Chan A, deVeber G, Fiedler B, Fullerton HJ, Goldenberg NA, Grabowski E, Gunther G, Heller C, Holzhauer S, Iorio A, Journeycake J, Junker R, Kirkham FJ, Kurnik K, Lynch JK, Male C, Manco-Johnson M, Mesters R, Monagle P, van Ommen CH, Raffini L, Rostasy K, Simioni P, Strater RD, Young G, Nowak-Gottl U. Impact of thrombophilia on risk of arterial ischemic stroke or
cerebral sinovenous thrombosis in neonates and children: a systematic review
and meta-analysis of observational studies. Circulation. 2010;121:1838–1847. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.913673. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
812. Goldenberg NA, Bernard TJ, Hillhouse J, Armstrong-Wells J, Galinkin J, Knapp-Clevenger R, Jacobson L, Marcovina S, Manco-Johnson MJ. Elevated lipoprotein (a), small apolipoprotein (a), and the risk
of arterial ischemic stroke in North American children. Haematologica. 2013;98:802–807. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.073833. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
813. Nordestgaard BG, Chapman MJ, Ray K, Boren J, Andreotti F, Watts GF, Ginsberg H, Amarenco P, Catapano A, Descamps OS, Fisher E, Kovanen PT, Kuivenhoven JA, Lesnik P, Masana L, Reiner Z, Taskinen MR, Tokgozoglu L, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, European Atherosclerosis Society Consensus Panel Lipoprotein(a) as a cardiovascular risk factor: current
status. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:2844–2853. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq386. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
814. Anticardiolipin antibodies are an independent risk factor for first
ischemic stroke: the Antiphospholipid Antibodies in Stroke Study (APASS)
Group. Neurology. 1993;43:2069–2073. doi: 10.1212/wnl.43.10.2069. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
815. Dragoni F, Chiarotti F, Rosano G, Simioni P, Tormene D, Mazzucconi MG, Cafolla A, Avvisati G. Thrombophilic screening in young patients (<40 years)
with idiopathic ischemic stroke: a controlled study. Thromb Res. 2011;127:85–90. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2010.11.013. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
816. Erkan D, Harrison MJ, Levy R, Peterson M, Petri M, Sammaritano L, Unalp-Arida A, Vilela V, Yazici Y, Lockshin MD. Aspirin for primary thrombosis prevention in the antiphospholipid
syndrome: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in
asymptomatic antiphospholipid antibody-positive individuals. Arthritis Rheum. 2007;56:2382–2391. doi: 10.1002/art.22663. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
817. Frances C, Papo T, Wechsler B, Laporte JL, Biousse V, Piette JC. Sneddon syndrome with or without antiphospholipid antibodies: a
comparative study in 46 patients. Medicine (Baltimore) 1999;78:209–219. doi: 10.1097/00005792-199907000-00001. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
818. Ginsburg KS, Liang MH, Newcomer L, Goldhaber SZ, Schur PH, Hennekens CH, Stampfer MJ. Anticardiolipin antibodies and the risk for ischemic stroke and
venous thrombosis. Ann Intern Med. 1992;117:997–1002. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-117-12-997. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
819. Brey RL, Abbott RD, Curb JD, Sharp DS, Ross GW, Stallworth CL, Kittner SJ. Beta(2)-glycoprotein 1-dependent anticardiolipin antibodies and
risk of ischemic stroke and myocardial infarction: the Honolulu Heart
Program. Stroke. 2001;32:1701–1706. doi: 10.1161/01.str.32.8.1701. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
820. Janardhan V, Wolf PA, Kase CS, Massaro JM, D’Agostino RB, Franzblau C, Wilson PW. Anticardiolipin antibodies and risk of ischemic stroke and
transient ischemic attack: the Framingham cohort and offspring
study. Stroke. 2004;35:736–741. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000117575.48205.2D. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
821. Galli M, Luciani D, Bertolini G, Barbui T. Anti-beta 2-glycoprotein I, antiprothrombin antibodies, and the
risk of thrombosis in the antiphospholipid syndrome. Blood. 2003;102:2717–2723. doi: 10.1182/blood-2002-11-3334. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
822. Heinzlef O, Abuaf N, Cohen A, Amarenco P, French Study of Aortic Plaques in Stroke Group Recurrent stroke and vascular events in elderly patients with
anticardiolipin antibodies: a prospective study. J Neurol. 2001;248:373–379. doi: 10.1007/s004150170176. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
823. Pengo V, Ruffatti A, Legnani C, Testa S, Fierro T, Marongiu F, De Micheli V, Gresele P, Tonello M, Ghirarduzzi A, Bison E, Denas G, Banzato A, Padayattil Jose S, Iliceto S. Incidence of a first thromboembolic event in asymptomatic
carriers of high-risk antiphospholipid antibody profile: a multicenter
prospective study. Blood. 2011;118:4714–4718. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-03-340232. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
824. Ruffatti A, Del Ross T, Ciprian M, Bertero MT, Sciascia S, Scarpato S, Montecucco C, Rossi S, Caramaschi P, Biasi D, Doria A, Rampudda M, Monica N, Fischetti F, Picillo U, Brucato A, Salvan E, Vittorio P, Meroni P, Tincani A, Antiphospholipid Syndrome Study Group of Italian Society of
Rheumatology Risk factors for a first thrombotic event in antiphospholipid
antibody carriers: a prospective multicentre follow-up study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011;70:1083–1086. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.142042. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
825. Petri M. Management of thrombosis in antiphospholipid antibody
syndrome. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2001;27:633–642. viii. doi: 10.1016/s0889-857x(05)70225-8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
826. Chan M, Becker RC, Shah SH, Levine SR. Coagulopathy and stroke. In: Goldstein LB, editor. A Primer on Stroke Prevention and Treatment: an Overview Based on
AHA/ASA Guidelines. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009. pp. 152–169. [ Google Scholar ] 
827. Pezzini A, Del Zotto E, Magoni M, Costa A, Archetti S, Grassi M, Akkawi NM, Albertini A, Assanelli D, Vignolo LA, Padovani A. Inherited thrombophilic disorders in young adults with ischemic
stroke and patent foramen ovale. Stroke. 2003;34:28–33. doi: 10.1161/01.str.0000046457.54037.cc. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
828. Bank I, Libourel EJ, Middeldorp S, Van Pampus EC, Koopman MM, Hamulyak K, Prins MH, Van Der Meer J, Buller HR. Prothrombin 20210A mutation: a mild risk factor for venous
thromboembolism but not for arterial thrombotic disease and
pregnancy-related complications in a family study. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164:1932–1937. doi: 10.1001/archinte.164.17.1932. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
829. Barnes C, Deveber G. Prothrombotic abnormalities in childhood ischaemic
stroke. Thromb Res. 2006;118:67–74. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2005.05.021. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
830. Dalen JE. Should patients with venous thromboembolism be screened for
thrombophilia? Am J Med. 2008;121:458–463. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2007.10.042. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
831. Hamedani AG, Cole JW, Mitchell BD, Kittner SJ. Meta-analysis of factor V Leiden and ischemic stroke in young
adults: the importance of case ascertainment. Stroke. 2010;41:1599–1603. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.581256. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
832. Wasay M, Bakshi R, Bobustuc G, Kojan S, Sheikh Z, Dai A, Cheema Z. Cerebral venous thrombosis: analysis of a multicenter cohort from
the United States. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2008;17:49–54. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2007.10.001. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
833. Wu O, Robertson L, Twaddle S, Lowe GD, Clark P, Greaves M, Walker ID, Langhorne P, Brenkel I, Regan L, Greer I. Screening for thrombophilia in high-risk situations: systematic
review and cost-effectiveness analysis: the Thrombosis: Risk and Economic
Assessment of Thrombophilia Screening (TREATS) study. Health Technol Assess. 2006;10:1–110. doi: 10.3310/hta10110. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
834. Wells PS, Louzada ML, Taljaard M, Anderson DR, Kahn SR, Langlois NJ, Rutberg J, Kovacs MJ, Rodger MA. A pilot study to assess the feasibility of a multicenter cluster
randomized trial for the management of asymptomatic persons with a
thrombophilia. J Genet Couns. 2009;18:475–482. doi: 10.1007/s10897-009-9239-7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
835. Libby P. Inflammation in atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012;32:2045–2051. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.179705. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
836. Kamel H, Iadecola C. Brain-immune interactions and ischemic stroke: clinical
implications. Arch Neurol. 2012;69:576–581. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.3590. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
837. Oei HH, van der Meer IM, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Stijnen T, Breteler MM, Witteman JC. Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 activity is associated
with risk of coronary heart disease and ischemic stroke: the Rotterdam
Study. Circulation. 2005;111:570–575. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000154553.12214.CD. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
838. Vittos O, Toana B, Vittos A, Moldoveanu E. Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2): a review of
its role and significance as a cardiovascular biomarker. Biomarkers. 2012;17:289–302. doi: 10.3109/1354750X.2012.664170. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
839. Nambi V, Hoogeveen RC, Chambless L, Hu Y, Bang H, Coresh J, Ni H, Boerwinkle E, Mosley T, Sharrett R, Folsom AR, Ballantyne CM. Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 and high-sensitivity
C-reactive protein improve the stratification of ischemic stroke risk in the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Stroke. 2009;40:376–381. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.513259. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
840. Pearson TA, Mensah GA, Alexander RW, Anderson JL, Cannon RO, 3rd, Criqui M, Fadl YY, Fortmann SP, Hong Y, Myers GL, Rifai N, Smith SC, Jr, Taubert K, Tracy RP, Vinicor F, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; American Heart
Association Markers of inflammation and cardiovascular disease: application
to clinical and public health practice: a statement for healthcare
professionals from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2003;107:499–511. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000052939.59093.45. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
841. Ridker PM, Cushman M, Stampfer MJ, Tracy RP, Hennekens CH. Inflammation, aspirin, and the risk of cardiovascular disease in
apparently healthy men. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:973–979. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199704033361401. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
842. Ridker PM, Buring JE, Shih J, Matias M, Hennekens CH. Prospective study of C-reactive protein and the risk of future
cardiovascular events among apparently healthy women. Circulation. 1998;98:731–733. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.98.8.731. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
843. Rost NS, Wolf PA, Kase CS, Kelly-Hayes M, Silbershatz H, Massaro JM, D’Agostino RB, Franzblau C, Wilson PW. Plasma concentration of C-reactive protein and risk of ischemic
stroke and transient ischemic attack: the Framingham study. Stroke. 2001;32:2575–2579. doi: 10.1161/hs1101.098151. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
844. Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration. Kaptoge S, Di Angelantonio E, Lowe G, Pepys MB, Thompson SG, Collins R, Danesh J. C-reactive protein concentration and risk of coronary heart
disease, stroke, and mortality: an individual participant
meta-analysis. Lancet. 2010;375:132–140. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61717-7. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
845. Kjaergaard AD, Bojesen SE, Johansen JS, Nordestgaard BG. Elevated plasma YKL-40 levels and ischemic stroke in the general
population. Ann Neurol. 2010;68:672–680. doi: 10.1002/ana.22220. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
846. Fischer LM, Schlienger RG, Matter C, Jick H, Meier CR. Effect of rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus erythematosus on
the risk of first-time acute myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol. 2004;93:198–200. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2003.09.037. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
847. Gabriel SE. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in rheumatoid
arthritis. Am J Med. 2008;121(suppl 1):S9–S14. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2008.06.011. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
848. Sodergren A, Stegmayr B, Lundberg V, Ohman ML, Wallberg-Jonsson S. Increased incidence of and impaired prognosis after acute
myocardial infarction among patients with seropositive rheumatoid
arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007;66:263–266. doi: 10.1136/ard.2006.052456. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
849. Turesson C, Jarenros A, Jacobsson L. Increased incidence of cardiovascular disease in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis: results from a community based study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2004;63:952–955. doi: 10.1136/ard.2003.018101. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
850. Wolfe F, Freundlich B, Straus WL. Increase in cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease prevalence
in rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol. 2003;30:36–40. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
851. Symmons DP, Gabriel SE. Epidemiology of CVD in rheumatic disease, with a focus on RA and
SLE. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2011;7:399–408. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2011.75. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
852. Lindhardsen J, Ahlehoff O, Gislason GH, Madsen OR, Olesen JB, Svendsen JH, Torp-Pedersen C, Hansen PR. Risk of atrial fibrillation and stroke in rheumatoid arthritis:
Danish nationwide cohort study. BMJ. 2012;344:e1257. doi: 10.1136/bmj.e1257. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
853. Esdaile JM, Abrahamowicz M, Grodzicky T, Li Y, Panaritis C, du Berger R, Cote R, Grover SA, Fortin PR, Clarke AE, Senecal JL. Traditional Framingham risk factors fail to fully account for
accelerated atherosclerosis in systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 2001;44:2331–2337. doi: 10.1002/1529-0131(200110)44:10<2331::aid-art395>3.0.co;2-i. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
854. Manzi S, Selzer F, Sutton-Tyrrell K, Fitzgerald SG, Rairie JE, Tracy RP, Kuller LH. Prevalence and risk factors of carotid plaque in women with
systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 1999;42:51–60. doi: 10.1002/1529-0131(199901)42:1<51::AID-ANR7>3.0.CO;2-D. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
855. Roman MJ, Moeller E, Davis A, Paget SA, Crow MK, Lockshin MD, Sammaritano L, Devereux RB, Schwartz JE, Levine DM, Salmon JE. Preclinical carotid atherosclerosis in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis. Ann Intern Med. 2006;144:249–256. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-144-4-200602210-00006. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
856. Salmon JE, Roman MJ. Subclinical atherosclerosis in rheumatoid arthritis and systemic
lupus erythematosus. Am J Med. 2008;121(suppl 1):S3–S8. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2008.06.010. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
857. Pearson TA. Heightened risk of cardiovascular disease in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis: introduction. Am J Med. 2008;121:S1–S2. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2008.06.009. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
858. Grau AJ, Urbanek C, Palm F. Common infections and the risk of stroke. Nat Rev Neurol. 2010;6:681–694. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2010.163. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
859. Elkind MS, Ramakrishnan P, Moon YP, Boden-Albala B, Liu KM, Spitalnik SL, Rundek T, Sacco RL, Paik MC. Infectious burden and risk of stroke: the Northern Manhattan
Study. Arch Neurol. 2010;67:33–38. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.271. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
860. Elkind MS, Luna JM, Moon YP, Boden-Albala B, Liu KM, Spitalnik S, Rundek T, Sacco RL, Paik MC. Infectious burden and carotid plaque thickness: the Northern
Manhattan Study. Stroke. 2010;41:e117–e122. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.571299. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
861. Cercek B, Shah PK, Noc M, Zahger D, Zeymer U, Matetzky S, Maurer G, Mahrer P, AZACS Investigators Effect of short-term treatment with azithromycin on recurrent
ischaemic events in patients with acute coronary syndrome in the
Azithromycin in Acute Coronary Syndrome (AZACS) trial: a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2003;361:809–813. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12706-7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
862. Zahn R, Schneider S, Frilling B, Seidl K, Tebbe U, Weber M, Gottwik M, Altmann E, Seidel F, Rox J, Hoffler U, Neuhaus KL, Senges J, Working Group of Leading Hospital Cardiologists Antibiotic therapy after acute myocardial infarction: a
prospective randomized study. Circulation. 2003;107:1253–1259. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000054613.57105.06. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
863. Elkind MS, Carty CL, O’Meara ES, Lumley T, Lefkowitz D, Kronmal RA, Longstreth WT., Jr Hospitalization for infection and risk of acute ischemic stroke:
the Cardiovascular Health Study. Stroke. 2011;42:1851–1856. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.608588. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
864. Mamas MA, Fraser D, Neyses L. Cardiovascular manifestations associated with influenza virus
infection. Int J Cardiol. 2008;130:304–309. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2008.04.044. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
865. Warren-Gash C, Smeeth L, Hayward AC. Influenza as a trigger for acute myocardial infarction or death
from cardiovascular disease: a systematic review. Lancet Infect Dis. 2009;9:601–610. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(09)70233-6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
866. Madjid M, Curkendall S, Blumentals WA. The influence of oseltamivir treatment on the risk of stroke
after influenza infection. Cardiology. 2009;113:98–107. doi: 10.1159/000172796. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
867. Grau AJ, Fischer B, Barth C, Ling P, Lichy C, Buggle F. Influenza vaccination is associated with a reduced risk of
stroke. Stroke. 2005;36:1501–1506. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000170674.45136.80. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
868. Nichol KL, Nordin J, Mullooly J, Lask R, Fillbrandt K, Iwane M. Influenza vaccination and reduction in hospitalizations for
cardiac disease and stroke among the elderly. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1322–1332. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa025028. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
869. Wang CS, Wang ST, Lai CT, Lin LJ, Chou P. Impact of influenza vaccination on major cause-specific
mortality. Vaccine. 2007;25:1196–1203. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.10.015. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
870. Johnstone J, Loeb M, Teo KK, Gao P, Dyal L, Liu L, Avezum A, Cardona-Munoz E, Sleight P, Fagard R, Yusuf S, Ongoing Telmisartan Alone and in Combination With Ramipril Global
EndPoint Trial (ONTARGET); Telmisartan Randomized Assessment Study in
ACE Intolerant Subjects With Cardiovascular Disease (TRANSCEND)
Investigators Influenza vaccination and major adverse vascular events in
high-risk patients. Circulation. 2012;126:278–286. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.071100. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
871. Davis MM, Taubert K, Benin AL, Brown DW, Mensah GA, Baddour LM, Dunbar S, Krumholz HM, American Heart Association; American College of Cardiology Influenza vaccination as secondary prevention for cardiovascular
disease: a science advisory from the American Heart Association/American
College of Cardiology. Circulation. 2006;114:1549–1553. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.178242. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
872. De Berardis G, Lucisano G, D’Ettorre A, Pellegrini F, Lepore V, Tognoni G, Nicolucci A. Association of aspirin use with major bleeding in patients with
and without diabetes. JAMA. 2012;307:2286–2294. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.5034. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
873. Bartolucci AA, Tendera M, Howard G. Meta-analysis of multiple primary prevention trials of
cardiovascular events using aspirin. Am J Cardiol. 2011;107:1796–1801. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2011.02.325. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
874. Raju N, Sobieraj-Teague M, Hirsh J, O’Donnell M, Eikelboom J. Effect of aspirin on mortality in the primary prevention of
cardiovascular disease. Am J Med. 2011;124:621–629. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2011.01.018. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
875. Antithrombotic Trialists’ (ATT) Collaboration. Baigent C, Blackwell L, Collins R, Emberson J, Godwin J, Peto R, Buring J, Hennekens C, Kearney P, Meade T, Patrono C, Roncaglioni MC, Zanchetti A. Aspirin in the primary and secondary prevention of vascular
disease: collaborative meta-analysis of individual participant data from
randomised trials. Lancet. 2009;373:1849–1860. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60503-1. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
876. US Preventive Services Task Force. Aspirin for the prevention of cardiovascular disease: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:396–404. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-150-6-200903170-00008. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
877. Pearson TA, Blair SN, Daniels SR, Eckel RH, Fair JM, Fortmann SP, Franklin BA, Goldstein LB, Greenland P, Grundy SM, Hong Y, Miller NH, Lauer RM, Ockene IS, Sacco RL, Sallis JF, Jr, Smith SC, Jr, Stone NJ, Taubert KA. AHA guidelines for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease
and stroke: 2002 update: consensus panel guide to comprehensive risk
reduction for adult patients without coronary or other atherosclerotic
vascular diseases: American Heart Association Science Advisory and
Coordinating Committee. Circulation. 2002;106:388–391. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000020190.45892.75. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
878. Hayden M, Pignone M, Phillips C, Mulrow C. Aspirin for the primary prevention of cardiovascular events: a
summary of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force. Ann Intern Med. 2002;136:161–172. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-136-2-200201150-00016. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
879. Collaborative overview of randomised trials of antiplatelet
therapy, I: prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke by
prolonged antiplatelet therapy in various categories of patients:
Antiplatelet Trialists’ Collaboration. BMJ. 1994;308:81–106. [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
880. Hart RG, Halperin JL, McBride R, Benavente O, Man-Son-Hing M, Kronmal RA. Aspirin for the primary prevention of stroke and other major
vascular events: meta-analysis and hypotheses. Arch Neurol. 2000;57:326–332. doi: 10.1001/archneur.57.3.326. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
881. Robinson JG, Rahilly-Tierney C, Lawler E, Gaziano JM. Benefits associated with achieving optimal risk factor levels for
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in older
men. J Clin Lipidol. 2012;6:58–65. doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2011.10.019. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
882. Soejima H, Ogawa H, Morimoto T, Nakayama M, Okada S, Uemura S, Kanauchi M, Doi N, Sakuma M, Jinnouchi H, Sugiyama S, Waki M, Saito Y, JPAD Trial Investigators Aspirin reduces cerebrovascular events in type 2 diabetic
patients with poorly controlled blood pressure: sub-analysis from the JPAD
trial. Circ J. 2012;76:1526–1532. doi: 10.1253/circj.cj-11-1033. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
883. Belch J, MacCuish A, Campbell I, Cobbe S, Taylor R, Prescott R, Lee R, Bancroft J, MacEwan S, Shepherd J, Macfarlane P, Morris A, Jung R, Kelly C, Connacher A, Peden N, Jamieson A, Matthews D, Leese G, McKnight J, O’Brien I, Semple C, Petrie J, Gordon D, Pringle S, MacWalter R, Prevention of Progression of Arterial Disease and Diabetes Study
Group; Diabetes Registry Group; Royal College of Physicians
Edinburgh The Prevention of Progression of Arterial Disease and Diabetes
(POPADAD) trial: factorial randomised placebo controlled trial of aspirin
and antioxidants in patients with diabetes and asymptomatic peripheral
arterial disease. BMJ. 2008;337:a1840. doi: 10.1136/bmj.a1840. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
884. De Berardis G, Sacco M, Strippoli GF, Pellegrini F, Graziano G, Tognoni G, Nicolucci A. Aspirin for primary prevention of cardiovascular events in people
with diabetes: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2009;339:b4531. doi: 10.1136/bmj.b4531. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
885. Calvin AD, Aggarwal NR, Murad MH, Shi Q, Elamin MB, Geske JB, Fernandez-Balsells MM, Albuquerque FN, Lampropulos JF, Erwin PJ, Smith SA, Montori VM. Aspirin for the primary prevention of cardiovascular events: a
systematic review and meta-analysis comparing patients with and without
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2009;32:2300–2306. doi: 10.2337/dc09-1297. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
886. Zhang C, Sun A, Zhang P, Wu C, Zhang S, Fu M, Wang K, Zou Y, Ge J. Aspirin for primary prevention of cardiovascular events in
patients with diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2010;87:211–218. doi: 10.1016/j.diabres.2009.09.029. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
887. Stavrakis S, Stoner JA, Azar M, Wayangankar S, Thadani U. Low-dose aspirin for primary prevention of cardiovascular events
in patients with diabetes: a meta-analysis. Am J Med Sci. 2011;341:1–9. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181f1fba8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
888. Pignone M, Alberts MJ, Colwell JA, Cushman M, Inzucchi SE, Mukherjee D, Rosenson RS, Williams CD, Wilson PW, Kirkman MS. Aspirin for primary prevention of cardiovascular events in people
with diabetes: a position statement of the American Diabetes Association, a
scientific statement of the American Heart Association, and an expert
consensus document of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation. Circulation. 2010;121:2694–2701. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3181e3b133. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
889. Ridker PM, Cook NR, Lee IM, Gordon D, Gaziano JM, Manson JE, Hennekens CH, Buring JE. A randomized trial of low-dose aspirin in the primary prevention
of cardiovascular disease in women. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:1293–1304. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa050613. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
890. Mosca L, Banka CL, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, Bushnell C, Dolor RJ, Ganiats TG, Gomes AS, Gornik HL, Gracia C, Gulati M, Haan CK, Judelson DR, Keenan N, Kelepouris E, Michos ED, Newby LK, Oparil S, Ouyang P, Oz MC, Petitti D, Pinn VW, Redberg RF, Scott R, Sherif K, Smith SC, Jr, Sopko G, Steinhorn RH, Stone NJ, Taubert KA, Todd BA, Urbina E, Wenger NK, Expert Panel/Writing Group; American Heart Association; American
Academy of Family Physicians; American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists; American College of Cardiology Foundation; Society of
Thoracic Surgeons; American Medical Women’s Association; Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention; Office of Research on
Women’s Health; Association of Black Cardiologists; American
College of Physicians; World Heart Federation; National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute; American College of Nurse Practitioners Evidence-based guidelines for cardiovascular disease prevention
in women: 2007 update. Circulation. 2007;115:1481–1501. [ Google Scholar ] 
891. Fowkes FG, Price JF, Stewart MC, Butcher I, Leng GC, Pell AC, Sandercock PA, Fox KA, Lowe GD, Murray GD, Aspirin for Asymptomatic Atherosclerosis Trialists Aspirin for prevention of cardiovascular events in a general
population screened for a low ankle brachial index: a randomized controlled
trial. JAMA. 2010;303:841–848. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.221. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
892. Uchiyama S, Demaerschalk BM, Goto S, Shinohara Y, Gotoh F, Stone WM, Money SR, Kwon SU. Stroke prevention by cilostazol in patients with
atherothrombosis: meta-analysis of placebo-controlled randomized
trials. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2009;18:482–490. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2009.07.010. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
893. Jardine MJ, Ninomiya T, Perkovic V, Cass A, Turnbull F, Gallagher MP, Zoungas S, Lambers Heerspink HJ, Chalmers J, Zanchetti A. Aspirin is beneficial in hypertensive patients with chronic
kidney disease: a post-hoc subgroup analysis of a randomized controlled
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:956–965. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.02.068. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
894. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Emergency department visits within the past 12 months among adults aged
18 and over, by selected characteristics: United States, selected years
1997–2011. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2011/094.pdf . Accessed
March 14, 2013. 
895. Hsia RY, Kellermann AL, Shen YC. Factors associated with closures of emergency departments in the
United States. JAMA. 2011;305:1978–1985. doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.620. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
896. Babcock Irvin C, Wyer PC, Gerson LW. Preventive care in the emergency department, part II: clinical
preventive services: an emergency medicine evidence-based review: Society
for Academic Emergency Medicine Public Health and Education Task Force
Preventive Services Work Group. Acad Emerg Med. 2000;7:1042–1054. doi: 10.1111/j.1553-2712.2000.tb02098.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
897. Bernstein SL, Haukoos JS. Public health, prevention, and emergency medicine: a critical
juxtaposition. Acad Emerg Med. 2008;15:190–193. doi: 10.1111/j.1553-2712.2008.00055.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
898. Reeves MJ, Hogan JG, Rafferty AP. Knowledge of stroke risk factors and warning signs among Michigan
adults. Neurology. 2002;59:1547–1552. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000031796.52748.a5. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
899. Marsden C, Pinell MC, Joyce SM. Emergency physicians and preventive medicine. West J Med. 1988;149:345. [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
900. Delgado MK, Acosta CD, Ginde AA, Wang NE, Strehlow MC, Khandwala YS, Camargo CA., Jr National survey of preventive health services in US emergency
departments. Ann Emerg Med. 2011;57:104–108.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2010.07.015. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
901. Karras DJ, Kruus LK, Cienki JJ, Wald MM, Ufberg JW, Shayne P, Wald DA, Heilpern KL. Utility of routine testing for patients with asymptomatic severe
blood pressure elevation in the emergency department. Ann Emerg Med. 2008;51:231–239. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2007.03.032. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
902. Levy P, Ye H, Compton S, Zalenski R, Byrnes T, Flack JM, Welch R. Subclinical hypertensive heart disease in black patients with
elevated blood pressure in an inner-city emergency
department. Ann Emerg Med. 2012;60:467–474.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2012.03.030. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
903. Lehrmann JF, Tanabe P, Baumann BM, Jones MK, Martinovich Z, Adams JG. Knowledge translation of the American College of Emergency
Physicians clinical policy on hypertension. Acad Emerg Med. 2007;14:1090–1096. doi: 10.1197/j.aem.2007.05.016. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
904. Baumann BM, Cline DM, Pimenta E. Treatment of hypertension in the emergency
department. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2011;5:366–377. doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2011.05.002. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
905. Ginde AA, Cagliero E, Nathan DM, Camargo CA., Jr Value of risk stratification to increase the predictive validity
of HbA1c in screening for undiagnosed diabetes in the US
population. J Gen Intern Med. 2008;23:1346–1353. doi: 10.1007/s11606-008-0661-6. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
906. Jelinek GA, Weiland TJ, Moore G, Tan G, Maslin M, Bowman K, Ward G, O’Dea K. Screening for type 2 diabetes with random finger-prick glucose
and bedside HbA1c in an Australian emergency department. Emerg Med Australas. 2010;22:427–434. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-6723.2010.01333.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
907. George PM, Valabhji J, Dawood M, Henry JA. Screening for type 2 diabetes in the accident and emergency
department. Diabet Med. 2005;22:1766–1769. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2005.01674.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
908. Ginde AA, Delaney KE, Pallin DJ, Camargo CA., Jr Multicenter survey of emergency physician management and referral
for hyperglycemia. J Emerg Med. 2010;38:264–270. doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2007.11.088. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
909. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Annual smoking-attributable mortality, years of potential life
lost, and economic costs–United States,
1995–1999. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2002;51:300–303. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
910. Bernstein SL, Boudreaux ED, Cydulka RK, Rhodes KV, Lettman NA, Almeida SL, McCullough LB, Mizouni S, Kellermann AL, American College of Emergency Physicians Task Force on Smoking
Cessation Tobacco control interventions in the emergency department: a
joint statement of emergency medicine organizations. Ann Emerg Med. 2006;48:e417–e426. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2006.02.018. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
911. Katz DA, Vander Weg MW, Holman J, Nugent A, Baker L, Johnson S, Hillis SL, Titler M. The Emergency Department Action in Smoking Cessation (EDASC)
trial: impact on delivery of smoking cessation counseling. Acad Emerg Med. 2012;19:409–420. doi: 10.1111/j.1553-2712.2012.01331.x. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
912. Bernstein SL, Bijur P, Cooperman N, Jearld S, Arnsten JH, Moadel A, Gallagher EJ. A randomized trial of a multicomponent cessation strategy for
emergency department smokers. Acad Emerg Med. 2011;18:575–583. doi: 10.1111/j.1553-2712.2011.01097.x. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
913. Matchar DB, McCrory DC, Barnett HJ, Feussner JR. Medical treatment for stroke prevention. Ann Intern Med. 1994;121:41–53. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-121-1-199407010-00008. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
914. McDonald AJ, Pelletier AJ, Ellinor PT, Camargo CA., Jr Increasing US emergency department visit rates and subsequent
hospital admissions for atrial fibrillation from 1993 to
2004. Ann Emerg Med. 2008;51:58–65. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2007.03.007. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
915. Scott PA, Pancioli AM, Davis LA, Frederiksen SM, Eckman J. Prevalence of atrial fibrillation and antithrombotic prophylaxis
in emergency department patients. Stroke. 2002;33:2664–2669. doi: 10.1161/01.str.0000035260.70403.88. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
916. Kelly AM, Kerr D, Hew R. Prevention of stroke in chronic and recurrent atrial
fibrillation: role of the emergency department in identification of
“at-risk” patients. Aust Health Rev. 2001;24:61–65. doi: 10.1071/ah010061. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
917. Meeker E, Dennehy CE, Weber EJ, Kayser SR. Emergency department management of patients on warfarin
therapy. Ann Emerg Med. 2011;58:192–199. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2011.01.018. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
918. D’Onofrio G, Degutis LC. Preventive care in the emergency department: screening and brief
intervention for alcohol problems in the emergency department: a systematic
review. Acad Emerg Med. 2002;9:627–638. doi: 10.1111/j.1553-2712.2002.tb02304.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
919. Jones LA. Systematic review of alcohol screening tools for use in the
emergency department. Emerg Med J. 2011;28:182–191. doi: 10.1136/emj.2009.085324. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
920. Wang TC, Kyriacou DN, Wolf MS. Effects of an intervention brochure on emergency department
patients’ safe alcohol use and knowledge. J Emerg Med. 2010;39:561–568. doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2008.03.003. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
921. Academic ED SBIRT Research Collaborative. The impact of screening, brief intervention, and referral for
treatment on emergency department patients’ alcohol
use. Ann Emerg Med. 2007;50:699–710. 710.e1–710.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2007.06.486. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
922. Bernstein E, Bernstein J, Feldman J, Fernandez W, Hagan M, Mitchell P, Safi C, Woolard R, Mello M, Baird J, Lee C, Bazargan-Hejazi S, Broderick K, Laperrier KA, Kellermann A, Wald MM, Taylor RE, Walton K, Grant-Ervin M, Rollinson D, Edwards D, Chan T, Davis D, Buchanan Marshall J, Aseltine R, James A, Schilling E, Abu-Hasaballah K, Baumann BM, Boudreaux ED, Maio RF, Cunningham RM, Murrell T, Doezema D, Anglin D, Eliassen A, Martin M, Pines J, Buchanan L, Turner J, D’Onofrio G, Degutis LC, Owens P. An evidence based alcohol screening, brief intervention and
referral to treatment (SBIRT) curriculum for emergency department (ED)
providers improves skills and utilization. Subst Abus. 2007;28:79–92. doi: 10.1300/J465v28n04_01. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
923. Vaughn LM, Nabors L, Pelley TJ, Hampton RR, Jacquez F, Mahabee-Gittens EM. Obesity screening in the pediatric emergency
department. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2012;28:548–552. doi: 10.1097/PEC.0b013e318258ada0. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
924. Williams JM, Chinnis AC, Gutman D. Health promotion practices of emergency
physicians. Am J Emerg Med. 2000;18:17–21. doi: 10.1016/s0735-6757(00)90041-x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
925. Yvonne Chan YF, Nagurka R, Richardson LD, Zaets SB, Brimacombe MB, Levine SR. Effectiveness of stroke education in the emergency department
waiting room. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2010;19:209–215. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2009.04.009. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
926. Bensberg M, Kennedy M. A framework for health promoting emergency
departments. Health Promot Int. 2002;17:179–188. doi: 10.1093/heapro/17.2.179. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
927. Li C, Balluz LS, Okoro CA, Strine TW, Lin JM, Town M, Garvin W, Murphy W, Bartoli W, Valluru B, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Surveillance of certain health behaviors and conditions among
states and selected local areas: Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System,
United States, 2009. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2011;60:1–250. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
928. Li C, Balluz LS, Ford ES, Okoro CA, Zhao G, Pierannunzi C. A comparison of prevalence estimates for selected health
indicators and chronic diseases or conditions from the Behavioral Risk
Factor Surveillance System, the National Health Interview Survey, and the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey,
2007–2008. Prev Med. 2012;54:381–387. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2012.04.003. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
929. Fang J, Yang Q, Hong Y, Loustalot F. Status of cardiovascular health among adult Americans in the 50
States and the District of Columbia, 2009. J Am Heart Assoc. 2012;1:e005371. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.112.005371. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
930. Holloway RG, Benesch C, Rush SR. Stroke prevention: narrowing the evidence-practice
gap. Neurology. 2000;54:1899–1906. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.10.1899. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
931. Davis DA, Thomson MA, Oxman AD, Haynes RB. Changing physician performance: a systematic review of the effect
of continuing medical education strategies. JAMA. 1995;274:700–705. doi: 10.1001/jama.274.9.700. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
932. O’Brien MA, Rogers S, Jamtvedt G, Oxman AD, Odgaard-Jensen J, Kristoffersen DT, Forsetlund L, Bainbridge D, Freemantle N, Davis DA, Haynes RB, Harvey EL. Educational outreach visits: effects on professional practice and
health care outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007:CD000409. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000409.pub2. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
933. Cohen SJ, Halvorson HW, Gosselink CA. Changing physician behavior to improve disease
prevention. Prev Med. 1994;23:284–291. doi: 10.1006/pmed.1994.1040. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
934. Backer EL, Geske JA, McIlvain HE, Dodendorf DM, Minier WC. Improving female preventive health care delivery through practice
change: an Every Woman Matters study. J Am Board Fam Pract. 2005;18:401–408. doi: 10.3122/jabfm.18.5.401. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
935. Fine LJ, Cutler JA. Hypertension and the treating physician: understanding and
reducing therapeutic inertia. Hypertension. 2006;47:319–320. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000200692.23410.c9. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
936. Wright J, Bibby J, Eastham J, Harrison S, McGeorge M, Patterson C, Price N, Russell D, Russell I, Small N, Walsh M, Young J. Multifaceted implementation of stroke prevention guidelines in
primary care: cluster-randomised evaluation of clinical and cost
effectiveness. Qual Saf Health Care. 2007;16:51–59. doi: 10.1136/qshc.2006.019778. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
937. Anderson RT, Camacho F, Iaconi AI, Tegeler CH, Balkrishnan R. Enhancing the effectiveness of community stroke risk screening: a
randomized controlled trial. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2011;20:330–335. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2010.02.002. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
938. Shannon KC, Sinacore JM, Bennett SG, Joshi AM, Sherin KM, Deitrich A. Improving delivery of preventive health care with the
Comprehensive Annotated Reminder Tool (CART) J Fam Pract. 2001;50:767–771. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
939. Choma NN, Huang RL, Dittus RS, Burnham KE, Roumie CL. Quality improvement initiatives improve hypertension care among
veterans. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2009;2:392–398. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.109.862714. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
940. Shea S, DuMouchel W, Bahamonde L. A meta-analysis of 16 randomized controlled trials to evaluate
computer-based clinical reminder systems for preventive care in the
ambulatory setting. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 1996;3:399–409. doi: 10.1136/jamia.1996.97084513. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
941. Baskerville NB, Hogg W, Lemelin J. Process evaluation of a tailored multifaceted approach to
changing family physician practice patterns improving preventive
care. J Fam Pract. 2001;50:W242–W249. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
942. Frijling B, Hulscher ME, van Leest LA, Braspenning JC, van den Hoogen H, Drenthen AJ, Grol RP. Multifaceted support to improve preventive cardiovascular care: a
nationwide, controlled trial in general practice. Br J Gen Pract. 2003;53:934–941. [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
943. Stone EG, Morton SC, Hulscher ME, Maglione MA, Roth EA, Grimshaw JM, Mittman BS, Rubenstein LV, Rubenstein LZ, Shekelle PG. Interventions that increase use of adult immunization and cancer
screening services: a meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2002;136:641–651. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-136-9-200205070-00006. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
944. Chaudhry B, Wang J, Wu S, Maglione M, Mojica W, Roth E, Morton SC, Shekelle PG. Systematic review: impact of health information technology on
quality, efficiency, and costs of medical care. Ann Intern Med. 2006;144:742–752. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-144-10-200605160-00125. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
945. de Koning JS, Klazinga N, Koudstaal PJ, Prins AD, Borsboom GJ, Mackenbach JP. Quality of stroke prevention in general practice: relationship
with practice organization. Int J Qual Health Care. 2005;17:59–65. doi: 10.1093/intqhc/mzi004. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
946. Houle SK, Chuck AW, McAlister FA, Tsuyuki RT. Effect of a pharmacist-managed hypertension program on health
system costs: an evaluation of the Study of Cardiovascular Risk Intervention
by Pharmacists-Hypertension (SCRIP-HTN) Pharmacotherapy. 2012;32:527–537. doi: 10.1002/j.1875-9114.2012.01097.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
947. Heisler M, Hofer TP, Schmittdiel JA, Selby JV, Klamerus ML, Bosworth HB, Bermann M, Kerr EA. Improving blood pressure control through a clinical pharmacist
outreach program in patients with diabetes mellitus in 2 high-performing
health systems: the adherence and intensification of medications cluster
randomized, controlled pragmatic trial. Circulation. 2012;125:2863–2872. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.089169. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
948. Harris MF, Fanaian M, Jayasinghe UW, Passey ME, McKenzie SH, Powell Davies G, Lyle DM, Laws RA, Schutze H, Wan Q. A cluster randomised controlled trial of vascular risk factor
management in general practice. Med J Aust. 2012;197:387–393. doi: 10.5694/mja12.10313. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
949. Tricco AC, Ivers NM, Grimshaw JM, Moher D, Turner L, Galipeau J, Halperin I, Vachon B, Ramsay T, Manns B, Tonelli M, Shojania K. Effectiveness of quality improvement strategies on the management
of diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2012;379:2252–2261. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60480-2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
950. Bosworth HB, Olsen MK, Grubber JM, Neary AM, Orr MM, Powers BJ, Adams MB, Svetkey LP, Reed SD, Li Y, Dolor RJ, Oddone EZ. Two self-management interventions to improve hypertension
control: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:687–695. doi: 10.1059/0003-4819-151-10-200911170-00148. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
951. Bosworth HB, Powers BJ, Olsen MK, McCant F, Grubber J, Smith V, Gentry PW, Rose C, Van Houtven C, Wang V, Goldstein MK, Oddone EZ. Home blood pressure management and improved blood pressure
control: results from a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med. 2011;171:1173–1180. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2011.276. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
952. Asch SM, McGlynn EA, Hogan MM, Hayward RA, Shekelle P, Rubenstein L, Keesey J, Adams J, Kerr EA. Comparison of quality of care for patients in the Veterans Health
Administration and patients in a national sample. Ann Intern Med. 2004;141:938–945. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-141-12-200412210-00010. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
953. Schilling L, Chase A, Kehrli S, Liu AY, Stiefel M, Brentari R. Kaiser Permanente’s performance improvement system, part
1: from benchmarking to executing on strategic priorities. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2010;36:484–498. doi: 10.1016/s1553-7250(10)36072-7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
954. Kupersmith J, Francis J, Kerr E, Krein S, Pogach L, Kolodner RM, Perlin JB. Advancing evidence-based care for diabetes: lessons from the
Veterans Health Administration. Health Aff (Millwood) 2007;26:w156–w168. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.26.2.w156. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
955. Cadilhac DA, Carter R, Thrift AG, Dewey HM. Organized blood pressure control programs to prevent stroke in
Australia: would they be cost-effective? Stroke. 2012;43:1370–1375. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.634949. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Associated Data 
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. 
Supplementary Materials 
supplement 
NIHMS808056-supplement-supplement.pdf (695.3KB, pdf) 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (1.2 MB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
