Clinical Management of Stable Coronary Artery Disease in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Circulation 
. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2025 Jun 27. 
Published in final edited form as: Circulation. 2020 Apr 13;141(19):e779–e806. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000766 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Clinical Management of Stable Coronary Artery Disease in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus 
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
Suzanne V Arnold 
Suzanne V Arnold , MD, MHA 
1 Saint Luke’s Mid America Heart Institute 
Chair 
Find articles by Suzanne V Arnold 
1 , Deepak L Bhatt 
Deepak L Bhatt , MD, MPH, FAHA 
2 Brigham and Women’s Hospital Heart and Vascular Center/Harvard Medical School 
Vice Chair 
Find articles by Deepak L Bhatt 
2 , Gregory W Barsness 
Gregory W Barsness , MD, FAHA 
3 Mayo Clinic 
Find articles by Gregory W Barsness 
3 , Alexis L Beatty 
Alexis L Beatty , MD 
4 Apple 
Find articles by Alexis L Beatty 
4 , Prakash C Deedwania 
Prakash C Deedwania , MD 
5 University of California at San Francisco, School of Medicine 
Find articles by Prakash C Deedwania 
5 , Silvio E Inzucchi 
Silvio E Inzucchi , MD 
6 Yale University School of Medicine 
Find articles by Silvio E Inzucchi 
6 , Mikhail Kosiborod 
Mikhail Kosiborod , MD, FAHA 
7 Saint Luke’s Mid America Heart Institute, and The George Institute for Global Health and University of New South Wales 
Find articles by Mikhail Kosiborod 
7 , Lawrence A Leiter 
Lawrence A Leiter , MD, FAHA 
8 Keenan Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of St. Michael’s Hospital, University of Toronto, CANADA 
Find articles by Lawrence A Leiter 
8 , Kasia J Lipska 
Kasia J Lipska , MD, MHS 
9 Yale University School of Medicine 
Find articles by Kasia J Lipska 
9 , Jonathan D Newman 
Jonathan D Newman , MD, MPH, FAHA 
10 New York University School of Medicine 
Find articles by Jonathan D Newman 
10 , Francine K Welty 
Francine K Welty , MD, FAHA 
11 Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 
Find articles by Francine K Welty 
11 , On behalf of the American Heart Association Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health and Council on Clinical Cardiology 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 Saint Luke’s Mid America Heart Institute 
2 Brigham and Women’s Hospital Heart and Vascular Center/Harvard Medical School 
3 Mayo Clinic 
4 Apple 
5 University of California at San Francisco, School of Medicine 
6 Yale University School of Medicine 
7 Saint Luke’s Mid America Heart Institute, and The George Institute for Global Health and University of New South Wales 
8 Keenan Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of St. Michael’s Hospital, University of Toronto, CANADA 
9 Yale University School of Medicine 
10 New York University School of Medicine 
11 Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 
Roles 
Suzanne V Arnold : MD, MHA , Chair 
Deepak L Bhatt : MD, MPH, FAHA , Vice Chair 
Issue date 2020 May 12. 
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at https://www.heart.org/permissions . A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears in the second paragraph ( https://www.heart.org/en/about-us/statements-and-policies/copyright-request-form ). 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC12204403  NIHMSID: NIHMS2085795  PMID: 32279539 
The publisher's version of this article is available at Circulation 
Abstract 
Although cardiologists have long treated patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) and concomitant type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), T2DM has traditionally been considered just a comorbidity that affected the development and progression of the disease. Over the past decade, a number of factors have shifted that have forced the cardiology community to reconsider the role of T2DM in CAD. First, in addition to being associated with increased cardiovascular risk, T2DM has the potential to affect a number of treatment choices for CAD. In this document, we discuss the role that T2DM has in the selection of testing for CAD, in medical management (both secondary prevention strategies and treatment of stable angina), and in the selection of revascularization strategy. Second, although glycemic control has been recommended as a part of comprehensive risk factor management in patients with CAD, there is mounting evidence that the mechanism by which glucose is managed can have a substantial impact on cardiovascular outcomes. In this document, we discuss the role of glycemic management (both in intensity of control and choice of medications) in cardiovascular outcomes. It is becoming clear that the cardiologist needs both to consider T2DM in cardiovascular treatment decisions and potentially to help guide the selection of glucose-lowering medications. Our statement provides a comprehensive summary of effective, patient-centered management of CAD in patients with T2DM, with emphasis on the emerging evidence. Given the increasing prevalence of T2DM and the accumulating evidence of the need to consider T2DM in treatment decisions, this knowledge will become ever more important to optimize our patients’ cardiovascular outcomes. 
Keywords: AHA Scientific Statements; blood glucose; coronary artery disease; diabetes mellitus, type 2; patient-centered care; secondary prevention 
The epidemic of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), linked to the increased burden of obesity, is projected to affect >600 million patients worldwide in the next 2 decades. 1 T2DM has a major impact on survival and quality of life, especially among patients diagnosed at a younger age. 2 Although all complications of T2DM are important, cardiovascular disease in general and coronary artery disease (CAD) specifically continue to be the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in this group. 3 After steady declines in acute myocardial infarction, stroke, and lower limb amputations among patients with T2DM in the past 15 years, there has been a recent resurgence in these morbid ischemic complications, particularly among young and middle-aged adults. 4 These alarming statistics highlight the urgent need to refocus on aggressive cardiovascular risk reduction in patients living with T2DM, especially in those who already have established CAD. Thus, to improve the longevity and quality of life in patients with T2DM, practice guidelines increasingly recognize the prevention of ischemic events as a key management priority. 5 , 6 
Significant benefits of comprehensive cardiovascular risk reduction strategies in patients with T2DM have been well documented. 7 However, cardiovascular event rates remain high, even among the patients with well-managed T2DM enrolled in contemporary outcomes trials, 8 – 10 reinforcing the need for additional tools to reduce this risk further. Fortunately, many such tools have emerged in recent years, including advances in anticoagulation and antiplatelet management, 11 , 12 novel lipid-modifying therapies, 9 , 13 – 15 and glucose-lowering agents with potent cardiovascular benefits. 8 , 10 , 16 – 19 Despite this compelling evidence and the plethora of newly available risk-reduction strategies, their adoption in clinical practice has been slow, and large gaps in the quality of care remain. 20 As an example, substantial proportions of patients with T2DM and CAD, including those after an acute coronary syndrome, do not receive therapies with proven cardiovascular benefit such as high-intensity statins, dual antiplatelet therapy, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors/angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs), and glucose-lowering agents with proven cardiovascular benefits. 21 Although the cost of medications and patient adherence are important considerations that predispose to these gaps, failure to adopt guideline-based recommendations remains a major underlying factor. 
These gaps in care highlight a critical opportunity for cardiovascular specialists to assume a more active role in the collaborative care of patients with T2DM and CAD, with the goal of multifactorial risk reduction. 22 Given the availability of many effective tools and the emerging focus on value-based care and population risk management, the time has never been more optimal for this paradigm to be successfully implemented. 
MANAGEMENT OF STABLE CAD 
Antiplatelet Therapy 
Among the factors contributing to an elevated cardiovascular risk in patients with T2DM is a generalized prothrombotic state 23 , 24 attributable to altered coagulation and platelet function ( Table 1 ). 25 , 26 Both hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia alter the endothelium, 27 disrupting the normal atheroprotective nitric oxide regulatory environment and encouraging a generalized proinflammatory, vasoconstrictive state predisposing to atherothrombosis. 27 – 29 In addition, dysregulation of platelet receptor density and signaling effects on adhesion, activation, and aggregation 30 result in enhanced platelet activity 31 and impaired antiplatelet therapeutic effect. 32 , 33 Increased platelet clearance results in a reduced platelet life span and a relative preponderance of large, immature circulating platelets. 34 , 35 Increased glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor density, 36 along with hyperglycemia-mediated increases in adhesion molecules such as von Willebrand factor, vitronectin, and p-selectin, 37 , 38 furthers this thrombotic propensity and elevates cardiovascular risk. 26 , 39 
Table 1. 
Management of Stable CAD 
Antithrombotics 
Underlying issue: T2DM is a generalized prothrombotic state caused by both altered coagulation and altered platelet function. 
Aspirin alone 
Lowest risk of bleeding but high residual platelet reactivity increases cardiovascular risk 
Clopidogrel alone 
Decreased cardiovascular risk without meaningfully increased risk of bleeding vs aspirin alone 
Aspirin+clopidogrel/ticagrelor 
Decreased cardiovascular risk with increased risk of bleeding; targets patients with additional risk factor and low risk of bleeding (use risk scores) 
Aspirin+low-dose rivaroxaban 
Decreased cardiovascular risk with increased risk of bleeding; targets the aberrant coagulation with T2DM 
Blood pressure 
Underlying issue: Coexisting hypertension increases the risk of MI, stroke, and all-cause mortality. 
Target blood pressure 
<140/90 mm Hg in most patients; consider <130/80 mm Hg if additional risk factors for stroke or microvascular complications 
ACE inhibitor/ARB 
First-line therapy because of decreased cardiovascular risk with CAD 
Long-acting thiazide diuretic 
Good cardiovascular risk reduction but slight increase in glucose 
Calcium channel blockers 
Good cardiovascular risk reduction and effective antianginal 
Aldosterone antagonists 
Particularly effective in patients with prior MI or LV dysfunction 
β-Blockers 
Do not reduce mortality in uncomplicated patients with stable CAD; choose vasodilating β-blocker for less adverse metabolic impact 
Lipids 
Underlying issue: Atherogenic lipid anomalies include hypertriglyceridemia, low HDL-C, and small, dense LDL particles. 
High-intensity statins 
Cornerstone of lipid therapy and secondary prevention 
Ezetimibe and PCSK9 inhibitors 
Additional cardiovascular risk reduction when LDL is >70 mg/dL despite maximally tolerated statins 
Niacin 
Not recommended 
Fibrates 
Recommended when triglycerides are very high (eg, >500 mg/dL) to reduce the risk of pancreatitis 
Icosapent ethyl 
Consider for further cardiovascular risk reduction when triglycerides remain elevated (>135 mg/dL) despite maximally tolerated statin 
Glycemic control 
Underlying issue: Hyperglycemia increases cardiovascular risk, but impact of glucose-lowering therapies on outcomes is complex, and therapy needs to be individualized. 
Glycemic target 
<7.0% if young and healthy (life expectancy >10–20 y); depends on preferences and capacity 
<8.0% or 8.5% for older patients with comorbidities or at high risk for hypoglycemia; depends on preferences, capacity, and types of treatment used 
Glucose-lowering medications 
Cardiovascular effects 
Noncardiovascular effects 
Metformin (usually first line) 
Cardiovascular benefit possible (low-quality evidence) 
No associated weight gain or hypoglycemia 
SGLT2 inhibitors 
Cardiovascular benefit (largely consistent among individual drugs); reduction in MACEs and heart failure hospitalizations 
Associated with weight loss, no hypoglycemia, lower blood pressure, and less progression of CKD 
GLP-1 receptor agonists 
Cardiovascular benefit; reduction in MACEs (some inconsistency among individual drugs) 
Associated with weight loss and no hypoglycemia 
Thiazolidinediones 
Likely cardiovascular benefit (but not heart failure) 
No hypoglycemia; associated with weight gain, edema, risk of heart failure, and bone fractures 
DPP4 inhibitors 
Neutral effect on cardiovascular outcomes 
No associated weight gain or hypoglycemia 
Insulin and sulfonylureas 
Likely neutral effect on cardiovascular outcomes 
Associated with weight gain and hypoglycemia 
Open in a new tab 
ACE indicates angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; CAD, coronary artery disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease; DPP4, dipeptidyl peptidase 4; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide-1; HDL-C, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LV, left ventricular; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular event; MI, myocardial infarction; PCSK9, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9; SGLT2, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2; and T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Aspirin and Clopidogrel 
In the setting of this platelet-centric thrombogenic milieu, medical management with antiplatelet therapies has been considered a principal focus of secondary preventive care in T2DM. Unfortunately, responsiveness to aspirin 40 and clopidogrel-based dual antiplatelet therapy 41 may be impaired in the setting of T2DM, 41 , 42 which is further exacerbated in patients with concomitant chronic kidney disease. 43 Because of the increased platelet turnover in patients with T2DM, the decreased responsiveness to antithrombotic medications be improved somewhat by more frequent and higher dosing regimens, 44 – 46 although the safety of such alternative regimens is not proven. Clopidogrel alone may be a reasonable option compared with aspirin in stable patients with T2DM and CAD (ie, no stent or acute coronary syndrome in the prior year). In the CAPRIE trial (Clopidogrel Versus Aspirin in Patients at Risk of Ischemic Events), clopidogrel was superior to aspirin in reducing ischemic events with no excess of bleeding in 19 185 patients with prior myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke, or peripheral artery disease. 47 In the subset of 3866 patients with diabetes mellitus, the benefits of clopidogrel over aspirin were even greater. 48 With the availability of less costly generic versions, clopidogrel can be a useful option for secondary prevention, especially in patients with T2DM. Long-term therapy with clopidogrel in addition to aspirin is also an option in select patients with stable CAD and T2DM, with the understanding that there is a balance between decreasing ischemic risks and increasing bleeding risks. 49 Given the competing risks and benefits, we recommend targeting long-term dual-antiplatelet therapy to those patients with additional high-risk markers (eg, prior myocardial infarction, younger age, tobacco use) with use of a risk calculator 23 along with shared decision-making. 
Ticagrelor 
Extending the previously documented risk reduction benefit of ticagrelor in patients after myocardial infarction, 50 – 52 THEMIS (Effect of Ticagrelor on Health Outcomes in Diabetes Mellitus Patients Intervention Study) 53 compared dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and low-dose ticagrelor versus aspirin alone among 19 271 patients with T2DM and CAD but without a history of myocardial infarction or stroke. Patients randomized to ticagrelor had a lower risk of the composite of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or stroke over an average follow-up of 40 months (ticagrelor versus placebo: 7.7% versus 8.5%; P =0.04), whereas the incidence of TIMI (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction) major bleeding was higher (2.2% versus 1.0%; P <0.001). 54 Notably, the efficacy and net clinical benefit of ticagrelor were more favorable among patients from THEMIS who had a history of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). 55 
Rivaroxaban 
The COMPASS trial (Cardiovascular Outcomes for People Using Anticoagulation Strategies) 56 – 59 examined whether rivaroxaban improved cardiovascular outcomes in 27 395 patients with stable atherosclerotic vascular disease. Three strategies were tested: rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily plus aspirin, rivaroxaban 5 mg twice daily, and aspirin alone (note that patients requiring dual antiplatelet therapy were excluded). The risk of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACEs) was significantly lower with the combination of rivaroxaban plus aspirin compared with either aspirin alone or rivaroxaban alone. There was an associated increased risk of bleeding with rivaroxaban, although no significant excess in fatal bleeding was noted. The ischemic benefits of rivaroxaban were consistent in the subgroup with diabetes mellitus, suggesting that low-dose anticoagulation added to antiplatelet therapy may be another option for secondary prevention in patients with T2DM and stable CAD. 
Platelet Function Testing 
T2DM exacerbates cardiovascular risk, inhibiting vascular protective mechanisms and encouraging a thrombotic propensity. Unfortunately, although long-established therapeutics such as aspirin and clopidogrel have shown benefit in reducing recurrent ischemic events, a high proportion of patients continue to have high on-treatment platelet reactivity, making these treatments less effective. Despite initial enthusiasm, multiple large, randomized studies have failed to show any clinical benefit when antithrombotic regimens are adjusted on the basis of platelet function testing. 60 – 62 Given the greater relative risk (RR) associated with T2DM, antithrombotic therapies have potential to provide greater absolute benefit in these patients. The continued evolution of more potent antiplatelet agents and therapeutic regimens has demonstrated promise in reducing risk and preserving safety in a much broader population of patients with T2DM. 
Blood Pressure Control 
The prevalence of hypertension in patients with T2DM is ≈2-fold greater than in the general population, with the vast majority of patients with T2DM (70%–80%) having concomitant hypertension. 63 Because both hypertension and T2DM increase with age, it is expected that the prevalence of both conditions will continue to increase in the coming decades as a result of increasing life expectancy. The presence of hypertension in patients with T2DM significantly increases the risk of myocardial infarction, stroke, and all-cause mortality. 63 , 64 Epidemiological observations have demonstrated that there is a progressive increase in the risk of macrovascular and microvascular events with increasing levels of systolic blood pressure starting at 115 mm Hg. 63 – 65 
Blood Pressure Target 
Similar to the overall primary and secondary prevention cohorts, the optimal blood pressure target for patients with T2DM has been debated, with guideline recommendations changing over time. Early interventional randomized trials showed benefit of aggressive blood pressure reduction in reducing the increased risk of both macrovascular and microvascular events in patients with T2DM. 63 Despite the fact that achieved blood pressures in the aggressive intervention arms of these studies were never <140 mm Hg, previous guidelines recommended a target blood pressure <130/80 mm Hg (and <120/75 mm Hg in those with renal impairment) in patients with T2DM largely on the basis of these trials. 64 , 65 However, subsequent trials that specifically examined the role of a blood pressure lowering strategy to <130 mm Hg in patients with T2DM and hypertension found no substantive benefit of intensive blood pressure control in reducing the risk of coronary events, although there was evidence for decreased risk of stroke. 5 , 66 – 69 The observed stroke reduction is consistent with observational data that have shown a linear relationship between systolic blood pressure and risk of stroke, with a decrease in stroke risk with lowering of systolic blood pressure to levels <120 mm Hg. 64 , 65 As a result of these studies, most society guideline statements changed their recommendations to a blood pressure target <140/90 mm Hg for patients with T2DM, with the consideration of a goal of <130/80 mm Hg in select high-risk patients when it can be achieved without harm. 5 , 70 
Intensive blood pressure control has again emerged as potentially beneficial in reducing cardiovascular risk due to SPRINT (Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial), in which there was a notable 25% relative/0.5% absolute reduced risk per year of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality with intensive (<120 mm Hg) as compared with standard (<140 mm Hg) systolic blood pressure control in patients with hypertension and high cardiovascular risk. 71 Importantly, at least in part due to the ACCORD trial (Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes), 72 patients with T2DM were explicitly excluded from SPRINT, so it is difficult to determine whether the results of SPRINT can extend to patients with T2DM and CAD. There was evidence of benefit of intensive blood pressure lowering in the prediabetes cohort of SPRINT, 71 a subsequent meta-analysis, 73 and a recent large observational study (13% with diabetes mellitus). 73a , 74 
It is important to recognize, however, that there are also potential risks of intensive blood pressure reduction (which generally requires multiple antihypertensive drugs). 63 – 65 , 69 , 72 , 75 , 76 Excessive blood pressure lowering in patients with concomitant CAD (especially in the presence of left ventricular hypertrophy or dysfunction) can potentially increase the risk of myocardial infarction due to a drop in coronary perfusion pressures across the diseased segments of the coronary arteries secondary to impairment of coronary autoregulation. 64 – 68 Indeed, data from the INVEST (International Verapamil SR Trandolapril Study), CLARIFY (Prospective Observational Longitudinal Registry of Patients With Stable Coronary Artery Disease), ONTARGET (Ongoing Telmisartan Alone and in Combination With Ramipril Global Endpoint Trial), and TRANSCEND (Telmisartan Randomised Assessment Study in ACE Intolerant Subjects With Cardiovascular Disease) studies showed that systolic blood pressure of <120 mm Hg and diastolic blood pressure <70 mm Hg were associated with adverse cardiovascular outcomes except for reduced risk of stroke in those achieving lower blood pressure values. 66 – 68 
There remains controversy regarding the level of blood pressure target that provides optimal cardiovascular protection in patients with T2DM and coexistent CAD. The 2017 Hypertension Clinical Practice Guidelines recommended a goal blood pressure <130/80 mm Hg in patients with T2DM. 76 However, as described above, such targets might not be optimal for all patients with T2DM and coexistent CAD. 5 , 63 – 69 , 77 There appears to be heterogeneity in the impact of intensive blood pressure lowering on coronary versus cerebral events, and the effects can also vary based on comorbid conditions (eg, recent acute coronary syndrome). 64 , 65 , 76 As such, while all patients with T2DM and CAD certainly benefit from a blood pressure of <140/90 mm Hg, 5 , 63 – 66 , 76 lower blood pressure targets of <130/80 mm Hg are likely appropriate for many patients—particularly those at higher risk of stroke (eg, black and Asian patients, those with cerebrovascular disease) and other microvascular complications such as chronic kidney disease. 
Choice of Antihypertensive Agents 
The choice of antihypertensive agents rests on a number of factors: efficacy in blood pressure reduction (only small differences between classes, on average 78 ), side-effect profile, cost and convenience (ie, dosing schedule), and off-target effects. In patients with T2DM and CAD, the last consideration can make drug selection more challenging. In the absence of other considerations, ACE inhibitors/ARBs should be considered first-line treatment for hypertension in patients with T2DM and CAD. ACE inhibitors/ARBs reduce the progression of kidney disease in patients with albuminuria (urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio ≥30 mg/g) 5 and reduce the risk of both incident and recurrent atherosclerotic ischemic events. 79 , 80 In the HOPE study (Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation), 81 3577 people with diabetes mellitus with cardiovascular disease or at least 1 other cardiovascular risk factor but no proteinuria or heart failure were randomized to ramipril versus placebo. The trial was stopped early (after 4.5 years) because of consistent benefit of ramipril, which was shown to reduce the risk of myocardial infarction by 22% (95% CI, 6–36), stroke by 33% (95% CI, 10–50), and cardiovascular death by 37% (95% CI, 21–51), findings that were independent of changes in blood pressure. In particular groups of patients with CAD—after myocardial infarction 81 , 82 and with reduced ejection fraction 83 , 84 —ACE inhibitors/ARBs are even more important. 
The majority of patients with hypertension and T2DM will require >1 antihypertensive medication to control blood pressure (in the standard care arm in ACCORD, 30% required 2 and 39% required ≥3 antihypertensive medications 70 ). The American Diabetes Association guidelines recommend thiazide-like diuretics (preferably long-acting agents such as chlorthalidone or indapamide) or dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers. Thiazide diuretics are well known to worsen glycemic control through a reduction in both insulin sensitivity and secretion, 85 – 88 although the clinical implications of this effect are still questioned, given the favorable cardiovascular outcomes in blood pressure trials with these agents. 86 Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (spironolactone, eplerenone) can also be effective antihypertensive agents (particularly for those with borderline or low potassium levels) 89 and are important for morbidity and mortality reduction in patients with left ventricular dysfunction. 90 , 91 
The issue with β-blockers is more complicated. In the setting of primary prevention, β-blockers are generally less preferred compared with ACE inhibitors/ARBs, long-acting thiazide diuretics, and dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers. 92 , 93 However, many patients with CAD have indications for β-blockers other than just blood pressure reduction. Patients who have had a myocardial infarction and those with chronic angina, left ventricular dysfunction (ejection fraction <40%), or arrhythmias all benefit from β-blockers. β-Blockers reduce myocardial oxygen demand and are often considered a part of optimal medical therapy (OMT) for all patients with CAD. For the indication of stable coronary disease in the absence of left ventricular dysfunction, β-blockers have not been shown to reduce the risk of mortality or myocardial infarction. 94 Furthermore, the benefit of long-term use of β-blockers after myocardial infarction has been questioned, with the best evidence showing that the benefit is limited to the first 30 days. 95 Thus, β-blockers as antihypertensive agents should be targeted to patients with clear indications such as angina or to those who require additional blood pressure lowering beyond other agents. Furthermore, it is optimal to select a β-blocker with a concomitant vasodilatory effect (eg, carvedilol, labetalol), which will have fewer adverse metabolic effects. 96 – 98 
Lipid Management 
Cardiovascular risk in T2DM is considerably elevated, at least in part as a result of the proatherogenic milieu of diabetic dyslipidemia that arises primarily from a deranged lipoprotein profile. 99 Typical lipid anomalies in T2DM include hypertriglyceridemia, which promotes the presence of small, dense low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles; reduced levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol caused by enhanced high-density lipoprotein cholesterol catabolism; and a predominance of large very LDL particles resulting from a synthesis-catabolism imbalance. 100 LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) levels in individuals with T2DM are often similar to those in individuals without T2DM, but the persistent hypertriglyceridemic state promotes LDL oxidation, and the concurrent hyperglycemia drives LDL glycation, all of which increase the atherogenicity of the LDL particles in T2DM. 100 Other lipid abnormalities that may be present in diabetic dyslipidemia are detailed in Table 2 . 101 
Table 2. 
Lipid Anomalies in Diabetic Dyslipidemia 
High triglycerides and triglycerol-rich lipoproteins 
High postprandial triglycerides 
High LDL particle number 
High small, dense LDL 
Low HDL-C 
Low small HDL, pre–β-1 HDL, α-3 HDL 
Low apolipoprotein AI 
High apolipoprotein B 
High apolipoprotein C-III 
High oxidized and glycated lipids 
Open in a new tab 
HDL indicates high-density lipoprotein; HDL-C, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; and LDL, low-density lipoprotein. 
Statins 
Although healthy lifestyle habits remain a cornerstone of T2DM management, trial data have confirmed the additional benefits of statin therapy in the primary and secondary prevention of CAD. 13 , 102 – 112 A large body of evidence indicates that statin-based strategies convey similar LDL-C lowering and relative cardiovascular risk reduction in patients with and those without T2DM. 102 – 112 However, because of the higher underlying risk of patients with T2DM, statins often result in greater absolute risk reduction. Among the 20 536 adults in the HPS (Heart Protection Study), which tested once-daily 40 mg simvastatin (versus placebo) in a mix of primary and secondary prevention patients, 5963 participants had diabetes mellitus (615 with type 1 diabetes mellitus), and 3982 had both diabetes mellitus and CAD. 108 The diabetes mellitus subanalysis showed that simvastatin was associated with a 22% (95% CI, 13–30) relative decrease in the rate of first major vascular events, regardless of baseline LDL-C levels. 102 In the TNT trial (Treating to New Targets), 10 001 adults with cardiovascular disease were randomized to once-daily 80 mg atorvastatin versus 10 mg atorvastatin, 109 of whom 1051 had diabetes mellitus. 112 Higher-dose atorvastatin was associated with significantly fewer cardiovascular (hazard ratio [HR], 0.85 [95% CI, 0.73–1.00]; P =0.044) and cerebrovascular (HR, 0.69 [95% CI, 0.48–0.98]; P =0.037) events, with similar risk reduction in those with and those without diabetes mellitus. In the Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaboration, which included 90 056 people from 14 randomized statin trials of both primary and secondary prevention (18 686 with diabetes mellitus), there was a 22% RR reduction (RRR) in major coronary events (RR, 0.78 [95% CI, 0.69–0.87]; P <0.0001) per 39-mg/dL (1-mmol/L) LDL-C decrease among those with diabetes mellitus, 113 an effect that was indistinguishable for the groups with and without diabetes mellitus. 114 
Multiple studies and meta-analyses have repeatedly shown that statins are associated with a small but significantly increased risk of incident T2DM. 115 This modest risk has been shown to be lower than the risk of incident T2DM associated with thiazide diuretics or nonvasodilating β-blockers 116 and, most important, is far overshadowed by the cardiovascular protective effect of statin therapy. 117 , 118 Sattar and colleagues 115 reported that although statin treatment for 4 years yielded 1 extra case of T2DM in a group of 255 individuals, 5.4 vascular events were concomitantly prevented. Furthermore, among patients with T2DM, the increase in glucose has also been shown to be rather modest, with an increase in mean glycated hemoglobin (HbA 1c ) level of 0.12% (95% CI, 0.04–0.20) over a mean follow-up of 3.6 years in a pooled analysis of 9 trials involving 9696 participants. 119 Therefore, it is important to recognize that although some patients with T2DM and CAD may be hesitant to take statins for this reason, they should be reassured that despite a potential modest increase in blood sugars, the risk-benefit ratio is clearly in favor of administering statins to people with T2DM and CAD. 
Nonstatin LDL-C–Lowering Treatments 
Despite their key role in secondary prevention in patients with T2DM and CAD, many patients are unable to tolerate intensive statins because of side effects or do not achieve adequate LDL-C lowering with maximally tolerated statins and need alternative lipid-lowering therapies for secondary prevention. IMPROVE-IT (Improved Reduction of Outcomes: Vytorin Efficacy International Trial) was the first study to demonstrate the benefit of a nonstatin add-on to background statin therapy. 13 Specifically, the addition of 10 mg ezetimibe to 40 mg simvastatin within 10 days of hospitalization for an acute coronary syndrome lowered LDL-C levels by an additional 17 mg/dL (0.4 mmol/L), which was associated with an overall modest, but significant, 2.0% absolute/6.4% relative reduction in the primary composite end point of cardiovascular death, major coronary event, or stroke after a median of 6 years. 13 Of interest is that the ezetimibe-simvastatin combination (versus placebo-simvastatin) lowered the 7-year Kaplan-Meier primary end point event rate in the subcohort with diabetes mellitus by an absolute 5.5% (40.0% versus 45.5%; HR, 0.85 [95% CI, 0.78–0.94]). 120 Furthermore, although the ezetimibe-simvastatin allocation had minimal impact on the incidence of myocardial infarction and stroke among those without diabetes mellitus, the number of these events was significantly lower with ezetimibe-simvastatin treatment in the group with diabetes mellitus ( P interaction for myocardial infarction=0.028; P interaction for ischemic stroke=0.031). 120 
The recent availability of the PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9) inhibitors offers new opportunities for managing hypercholesterolemia. 121 – 124 The FOURIER trial (Further Cardiovascular Outcomes Research With PCSK9 Inhibition in Subjects With Elevated Risk) randomized 27 564 participants with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (11 031 with diabetes mellitus) to either placebo or evolocumab (140 mg every 2 weeks or 420 mg every month) on background statin therapy. 125 In patients with versus without diabetes mellitus, with evolocumab, there were comparable LDL-C reductions (57% versus 60% mean reductions) and RRRs (27% versus 23% RRR) in the primary composite end point of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, stroke, and hospitalization for unstable angina or revascularization. 9 There were also no increase in incident T2DM and no changes in fasting plasma glucose or HbA 1c over the median 2.2 years of follow-up. 9 
In the ODYSSEY OUTCOMES trial (Evaluation of Cardiovascular Outcomes After an Acute Coronary Syndrome During Treatment With Alirocumab), 18 924 adults with a recent acute coronary syndrome (5444 with diabetes mellitus) were randomized to either alirocumab every 2 weeks or placebo in addition to maximally tolerated statin therapy. 126 Alirocumab was then titrated between 75 and 150 mg to maintain LDL-C levels between 25 mg/dL (0.65 mmol/L) and 50 mg/dL (1.3 mmol/L). The combination of alirocumab and statins resulted in an absolute risk reduction for time to first MACE of 2.3% in the group with diabetes mellitus relative to 1.2% for those without diabetes mellitus. 14 Although neither PCSK9 inhibitor reduced cardiovascular mortality in these trials, 125 , 126 the cumulative data from the FOURIER and ODYSSEY OUTCOMES trials suggest that PCSK9 inhibitors effectively lower LDL-C and cardiovascular risk in individuals with CAD regardless of diabetes mellitus status. 
The reporting of IMPROVE-IT, FOURIER, and ODYSSEY OUTCOMES also supports the 2010 CTT suggestion that “lower is better” when it comes to LDL-C and cardiovascular risk reduction. 127 This CTT meta-analysis of 26 randomized trials with 170 000 participants had determined that every 39-mg/dL (1.0 mmol/L) reduction in LDL-C culminated in a 10% decrease in all-cause mortality (RR, 0.90 [95% CI, 0.87–0.93]; P <0.0001) that was driven primarily by diminished cardiac-related deaths. 127 The proposed linear correlation between LDL-C lowering and cardiovascular risk reduction, coupled with the limited long-term safety data on very low LDL-C levels (<25 mg/dL or 0.65 mmol/L), supports the notion of aiming for low LDL-C levels, especially in those patients with the highest absolute risk of a recurrent event (eg, T2DM, peripheral artery disease, recent incident of acute coronary syndrome, and multiple prior cardiovascular events), but not at the expense of elevating the risk of adverse events. 127 
The evidence to date supports an LDL-C–lowering strategy to reduce the risk of subsequent cardiovascular events in individuals with T2DM and CAD. Accordingly, statins are an essential component in the management of these individuals. However, because patients with both T2DM and CAD represent a high-risk group, additional agents may be needed for LDL-C lowering beyond what is possible with statin monotherapy. In these patients, particularly when LDL-C levels are >70 mg/dL despite maximally tolerated statin, the addition of non-statin LDL-C–lowering therapies such as ezetimibe and PCKS9 inhibitors should be considered on the basis of the individual’s overall cardiovascular risk profile, personal preferences, and drug access. 
Non-LDL Target Therapies 
Multiple dyslipidemia and cardiovascular risk-lowering trials have tested the combination of a statin with a nonstatin lipid-lowering medication, with often disappointing results. Combinations of statins with fibrates, niacin, or fish oil have thus far generally failed to demonstrate cardiovascular benefits beyond that achieved with statins alone. 128 – 132 Of note, when data from several fibrate trials were stratified by lipid profiles, it appeared that individuals with hypertriglyceridemia and low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels may have a reduction in cardiovascular risk with the addition of fibrates to background statin therapy. 130 , 133 – 135 Furthermore, fibrates or fish oil would be indicated when triglycerides are very high (>500 mg/dL) to reduce the risk of pancreatitis. 5 
REDUCE-IT (Reduction of Cardiovascular Events With Icosapent Ethyl-Intervention Trial) randomized 8179 individuals with either cardiovascular disease or diabetes mellitus and 1 additional risk factor to 2 g icosapent ethyl twice daily or placebo. Patients also had to have triglycerides between 135 and 499 mg/dL (1.5 and 5.6 mmol/L) and LDL-C between 41 and 100 mg/dL (1.1 and 2.6 mmol/L). 15 Overall, there was a significant reduction in the risk of the composite of cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, stroke, coronary revascularization, or unstable angina with icosapent ethyl, an effect that was similar in those with diabetes mellitus (HR, 0.77 [95% CI, 0.68–0.87]) and those without diabetes mellitus (HR, 0.73 [95% CI, 0.62–0.85]). Icosapent ethyl is the first non–LDL-focused lipid therapy to demonstrate cardiovascular benefit and should be considered first-line therapy for patients with T2DM and CAD whose triglycerides remain elevated (>135 mg/dL) despite maximally tolerated statin and lifestyle changes, as now recommended in the American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care. 5 
Lifestyle Modification and Weight Management 
Lifestyle and health behavior management, including smoking cessation, heart-healthy diet, weight loss (if overweight or obese), sleep and stress management, and exercise/physical activity, is a cornerstone of clinical care for both patients with T2DM and those with CAD. However, there are limited randomized trials for lifestyle and health behavior management in the care of patients with T2DM with comorbid CAD. Instead, evidence to support lifestyle and health behavior management for T2DM and stable CAD has been extrapolated from primary prevention trials and from subgroups of participants with T2DM from studies focusing on the secondary prevention of CAD. 63 , 136 
Smoking Cessation 
Smoking cessation is strongly recommended for all patients with T2DM, regardless of the presence of comorbid CAD. 5 There is robust evidence to support the causal links between cigarette smoking and multiple poor health outcomes. 137 – 139 In a cohort study of >2600 patients who survived to hospital discharge after a first myocardial infarction, smoking was associated with an increased risk of recurrent events (RR, 1.51 [95% CI, 1.10–2.07] for active smokers compared with nonsmokers). 140 However, smoking cessation can substantially reduce the risk of recurrent CAD events, declining to the level of risk of nonsmokers by ≈3 years after cessation. This benefit of smoking cessation has been shown to be similar for those with and without T2DM. 141 Smoking cessation can be associated with weight gain, which can be particularly problematic in patients with T2DM who may already struggle with obesity and associated insulin resistance. However, data have also shown that weight gain associated with smoking cessation, even among overweight patients with T2DM, does not significantly attenuate the cardiovascular risk reduction observed with smoking cessation. 142 
Diet 
The American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes dietary guidelines for patients with T2DM emphasize consumption of fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy foods. 5 There are no specific recommendations for patients with T2DM and concomitant CAD, primarily because the majority of data on the effects of diet on atherosclerotic outcomes come from primary prevention trials. 7 , 143 , 144 The PREDIMED trial (Prevención con Dieta Mediterránea), the largest primary prevention dietary randomized controlled trial to date, randomized 7447 participants at high risk of cardiovascular disease (48.5%; 3614 of 7447 had T2DM) to a Mediterranean diet supplemented with either extravirgin olive oil or mixed nuts versus a control diet. 145 The trial was stopped early because of a 30% reduction in the primary composite outcome of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction, or stroke observed with the Mediterranean diet, results that were similar in patients with T2DM. There is also evidence that diets rich in low-carbohydrate and low-glycemic-index foods may improve both glycemic control and cardiovascular risk factors. 146 , 147 The role of low-carbohydrate diets and use of the glycemic index for primary and secondary prevention of CAD warrant further investigation. 
Psychosocial Factors and Sleep 
Observational data indicate that depression exacerbates the risk of macrovascular complications in people with T2DM. In the REGARDS prospective cohort study (Reasons for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke), people with T2DM who reported elevated depressive symptoms or perceived stress had a significantly increased incidence of stroke (HR, 1.57 [95% CI, 1.05–2.33]) and acute cardiovascular disease (HR, 1.57 [95% CI, 1.02–2.40]) over 6 years of follow-up. 148 Similarly, among 1533 people with T2DM in the Denmark arm of the ADDITION study (Anglo-Danish-Dutch Study of Intensive Treatment in People With Screen Detected Diabetes in Primary Care), psychological distress assessed by the Mental Health Inventory was associated with a 1.8-fold higher risk (95% CI, 1.23–2.53) of having a cardiovascular event (nonfatal myocardial infarction, nonfatal stroke, revascularization, or amputation) compared with a lower Mental Health Inventory score. 149 Whether depression and psychosocial stress increase the risk of adverse atherosclerotic events more in patients with T2DM compared with nondiabetic patients, the mechanisms of these associations, 150 and whether intervention will alter the clinical course of CAD are unknown. 
Given its association with obesity, disordered sleep is an underdiagnosed condition among patients with T2DM and significantly contributes to sympathetic activation, inflammation, and endothelial dysfunction. 151 Treatment of obstructive sleep apnea may reduce blood pressure and have other beneficial cardiometabolic effects, 152 despite a lack of clear benefit on cardiovascular outcomes. 153 In addition to obstructive sleep apnea, insufficient or short sleep duration without obstructive sleep apnea has been associated with adverse effects on serum lipids, insulin resistance, and perturbations of the autonomic nervous system associated with CAD. 154 
Physical Activity and Exercise 
The American Diabetes Association guidelines recommend that patients interrupt prolonged sitting with light activity every 30 minutes and engage in at least 150 min/wk of moderate to vigorous physical activity. 155 Despite these recommendations, patients with T2DM spend less time engaging in physical activity 156 and have lower exercise capacity compared with those without T2DM, 157 , 158 factors associated with a higher risk of cardiovascular events. 156 , 157 Supervised exercise training is preferred to home training because it results in greater improvements in HbA 1c , body mass index, waist circumference, blood pressure, exercise capacity, muscle strength, and cholesterol levels. 155 , 159 Similarly, stable CAD guidelines recommend at least 150 min/wk of moderate to vigorous physical activity and referral at first diagnosis to cardiac rehabilitation, which includes supervised exercise training with a comprehensive secondary prevention program. 160 
Compared with patients without T2DM, patients with T2DM who enroll in cardiac rehabilitation have a greater risk factor burden and lower exercise capacity at baseline, are less likely to complete cardiac rehabilitation, and have a higher mortality. 161 – 163 Although some studies of exercise-based interventions in patients with T2DM with CAD have demonstrated improvements in exercise capacity, 164 waist circumference, 156 and endothelial function, 165 others have shown no significant improvements in HbA 1c or exercise capacity and poor adherence to the intervention. 156 , 166 However, 1 study of patients with T2DM (n=68, 63% with CAD) randomized to a T2DM-tailored cardiac rehabilitation program or usual care found that the T2DM-focused cardiac rehabilitation program significantly improved blood pressure, waist circumference, exercise capacity, HbA 1c , and cholesterol. 167 Furthermore, patients with T2DM who attend cardiac rehabilitation achieve relative improvements in exercise capacity 162 , 163 and relative reductions in hospitalizations and mortality similar to those in patients without T2DM. 168 Therefore, it is recommended that patients with T2DM and CAD receive individualized T2DM assessment and management as a part of cardiac rehabilitation. 169 , 170 
Weight Management 
Because it is challenging for obese patients with T2DM to lose weight with diet and exercise alone, 171 clinicians should consider referring obese individuals to nutrition or structured weight loss programs. 172 Several weight loss medications of relatively modest efficacy are now available, 172 although safety data in patients with concomitant CAD are limited. The 2 notable exceptions are lorcaserin, which had a neutral effect on MACEs in the CAMELLIA-TIMI 61 study (Cardiovascular and Metabolic Effects of Lorcaserin in Patients Who Have Excess Weight and/or Obesity), 173 and liraglutide, which reduced MACEs in the LEADER trial (Liraglutide Effect and Action in Diabetes: Evaluation of Cardiovascular Outcome Results), at least in the lower doses used for T2DM. 17 The risks and benefits of pharmacological management of obesity are complex and outside the scope of this statement. Guidelines also recommend consideration of bariatric surgery (sometimes referred to as metabolic surgery), 174 with the most common procedures including Roux-en-y gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy. In addition to weight loss, clinical trials of bariatric surgery in patients with T2DM have consistently shown improvement in cardiovascular risk factors, including better glycemic control, lower blood pressure, higher high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and lower triglyceride levels. 175 – 177 Although this improvement in cardiovascular risk factors would be expected to translate into a reduction in ischemic events, randomized controlled trials have thus far been inadequately powered to assess cardiovascular events and mortality, although observational studies have consistently shown cardiovascular risk reduction with such procedures. 176 , 178 , 179 An observational matched cohort study of 12 264 Swedish patients with diabetes mellitus showed a 58% RRR (HR, 0.42 [95% CI, 0.30–0.57]; P <0.001) in all-cause mortality over a median follow-up of 3.5 years with gastric bypass versus control, with 5-year absolute risks of death of 1.8% (95% CI, 1.5–2.2) in the gastric bypass group versus 5.8% (95% CI, 5.0–6.8) in the control group. 180 Despite these potential benefits, bariatric surgery remains underused among eligible patients. 181 Although bariatric surgery has risks, 178 which are likely higher in patients with existing CAD, it may be another effective tool for cardiovascular risk reduction in the subset of patients with obesity, particularly in those with body mass indexes ≥35 kg/m 2 . 
Glycemic Control 
For several decades, T2DM guidelines instructed clinicians to strictly control blood glucose levels of patients with T2DM to reduce the risk of complications, including heart disease. The prevailing concept was that risk reduction could be achieved by a clinical focus on reaching target values of HbA 1c , agnostic to the strategies used. However, 3 major clinical trials of intensive glycemic control (lowering HbA 1c levels to <6%–6.5%) demonstrated no reduction in major cardiovascular events compared with less intensive glycemic control in patients with T2DM. 182 – 184 In contrast, several cardiovascular outcomes trials (CVOTs) demonstrated that drugs that lowered HbA 1c to similar levels had different effects on cardiovascular outcomes. 8 , 10 , 17 , 185 , 186 The results of these studies suggest that the strategy used to achieve glycemic control matters because the total effect of a specific glucose-lowering agent is not conveyed by the degree to which it lowers glucose. This evidence is shifting our previous glucocentric approach to T2DM care toward one that considers the actual method of glycemic management. 
Glycemic Targets in Patients With CAD 
The first major clinical trial of glycemic control among patients with T2DM was UKPDS (UK Prospective Diabetes Study). 187 , 188 This trial showed that more intensive glycemic control (achieved median HbA 1c , 7.0%) compared with standard treatment (HbA 1c , 7.9%) was associated with a reduction in the risk for myocardial infarction (RR, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.71–1.00]) among newly diagnosed patients with T2DM, but this did not reach statistical significance ( P =0.052). 187 In the 10-year follow-up of UKPDS, despite the loss of differences in HbA 1c levels between the 2 groups by 1 year, the risk of myocardial infarction was lower among patients originally randomized to intensive glycemic control (RR, 0.85 [95% CI, 0.74–0.97]). 189 Notably, the study was conducted before the widespread use of cardioprotective therapies such as statins and renin-angiotensin system inhibitors, and it excluded patients with long-standing T2DM or those with a myocardial infarction in the prior year. Nevertheless, the findings suggest that glycemic control, if instituted early in the course of T2DM, may lower the risk of cardiovascular events, but the effect is modest. 
Subsequent clinical trials of intensive versus standard glycemic control among patients with long-standing T2DM and with multiple risk factors for cardiovascular disease did not show similar benefits. 182 – 184 These trials included a substantial proportion of patients with established macrovascular disease (ACCORD, 35.2%; ADVANCE [Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: Preterax and Diamicron MR Controlled Evaluation], 32.3%; and VADT [Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial], 40.3%) and generally targeted HbA 1c levels <6.5%. 182 – 184 One trial was stopped early because of an increased risk of death among patients randomized to intensive glycemic control. 184 The other 2 trials demonstrated no benefit with respect to the primary outcome, major cardiovascular events, with no heterogeneity of effect based on the presence or absence of established macrovascular disease. 182 , 183 Several factors have been postulated as playing a potential role in the observed lack of benefit. These include weight gain and increased risk of hypoglycemia associated with intensive glycemic control strategies, the specific agents used to achieve glucose control, and the timing of the intervention (ie, inability to reverse established atherosclerotic changes late in the course of T2DM). Taken together, these trials suggest that the general strategy of targeting HbA 1c levels to <6.5% among patients with T2DM does not reduce the risk of subsequent cardiovascular disease. 
The American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care recommend that a reasonable HbA 1c goal for many nonpregnant adults is still <7%. 190 A less stringent goal such as <8% or <8.5% may be appropriate for patients with a history of severe hypoglycemia, limited life expectancy, advanced microvascular or macrovascular complications, extensive comorbid conditions, or long-standing T2DM. 190 The rationale for these recommendations is that intensive glycemic control generally reduces the risk of microvascular end points, even if it does not reduce major cardiovascular events. Notably, the evidence for microvascular benefit with intensive glycemic control is more robust in the UKPDS study 187 compared with the 3 more recent trials (ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VADT). 182 – 184 Moreover, the last trial showed minimal, if any, effect on hard clinical microvascular outcomes such as blindness, need for dialysis or transplantation, renal death, or clinical neuropathy. 191 Therefore, the microvascular benefits may be more likely to be realized by patients early in the course of T2DM and with longer life expectancy. The relatively intense efforts to achieve an HbA 1c <7% among patients with long-standing T2DM increase the risks associated with polypharmacy, contribute to treatment burden (including financial burden), and may increase the risk of hypoglycemia. 192 
Hypoglycemia 
Intensive glycemic control in all major clinical trials was shown to increase the risk of severe hypoglycemia 2- to 3-fold. 182 – 184 , 187 , 193 More than just a nuisance, hypoglycemia can cause direct harm, including falls, injuries and fractures, motor vehicle accidents, and even coma and death. 194 Because insulin-induced severe hypoglycemia is thought to cause death by inducing fatal cardiac arrhythmias, there have been long-standing concerns about the impact of hypoglycemia on cardiovascular events, especially in patients with preexisting cardiovascular disease. Indeed, multiple studies have shown a strong relationship between hypoglycemia (severe or not severe) and cardiovascular events and mortality. 195 – 201 Yet, whether hypoglycemia is a marker of vulnerability or a causal mediator of cardiovascular events remains unclear. 202 Regardless of the causality, the occurrence of hypoglycemia should be minimized in all patients with T2DM, especially among patients with preexisting cardiovascular disease. 
Impact of Specific Glucose-Lowering Drugs on CAD Outcomes 
Sulfonylureas and Insulin 
Given the known high risk for CAD in patients with T2DM and the varying physiological actions of glucose-lowering agents, clinicians have long wondered whether any specific T2DM medication offered unique advantages or disadvantages (over and above any benefits of glycemic control) to the cardiovascular system. For years, concerns have been raised about the traditional T2DM drugs, the sulfonylureas, which reduce blood glucose by depolarizing β-cell membranes, resulting in insulin release. Hyperinsulinemia, hypoglycemia, and blunting of ischemic preconditioning have been raised as specific concerns. However, although sulfonylureas have been associated with increased cardiovascular mortality in retrospective observational studies, most large controlled clinical trials have generally proved sulfonylureas (particularly second-generation agents) to be safe and cardiovascular neutral. 183 , 187 , 203 , 204 In the CAROLINA randomized trial (Cardiovascular Outcome Study of Linagliptin Versus Glimepiride in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes) of 6033 patients with T2DM and cardiovascular risk factors, there was no difference in the risk of cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke in patients treated with glimepiride versus linagliptin, albeit with a marked increased risk of hypoglycemia with the sulfonylurea. 204 Sulfonylurea use has been linked to improved microvascular outcomes, specifically retinopathy and albuminuria, in the context of intensive glycemic control in the UKPDS study. 187 Insulin therapy has raised similar concerns with respect to cardiovascular safety and has been associated with adverse cardiovascular outcomes and mortality in observational studies. 205 , 206 However, these data are challenging to interpret because insulin tends to be reserved for those patients with more advanced disease. As with the sulfonylureas, randomized trials have shown insulin to be associated with a reduced risk of microvascular complications in the context of intensive glycemic control; insulin appears safe from a cardiovascular standpoint, but it does not reduce adverse cardiovascular events. 184 , 187 Accordingly, sulfonylureas and insulin can be used cautiously as glucose-lowering therapies in a patient with stable CAD, but careful attention should be paid to avoiding hypoglycemia and excess weight gain. Given these adverse effects, neither insulin nor sulfonylureas should be first-line therapies for most patients with established CAD, especially given the documented cardiovascular benefits associated with the use of other glucose-lowering drugs. 
Metformin 
In contrast to sulfonylureas and insulin, metformin may actually improve cardiovascular outcomes and is not associated with either hypoglycemia or weight gain. Within a substudy of the UKPDS (n=1704 randomized to metformin [n=324] versus sulfonylureas/insulin), metformin was associated with fewer myocardial infarctions (11.0 per 1000 person-years versus 18.0 per 1000 person-years; 39% RRR) and deaths (13.5 per 1000 person-years versus 20.6 per 1000 person-years; 36% RRR). 188 Follow-up studies involving metformin appeared to support a potential cardiovascular benefit, but these studies were small and the findings were not robust. 207 , 208 A large trial is currently recruiting through the US Veterans Affairs to examine the cardiovascular benefit of metformin versus placebo in patients with prediabetes and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (results expected in 2024). Nonetheless, this agent continues to be the most popular glucose-lowering agent in the United States and Europe for people with T2DM, including those with CAD, and remains the drug most frequently recommended as first-line therapy in treatment guidelines. 
Thiazolidinedione 
Thiazolidinediones are insulin-sensitizing agents and thus were attractive options with potential cardiovascular benefits, given the link between insulin resistance and CAD. An early cardiovascular outcome trial, PROactive (Prospective Pioglitazone Clinical Trial in Macrovascular Events), suggested a cardiovascular benefit from the thiazolidinedione pioglitazone in 5238 patients with T2DM with preexisting macrovascular disease. Although the primary outcome of the trial, a broad cardiovascular composite, was not significantly reduced (HR, 0.90 [95% CI, 0.80–1.02]), pioglitazone resulted in a 16% RRR in the secondary outcome of MACEs (11.6% versus 13.6%). 209 Given the neutral primary outcome, this secondary finding was considered hypothesis generating. Subsequently, a major controversy emerged involving rosiglitazone, with a well-publicized meta-analysis of small phase 3 trials suggesting an increase in myocardial ischemic events (odds ratio, 1.43 [95% CI, 1.03–1.98]). 210 However, rosiglitazone was later demonstrated to be neutral for major cardiovascular events in the RECORD trial (Rosiglitazone Evaluated for Cardiac Outcomes and Regulation of Glycemia in Diabetes). 211 Finally, in the IRIS trial (Insulin Resistance Intervention After Stroke), which involved 3876 patients with stroke and insulin resistance (but notably not T2DM), pioglitazone produced a 24% RRR in stroke or myocardial infarction (9.0% versus 11.8%). 212 In a post hoc analysis of IRIS, pioglitazone was also associated with a 29% RRR in acute coronary syndrome (4.3% versus 6.0%) and 38% RRR in myocardial infarction (1.7% versus 2.7%). 213 
Despite their likely atherosclerotic benefit, thiazolidinediones unfortunately also increase the risk of heart failure as a result of their sodium retentive properties at the distal nephron, and this risk is accentuated at higher doses and when the drugs are used with insulin. Thus, they remain contraindicated in patients with established heart failure and must be used with some caution in patients with CAD, given the underlying risk of heart failure in this group. Notably, in IRIS, there was no increased risk of heart failure hospitalizations with pioglitazone, but patients with known heart failure were excluded, and there were protocols in place for study drug dose reduction with any signs of fluid overload. Thiazolidinediones can be used in patients with CAD but without known heart failure and may have important atherosclerotic benefits; however, the clinician must be vigilant for any signs of fluid overload so as to reduce the risk of overt heart failure. 
Dipeptidyl Peptidase 4 Inhibitors 
Partially in response to the rosiglitazone controversy, the US Food and Drug Administration released guidance to the pharmaceutical industry in 2008 that essentially mandated large CVOTs to demonstrate cardiovascular safety of any new glucose-lowering agent. 214 The first drug category to report outcomes in these CVOTs was the DPP4 (dipeptidyl peptidase 4) inhibitors, oral agents that increase concentrations of endogenous incretin hormones, increasing insulin and decreasing glucagon secretion in a glucose-dependent manner. These medications are somewhat less powerful than traditional agents but do not result in any hypoglycemia or weight gain and are generally well tolerated. In 4 trials to date, the DPP4 inhibitors have been shown to be neutral in terms of cardiovascular outcomes. 185 , 186 , 215 , 216 Notably, 1 drug in this class, saxagliptin, led to a 26% increase in heart failure hospitalization in the SAVOR-TIMI 53 trial (Saxagliptin Assessment of Vascular Outcomes Recorded in Patients With Diabetes Mellitus), with no clear explanation of the mechanism. 186 Alogliptin also showed a trend toward increased heart failure hospitalizations in the EXAMINE trial (Cardiovascular Outcomes Study of Alogliptin in Patients With Type 2 Diabetes and Acute Coronary Syndrome), 185 and both now carry relevant warnings in their labels. Subsequent observational studies, CVOTs, and meta-analyses have not shown an excess heart failure risk with DPP4 inhibitors. 217 , 218 
Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 Inhibitors 
The first drug class to show clear benefits on cardiovascular outcomes was the SGLT2 (sodium-glucose cotransporter 2) inhibitors. These oral agents reduce blood glucose by increasing glucosuria and are associated with modest reductions in body weight and blood pressure. Their main side effects include increased urination and genitourinary infections. In the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial (BI 10773 [Empagliflozin] Cardiovascular Outcome Event Trial in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Patients), empagliflozin reduced MACEs by 14% (HR, 0.86 [95% CI, 0.75–0.99]) in patients with established cardiovascular disease, which was driven primarily by a significant reduction in cardiovascular mortality (3.7% versus 5.9%; 38% RRR). 8 Empagliflozin also reduced all-cause mortality (5.7% versus 8.3%; 32% RRR), hospitalizations for heart failure (2.7% versus 4.1%; 35% RRR), 219 and progression of chronic kidney disease (12.7% versus 18.8%; 39% RRR). 220 The event curves for cardiovascular death and heart failure hospitalization diverged early, suggesting that the effects of the drug were not mediated through the traditional reduction in atherosclerosis but perhaps instead through a rapid effect on hemodynamics. A follow-up analysis showed that these benefits were also consistent regardless of HbA 1c before and during therapy. 221 There were mixed results with canagliflozin in CANVAS (Canagliflozin Cardiovascular Assessment Study) involving 10 142 patients with established or at high risk for cardiovascular disease. Canagliflozin reduced MACEs (26.9 per 1000 person-years versus 31.5 per 1000 person-years; 14% RRR), heart failure hospitalization (5.5 per 1000 person-years versus 8.7 per 1000 person-years; 33% RRR), and chronic kidney disease progression (6.6 per 1000 person-years versus 9.0 per 1000 person-years; 40% RRR) at rates similar to empagliflozin, but there was no significant reduction in cardiovascular death. 19 These benefits were somewhat counterbalanced by a doubling of amputation rates (6.3 per 1000 person-years versus 3.4 per 1000 person-years) and more bone fractures in the canagliflozin arm of CANVAS, adverse effects that have not been reported to date with other SGLT2 inhibitors and were not observed in a subsequent trial of canagliflozin. 222 Finally, in DECLARE-TIMI 58 (Dapagliflozin Effect on Cardiovascular Events), dapagliflozin did not significantly reduce MACEs in 17 160 patients with established or at high risk for cardiovascular disease. Dapagliflozin significantly reduced the risk of the dual primary composite outcome of cardiovascular death or heart failure hospitalization (4.9% versus 5.8%; 17% RRR) and reduced progression of chronic kidney disease. 16 Notably, DECLARE enrolled more patients without preexisting cardiovascular disease (59%) than either CANVAS (34%) or EMPA-REG OUTCOME (0%), meaning that at least some of the benefits of SGLT2 inhibition extend to those without overt cardiovascular disease. 222 , 223 Updated drug labels for empagliflozin and canagliflozin now include indications for cardiovascular benefits. 
Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonists 
The final category reporting CVOT results was the GLP-1 (glucagon-like peptide-1) receptor agonists, injectables that mimic the effects of the DPP4 inhibitors while also delaying gastric emptying and centrally decreasing appetite. Side effects include nausea and vomiting and possibly an increase in gallbladder disease. Their use is associated with a stronger effect on HbA 1c and weight loss than either DPP4 inhibitors or SGLT2 inhibitors. Unlike these other drug classes, there has been greater inconsistency in the outcomes of the CVOTs for the different GLP-1 receptor agonists. ELIXA (Evaluation of Lixisenatide in Acute Coronary Syndrome) was the first to report and showed that the short-acting GLP-1 receptor agonist lixisenatide had no impact on MACEs in 6068 patients after an acute coronary syndrome. 224 In the second GLP-1 receptor agonist CVOT, LEADER, liraglutide led to a 13% RRR in MACEs (13.0% versus 14.9%) and a 22% RRR in cardiovascular death (4.7% versus 6.0%) in 9340 patients with overt or at high risk for cardiovascular disease. 17 In SUSTAIN 6 (Trial to Evaluate Cardiovascular and Other Long-term Outcomes with Semaglutide in Subjects With Type 2 Diabetes; n=3297), semaglutide produced a 26% RRR in MACEs (6.6% versus 8.9%) but no reduction in cardiovascular mortality. 10 The next CVOT, EXSCEL (Exenatide Study of Cardiovascular Event Lowering Trial; n=14 752), found extended-release exenatide to be neutral for MACEs. 225 Finally, Harmony Outcomes (n=9463) reported a 22% RRR in MACEs (7.1% versus 9.0) with albiglutide in patients with T2DM and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, 18 but this GLP-1 receptor agonist is no longer marketed as a result of the manufacturer’s decision. 
On the basis of these studies, it is now clear that although glucose lowering itself has, at best, only modest impact on cardiovascular events, the method by which glucose is lowered may. Accordingly, guideline committees have amended their recommendations for the management of patients with T2DM on the basis of the presence or absence of cardiovascular disease. In both a consensus report from the American Diabetes Association and European Association for the Study of Diabetes and an expert consensus decision pathway from the American College of Cardiology, use of either a GLP-1 receptor agonist or an SGLT2 inhibitor demonstrated to improve cardiovascular outcomes is advised in patients with high cardiovascular risk regardless of HbA 1c . 226 – 228 If heart failure or chronic kidney disease dominates the clinical picture, an SGLT2 inhibitor is preferred. 
MANAGEMENT OF STABLE ANGINA 
Workup of Angina 
Current US guidelines recommend that most patients with stable ischemic heart disease undergo noninvasive ischemic testing at some point to gain prognostic information. 160 , 229 A variety of noninvasive tests are available that incorporate electrocardiography, radionuclide scintigraphy, echocardiography, or coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA). Although these tests have been the focus of guidelines for the assessment of stable angina, studies designed to answer clinical questions about the management of stable CAD in T2DM are lacking. 
Anatomic Versus Functional Testing 
Two large studies have tested CTA versus functional testing in the workup for stable angina. The SCOT-HEART trial (Scottish Computed Tomography of the Heart) was an open-label randomized comparison of CTA with standard care (which could include stress testing, angiography, or continued medical management) in 4146 subjects with stable chest pain (444 with diabetes mellitus) from 2010 to 2014. 230 At the 5-year follow-up, the rate of the composite end point of death caused by CAD or nonfatal myocardial infarction was lower in the CTA group than in the standard care group (2.3% versus 3.9%; HR, 0.59 [95% CI, 0.41–0.84]; P =0.004). This difference was caused primarily by a lower rate of nonfatal myocardial infarction in the CTA group than in the standard care group (HR, 0.60 [95% CI, 0.41–0.87]). This effect was similar in the subset of patients with diabetes mellitus (primary end point HR, 0.36 [95% CI, 0.15–0.87]). Revascularization rates were similar in the 2 groups and probably did not play a major role in the difference between the groups in the rate of the primary end point. The authors speculated that the mechanism by which myocardial infarctions were prevented may be, in part, related to more appropriate use of preventive therapies in the CTA group that may have been prompted from the test results. 
The findings of the SCOT-HEART trial are in contrast to those of PROMISE (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of Chest Pain), which randomly assigned 8966 patients with stable chest pain (1908 with diabetes mellitus) to either CTA or functional testing and showed no difference in outcomes over a median of 2 years of follow-up. 231 Further analysis showed that a substantial proportion of myocardial infarctions occurred in patients with nonobstructive CAD identified by CTA, disease that would not be detected by functional testing and could prompt important changes in prevention strategies. However, there was a significant interaction by diabetes mellitus ( P =0.02); patients with diabetes mellitus who were randomized to CTA had a lower risk of cardiovascular death or nonfatal myocardial infarction compared with those randomized to functional stress testing (1.1% versus 2.6%; adjusted HR, 0.38 [95% CI, 0.18–0.79]; P =0.01), whereas there was no significant difference in outcomes in patients without diabetes mellitus. 232 Overall, CTA may provide an advantage over stress testing in the management of patients with T2DM and stable angina, mostly for its ability to diagnose nonobstructive CAD and therefore inform medical management. 
Medical Therapy Options 
Despite advances in interventions that prevent and slow the progression of atherosclerosis and revascularization technologies to reduce myocardial ischemia, about one-third of patients with stable CAD report chronic angina. 233 Increasing burden of chronic angina not only affects patients’ quality of life 234 , 235 but also is associated with increased hospitalizations and healthcare costs. 236 However, angina remains both underrecognized 237 , 238 and undertreated. 239 , 240 Patients with angina and concomitant T2DM are a particularly challenging group because they often have more diffuse and extensive CAD that may not be as amenable to revascularization. 241 , 242 Even among patients who are candidates, residual angina after revascularization is quite common, with ≈20% to 30% of patients reporting angina at 1 year after revascularization. 243 – 245 Thus, medical management of angina can play a particularly important role in improving the quality of life of patients with T2DM and stable coronary disease. 
Antianginal Efficacy 
Options for medical management of stable angina have 1 of 2 mechanisms: increasing myocardial oxygen supply (nitrates, calcium channel blockers) or decreasing myocardial oxygen demand (β-blockers, calcium channel blockers, ranolazine, ivabradine). Guidelines generally recommend β-blockers or calcium channel blockers as first-line therapy, with long-acting nitrates and ranolazine considered when β-blockers or calcium channel blockers are contraindicated, poorly tolerated, or insufficient to control symptoms ( Table 3 ). 246 , 247 For the indication of stable coronary disease, none of these medications have been shown to reduce the risk of mortality or myocardial infarction. 94 , 248 – 251 In addition, both a meta-analysis and a systematic review found similar effects on angina and exercise duration among β-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and nitrates. 251 , 252 Therefore, selecting medications for the treatment of stable angina should focus on other factors specific to the patient (eg, effects on blood pressure or heart rate, side effects, costs, glycemic effects). 
Table 3. 
Management of Stable Angina 
Medical therapy 
Underlying issue: No antianginal medications reduce morbidity or mortality in stable CAD and have similar impact on reducing angina. 
β-Blockers 
Preference for vasodilating β-blockers with less adverse metabolic effects 
Calcium channel blockers 
Avoid nondihydropyridines in patients with LV dysfunction or with β-blockers 
Long-acting nitrates 
Long-term use can cause tolerance and endothelial dysfunction 
Ranolazine 
No hemodynamic effects; moderate reduction in HbA 1c 
Revascularization 
Underlying issues: Both surgical and percutaneous revascularization outcomes are impaired in the setting of T2DM, with increased risk of both procedural complications and recurrent ischemic events. 
Multivessel CAD, left main disease, complex coronary anatomy 
CABG is associated with lower MACEs compared with PCI 
Use of the IMA to the anterior wall is an important driver of benefit of CABG 
Typically achieve more complete revascularization with CABG vs PCI 
Newest-generation drug-eluting stents have narrowed the gap between CABG and PCI 
Open in a new tab 
CABG indicates coronary artery bypass grafting; CAD, coronary artery disease; HbA 1c , glycated hemoglobin; IMA, internal mammary artery; LV, left ventricular; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular event; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; and T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Effects of Antianginals on Glucose 
There are 2 special considerations in the choice of antianginal medications for patients with concomitant T2DM. First, many β-blockers (eg, metoprolol, atenolol) that effectively treat angina also have adverse metabolic effects. β-Blockers reduce heart rate and myocardial contractility (thereby reducing myocardial oxygen demand), but this can induce compensatory peripheral vasoconstriction, which leads to increased insulin resistance and a more atherogenic lipid profile. 96 , 97 , 253 β-Blockers that have a concomitant vasodilatory effect (eg, carvedilol, labetalol, nebivolol), however, have neutral or beneficial effects on metabolic parameters. 96 – 98 In head-to-head trials, patients with T2DM who were treated with vasodilating (versus nonvasodilating) β-blockers had small but significant decreases in HbA 1c levels (0.1%–0.2%), improved insulin sensitivity, lower cholesterol levels, less weight gain, and less progression to microalbuminuria. 96 , 254 – 256 
A second consideration of pharmacological treatment of angina in patients with T2DM is the impact of ranolazine on both angina and blood glucose. Ranolazine reduces myocardial ischemia at the cellular level and is the only antianginal medication to be tested and found effective specifically in patients with T2DM. 257 In addition to its antianginal effects, ranolazine appears to reduce HbA 1c by ≈0.5% to 0.7% via a reduction in glucagon secretion. 258 Both the antianginal effect 259 and the glucose-lowering effect 260 – 262 of ranolazine appear to be enhanced in patients with poorly controlled T2DM. 
The metabolic impact of β-blockers and ranolazine is modest, and other considerations may make other antianginal medications preferable in patients with angina and concomitant T2DM. Most important is the recognition of angina among patients with stable coronary disease, understanding that patients with T2DM have at least as high a burden of angina as those without T2DM. Once angina is recognized and quantified, effective antianginal medications can be applied, with selection of those medications that are T2DM friendly, when no other competing considerations are present. 
Revascularization Options 
OMT with risk modification remains the foundation of management in patients with T2DM and CAD. 263 , 264 However, as coronary anatomic burden and complexity increase, particularly among those with large ischemic burden or frequent angina, the benefit of revascularization combined with OMT becomes manifest. 263 , 265 – 267 Both surgical and percutaneous revascularization outcomes are impaired in the setting of T2DM, with an increased risk of adverse procedural events and of long-term lesion development, progression, and restenosis. 25 , 268 , 269 The relative benefit and risk of each revascularization strategy vary by the extent and complexity of CAD and the patient’s underlying comorbid state. 270 Therefore, individualized consideration of the need for and optimal choice of revascularization strategy is required. 271 In patients with multivessel CAD, left main disease, and complex coronary anatomy, coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is associated with reduced long-term MACEs compared with PCI, albeit with a small increased early risk of stroke 272 , 273 (30-day stroke rate for CABG versus PCI, 1.8% versus 0.3% 274 ). The reduced MACEs observed after CABG are driven largely by a lesser need for repeat revascularization with CABG than with PCI, particularly in the initial years after revascularization. 273 Several lines of evidence, however, suggest that the more complete revascularization that can be achieved in bypassed territories accounts for a gradual accrual of benefit beyond 4 to 5 years after CABG, whereas there is an accompanying hazard associated with incomplete PCI over this time course. 275 , 276 
Importance of the Internal Mammary Artery 
BARI (Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation), 277 which randomized patients with multivessel CAD to CABG or balloon angioplasty, provides a framework to understand the beneficial impact of durable revascularization, particularly of the left anterior descending artery. 278 In this trial, significantly improved survival was noted in the subgroup of patients with diabetes mellitus who were randomized to CABG, a difference that continued to accrue out to 10 years from study entry. 279 Much of the observed long-term benefit of CABG over balloon angioplasty was attributable to a durable surgical conduit bypassing the entire proximal vessel, resulting in a documented early survival advantage after myocardial infarction in patients treated with left internal mammary artery (IMA) grafts. 280 A consistent effect has been identified throughout subsequent contemporary revascularization trials, 266 including in pooled analysis. 281 Bilateral IMA implantation is less commonly used than single IMA implantation because of concern about increased sternal wound infection rates. 282 – 284 Although pooled analysis from retrospective studies suggests the safety of skeletonized bilateral IMA harvest 285 , 286 and the potential for superior long-term survival associated with this approach, 284 the only large-scale randomized experience with bilateral IMA to date failed to demonstrate early 287 or 5-year superiority compared with single IMA. 288 
PCI With Drug-Eluting Stents 
Although patients with T2DM are at increased risk for the full spectrum of ischemic events compared with those without T2DM, the issue of restenosis after PCI has been an area of particular concern in those with T2DM. 289 Approximately 15% of patients with T2DM will require target vessel revascularization within 2 years after bare metal stenting, 290 which is reduced by 60% to 70% with the use of drug-eluting stents. 291 As PCI technology has advanced, the benefit of CABG over PCI in patients with T2DM has therefore been challenged. The FREEDOM trial 274 (Future Revascularization Evaluation in Patients With Diabetes Mellitus: Optimal Management of Multivessel Disease) was the first large-scale investigation of contemporary CABG (94% IMA implantation to the left anterior descending artery) compared with drug-eluting stent–based PCI (first-generation paclitaxel- or sirolimus-eluting stents) among 1900 patients with diabetes mellitus and CAD. With excellent adherence to OMT in both cohorts, the primary composite outcome of 5-year rates of death resulting from any cause, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke occurred more frequently in the PCI group (26.6% versus 18.7%; P =0.005), as did the individual outcomes of death (16.3% versus 10.9%; P <0.05) and nonfatal myocardial infarction (13.9% versus 6%; P <0.001), although stroke was more common after CABG (5.2% versus 2.4%; P =0.03). Impressively, these results were consistent across all prespecified subgroups. 274 , 275 , 292 Extended follow-up (mean, 7.5 years) of the original 1900 randomized patients found a significant 25% relative survival benefit for CABG compared with PCI (81.7% versus 75.7%; P =0.01), with survival curves diverging beyond 2 years and continuing to widen throughout follow-up, suggesting a robust long-term benefit. 293 There was also a small favorable benefit in quality of life favoring CABG from 6 months to 2 years, although there was no further accrual of benefit beyond 2 years. 294 
Meta-Analytic Results 
A pooled patient-level data analysis of 11 518 patients from 11 multivessel revascularization trials found a survival advantage at 5 years associated with CABG compared with PCI among the 4386 patients with diabetes mellitus in the studies (84.5% versus 90.0%; P =0.0004). 272 Pooled analysis of patient-level data from BARI2D (Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes), 263 COURAGE (Clinical Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization and Aggressive Drug Evaluation), 264 and FREEDOM 274 showed a reduction in 5-year composite rates of death, myocardial infarction, or stroke in patients with diabetes mellitus randomized to OMT+CABG compared with OMT+PCI or OMT alone. 272 , 295 When the additional end point of need for subsequent revascularization was included in the composite, OMT+CABG was again superior to other strategies regardless of baseline angina severity. 296 
Diabetes mellitus is associated with marked and widespread vascular perturbation leading to enhanced cardiovascular risk. In particular, the increased vascular disease burden and progressive nature of CAD in patients with T2DM lead to an increased propensity toward postrevascularization target and nontarget vessel ischemic events, especially in those with more advanced T2DM as reflected by insulin requirements. 265 , 297 Because both percutaneous and surgical revascularization outcomes are impaired in the presence of T2DM, primary and secondary medical preventive therapy remains the foundation of care. When revascularization is indicated, 271 optimal approaches include PCI with newest-generation drug-eluting stents and CABG with IMA implantation. For patients with complex CAD or multiple comorbidities, an individualized, patient-centric heart team approach to revascularization strategy, including consideration of coronary anatomy, risk profile, presentation features, and patient preference, is essential, with the understanding that CABG with OMT will offer improved outcomes in the majority of patients with T2DM and multivessel CAD and is the revascularization strategy recommended by current US and European society guidelines. 229 , 298 Ongoing medical, surgical, and percutaneous developments require continuous reassessment of RRs and benefits associated with these modalities to ensure optimal outcome in patients with T2DM. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
A remarkable transformation in the care of patients with T2DM is occurring. Clinical trials have uncovered several new drugs that not only reduce glucose but also improve cardiovascular and renal outcomes. These advances build on concurrent improvements in the management of other risk factors in patients with T2DM such as elevated LDL-C, triglycerides, and hypertension. The options in antithrombotic therapy for patients with T2DM have also expanded. Our understanding of diagnostic modalities to assess CAD burden in patients with T2DM has been refined, as well as the appropriate roles of lifestyle management, medical therapy, and percutaneous or surgical revascularization. Thus, the expanding knowledge base needed for the care of patients with T2DM necessitates a broad range of physicians to understand and apply the evidence that can directly improve clinical outcomes. 
Disclosures 
Writing Group Disclosures 
Writing Group Member 
Employment 
Research Grant 
Other Research Support 
Speakers’ Bureau/Honoraria 
Expert Witness 
Ownership Interest 
Consultant/Advisory Board 
Other 
Suzanne V. Arnold 
Saint Luke’s Mid America Heart Institute 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Deepak L. Bhatt ‡ 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital Heart and Vascular Center/Harvard Medical School 
Research Funding: Abbott † ; Afimmune † ; Amarin † ; Amgen † ; AstraZeneca † ; Bayer † ; Boehringer Ingelheim † ; Bristol-Myers Squibb † ; Cardax † ; Chiesi † ; CSL Behring † ; Eisai † ; Ethicon † ; Ferring Pharmaceuticals † ; Forest Laboratories † ; Fractyl † ; Idorsia † ; Ironwood † ; Ischemix † ; Lexicon † ; Lilly † ; Medtronic † ; Pfizer † ; PhaseBio † ; PLx Pharma † ; Regeneron † ; Roche † ; Sanofi Aventis † ; Synaptic † ; The Medicines Company † ; Unfunded Research: FlowCo * ; Merck * ; Novo Nordisk * ; Takeda * 
Please see below 
Please see below 
None 
None 
Advisory Board: Cardax * ; Cereno Scientific * ; Elsevier Practice Update Cardiology * ; Medscape Cardiology * ; PhaseBio * ; PLx Pharma * ; Regado Biosciences * 
None 
Gregory W. Barsness 
Mayo Clinic 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Mayo Clinic (salaried physician) † 
Alexis L. Beatty 
Apple 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Apple Inc † 
None 
Apple (research scientist) † 
Prakash C. Deedwania 
University of California at San Francisco, School of Medicine 
Boehringer † ; Novartis † ; Sanofi † (all research grants to institution) 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Janssen * 
None 
Silvio E. Inzucchi 
Yale University School of Medicine 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Boehringer Ingelheim * ; AstraZeneca † ; Novo Nordisk † ; Merck (immediate family members) * ; Sanofi/Lexicon * ; Abbott/Alere * 
None 
Mikhail Kosiborod 
Saint Luke’s Mid America Heart Institute, and The George Institute for Global Health and University of New South Wales 
AstraZeneca † ; Boehringer Ingelheim † 
AstraZeneca † 
None 
None 
None 
Amarin * ; Amgen * ; Applied Therapeutics * ; AstraZeneca † ; Bayer † ; Boehringer Ingelheim † ; Eisai † ; Eli Lilly † ; GlaxoKline Smith * ; Glytec * ; Intarcia * ; Janssen † ; Merck (diabetes) † ; Novartis * ; Novo Nordisk † ; Sanofi † ; Vifor Pharma * 
None 
Lawrence A. Leiter 
Keenan Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of St. Michael’s Hospital, University of Toronto, CANADA 
Amgen * ; Esperion * ; GSK * ; Kowa * ; The Medicines Company * (all steering committees); AstraZeneca (Executive Committee and site investigator) † ; Bayer * ; Janssen * (all site investigators); Resverlogix (DSMB) * ; Sanofi (Executive Committee) * 
None 
Amgen * ; AstraZeneca * ; Boehringer Ingelheim * ; Eli Lilly * ; Janssen * ; Merck * ; Novo Nordisk * ; Sanofi * ; Servier * 
None 
None 
Amgen * ; AstraZeneca * ; Boehringer Ingelheim * ; Eli Lilly * ; Janssen * ; Merck * ; Novo Nordisk * ; Regeneron * ; Sanofi * ; Servier * ; HLS * ; Applied Therapeutics * 
None 
Kasia J. Lipska 
Yale University School of Medicine 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Jonathan D. Newman 
New York University School of Medicine 
National Institutes of Health (K23HL125991) † 
None 
Creative Educational Concepts * 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Francine K. Welty 
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Open in a new tab 
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition. 
* 
Modest. 
† 
Significant. 
‡ 
Deepak L. Bhatt: 
Other column relationships (all significant): Advisory Board: Cardax, Cereno Scientific, Elsevier Practice Update Cardiology, Medscape Cardiology, PhaseBio, PLx Pharma, Regado Biosciences; Board of Directors: Boston VA Research Institute, Society of Cardiovascular Patient Care, TobeSoft; chair: American Heart Association Quality Oversight Committee; Data Monitoring committees: Baim Institute for Clinical Research (formerly Harvard Clinical Research Institute, for the PORTICO trial, funded by St. Jude Medical, now Abbott), Cleveland Clinic (including for the ExCEED trial, funded by Edwards), Duke Clinical Research Institute, Mayo Clinic, Mount Sinai School of Medicine (for the ENVISAGE trial, funded by Daiichi Sankyo), Population Health Research Institute† 
Honoraria column relationships (all significant): honoraria: American College of Cardiology (senior associate editor, Clinical Trials and News , ACC.org ; vice chair, ACC Accreditation Committee); Baim Institute for Clinical Research (formerly Harvard Clinical Research Institute; RE-DUAL PCI clinical trial steering committee funded by Boehringer Ingelheim; AEGIS-II executive committee funded by CSL Behring); Belvoir Publications (editor in chief, Harvard Heart Letter ); Duke Clinical Research Institute (clinical trial steering committees, including for the PRONOUNCE trial, funded by Ferring Pharmaceuticals); HMP Global (editor in chief, Journal of Invasive Cardiology ); Journal of the American College of Cardiology (guest editor; associate editor); Medtelligence/ReachMD (CME steering committees); MJH Life Sciences, Population Health Research Institute (for the COMPASS operations committee, publications committee, steering committee, and US national coleader, funded by Bayer); Slack Publications (chief medical editor, Cardiology Today’s Intervention ); Society of Cardiovascular Patient Care (secretary/treasurer); WebMD (CME steering committees); other: Clinical Cardiology (deputy editor); NCDR-ACTION Registry Steering Committee (chair); VA CART Research and Publications Committee (chair); Research Committee (chair), research funding: Abbott, Afimmune, Amarin, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cardax, Chiesi, CSL Behring, Eisai, Ethicon, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Forest Laboratories, Fractyl, Idorsia, Ironwood, Ischemix, Lexicon, Lilly, Medtronic, Pfizer,PhaseBio, PLx Pharma, Regeneron, Roche, Sanofi Aventis, Synaptic, The Medicines Company; royalties: Elsevier (editor, Cardiovascular Intervention: A Companion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease ); site coinvestigator: Biotronik, Boston Scientific, CSI, St. Jude Medical (now Abbott), Svelte; trustee: American College of Cardiology; unfunded research: FlowCo, Merck, Novo Nordisk, Takeda† 
Reviewer Disclosures 
Reviewer 
Employment 
Research Grant 
Other Research Support 
Speakers’ Bureau/Honoraria 
Expert Witness 
Ownership Interest 
Consultant/Advisory Board 
Other 
Sripal Bangalore 
New York University 
NHLBI (PI of the ISCHEMIA CKD trial) † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Abbott Vascular * ; Biotronik * ; Amgen * ; Pfizer * 
None 
Bernard Chaitman 
St. Louis University HSC 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
NovoNordisk † ; Merck * 
None 
Joseph Loscalzo 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital/Harvard Medical School 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Debabrata Mukherjee 
Texas Tech University 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Open in a new tab 
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition. 
* 
Modest. 
† 
Significant. 
Footnotes 
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest. 
This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on February 4, 2020, and the American Heart Association Executive Committee on April 3, 2020. A copy of the document is available at https://professional.heart.org/statements by using either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 215-356-2721 or email Meredith.Edelman@wolterskluwer.com . 
The expert peer review of AHA-commissioned documents (eg, scientific statements, clinical practice guidelines, systematic reviews) is conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines development, visit https://professional.heart.org/statements . Select the “Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.” 
Contributor Information 
Suzanne V. Arnold, Saint Luke’s Mid America Heart Institute. 
Deepak L. Bhatt, Brigham and Women’s Hospital Heart and Vascular Center/Harvard Medical School. 
Gregory W. Barsness, Mayo Clinic. 
Alexis L. Beatty, Apple. 
Prakash C. Deedwania, University of California at San Francisco, School of Medicine. 
Silvio E. Inzucchi, Yale University School of Medicine. 
Mikhail Kosiborod, Saint Luke’s Mid America Heart Institute, and The George Institute for Global Health and University of New South Wales. 
Lawrence A. Leiter, Keenan Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of St. Michael’s Hospital, University of Toronto, CANADA. 
Kasia J. Lipska, Yale University School of Medicine. 
Jonathan D. Newman, New York University School of Medicine. 
Francine K. Welty, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. 
REFERENCES 
1. International Diabetes Federation. IDF Diabetes Atlas. 8th ed. 2017. http://diabetesatlasorg/resources/2017-atlashtml . Accessed April 6, 2019. [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Sattar N, Rawshani A, Franzén S, Rawshani A, Svensson AM, Rosengren A, McGuire DK, Eliasson B, Gudbjörnsdottir S. Age at diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus and associations with cardiovascular and mortality risks. Circulation. 2019;139:2228–2237. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.037885
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Cavender MA, Steg PG, Smith SC Jr, Eagle K, Ohman EM, Goto S, Kuder J, Im K, Wilson PW, Bhatt DL; on behalf of the REACH Registry Investigators. Impact of diabetes mellitus on hospitalization for heart failure, cardiovascular events, and death: outcomes at 4 years from the Reduction of Atherothrombosis for Continued Health (REACH) Registry. Circulation. 2015;132:923–931. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.014796
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Gregg EW, Hora I, Benoit SR. Resurgence in diabetes-related complications. JAMA. 2019;321:1867–1868. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.347
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. American Diabetes Association. 10: Cardiovascular disease and risk management: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes–2019. Diabetes Care. 2019;42:S103–S123. doi: 10.2337/dc19-S010
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, Buroker AB, Goldberger ZD, Hahn EJ, Himmelfarb CD, Khera A, Lloyd-Jones D, McEvoy JW, et al. 
2019 ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines [published corrections appear in Circulation . 2019;140:e649–650 and Circulation . 2020;141:e60]. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000678
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Gaede P, Lund-Andersen H, Parving HH, Pedersen O. Effect of a multifactorial intervention on mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:580–591. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0706245
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, Fitchett D, Bluhmki E, Hantel S, Mattheus M, Devins T, Johansen OE, Woerle HJ, et al. ; EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliflozin, cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2117–2128. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1504720
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. Sabatine MS, Leiter LA, Wiviott SD, Giugliano RP, Deedwania P, De Ferrari GM, Murphy SA, Kuder JF, Gouni-Berthold I, Lewis BS, et al. 
Cardiovascular safety and efficacy of the PCSK9 inhibitor evolocumab in patients with and without diabetes and the effect of evolocumab on glycaemia and risk of new-onset diabetes: a prespecified analysis of the FOURIER randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5:941–950. doi: 10.1016/S2213-8587(17)30313-3
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, Eliaschewitz FG, Jódar E, Leiter LA, Lingvay I, Rosenstock J, Seufert J, Warren ML, et al. ; SUSTAIN-6 Investigators. Semaglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:1834–1844. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1607141
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. Laine M, Gaubert M, Frere C, Peyrol M, Thuny F, Yvorra S, Chelini V, Bultez B, Luigi S, Mokrani Z, et al. 
COMparison of Platelet reactivity following prAsugrel and ticagrelor loading dose in ST-Segment elevation myocardial infarctION patients: the COMPASSION study. Platelets. 2015;26:570–572. doi: 10.3109/09537104.2014.959914
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Bonaca MP, Bhatt DL, Cohen M, Steg PG, Storey RF, Jensen EC, Magnani G, Bansilal S, Fish MP, Im K, et al. ; PEGASUS-TIMI 54 Steering Committee and Investigators. Long-term use of ticagrelor in patients with prior myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1791–1800. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1500857
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. Cannon CP, Blazing MA, Giugliano RP, McCagg A, White JA, Theroux P, Darius H, Lewis BS, Ophuis TO, Jukema JW, et al. ; IMPROVE-IT Investigators. Ezetimibe added to statin therapy after acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2387–2397. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1410489
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. Ray KK, Colhoun HM, Szarek M, Baccara-Dinet M, Bhatt DL, Bittner VA, Budaj AJ, Diaz R, Goodman SG, Hanotin C, et al. ; ODYSSEY OUTCOMES Committees and Investigators. Effects of alirocumab on cardiovascular and metabolic outcomes after acute coronary syndrome in patients with or without diabetes: a prespecified analysis of the ODYSSEY OUTCOMES randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2019;7:618–628.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Miller M, Brinton EA, Jacobson TA, Ketchum SB, Doyle RT Jr, Juliano RA, Jiao L, Granowitz C, et al. ; REDUCE-IT Investigators. Cardiovascular risk reduction with icosapent ethyl for hypertriglyceridemia. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:11–22. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1812792
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, Mosenzon O, Kato ET, Cahn A, Silverman MG, Zelniker TA, Kuder JF, Murphy SA, et al. ; DECLARE–TIMI 58 Investigators. Dapagliflozin and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:347–357. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1812389
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K, Kristensen P, Mann JF, Nauck MA, Nissen SE, Pocock S, Poulter NR, Ravn LS, et al. ; LEADER Steering Committee; LEADER Trial Investigators. Liraglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:311–322. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1603827
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
18. Hernandez AF, Green JB, Janmohamed S, D’Agostino RB Sr, Granger CB, Jones NP, Leiter LA, Rosenberg AE, Sigmon KN, Somerville MC, et al. ; Harmony Outcomes Committees and Investigators. Albiglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease (Harmony Outcomes): a double-blind, randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2018;392:1519–1529. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)32261-X
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
19. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, de Zeeuw D, Fulcher G, Erondu N, Shaw W, Law G, Desai M, Matthews DR; CANVAS Program Collaborative Group. Canagliflozin and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:644–657. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1611925
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
20. Arnold SV, Inzucchi SE, Tang F, McGuire DK, Mehta SN, Maddox TM, Goyal A, Sperling LS, Einhorn D, Wong ND, et al. 
Real-world use and modeled impact of glucose-lowering therapies evaluated in recent cardiovascular outcomes trials: An NCDR ® Research to Practice project. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2017;24:1637–1645. doi: 10.1177/2047487317729252
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
21. Arnold SV, de Lemos JA, Rosenson RS, Ballantyne CM, Liu Y, Mues KE, Alam S, Elliott-Davey M, Bhatt DL, Cannon CP, et al. ; on behalf of the GOULD Investigators. Use of guideline-recommended risk reduction strategies among patients with diabetes and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 2019;140:618–620. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.041730
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
22. Nassif ME, Kosiborod M. Are we ready to bell the cat? A call for cardiologists to embrace glucose-lowering therapies proven to improve cardiovascular outcomes. Circulation. 2018;138:4–6. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.022680
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
23. Yeh RW, Secemsky EA, Kereiakes DJ, Normand SL, Gershlick AH, Cohen DJ, Spertus JA, Steg PG, Cutlip DE, Rinaldi MJ, et al. ; DAPT Study Investigators. Development and validation of a prediction rule for benefit and harm of dual antiplatelet therapy beyond 1 year after percutaneous coronary intervention. JAMA. 2016;315:1735–1749. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.3775
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
24. Grant PJ. Diabetes mellitus as a prothrombotic condition. J Intern Med. 2007;262:157–172.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
25. Barsness GW, Holmes DR Jr, Gersh BJ. Integrated management of patients with diabetes mellitus and ischemic heart disease: PCI, CABG, and medical therapy. Curr Probl Cardiol. 2005;30:583–617.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
26. Sobel BE, Hardison RM, Genuth S, Brooks MM, McBane RD 3rd, Schneider DJ, Pratley RE, Huber K, Wolk R, Krishnaswami A, et al. ; for the BARI 2D Investigators. Profibrinolytic, antithrombotic, and antiinflammatory effects of an insulin-sensitizing strategy in patients in the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial. Circulation. 2011;124:695–703. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.014860
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
27. Lee JH, Lee R, Hwang MH, Hamilton MT, Park Y. The effects of exercise on vascular endothelial function in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2018;10:15. doi: 10.1186/s13098-018-0316-7
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
28. De Vriese AS, Verbeuren TJ, Van de Voorde J, Lameire NH, Vanhoutte PM. Endothelial dysfunction in diabetes. Br J Pharmacol. 2000;130:963–974.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
29. Maria Assunta P, Sara G, Carmela N, Maria Rosaria C, Monica M. Endothelial dysfunction in diabetes: from mechanisms to therapeutic targets. Curr Med Chem. 2009;16:94–112.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
30. Davi G, Catalano I, Averna M, Notarbartolo A, Strano A, Ciabattoni G, Patrono C. Thromboxane biosynthesis and platelet function in type II diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med. 1990;322:1769–1774.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
31. Ferroni P, Basili S, Falco A, Davì G. Platelet activation in type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Thromb Haemost. 2004;2:1282–1291. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2004.00836.x
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
32. Angiolillo DJ, Jakubowski JA, Ferreiro JL, Tello-Montoliu A, Rollini F, Franchi F, Ueno M, Darlington A, Desai B, Moser BA, et al. 
Impaired responsiveness to the platelet P2Y12 receptor antagonist clopidogrel in patients with type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:1005–1014. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.06.1170
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
33. Davi G, Gresele P, Violi F, Basili S, Catalano M, Giammarresi C, Volpato R, Nenci GG, Ciabattoni G, Patrono C. Diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertension but not vascular disease per se are associated with persistent platelet activation in vivo: evidence derived from the study of peripheral arterial disease. Circulation. 1997;96:69–75.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
34. Tschoepe D, Roesen P, Esser J, Schwippert B, Nieuwenhuis HK, Kehrel B, Gries FA. Large platelets circulate in an activated state in diabetes mellitus. Semin Thromb Hemost. 1991;17:433–438. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-1002650
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
35. Grove EL, Hvas AM, Kristensen SD. Immature platelets in patients with acute coronary syndromes. Thromb Haemost. 2009;101:151–156.
[ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
36. Tschoepe D, Roesen P, Kaufmann L, Schauseil S, Kehrel B, Ostermann H, Gries FA. Evidence for abnormal platelet glycoprotein expression in diabetes mellitus. Eur J Clin Invest. 1990;20:166–170. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2362.1990.tb02264.x
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
37. Keating FK, Sobel BE, Schneider DJ. Effects of increased concentrations of glucose on platelet reactivity in healthy subjects and in patients with and without diabetes mellitus. Am J Cardiol. 2003;92:1362–1365.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
38. Tschoepe D, Driesch E, Schwippert B, Nieuwenhuis H-K, Gries FA. Exposure of adhesion molecules on activated platelets in patients with newly diagnosed IDDM is not normalized by near-normoglycemia. Diabetes. 1995;44:890–894.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
39. Osende JI, Badimon JJ, Fuster V, Herson P, Rabito P, Vidhun R, Zaman A, Rodriguez OJ, Lev EI, Rauch U, et al. 
Blood thrombogenicity in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients is associated with glycemic control. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;38:1307–1312. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(01)01555-8
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
40. Duzenli MA, Ozdemir K, Aygul N, Soylu A, Tokac M. Comparison of increased aspirin dose versus combined aspirin plus clopidogrel therapy in patients with diabetes mellitus and coronary heart disease and impaired antiplatelet response to low-dose aspirin. Am J Cardiol. 2008;102:396–400. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.03.074
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
41. Price MJ, Nayak KR, Barker CM, Kandzari DE, Teirstein PS. Predictors of heightened platelet reactivity despite dual-antiplatelet therapy in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol. 2009;103:1339–1343. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2009.01.341
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
42. Mangiacapra F, Patti G, Peace A, Gatto L, Vizzi V, Ricottini E, D’Ambrosio A, Muller O, Barbato E, Di Sciascio G. Comparison of platelet reactivity and periprocedural outcomes in patients with versus without diabetes mellitus and treated with clopidogrel and percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol. 2010;106:619–623. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2010.04.015
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
43. Angiolillo DJ, Bernardo E, Capodanno D, Vivas D, Sabaté M, Ferreiro JL, Ueno M, Jimenez-Quevedo P, Alfonso F, Bass TA, et al. 
Impact of chronic kidney disease on platelet function profiles in diabetes mellitus patients with coronary artery disease taking dual antiplatelet therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:1139–1146. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.10.043
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
44. Ferreiro JL, Angiolillo DJ. Diabetes and antiplatelet therapy in acute coronary syndrome. Circulation. 2011;123:798–813. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.913376
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
45. Capodanno D, Patel A, Dharmashankar K, Ferreiro JL, Ueno M, Kodali M, Tomasello SD, Capranzano P, Seecheran N, Darlington A, et al. 
Pharmacodynamic effects of different aspirin dosing regimens in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients with coronary artery disease. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2011;4:180–187. doi: 10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.110.96018
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
46. Bethel MA, Harrison P, Sourij H, Sun Y, Tucker L, Kennedy I, White S, Hill L, Oulhaj A, Coleman RL, et al. 
Randomized controlled trial comparing impact on platelet reactivity of twice-daily with once-daily aspirin in people with type 2 diabetes. Diabet Med. 2016;33:224–230. doi: 10.1111/dme.12828
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
47. CAPRIE Steering Committee. A randomised, blinded, trial of clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients at risk of ischaemic events (CAPRIE). Lancet. 1996;348:1329–39. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(96)09457-3
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
48. Bhatt DL, Marso SP, Hirsch AT, Ringleb PA, Hacke W, Topol EJ. Amplified benefit of clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients with diabetes mellitus. Am J Cardiol. 2002;90:625–628. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9149(02)02567-5
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
49. Mauri L, Kereiakes DJ, Yeh RW, Driscoll-Shempp P, Cutlip DE, Steg PG, Normand SL, Braunwald E, Wiviott SD, Cohen DJ, et al. ; DAPT Study Investigators. Twelve or 30 months of dual antiplatelet therapy after drug-eluting stents. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:2155–2166. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1409312
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
50. Bhatt DL, Fox KA, Hacke W, Berger PB, Black HR, Boden WE, Cacoub P, Cohen EA, Creager MA, Easton JD, et al. ; CHARISMA Investigators. Clopidogrel and aspirin versus aspirin alone for the prevention of atherothrombotic events. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1706–1717. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa060989
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
51. Bhatt DL, Flather MD, Hacke W, Berger PB, Black HR, Boden WE, Cacoub P, Cohen EA, Creager MA, Easton JD, et al. ; CHARISMA Investigators. Patients with prior myocardial infarction, stroke, or symptomatic peripheral arterial disease in the CHARISMA trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:1982–1988. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.03.025
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
52. Bhatt DL, Bonaca MP, Bansilal S, Angiolillo DJ, Cohen M, Storey RF, Im K, Murphy SA, Held P, Braunwald E, et al. 
Reduction in ischemic events with ticagrelor in diabetic patients with prior myocardial infarction in PEGASUS-TIMI 54. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:2732–2740. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.03.529
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
53. Bhatt DL, Fox K, Harrington RA, Leiter LA, Mehta SR, Simon T, Andersson M, Himmelmann A, Ridderstråle W, Held C, et al. ; THEMIS Steering Committee. Rationale, design and baseline characteristics of the Effect of Ticagrelor on Health Outcomes in Diabetes Mellitus Patients Intervention Study. Clin Cardiol. 2019;42:498–505. doi: 10.1002/clc.23164
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
54. Steg PG, Bhatt DL, Simon T, Fox K, Mehta SR, Harrington RA, Held C, Andersson M, Himmelmann A, Ridderstråle W, et al. ; THEMIS Steering Committee and Investigators. Ticagrelor in patients with stable coronary disease and diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:1309–1320. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1908077
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
55. Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Mehta SR, Leiter LA, Simon T, Fox K, Held C, Andersson M, Himmelmann A, Ridderstråle W, et al. ; THEMIS Steering Committee and Investigators. Ticagrelor in patients with diabetes and stable coronary artery disease with a history of previous percutaneous coronary intervention (THEMIS-PCI): a phase 3, placebo-controlled, randomised trial. Lancet. 2019;394:1169–1180. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(19)31887-2
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
56. Cavender MA, Scirica BM, Bonaca MP, Angiolillo DJ, Dalby AJ, Dellborg M, Morais J, Murphy SA, Ophuis TO, Tendera M, et al. 
Vorapaxar in patients with diabetes mellitus and previous myocardial infarction: findings from the Thrombin Receptor Antagonist in Secondary Prevention of Atherothrombotic Ischemic Events-TIMI 50 trial. Circulation. 2015;131:1047–1053. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.013774
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
57. Connolly SJ, Eikelboom JW, Bosch J, Dagenais G, Dyal L, Lanas F, Metsarinne K, O’Donnell M, Dans AL, Ha JW, et al. ; COMPASS Investigators. Rivaroxaban with or without aspirin in patients with stable coronary artery disease: an international, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2018;391:205–218. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32458-3
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
58. Anand SS, Bosch J, Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Diaz R, Widimsky P, Aboyans V, Alings M, Kakkar AK, Keltai K, et al. ; COMPASS Investigators. Rivaroxaban with or without aspirin in patients with stable peripheral or carotid artery disease: an international, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2018;391:219–229. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32409-1
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
59. Anand SS, Caron F, Eikelboom JW, Bosch J, Dyal L, Aboyans V, Abola MT, Branch KRH, Keltai K, Bhatt DL, et al. 
Major adverse limb events and mortality in patients with peripheral artery disease: the COMPASS trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:2306–2315. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.03.008
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
60. Price MJ, Endemann S, Gollapudi RR, Valencia R, Stinis CT, Levisay JP, Ernst A, Sawhney NS, Schatz RA, Teirstein PS. Prognostic significance of post-clopidogrel platelet reactivity assessed by a point-of-care assay on thrombotic events after drug-eluting stent implantation. Eur Heart J. 2008;29:992–1000. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehn046
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
61. Trenk D, Stone GW, Gawaz M, Kastrati A, Angiolillo DJ, Müller U, Richardt G, Jakubowski JA, Neumann FJ. A randomized trial of prasugrel versus clopidogrel in patients with high platelet reactivity on clopidogrel after elective percutaneous coronary intervention with implantation of drug-eluting stents: results of the TRIGGER-PCI (Testing Platelet Reactivity In Patients Undergoing Elective Stent Placement on Clopidogrel to Guide Alternative Therapy With Prasugrel) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:2159–2164. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.02.026
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
62. Collet JP, Cuisset T, Rangé G, Cayla G, Elhadad S, Pouillot C, Henry P, Motreff P, Carrié D, Boueri Z, et al. ; ARCTIC Investigators. Bedside monitoring to adjust antiplatelet therapy for coronary stenting. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2100–2109. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1209979
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
63. Fox CS, Golden SH, Anderson C, Bray GA, Burke LE, de Boer IH, Deedwania P, Eckel RH, Ershow AG, Fradkin J, et al. ; on behalf of the American Heart Association Diabetes Committee of the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health, Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research, and the American Diabetes Association. Update on prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus in light of recent evidence: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association and the American Diabetes Association. Circulation. 2015;132:691–718. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000230
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
64. Deedwania PC. Blood pressure control in diabetes mellitus: is lower always better, and how low should it go?
Circulation. 2011;123:2776–2778. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.033704
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
65. Deedwania P. The ongoing saga of optimal blood pressure level in patients with diabetes mellitus and coronary artery disease. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018;7:e010752. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.118.010752
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
66. Cooper-DeHoff RM, Gong Y, Handberg EM, Bavry AA, Denardo SJ, Bakris GL, Pepine CJ. Tight blood pressure control and cardiovascular outcomes among hypertensive patients with diabetes and coronary artery disease. JAMA. 2010;304:61–68. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.884
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
67. Vidal-Petiot E, Ford I, Greenlaw N, Ferrari R, Fox KM, Tardif JC, Tendera M, Tavazzi L, Bhatt DL, Steg PG; CLARIFY Investigators. Cardiovascular event rates and mortality according to achieved systolic and diastolic blood pressure in patients with stable coronary artery disease: an international cohort study. Lancet. 2016;388:2142–2152. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31326-5
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
68. Böhm M, Schumacher H, Teo KK, Lonn EM, Mahfoud F, Mann JFE, Mancia G, Redon J, Schmieder RE, Sliwa K, et al. 
Achieved blood pressure and cardiovascular outcomes in high-risk patients: results from ONTARGET and TRANSCEND trials. Lancet. 2017;389:2226–2237. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30754-7
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
69. Bangalore S, Kumar S, Lobach I, Messerli FH. Blood pressure targets in subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus/impaired fasting glucose: observations from traditional and bayesian random-effects meta-analyses of randomized trials. Circulation. 2011;123:2799–2810, 9 p following 810. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.016337
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
70. Williams B, Mancia G, Spiering W, Agabiti Rosei E, Azizi M, Burnier M, Clement DL, Coca A, de Simone G, Dominiczak A, et al. ; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2018 ESC/ESH guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3021–3104. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehy339
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
71. Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, Whelton PK, Snyder JK, Sink KM, Rocco MV, Reboussin DM, Rahman M, Oparil S, Lewis CE, et al. ; SPRINT Research Group. A randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2103–2116. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1511939
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
72. ACCORD Study Group, Cushman WC, Evans GW, Byington RP, Goff DC Jr, Grimm RH Jr, Cutler JA, Simons-Morton DG, Basile JN, Corson MA, Probstfield JL, et al. 
Effects of intensive blood-pressure control in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1575–1585. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1001286
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
73. Bundy JD, Li C, Stuchlik P, Bu X, Kelly TN, Mills KT, He H, Chen J, Whelton PK, He J. Systolic blood pressure reduction and risk of cardiovascular disease and mortality: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:775–781. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2017.1421
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
73a. Flint AC, Conell C, Ren X, Banki NM, Chan SL, Rao VA, Melles RB, Bhatt DL. Effect of systolic and diastolic blood pressure on cardiovascular outcomes. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:243–251.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
74. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, Neal B, Woodward M, Billot L, Harrap S, Poulter N, Marre M, Cooper M, et al. ; ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Effects of a fixed combination of perindopril and indapamide on macrovascular and microvascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (the ADVANCE trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;370:829–840. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61303-8
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
75. White WB, Jalil F, Cushman WC, Bakris GL, Bergenstal R, Heller SR, Liu Y, Mehta C, Zannad F, Cannon CP. Average clinician-measured blood pressures and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and ischemic heart disease in the EXAMINE trial. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018;7:e009114. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.118.009114
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
76. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, Casey DE Jr, Collins KJ, Dennison Himmelfarb C, DePalma SM, Gidding S, Jamerson KA, Jones DW, et al. 
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2018;138:e484–e594. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000596
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
77. Rosendorff C, Lackland DT, Allison M, Aronow WS, Black HR, Blumenthal RS, Cannon CP, de Lemos JA, Elliott WJ, Findeiss L, et al. ; on behalf of the American Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and American Society of Hypertension. Treatment of hypertension in patients with coronary artery disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and American Society of Hypertension [published correction appears in Circulation . 2016;134:e260]. Circulation. 2015;131:e435–e470. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000207
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
78. Manisty CH, Hughes AD. Meta-analysis of the comparative effects of different classes of antihypertensive agents on brachial and central systolic blood pressure, and augmentation index. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2013;75:79–92. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2012.04342.x
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
79. Catalá-López F, Macías Saint-Gerons D, González-Bermejo D, Rosano GM, Davis BR, Ridao M, Zaragoza A, Montero-Corominas D, Tobías A, de la Fuente-Honrubia C, et al. 
Cardiovascular and renal outcomes of renin-angiotensin system blockade in adult patients with diabetes mellitus: a systematic review with network meta-analyses. PLoS Med. 2016;13:e1001971. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001971
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
80. Dagenais GR, Pogue J, Fox K, Simoons ML, Yusuf S. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors in stable vascular disease without left ventricular systolic dysfunction or heart failure: a combined analysis of three trials. Lancet. 2006;368:581–588. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69201-5
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
81. Effects of ramipril on cardiovascular and microvascular outcomes in people with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE study and MICRO-HOPE substudy: Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators. Lancet. 2000;355:253–259.
[ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
82. Indications for ACE inhibitors in the early treatment of acute myocardial infarction: systematic overview of individual data from 100,000 patients in randomized trials: ACE Inhibitor Myocardial Infarction Collaborative Group. Circulation. 1998;97:2202–2212.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
83. Effect of enalapril on survival in patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fractions and congestive heart failure: the SOLVD Investigators. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:293–302.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
84. Pfeffer MA, McMurray JJ, Velazquez EJ, Rouleau JL, Køber L, Maggioni AP, Solomon SD, Swedberg K, Van de Werf F, White H, et al. ; Valsartan in Acute Myocardial Infarction Trial Investigators. Valsartan, captopril, or both in myocardial infarction complicated by heart failure, left ventricular dysfunction, or both. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1893–1906. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa032292
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
85. Standl E, Erbach M, Schnell O. What should be the antihypertensive drug of choice in diabetic patients and should we avoid drugs that increase glucose levels? Pro and cons. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2012;28(suppl 2):60–66. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.2355 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
86. ALLHAT Officers and Coordinators for the ALLHAT Collaborative Research Group; the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial. Major outcomes in high-risk hypertensive patients randomized to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel blocker vs diuretic: the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). JAMA. 2002;288:2981–2997. doi: 10.1001/jama.288.23.2981
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
87. Kostis JB, Wilson AC, Freudenberger RS, Cosgrove NM, Pressel SL, Davis BR; SHEP Collaborative Research Group. Long-term effect of diuretic-based therapy on fatal outcomes in subjects with isolated systolic hypertension with and without diabetes. Am J Cardiol. 2005;95:29–35. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2004.08.059
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
88. Verdecchia P, Reboldi G, Angeli F, Borgioni C, Gattobigio R, Filippucci L, Norgiolini S, Bracco C, Porcellati C. Adverse prognostic significance of new diabetes in treated hypertensive subjects. Hypertension. 2004;43:963–969. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000125726.92964.ab
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
89. Fernet M, Beckerman B, Abreu P, Lins K, Vincent J, Burgess E. Antihypertensive effect of the mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist eplerenone: a pooled analysis of patient-level data from comparative trials using regulatory-approved doses. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2018;14:233–246. doi: 10.2147/VHRM.S170141
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
90. Pitt B, Remme W, Zannad F, Neaton J, Martinez F, Roniker B, Bittman R, Hurley S, Kleiman J, Gatlin M; Eplerenone Post-Acute Myocardial Infarction Heart Failure Efficacy and Survival Study Investigators. Eplerenone, a selective aldosterone blocker, in patients with left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1309–1321. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa030207
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
91. Pitt B, Zannad F, Remme WJ, Cody R, Castaigne A, Perez A, Palensky J, Wittes J. The effect of spironolactone on morbidity and mortality in patients with severe heart failure: Randomized Aldactone Evaluation Study Investigators. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:709–717. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199909023411001
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
92. Ettehad D, Emdin CA, Kiran A, Anderson SG, Callender T, Emberson J, Chalmers J, Rodgers A, Rahimi K. Blood pressure lowering for prevention of cardiovascular disease and death: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2016;387:957–967. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)01225-8
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
93. Carlberg B, Samuelsson O, Lindholm LH. Atenolol in hypertension: is it a wise choice?
Lancet. 2004;364:1684–1689. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)17355-8
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
94. Bangalore S, Steg G, Deedwania P, Crowley K, Eagle KA, Goto S, Ohman EM, Cannon CP, Smith SC, Zeymer U, et al. ; REACH Registry Investigators. β-Blocker use and clinical outcomes in stable outpatients with and without coronary artery disease. JAMA. 2012;308:1340–1349. doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.12559
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
95. Bangalore S, Makani H, Radford M, Thakur K, Toklu B, Katz SD, DiNicolantonio JJ, Devereaux PJ, Alexander KP, Wetterslev J, et al. 
Clinical outcomes with β-blockers for myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am J Med. 2014;127:939–953. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2014.05.032
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
96. Bakris GL, Fonseca V, Katholi RE, McGill JB, Messerli FH, Phillips RA, Raskin P, Wright JT Jr, Oakes R, Lukas MA, et al. ; GEMINI Investigators. Metabolic effects of carvedilol vs metoprolol in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;292:2227–2236. doi: 10.1001/jama.292.18.2227
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
97. Bangalore S, Parkar S, Grossman E, Messerli FH. A meta-analysis of 94,492 patients with hypertension treated with beta blockers to determine the risk of new-onset diabetes mellitus. Am J Cardiol. 2007;100:1254–1262. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2007.05.057
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
98. Schmidt AC, Graf C, Brixius K, Scholze J. Blood pressure-lowering effect of nebivolol in hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: the YESTONO study. Clin Drug Investig. 2007;27:841–849. doi: 10.2165/00044011-200727120-00006 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
99. Rana JS, Liu JY, Moffet HH, Solomon MD, Go AS, Jaffe MG, Karter AJ. Metabolic dyslipidemia and risk of coronary heart disease in 28,318 adults with diabetes mellitus and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol <100 mg/dl. Am J Cardiol. 2015;116:1700–1704. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2015.08.039
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
100. Vergès B. Pathophysiology of diabetic dyslipidaemia: where are we?
Diabetologia. 2015;58:886–899. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3525-8
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
101. Fruchart JC, Sacks FM, Hermans MP, Assmann G, Brown WV, Ceska R, Chapman MJ, Dodson PM, Fioretto P, Ginsberg HN, et al. ; Residual Risk Reduction Initiative (R3I). The Residual Risk Reduction Initiative: a call to action to reduce residual vascular risk in dyslipidaemic patient. Diab Vasc Dis Res. 2008;5:319–335. doi: 10.3132/dvdr.2008.046
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
102. Collins R, Armitage J, Parish S, Sleigh P, Peto R; Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of cholesterol-lowering with simvastatin in 5963 people with diabetes: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2003;361:2005–2016. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(03)13636-7
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
103. Long-Term Intervention with Pravastatin in Ischaemic Disease Study Group. Prevention of cardiovascular events and death with pravastatin in patients with coronary heart disease and a broad range of initial cholesterol levels. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:1349–1357.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
104. Sacks FM, Pfeffer MA, Moye LA, Rouleau JL, Rutherford JD, Cole TG, Brown L, Warnica JW, Arnold JM, Wun CC, et al. 
The effect of pravastatin on coronary events after myocardial infarction in patients with average cholesterol levels: Cholesterol and Recurrent Events Trial investigators. N Engl J Med. 1996;335:1001–1009. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199610033351401
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
105. Brugts JJ, Yetgin T, Hoeks SE, Gotto AM, Shepherd J, Westendorp RG, de Craen AJ, Knopp RH, Nakamura H, Ridker P, et al. 
The benefits of statins in people without established cardiovascular disease but with cardiovascular risk factors: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2009;338:b2376. doi: 10.1136/bmj.b2376
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
106. Colhoun HM, Betteridge DJ, Durrington PN, Hitman GA, Neil HA, Livingstone SJ, Thomason MJ, Mackness MI, Charlton-Menys V, Fuller JH; CARDS Investigators. Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease with atorvastatin in type 2 diabetes in the Collaborative Atorvastatin Diabetes Study (CARDS): multicentre randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;364:685–696. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16895-5
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
107. Costa J, Borges M, David C, Vaz Carneiro A. Efficacy of lipid lowering drug treatment for diabetic and non-diabetic patients: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2006;332:1115–1124. doi: 10.1136/bmj.38793.468449.AE
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
108. Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of cholesterol lowering with simvastatin in 20,536 high-risk individuals: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2002;360:7–22. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)09327-3
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
109. LaRosa JC, Grundy SM, Waters DD, Shear C, Barter P, Fruchart JC, Gotto AM, Greten H, Kastelein JJ, Shepherd J, et al. ; Treating to New Targets (TNT) Investigators. Intensive lipid lowering with atorvastatin in patients with stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:1425–1435. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa050461
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
110. Leiter LA, Betteridge DJ, Farnier M, Guyton JR, Lin J, Shah A, Johnson-Levonas AO, Brudi P. Lipid-altering efficacy and safety profile of combination therapy with ezetimibe/statin vs. statin monotherapy in patients with and without diabetes: an analysis of pooled data from 27 clinical trials. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2011;13:615–628. doi: 10.1111/j.1463-1326.2011.01383.x
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
111. Pyŏrälä K, Pedersen TR, Kjekshus J, Faergeman O, Olsson AG, Thorgeirsson G. Cholesterol lowering with simvastatin improves prognosis of diabetic patients with coronary heart disease: a subgroup analysis of the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S). Diabetes Care. 1997;20:614–620. doi: 10.2337/diacare.20.4.614
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
112. Shepherd J, Barter P, Carmena R, Deedwania P, Fruchart JC, Haffner S, Hsia J, Breazna A, LaRosa J, Grundy S, et al. 
Effect of lowering LDL cholesterol substantially below currently recommended levels in patients with coronary heart disease and diabetes: the Treating to New Targets (TNT) study. Diabetes Care. 2006;29:1220–1226. doi: 10.2337/dc05-2465
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
113. Baigent C, Keech A, Kearney PM, Blackwell L, Buck G, Pollicino C, Kirby A, Sourjina T, Peto R, Collins R, et al. ; Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaborators. Efficacy and safety of cholesterol-lowering treatment: prospective meta-analysis of data from 90,056 participants in 14 randomised trials of statins. Lancet. 2005;366:1267–1278. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67394-1
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
114. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists Collaborators, Kearney PM, Blackwell L, Collins R, Keech A, Simes J, Peto R, Armitage J, Baigent C. Efficacy of cholesterol-lowering therapy in 18,686 people with diabetes in 14 randomised trials of statins: a meta-analysis. Lancet. 2008;371:117–125. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60104-X
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
115. Sattar N, Preiss D, Murray HM, Welsh P, Buckley BM, de Craen AJ, Seshasai SR, McMurray JJ, Freeman DJ, Jukema JW, et al. 
Statins and risk of incident diabetes: a collaborative meta-analysis of randomised statin trials. Lancet. 2010;375:735–742. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61965-6
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
116. Elliott WJ, Meyer PM. Incident diabetes in clinical trials of antihypertensive drugs: a network meta-analysis. Lancet. 2007;369:201–207. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60108-1
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
117. Waters DD, Ho JE, Boekholdt SM, DeMicco DA, Kastelein JJ, Messig M, Breazna A, Pedersen TR. Cardiovascular event reduction versus new-onset diabetes during atorvastatin therapy: effect of baseline risk factors for diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:148–152. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.09.042
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
118. Kearney PM, Blackwell L, Collins R, Keech A, Simes J, Peto R, Armitage J, Baigent C; Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaborators. Efficacy of cholesterol-lowering therapy in 18,686 people with diabetes in 14 randomised trials of statins: a meta-analysis. Lancet. 2008;371:117–125. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60104-X
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
119. Erqou S, Lee CC, Adler AI. Statins and glycaemic control in individuals with diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetologia. 2014;57:2444–2452. doi: 10.1007/s00125-014-3374-x
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
120. Giugliano RP, Cannon CP, Blazing MA, Nicolau JC, Corbalán R, Špinar J, Park JG, White JA, Bohula EA, Braunwald E; on behalf of the IMPROVE-IT (Improved Reduction of Outcomes: Vytorin Efficacy International Trial) Investigators. Benefit of adding ezetimibe to statin therapy on cardiovascular outcomes and safety in patients with versus without diabetes mellitus: results from IMPROVE-IT (Improved Reduction of Outcomes: Vytorin Efficacy International Trial). Circulation. 2018;137:1571–1582. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.030950
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
121. Landmesser U, Chapman MJ, Stock JK, Amarenco P, Belch JJF, Borén J, Farnier M, Ference BA, Gielen S, Graham I, et al. 
2017 Update of ESC/EAS Task Force on Practical Clinical Guidance for proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibition in patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease or in familial hypercholesterolaemia. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:1131–1143. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx549
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
122. Lloyd-Jones DM, Morris PB, Ballantyne CM, Birtcher KK, Daly DD Jr, DePalma SM, Minissian MB, Orringer CE, Smith SC Jr. 2017 Focused update of the 2016 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on the role of non-statin therapies for LDL-cholesterol lowering in the management of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology Task Force on Expert Consensus Decision Pathways. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:1785–1822. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.07.745
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
123. Anderson TJ, Grégoire J, Pearson GJ, Barry AR, Couture P, Dawes M, Francis GA, Genest J Jr, Grover S, Gupta M, et al. 
2016 Canadian Cardiovascular Society guidelines for the management of dyslipidemia for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in the adult. Can J Cardiol. 2016;32:1263–1282. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2016.07.510
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
124. Diabetes Canada Clinical Practice Guidelines Expert Committee, Mancini GBJ, Hegele RA, Leiter LA. Dyslipidemia. Can J Diabetes. 2018;42(suppl 1):S178–S185.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
125. Sabatine MS, Giugliano RP, Keech AC, Honarpour N, Wiviott SD, Murphy SA, Kuder JF, Wang H, Liu T, Wasserman SM, et al. ; FOURIER Steering Committee and Investigators. Evolocumab and clinical outcomes in patients with cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:1713–1722. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1615664
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
126. Schwartz GG, Steg PG, Szarek M, Bhatt DL, Bittner VA, Diaz R, Edelberg JM, Goodman SG, Hanotin C, Harrington RA, et al. ; ODYSSEY OUTCOMES Committees and Investigators. Alirocumab and cardiovascular outcomes after acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:2097–2107. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1801174
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
127. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists Collaboration, Baigent C, Blackwell L, Emberson J, Holland LE, Reith C, Bhala N, Peto R, Barnes EH, Keech A, Simes J, et al. 
Efficacy and safety of more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: a meta-analysis of data from 170,000 participants in 26 randomised trials. Lancet. 2010;376:1670–1681. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61350-5
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
128. Landray MJ, Haynes R, Hopewell JC, Parish S, Aung T, Tomson J, Wallendszus K, Craig M, Jiang L, Collins R, et al. ; HPS2-THRIVE Collaborative Group. Effects of extended-release niacin with laropiprant in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:203–212. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1300955
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
129. Boden WE, Probstfield JL, Anderson T, Chaitman BR, Desvignes-Nickens P, Koprowicz K, McBride R, Teo K, Weintraub W; AIM-HIGH Investigators. Niacin in patients with low HDL cholesterol levels receiving intensive statin therapy. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2255–2267. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1107579
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
130. Ginsberg HN, Elam MB, Lovato LC, Crouse JR 3rd, Leiter LA, Linz P, Friedewald WT, Buse JB, Gerstein HC, Probstfield J, et al. ; ACCORD Study Group. Effects of combination lipid therapy in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1563–1574. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1001282
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
131. Keech A, Simes RJ, Barter P, Best J, Scott R, Taskinen MR, Forder P, Pillai A, Davis T, Glasziou P, et al. ; FIELD Study Investigators. Effects of long-term fenofibrate therapy on cardiovascular events in 9795 people with type 2 diabetes mellitus (the FIELD study): randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;366:1849–1861. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67667-2
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
132. Popoff F, Balaciano G, Bardach A, Comandé D, Irazola V, Catalano HN, Izcovich A. Omega 3 fatty acid supplementation after myocardial infarction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2019;19:136. doi: 10.1186/s12872-019-1086-3
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
133. Scott R, O’Brien R, Fulcher G, Pardy C, D’Emden M, Tse D, Taskinen MR, Ehnholm C, Keech A; Fenofibrate Intervention and Event Lowering in Diabetes (FIELD) Study Investigators. Effects of fenofibrate treatment on cardiovascular disease risk in 9,795 individuals with type 2 diabetes and various components of the metabolic syndrome: the Fenofibrate Intervention and Event Lowering in Diabetes (FIELD) study. Diabetes Care. 2009;32:493–498. doi: 10.2337/dc08-1543
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
134. Koskinen P, Mänttäri M, Manninen V, Huttunen JK, Heinonen OP, Frick MH. Coronary heart disease incidence in NIDDM patients in the Helsinki Heart Study. Diabetes Care. 1992;15:820–825. doi: 10.2337/diacare.15.7.820
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
135. Goldenberg I, Goldbourt U, Boyko V, Behar S, Reicher-Reiss H; BIP Study Group. Relation between on-treatment increments in serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and cardiac mortality in patients with coronary heart disease (from the Bezafibrate Infarction Prevention trial). Am J Cardiol. 2006;97:466–471. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.09.078
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
136. Newman JD, Schwartzbard AZ, Weintraub HS, Goldberg IJ, Berger JS. Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in diabetes mellitus. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:883–893. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.07.001
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
137. Njølstad I, Arnesen E, Lund-Larsen PG. Smoking, serum lipids, blood pressure, and sex differences in myocardial infarction: a 12-year follow-up of the Finnmark Study. Circulation. 1996;93:450–456. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.93.3.450
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
138. Jee SH, Suh I, Kim IS, Appel LJ. Smoking and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in men with low levels of serum cholesterol: the Korea Medical Insurance Corporation Study. JAMA. 1999;282:2149–2155. doi: 10.1001/jama.282.22.2149
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
139. Prescott E, Hippe M, Schnohr P, Hein HO, Vestbo J. Smoking and risk of myocardial infarction in women and men: longitudinal population study. BMJ. 1998;316:1043–1047. doi: 10.1136/bmj.316.7137.1043
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
140. Rea TD, Heckbert SR, Kaplan RC, Smith NL, Lemaitre RN, Psaty BM. Smoking status and risk for recurrent coronary events after myocardial infarction. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137:494–500. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-137-6-200209170-00009
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
141. Al-Delaimy WK, Manson JE, Solomon CG, Kawachi I, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC, Hu FB. Smoking and risk of coronary heart disease among women with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Arch Intern Med. 2002;162:273–279. doi: 10.1001/archinte.162.3.273
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
142. Clair C, Rigotti NA, Meigs JB. Smoking cessation, weight change, and risk of cardiovascular disease–reply. JAMA. 2013;310:323. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.7945 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
143. Look Ahead Research Group; Wing RR, Bolin P, Brancati FL, Bray GA, Clark JM, Coday M, Crow RS, Curtis JM, Egan CM, Espeland MA, et al. 
Cardiovascular effects of intensive lifestyle intervention in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:145–154. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1212914
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
144. Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study Research Group; Orchard TJ, Temprosa M, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, Goldberg RB, Mather KJ, Marcovina SM, Montez M, Ratner RE, Saudek CD, et al. 
Long-term effects of the Diabetes Prevention Program interventions on cardiovascular risk factors: a report from the DPP Outcomes Study. Diabet Med. 2013;30:46–55. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2012.03750.x
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
145. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvadó J, Covas MI, Corella D, Arós F, Gómez-Gracia E, Ruiz-Gutiérrez V, Fiol M, Lapetra J, et al. ; PREDIMED Study Investigators. Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease with a Mediterranean diet. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1279–1290. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1200303
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
146. Esposito K, Maiorino MI, Bellastella G, Chiodini P, Panagiotakos D, Giugliano D. A journey into a Mediterranean diet and type 2 diabetes: a systematic review with meta-analyses. BMJ Open. 2015;5:e008222. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008222 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
147. Sacks FM, Carey VJ, Anderson CA, Miller ER 3rd, Copeland T, Charleston J, Harshfield BJ, Laranjo N, McCarron P, Swain J, et al. 
Effects of high vs low glycemic index of dietary carbohydrate on cardiovascular disease risk factors and insulin sensitivity: the OmniCarb randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2014;312:2531–2541. doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.16658
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
148. Cummings DM, Kirian K, Howard G, Howard V, Yuan Y, Muntner P, Kissela B, Redmond N, Judd SE, Safford MM. Consequences of comorbidity of elevated stress and/or depressive symptoms and incident cardiovascular outcomes in diabetes: results from the REasons for Geographic And Racial Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) Study. Diabetes Care. 2016;39:101–109. doi: 10.2337/dc15-1174
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
149. Dalsgaard EM, Vestergaard M, Skriver MV, Maindal HT, Lauritzen T, Borch-Johnsen K, Witte D, Sandbaek A. Psychological distress, cardiovascular complications and mortality among people with screen-detected type 2 diabetes: follow-up of the ADDITION-Denmark trial. Diabetologia. 2014;57:710–717. doi: 10.1007/s00125-014-3165-4
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
150. Hackett RA, Steptoe A. Psychosocial factors in diabetes and cardiovascular risk. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2016;18:95. doi: 10.1007/s11886-016-0771-4
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
151. St-Onge MP, Grandner MA, Brown D, Conroy MB, Jean-Louis G, Coons M, Bhatt DL; on behalf of the American Heart Association Obesity, Behavior Change, Diabetes, and Nutrition Committees of the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health; Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Council on Clinical Cardiology; and Stroke Council. Sleep duration and quality: impact on lifestyle behaviors and cardiometabolic health: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e367–e386. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000444
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
152. Gottlieb DJ, Punjabi NM, Mehra R, Patel SR, Quan SF, Babineau DC, Tracy RP, Rueschman M, Blumenthal RS, Lewis EF, et al. 
CPAP versus oxygen in obstructive sleep apnea. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:2276–2285. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1306766
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
153. McEvoy RD, Antic NA, Heeley E, Luo Y, Ou Q, Zhang X, Mediano O, Chen R, Drager LF, Liu Z, et al. ; SAVE Investigators and Coordinators. CPAP for prevention of cardiovascular events in obstructive sleep apnea. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:919–931. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1606599
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
154. Joseph JJ, Golden SH. Type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease: what next?
Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2014;21:109–120. doi: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000044
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
155. Colberg SR, Sigal RJ, Yardley JE, Riddell MC, Dunstan DW, Dempsey PC, Horton ES, Castorino K, Tate DF. Physical activity/exercise and diabetes: a position statement of the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care. 2016;39:2065–2079. doi: 10.2337/dc16-1728
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
156. Karjalainen JJ, Kiviniemi AM, Hautala AJ, Piira OP, Lepojärvi ES, Perkiömäki JS, Junttila MJ, Huikuri HV, Tulppo MP. Effects of physical activity and exercise training on cardiovascular risk in coronary artery disease patients with and without type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2015;38:706–715. doi: 10.2337/dc14-2216
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
157. Beatty AL, Schiller NB, Whooley MA. Six-minute walk test as a prognostic tool in stable coronary heart disease: data from the Heart and Soul Study. Arch Intern Med. 2012;172:1096–1102. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2012.2198
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
158. Ruo B, Rumsfeld JS, Pipkin S, Whooley MA. Relation between depressive symptoms and treadmill exercise capacity in the Heart and Soul Study. Am J Cardiol. 2004;94:96–99. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2004.03.035
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
159. Balducci S, Zanuso S, Nicolucci A, De Feo P, Cavallo S, Cardelli P, Fallucca S, Alessi E, Fallucca F, Pugliese G; Italian Diabetes Exercise Study (IDES) Investigators. Effect of an intensive exercise intervention strategy on modifiable cardiovascular risk factors in subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a randomized controlled trial: the Italian Diabetes and Exercise Study (IDES). Arch Intern Med. 2010;170:1794–1803. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2010.380
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
160. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, Berra K, Blankenship JC, Dallas AP, Douglas PS, Foody JM, Gerber TC, Hinderliter AL, et al. 
2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association task force on practice guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons [published correction appears in Circulation . 2014;129:e463]. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e318277d6a0
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
161. Suresh V, Harrison RA, Houghton P, Naqvi N. Standard cardiac rehabilitation is less effective for diabetics. Int J Clin Pract. 2001;55:445–448.
[ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
162. Banzer JA, Maguire TE, Kennedy CM, O’Malley CJ, Balady GJ. Results of cardiac rehabilitation in patients with diabetes mellitus. Am J Cardiol. 2004;93:81–84. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2003.09.017
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
163. Mourot L, Boussuges A, Maunier S, Chopra S, Rivière F, Debussche X, Blanc P. Cardiovascular rehabilitation in patients with diabetes. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2010;30:157–164. doi: 10.1097/HCR.0b013e3181c565fe
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
164. Wu YT, Wu YW, Hwang CL, Wang SS. Changes in diastolic function after exercise training in patients with and without diabetes mellitus after coronary artery bypass surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med. 2012;48:351–360.
[ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
165. Sixt S, Beer S, Blüher M, Korff N, Peschel T, Sonnabend M, Teupser D, Thiery J, Adams V, Schuler G, Niebauer J. Long- but not short-term multifactorial intervention with focus on exercise training improves coronary endothelial dysfunction in diabetes mellitus type 2 and coronary artery disease. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:112–119. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehp398
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
166. Byrkjeland R, Njerve IU, Anderssen S, Arnesen H, Seljeflot I, Solheim S. Effects of exercise training on HbA1c and VO2peak in patients with type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease: a randomised clinical trial. Diab Vasc Dis Res. 2015;12:325–333. doi: 10.1177/1479164115590552
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
167. Soja AM, Zwisler AD, Frederiksen M, Melchior T, Hommel E, Torp-Pedersen C, Madsen M. Use of intensified comprehensive cardiac rehabilitation to improve risk factor control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus or impaired glucose tolerance: the randomized DANish StUdy of impaired glucose metabolism in the settings of cardiac rehabilitation (DANSUK) study. Am Heart J. 2007;153:621–628. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2007.01.030
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
168. Armstrong MJ, Sigal RJ, Arena R, Hauer TL, Austford LD, Aggarwal S, Stone JA, Martin BJ. Cardiac rehabilitation completion is associated with reduced mortality in patients with diabetes and coronary artery disease. Diabetologia. 2015;58:691–698. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3491-1
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
169. Lopez-Jimenez F, Kramer VC, Masters B, Stuart PM, Mullooly C, Hinshaw L, Haas L, Warwick K. Recommendations for managing patients with diabetes mellitus in cardiopulmonary rehabilitation: an American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation statement. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2012;32:101–112. doi: 10.1097/HCR.0b013e31823be0bc
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
170. American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation. Guidelines for Cardiac Rehabilitation and Secondary Prevention Programs. 5th ed. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 2013. [ Google Scholar ] 
171. Van Gaal L, Scheen A. Weight management in type 2 diabetes: current and emerging approaches to treatment. Diabetes Care. 2015;38:1161–1172. doi: 10.2337/dc14-1630
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
172. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, Ard JD, Comuzzie AG, Donato KA, Hu FB, Hubbard VS, Jakicic JM, Kushner RF, et al. 
2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the management of overweight and obesity in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society [published correction appears in Circulation. 2014;129:S139–S140]. Circulation. 2014;129(suppl 2):S102–S138. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000437739.71477.ee
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
173. Bohula EA, Wiviott SD, McGuire DK, Inzucchi SE, Kuder J, Im K, Fanola CL, Qamar A, Brown C, Budaj A, et al. ; CAMELLIA–TIMI 61 Steering Committee and Investigators. Cardiovascular safety of lorcaserin in overweight or obese patients. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:1107–1117. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1808721
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
174. American Diabetes Association. 7: Obesity management for the treatment of type 2 diabetes: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes–2018. Diabetes Care. 2018;41:S65–S72. doi: 10.2337/dc18-S007
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
175. Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, Wolski K, Aminian A, Brethauer SA, Navaneethan SD, Singh RP, Pothier CE, Nissen SE, et al. 
Bariatric surgery versus intensive medical therapy for diabetes: 5-year outcomes. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:641–651. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1600869
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
176. Vest AR, Heneghan HM, Agarwal S, Schauer PR, Young JB. Bariatric surgery and cardiovascular outcomes: a systematic review. Heart. 2012;98:1763–1777. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2012-301778
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
177. Courcoulas AP, Belle SH, Neiberg RH, Pierson SK, Eagleton JK, Kalarchian MA, DeLany JP, Lang W, Jakicic JM. Three-year outcomes of bariatric surgery vs lifestyle intervention for type 2 diabetes mellitus treatment: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Surg. 2015;150:931–940. doi: 10.1001/jamasurg.2015.1534
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
178. Sjöström L, Peltonen M, Jacobson P, Ahlin S, Andersson-Assarsson J, Anveden Å, Bouchard C, Carlsson B, Karason K, Lönroth H, et al. 
Association of bariatric surgery with long-term remission of type 2 diabetes and with microvascular and macrovascular complications. JAMA. 2014;311:2297–2304. doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.5988
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
179. Fisher DP, Johnson E, Haneuse S, Arterburn D, Coleman KJ, O’Connor PJ, O’Brien R, Bogart A, Theis MK, Anau J, et al. 
Association between bariatric surgery and macrovascular disease outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and severe obesity. JAMA. 2018;320:1570–1582. doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.14619
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
180. Eliasson B, Liakopoulos V, Franzén S, Näslund I, Svensson AM, Ottosson J, Gudbjörnsdottir S. Cardiovascular disease and mortality in patients with type 2 diabetes after bariatric surgery in Sweden: a nationwide, matched, observational cohort study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2015;3:847–854. doi: 10.1016/S2213-8587(15)00334-4
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
181. Martin M, Beekley A, Kjorstad R, Sebesta J. Socioeconomic disparities in eligibility and access to bariatric surgery: a national population-based analysis. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2010;6:8–15. doi: 10.1016/j.soard.2009.07.003
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
182. Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, Reda D, Emanuele N, Reaven PD, Zieve FJ, Marks J, Davis SN, Hayward R, et al. ; VADT Investigators. Glucose control and vascular complications in veterans with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:129–139. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0808431
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
183. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, Neal B, Billot L, Woodward M, Marre M, Cooper M, Glasziou P, Grobbee D, et al. 
Intensive blood glucose control and vascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2560–2572.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
184. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP, Goff DC Jr, Bigger JT, Buse JB, Cushman WC, Genuth S, Ismail-Beigi F, Grimm RH Jr, et al. 
Effects of intensive glucose lowering in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2545–2559.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
185. White WB, Cannon CP, Heller SR, Nissen SE, Bergenstal RM, Bakris GL, Perez AT, Fleck PR, Mehta CR, Kupfer S, et al. ; EXAMINE Investigators. Alogliptin after acute coronary syndrome in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:1327–1335. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1305889
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
186. Scirica BM, Bhatt DL, Braunwald E, Steg PG, Davidson J, Hirshberg B, Ohman P, Frederich R, Wiviott SD, Hoffman EB, et al. ; SAVOR-TIMI 53 Steering Committee and Investigators. Saxagliptin and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:1317–1326. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1307684
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
187. Intensive blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment and risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33): UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Lancet. 1998;352:837–853.
[ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
188. Effect of intensive blood-glucose control with metformin on complications in overweight patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34): UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Lancet. 1998;352:854–865.
[ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
189. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Matthews DR, Neil HA. 10-Year follow-up of intensive glucose control in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1577–1589. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0806470
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
190. Glycemic targets: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes–2019. Diabetes Care. 2019;42:S61–S70.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
191. Rodríguez-Gutiérrez R, Montori VM. Glycemic control for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: our evolving faith in the face of evidence. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2016;9:504–512. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.116.002901
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
192. Lipska KJ, Krumholz H, Soones T, Lee SJ. Polypharmacy in the aging patient: a review of glycemic control in older adults with type 2 diabetes. JAMA. 2016;315:1034–1045. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.0299
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
193. Nathan DM, Cleary PA, Backlund JY, Genuth SM, Lachin JM, Orchard TJ, Raskin P, Zinman B; Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (DCCT/EDIC) Study Research Group. Intensive diabetes treatment and cardiovascular disease in patients with type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:2643–2653. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa052187
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
194. Seaquist ER, Anderson J, Childs B, Cryer P, Dagogo-Jack S, Fish L, Heller SR, Rodriguez H, Rosenzweig J, Vigersky R. Hypoglycemia and diabetes: a report of a workgroup of the American Diabetes Association and the Endocrine Society. Diabetes Care. 2013;36:1384–1395. doi: 10.2337/dc12-2480
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
195. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Ziegenfuss JY, Shah ND, Wermers RA, Smith SA. Increased mortality of patients with diabetes reporting severe hypoglycemia. Diabetes Care. 2012;35:1897–1901. doi: 10.2337/dc11-2054
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
196. Bedenis R, Price AH, Robertson CM, Morling JR, Frier BM, Strachan MW, Price JF. Association between severe hypoglycemia, adverse macrovascular events, and inflammation in the Edinburgh Type 2 Diabetes Study. Diabetes Care. 2014;37:3301–3308. doi: 10.2337/dc14-0908
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
197. Zoungas S, Patel A, Chalmers J, de Galan BE, Li Q, Billot L, Woodward M, Ninomiya T, Neal B, MacMahon S, et al. ; ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Severe hypoglycemia and risks of vascular events and death. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:1410–1418. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1003795
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
198. Bonds DE, Miller ME, Bergenstal RM, Buse JB, Byington RP, Cutler JA, Dudl RJ, Ismail-Beigi F, Kimel AR, Hoogwerf B, et al. 
The association between symptomatic, severe hypoglycaemia and mortality in type 2 diabetes: retrospective epidemiological analysis of the ACCORD study. BMJ. 2010;340:b4909. doi: 10.1136/bmj.b4909
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
199. Goto A, Arah OA, Goto M, Terauchi Y, Noda M. Severe hypoglycaemia and cardiovascular disease: systematic review and meta-analysis with bias analysis. BMJ. 2013;347:f4533. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f4533
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
200. Khunti K, Davies M, Majeed A, Thorsted BL, Wolden ML, Paul SK. Hypoglycemia and risk of cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality in insulin-treated people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes: a cohort study. Diabetes Care. 2015;38:316–322. doi: 10.2337/dc14-0920
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
201. Lee AK, Warren B, Lee CJ, McEvoy JW, Matsushita K, Huang ES, Sharrett AR, Coresh J, Selvin E. The association of severe hypoglycemia with incident cardiovascular events and mortality in adults with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2018;41:104–111. doi: 10.2337/dc17-1669
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
202. Ikeno F, Brooks MM, Nakagawa K, Kim MK, Kaneda H, Mitsutake Y, Vlachos HA, Schwartz L, Frye RL, Kelsey SF, Waseda K, Hlatky MA; BARI-2D Study Group. SYNTAX score and long-term outcomes: the BARI-2D trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:395–403. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.10.067
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
203. Vaccaro O, Masulli M, Nicolucci A, Bonora E, Del Prato S, Maggioni AP, Rivellese AA, Squatrito S, Giorda CB, Sesti G, et al. ; Thiazolidinediones Or Sulfonylureas Cardiovascular Accidents Intervention Trial (TOSCA.IT) Study Group; Italian Diabetes Society. Effects on the incidence of cardiovascular events of the addition of pioglitazone versus sulfonylureas in patients with type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled with metformin (TOSCA.IT): a randomised, multicentre trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5:887–897. doi: 10.1016/S2213-8587(17)30317-0
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
204. Rosenstock J, Kahn SE, Johansen OE, Zinman B, Espeland MA, Woerle HJ, Pfarr E, Keller A, Mattheus M, Baanstra D, et al. ; CAROLINA Investigators. Effect of linagliptin vs glimepiride on major adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes: the CAROLINA randomized clinical trial [published online September 19, 2019]. JAMA. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.13772. https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/2751398 . [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
205. Currie CJ, Peters JR, Tynan A, Evans M, Heine RJ, Bracco OL, Zagar T, Poole CD. Survival as a function of HbA(1c) in people with type 2 diabetes: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 2010;375:481–489. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61969-3
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
206. Currie CJ, Poole CD, Evans M, Peters JR, Morgan CL. Mortality and other important diabetes-related outcomes with insulin vs other antihyperglycemic therapies in type 2 diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98:668–677. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-3042
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
207. Hong J, Zhang Y, Lai S, Lv A, Su Q, Dong Y, Zhou Z, Tang W, Zhao J, Cui L, et al. ; SPREAD-DIMCAD Investigators. Effects of metformin versus glipizide on cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease. Diabetes Care. 2013;36:1304–1311. doi: 10.2337/dc12-0719
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
208. Kooy A, de Jager J, Lehert P, Bets D, Wulffelé MG, Donker AJ, Stehouwer CD. Long-term effects of metformin on metabolism and microvascular and macrovascular disease in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169:616–625. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2009.20
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
209. Dormandy JA, Charbonnel B, Eckland DJ, Erdmann E, Massi-Benedetti M, Moules IK, Skene AM, Tan MH, Lefèbvre PJ, Murray GD, et al. ; PROactive Investigators. Secondary prevention of macrovascular events in patients with type 2 diabetes in the PROactive Study (PROspective pioglitAzone Clinical Trial In macroVascular Events): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;366:1279–1289. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67528-9
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
210. Nissen SE, Wolski K. Effect of rosiglitazone on the risk of myocardial infarction and death from cardiovascular causes. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2457–2471. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa072761
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
211. Home PD, Pocock SJ, Beck-Nielsen H, Curtis PS, Gomis R, Hanefeld M, Jones NP, Komajda M, McMurray JJ; RECORD Study Team. Rosiglitazone evaluated for cardiovascular outcomes in oral agent combination therapy for type 2 diabetes (RECORD): a multicentre, randomised, open-label trial. Lancet. 2009;373:2125–2135. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60953-3
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
212. Kernan WN, Viscoli CM, Furie KL, Young LH, Inzucchi SE, Gorman M, Guarino PD, Lovejoy AM, Peduzzi PN, Conwit R, et al. ; IRIS Trial Investigators. Pioglitazone after Ischemic Stroke or Transient Ischemic Attack. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:1321–1331. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1506930
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
213. Young LH, Viscoli CM, Curtis JP, Inzucchi SE, Schwartz GG, Lovejoy AM, Furie KL, Gorman MJ, Conwit R, Abbott JD, et al. ; for the IRIS Investigators. Cardiac outcomes after ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack: effects of pioglitazone in patients with insulin resistance without diabetes mellitus. Circulation. 2017;135:1882–1893. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024863
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
214. Iung B, Cachier A, Baron G, Messika-Zeitoun D, Delahaye F, Tornos P, Gohlke-Bärwolf C, Boersma E, Ravaud P, Vahanian A. Decision-making in elderly patients with severe aortic stenosis: why are so many denied surgery?
Eur Heart J. 2005;26:2714–2720. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehi471
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
215. Green JB, Bethel MA, Armstrong PW, Buse JB, Engel SS, Garg J, Josse R, Kaufman KD, Koglin J, Korn S, et al. ; TECOS Study Group. Effect of sitagliptin on cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:232–242. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1501352
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
216. Rosenstock J, Perkovic V, Johansen OE, Cooper ME, Kahn SE, Marx N, Alexander JH, Pencina M, Toto RD, Wanner C, et al. ; CARMELINA Investigators. Effect of linagliptin vs placebo on major cardiovascular events in adults with type 2 diabetes and high cardiovascular and renal risk: the CARMELINA randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2019;321:69–79. doi: 10.1001/jama.2018.18269
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
217. Liu D, Jin B, Chen W, Yun P. Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM): a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2019;20:15. doi: 10.1186/s40360-019-0293-y
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
218. McGuire DK, Alexander JH, Johansen OE, Perkovic V, Rosenstock J, Cooper ME, Wanner C, Kahn SE, Toto RD, Zinman B, et al. ; on behalf of the CARMELINA Investigators. Linagliptin effects on heart failure and related outcomes in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus at high cardiovascular and renal risk in CARMELINA. Circulation. 2019;139:351–361. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.038352
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
219. Fitchett D, Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, Hantel S, Salsali A, Johansen OE, Woerle HJ, Broedl UC, Inzucchi SE; EMPA-REG OUTCOME ® Trial Investigators. Heart failure outcomes with empagliflozin in patients with type 2 diabetes at high cardiovascular risk: results of the EMPA-REG OUTCOME ® trial. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:1526–1534. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv728
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
220. Wanner C, Inzucchi SE, Lachin JM, Fitchett D, von Eynatten M, Mattheus M, Johansen OE, Woerle HJ, Broedl UC, Zinman B; EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliflozin and progression of kidney disease in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:323–334. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1515920
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
221. Inzucchi SE, Kosiborod M, Fitchett D, Wanner C, Hehnke U, Kaspers S, George JT, Zinman B. Improvement in cardiovascular outcomes with empagliflozin is independent of glycemic control. Circulation. 2018;138:1904–1907. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.035759
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
222. Perkovic V, Jardine MJ, Neal B, Bompoint S, Heerspink HJL, Charytan DM, Edwards R, Agarwal R, Bakris G, Bull S, et al. ; CREDENCE Trial Investigators. Canagliflozin and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:2295–2306. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1811744
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
223. Zelniker TA, Wiviott SD, Raz I, Im K, Goodrich EL, Bonaca MP, Mosenzon O, Kato ET, Cahn A, Furtado RHM, et al. 
SGLT2 inhibitors for primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cardiovascular outcome trials. Lancet. 2019;393:31–39. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)32590-X
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
224. Pfeffer MA, Claggett B, Diaz R, Dickstein K, Gerstein HC, Køber LV, Lawson FC, Ping L, Wei X, Lewis EF, et al. ; ELIXA Investigators. Lixisenatide in patients with type 2 diabetes and acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2247–2257. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1509225
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
225. Holman RR, Bethel MA, Mentz RJ, Thompson VP, Lokhnygina Y, Buse JB, Chan JC, Choi J, Gustavson SM, Iqbal N, et al. ; EXSCEL Study Group. Effects of once-weekly exenatide on cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:1228–1239. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1612917
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
226. Davies MJ, D’Alessio DA, Fradkin J, Kernan WN, Mathieu C, Mingrone G, Rossing P, Tsapas A, Wexler DJ, Buse JB. Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 2018. a consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care. 2018;41:2669–2701. doi: 10.2337/dci18-0033
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
227. Buse JB, Wexler DJ, Tsapas A, Rossing P, Mingrone G, Mathieu C, D’Alessio DA, Davies MJ. 2019 Update to: management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 2018: a consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care. 2020;43:487–493. doi: 10.2337/dci19-0066
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
228. Das SR, Everett BM, Birtcher KK, Brown JM, Cefalu WT, Januzzi JL Jr, Kalyani RR, Kosiborod M, Magwire ML, Morris PB, et al. 
2018 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on novel therapies for cardiovascular risk reduction in patients with type 2 diabetes and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology Task Force on Expert Consensus Decision Pathways. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72:3200–3223. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.09.020
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
229. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, Bittl JA, Byrne JG, Fletcher BJ, Fonarow GC, Lange RA, Levine GN, Maddox TM, et al. 
2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation. 2014;130:1749–1767. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000095
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
230. SCOT-HEART Investigators, Newby DE, Adamson PD, Berry C, Boon NA, Dweck MR, Flather M, Forbes J, Hunter A, Lewis S, MacLean S, et al. 
Coronary CT angiography and 5-year risk of myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:924–933. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1805971
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
231. Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, Mark DB, Al-Khalidi HR, Cavanaugh B, Cole J, Dolor RJ, Fordyce CB, Huang M, et al. ; PROMISE Investigators. Outcomes of anatomical versus functional testing for coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1291–1300. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1415516
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
232. Sharma A, Coles A, Sekaran NK, Pagidipati NJ, Lu MT, Mark DB, Lee KL, Al-Khalidi HR, Hoffmann U, Douglas PS. Stress testing versus CT angiography in patients with diabetes and suspected coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:893–902. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.11.056
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
233. Kureshi F, Shafiq A, Arnold SV, Gosch K, Breeding T, Kumar AS, Jones PG, Spertus JA. The prevalence and management of angina among patients with chronic coronary artery disease across US outpatient cardiology practices: insights from the Angina Prevalence and Provider Evaluation of Angina Relief (APPEAR) study. Clin Cardiol. 2017;40:6–10. doi: 10.1002/clc.22628
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
234. Brown N, Melville M, Gray D, Young T, Munro J, Skene AM, Hampton JR. Quality of life four years after acute myocardial infarction: Short Form 36 scores compared with a normal population. Heart. 1999;81:352–358. doi: 10.1136/hrt.81.4.352
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
235. Brorsson B, Bernstein SJ, Brook RH, Werkö L. Quality of life of patients with chronic stable angina before and four years after coronary revascularisation compared with a normal population. Heart. 2002;87:140–145. doi: 10.1136/heart.87.2.140
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
236. Arnold SV, Morrow DA, Lei Y, Cohen DJ, Mahoney EM, Braunwald E, Chan PS. Economic impact of angina after an acute coronary syndrome: insights from the MERLIN-TIMI 36 trial. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2009;2:344–353. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.108.829523
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
237. Shafiq A, Arnold SV, Gosch K, Kureshi F, Breeding T, Jones PG, Beltrame J, Spertus JA. Patient and physician discordance in reporting symptoms of angina among stable coronary artery disease patients: insights from the Angina Prevalence and Provider Evaluation of Angina Relief (APPEAR) study. Am Heart J. 2016;175:94–100. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2016.02.015
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
238. Arnold SV, Grodzinsky A, Gosch KL, Kosiborod M, Jones PG, Breeding T, Towheed A, Beltrame J, Alexander KP, Spertus JA. Predictors of physician under-recognition of angina in outpatients with stable coronary artery disease. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2016;9:554–559. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.116.002781
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
239. Beltrame JF, Weekes AJ, Morgan C, Tavella R, Spertus JA. The prevalence of weekly angina among patients with chronic stable angina in primary care practices: the Coronary Artery Disease in General Practice (CADENCE) study. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169:1491–1499. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2009.295
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
240. Qintar M, Spertus JA, Gosch KL, Beltrame J, Kureshi F, Shafiq A, Breeding T, Alexander KP, Arnold SV. Effect of angina under-recognition on treatment in outpatients with stable ischaemic heart disease. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes. 2016;2:208–214. doi: 10.1093/ehjqcco/qcw016
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
241. Duarte R, Castela S, Reis RP, Correia MJ, Ramos A, Pereira AP, Martins P, Correia JM. Acute coronary syndrome in a diabetic population: risk factors and clinical and angiographic characteristics. Rev Port Cardiol. 2003;22:1077–1088.
[ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
242. Herlitz J, Wognsen GB, Emanuelsson H, Haglid M, Karlson BW, Karlsson T, Albertsson P, Westberg S. Mortality and morbidity in diabetic and nondiabetic patients during a 2-year period after coronary artery bypass grafting. Diabetes Care. 1996;19:698–703. doi: 10.2337/diacare.19.7.698
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
243. Abdallah MS, Wang K, Magnuson EA, Osnabrugge RL, Kappetein AP, Morice MC, Mohr FA, Serruys PW, Cohen DJ; SYNTAX Trial Investigators. Quality of life after surgery or DES in patients with 3-vessel or left main disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:2039–2050. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.02.031
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
244. Cohen DJ, Van Hout B, Serruys PW, Mohr FW, Macaya C, den Heijer P, Vrakking MM, Wang K, Mahoney EM, Audi S, et al. ; Synergy Between PCI with Taxus and Cardiac Surgery Investigators. Quality of life after PCI with drug-eluting stents or coronary-artery bypass surgery. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:1016–1026. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1001508
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
245. Grodzinsky A, Kosiborod M, Tang F, Jones PG, McGuire DK, Spertus JA, Beltrame JF, Jang JS, Goyal A, Butala NM, et al. 
Residual angina after elective percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with diabetes mellitus. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2017;10:e003553. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.117.003553
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
246. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, Berra K, Blankenship JC, Dallas AP, Douglas PS, Foody JM, Gerber TC, Hinderliter AL, et al. 
2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons [published correction appears in Circulation . 2014;129:e462]. Circulation. 2012;126:3097–3137. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3182776f83
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
247. Knuuti J, Wijns W, Saraste A, Capodanno D, Barbato E, Funck-Brentano C, Prescott E, Storey RF, Deaton C, Cuisset T, et al. ; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2019 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of chronic coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J. 2020;41:407–477. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehz425
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
248. Poole-Wilson PA, Lubsen J, Kirwan BA, van Dalen FJ, Wagener G, Danchin N, Just H, Fox KA, Pocock SJ, Clayton TC, et al. ; Coronary Disease Trial Investigating Outcome With Nifedipine Gastrointestinal Therapeutic System Investigators. Effect of long-acting nifedipine on mortality and cardiovascular morbidity in patients with stable angina requiring treatment (ACTION trial): randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;364:849–857. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16980-8
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
249. Fox K, Ford I, Steg PG, Tardif JC, Tendera M, Ferrari R; SIGNIFY Investigators. Ivabradine in stable coronary artery disease without clinical heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1091–1099. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1406430
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
250. Wilson SR, Scirica BM, Braunwald E, Murphy SA, Karwatowska Prokopczuk E, Buros JL, Chaitman BR, Morrow DA. Efficacy of ranolazine in patients with chronic angina: observations from the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled MERLIN-TIMI (Metabolic Efficiency With Ranolazine for Less Ischemia in Non-ST-Segment Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes) 36 Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53:1510–1516. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.01.037
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
251. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Stable angina: management. 2011. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg126 . NICE guidelines. Accessed April 6, 2019. [ PubMed ] 
252. Heidenreich PA, McDonald KM, Hastie T, Fadel B, Hagan V, Lee BK, Hlatky MA. Meta-analysis of trials comparing beta-blockers, calcium antagonists, and nitrates for stable angina. JAMA. 1999;281:1927–1936. doi: 10.1001/jama.281.20.1927
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
253. Dornhorst A, Powell SH, Pensky J. Aggravation by propranolol of hyperglycaemic effect of hydrochlorothiazide in type II diabetics without alteration of insulin secretion. Lancet. 1985;1:123–126. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(85)91900-2
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
254. Badar VA, Hiware SK, Shrivastava MP, Thawani VR, Hardas MM. Comparison of nebivolol and atenolol on blood pressure, blood sugar, and lipid profile in patients of essential hypertension. Indian J Pharmacol. 2011;43:437–440. doi: 10.4103/0253-7613.83117
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
255. Giugliano D, Acampora R, Marfella R, De Rosa N, Ziccardi P, Ragone R, De Angelis L, D’Onofrio F. Metabolic and cardiovascular effects of carvedilol and atenolol in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and hypertension: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 1997;126:955–959. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-126-12-199706150-00004
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
256. Torp-Pedersen C, Metra M, Charlesworth A, Spark P, Lukas MA, Poole-Wilson PA, Swedberg K, Cleland JG, Di Lenarda A, Remme WJ, et al. ; COMET Investigators. Effects of metoprolol and carvedilol on preexisting and new onset diabetes in patients with chronic heart failure: data from the Carvedilol Or Metoprolol European Trial (COMET). Heart. 2007;93:968–973. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2006.092379
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
257. Kosiborod M, Arnold SV, Spertus JA, McGuire DK, Li Y, Yue P, Ben-Yehuda O, Katz A, Jones PG, Olmsted A, et al. 
Evaluation of ranolazine in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and chronic stable angina: results from the TERISA randomized clinical trial (Type 2 Diabetes Evaluation of Ranolazine in Subjects With Chronic Stable Angina). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:2038–2045. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.02.011
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
258. Dhalla AK, Yang M, Ning Y, Kahlig KM, Krause M, Rajamani S, Belardinelli L. Blockade of Na+ channels in pancreatic α-cells has antidiabetic effects. Diabetes. 2014;63:3545–3556. doi: 10.2337/db13-1562
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
259. Arnold SV, McGuire DK, Spertus JA, Li Y, Yue P, Ben-Yehuda O, Belardinelli L, Jones PG, Olmsted A, Chaitman BR, et al. 
Effectiveness of ranolazine in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and chronic stable angina according to baseline hemoglobin A1c. Am Heart J. 2014;168:457–465.e2.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
260. Timmis AD, Chaitman BR, Crager M. Effects of ranolazine on exercise tolerance and HbA1c in patients with chronic angina and diabetes. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:42–48. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehi495
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
261. Morrow DA, Scirica BM, Chaitman BR, McGuire DK, Murphy SA, Karwatowska-Prokopczuk E, McCabe CH, Braunwald E; MERLIN-TIMI 36 Investigators. Evaluation of the glycometabolic effects of ranolazine in patients with and without diabetes mellitus in the MERLIN-TIMI 36 randomized controlled trial. Circulation. 2009;119:2032–2039. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.763912
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
262. Chisholm JW, Goldfine AB, Dhalla AK, Braunwald E, Morrow DA, Karwatowska-Prokopczuk E, Belardinelli L. Effect of ranolazine on A1C and glucose levels in hyperglycemic patients with non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:1163–1168. doi: 10.2337/dc09-2334
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
263. Frye RL, August P, Brooks MM, Hardison RM, Kelsey SF; BARI 2D Study Group. A randomized trial of therapies for type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:2503–2515. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0805796
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
264. Boden WE, O’Rourke RA, Teo KK, Hartigan PM, Maron DJ, Kostuk WJ, Knudtson M, Dada M, Casperson P, Harris CL, et al. ; COURAGE Trial Research Group. Optimal medical therapy with or without PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1503–1516. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa070829
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
265. Brooks MM, Chaitman BR, Nesto RW, Hardison RM, Feit F, Gersh BJ, Krone RJ, Sako EY, Rogers WJ, Garber AJ, et al. ; BARI 2D Study Group. Clinical and angiographic risk stratification and differential impact on treatment outcomes in the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial. Circulation. 2012;126:2115–2124. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.092973
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
266. Chaitman BR, Hardison RM, Adler D, Gebhart S, Grogan M, Ocampo S, Sopko G, Ramires JA, Schneider D, Frye RL; Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) Study Group. The Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes randomized trial of different treatment strategies in type 2 diabetes mellitus with stable ischemic heart disease: impact of treatment strategy on cardiac mortality and myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2009;120:2529–2540. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.913111
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
267. ISCHEMIA study results. https://www.ischemiatrial.org/ischemia-study-results . Accessed November 23, 2019. 
268. Nicholls SJ, Tuzcu EM, Kalidindi S, Wolski K, Moon KW, Sipahi I, Schoenhagen P, Nissen SE. Effect of diabetes on progression of coronary atherosclerosis and arterial remodeling: a pooled analysis of 5 intravascular ultrasound trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:255–262. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.03.051
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
269. Barsness GW, Gersh BJ, Brooks MM, Frye RL; BARI 2D Trial Investigators. Rationale for the revascularization arm of the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) Trial. Am J Cardiol. 2006;97:31G–40G. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2006.03.011 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
270. Banning AP, Westaby S, Morice MC, Kappetein AP, Mohr FW, Berti S, Glauber M, Kellett MA, Kramer RS, Leadley K, et al. 
Diabetic and nondiabetic patients with left main and/or 3-vessel coronary artery disease: comparison of outcomes with cardiac surgery and paclitaxel-eluting stents. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:1067–1075. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.09.057
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
271. Patel MR, Calhoon JH, Dehmer GJ, Grantham JA, Maddox TM, Maron DJ, Smith PK. ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/SCAI/SCCT/STS 2016 appropriate use criteria for coronary revascularization in patients with acute coronary syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:570–591. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.10.034
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
272. Head SJ, Milojevic M, Daemen J, Ahn JM, Boersma E, Christiansen EH, Domanski MJ, Farkouh ME, Flather M, Fuster V, et al. 
Mortality after coronary artery bypass grafting versus percutaneous coronary intervention with stenting for coronary artery disease: a pooled analysis of individual patient data. Lancet. 2018;391:939–948. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30423-9
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
273. Bhatt DL. CABG the clear choice for patients with diabetes and multivessel disease. Lancet. 2018;391:913–914. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30424-0
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
274. Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Sleeper LA, Siami FS, Dangas G, Mack M, Yang M, Cohen DJ, Rosenberg Y, Solomon SD, et al. ; FREEDOM Trial Investigators. Strategies for multivessel revascularization in patients with diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2375–2384. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1211585
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
275. Esper RB, Farkouh ME, Ribeiro EE, Hueb W, Domanski M, Hamza TH, Siami FS, Godoy LC, Mathew V, French J, et al. 
SYNTAX score in patients with diabetes undergoing coronary revascularization in the FREEDOM trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72(pt A):2826–2837. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.09.046
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
276. Jiménez-Navarro MF, López-Jiménez F, Barsness G, Lennon RJ, Sandhu GS, Prasad A. Long-term prognosis of complete percutaneous coronary revascularisation in patients with diabetes with multivessel disease. Heart. 2015;101:1233–1239. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2014-307143
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
277. Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation (BARI) Investigators. Comparison of coronary bypass surgery with angioplasty in patients with multivessel disease. N Engl J Med. 1996;335:217–225.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
278. BARI Investigators. Influence of diabetes on 5-year mortality and morbidity in a randomized trial comparing CABG and PTCA in patients with multivessel disease: the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation (BARI). Circulation. 1997;96:1761–1769. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.96.6.1761
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
279. BARI Investigators. The final 10-year follow-up results from the BARI randomized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:1600–1606. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2006.11.048
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
280. Detre KM, Lombardero MS, Brooks MM, Hardison RM, Holubkov R, Sopko G, Frye RL, Chaitman BR. The effect of previous coronary-artery bypass surgery on the prognosis of patients with diabetes who have acute myocardial infarction: Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation Investigators. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:989–997. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200004063421401
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
281. Doenst T, Haverich A, Serruys P, Bonow RO, Kappetein P, Falk V, Velazquez E, Diegeler A, Sigusch H. PCI and CABG for treating stable coronary artery disease: JACC review topic of the week. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:964–976. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.11.053
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
282. Agrifoglio M, Trezzi M, Barili F, Dainese L, Cheema FH, Topkara VK, Ghislandi C, Parolari A, Polvani G, Alamanni F, et al. 
Double vs single internal thoracic artery harvesting in diabetic patients: role in perioperative infection rate. J Cardiothorac Surg. 2008;3:35. doi: 10.1186/1749-8090-3-35
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
283. Momin AU, Deshpande R, Potts J, El-Gamel A, Marrinan MT, Omigie J, Desai JB. Incidence of sternal infection in diabetic patients undergoing bilateral internal thoracic artery grafting. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80:1765–1772. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2005.04.061
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
284. Kajimoto K, Yamamoto T, Amano A. Coronary artery bypass revascularization using bilateral internal thoracic arteries in diabetic patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;99:1097–1104. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.09.045
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
285. Deo SV, Shah IK, Dunlay SM, Erwin PJ, Locker C, Altarabsheh SE, Boilson BA, Park SJ, Joyce LD. Bilateral internal thoracic artery harvest and deep sternal wound infection in diabetic patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95:862–869. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.11.068
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
286. Weiss AJ, Zhao S, Tian DH, Taggart DP, Yan TD. A meta-analysis comparing bilateral internal mammary artery with left internal mammary artery for coronary artery bypass grafting. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;2:390–400. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2225-319X.2013.07.16
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
287. Taggart DP, Altman DG, Gray AM, Lees B, Nugara F, Yu LM, Campbell H, Flather M; ART Investigators. Randomized trial to compare bilateral vs. single internal mammary coronary artery bypass grafting: 1-year results of the Arterial Revascularisation Trial (ART). Eur Heart J. 2010;31:2470–2481. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq318
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
288. Taggart DP, Altman DG, Gray AM, Lees B, Gerry S, Benedetto U, Flather M; ART Investigators. Randomized trial of bilateral versus single internal-thoracic-artery grafts. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:2540–2549. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1610021
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
289. Yeh RW, Normand SL, Wolf RE, Jones PG, Ho KK, Cohen DJ, Cutlip DE, Mauri L, Kugelmass AD, Amin AP, et al. 
Predicting the restenosis benefit of drug-eluting versus bare metal stents in percutaneous coronary intervention. Circulation. 2011;124:1557–1564. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.045229
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
290. Tu JV, Bowen J, Chiu M, Ko DT, Austin PC, He Y, Hopkins R, Tarride JE, Blackhouse G, Lazzam C, et al. 
Effectiveness and safety of drug-eluting stents in Ontario. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:1393–1402. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa071076
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
291. Stettler C, Allemann S, Wandel S, Kastrati A, Morice MC, Schömig A, Pfisterer ME, Stone GW, Leon MB, de Lezo JS, et al. 
Drug eluting and bare metal stents in people with and without diabetes: collaborative network meta-analysis. BMJ. 2008;337:a1331. doi: 10.1136/bmj.a1331
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
292. Farkouh ME, Sidhu MS, Brooks MM, Vlachos H, Boden WE, Frye RL, Hartigan P, Siami FS, Bittner VA, Chaitman BR, et al. 
Impact of chronic kidney disease on outcomes of myocardial revascularization in patients with diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:400–411. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.11.044
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
293. Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Dangas GD, Godoy LC, Mack MJ, Siami FS, Hamza TH, Shah B, Stefanini GG, Sidhu MS, et al. ; FREEDOM Follow-On Study Investigators. Long-term survival following multivessel revascularization in patients with diabetes: the FREEDOM Follow-On Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:629–638. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.11.001
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
294. Abdallah MS, Wang K, Magnuson EA, Spertus JA, Farkouh ME, Fuster V, Cohen DJ; FREEDOM Trial Investigators. Quality of life after PCI vs CABG among patients with diabetes and multivessel coronary artery disease: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;310:1581–1590. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.279208
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
295. Mancini GB, Farkouh ME, Brooks MM, Chaitman BR, Boden WE, Vlachos H, Hartigan PM, Siami FS, Sidhu MS, Bittner V, et al. 
Medical treatment and revascularization options in patients with type 2 diabetes and coronary disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:985–995. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.06.021
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
296. Mancini GBJ, Boden WE, Brooks MM, Vlachos H, Chaitman BR, Frye R, Bittner V, Hartigan PM, Dagenais GR. Impact of treatment strategies on outcomes in patients with stable coronary artery disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus according to presenting angina severity: a pooled analysis of three federally-funded randomized trials. Atherosclerosis. 2018;277:186–194. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2018.04.005
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
297. Konigstein M, Ben-Yehuda O, Smits PC, Love MP, Banai S, Perlman GY, Golomb M, Ozan MO, Liu M, Leon MB, et al. 
Outcomes among diabetic patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention with contemporary drug-eluting stents: analysis from the BIONICS randomized trial. J Cardiovasc Interv. 2018;11:2467–2476. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
298. Neumann FJ, Sousa-Uva M, Ahlsson A, Alfonso F, Banning AP, Benedetto U, Byrne RA, Collet JP, Falk V, Head SJ, et al. ; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2018 ESC/EACTS guidelines on myocardial revascularization. Eur Heart J. 2019;40:87–165. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehy394
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (539.4 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
