Clinical Recommendations for Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing Data Assessment in Specific Patient Populations - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Circulation 
. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2016 Mar 3. 
Published in final edited form as: Circulation. 2012 Sep 5;126(18):2261–2274. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31826fb946 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Clinical Recommendations for Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing Data Assessment in Specific Patient Populations 
Marco Guazzi 
Marco Guazzi 
1 Department of Medical Sciences, Cardiology, I.R.C.C.S. San Donato Hospital, University of Milan, San Donato Milanese, P.za Malan, 2, 20097, Milan, Italy 
Co-Chair 
Find articles by Marco Guazzi 
1, * , Volker Adams 
Volker Adams 
2 Department of Cardiology, University Leipzig–Heart Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany 
Find articles by Volker Adams 
2 , Viviane Conraads 
Viviane Conraads 
3 Department of Cardiology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium 
Find articles by Viviane Conraads 
3 , Martin Halle 
Martin Halle 
4 Department of Prevention and Sports Medicine, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany; Munich Heart Association, Munich, Germany 
Find articles by Martin Halle 
4 , Alessandro Mezzani 
Alessandro Mezzani 
5 Exercise Pathophysiology Laboratory, Cardiac Rehabilitation Division, S. Maugeri Foundation IRCCS, Scientific Institute of Veruno, Veruno (NO), Italy 
Find articles by Alessandro Mezzani 
5 , Luc Vanhees 
Luc Vanhees 
6 Research Centre for Cardiovascular and Respiratory Rehabilitation, Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Leuven, Belgium 
Find articles by Luc Vanhees 
6 , Ross Arena 
Ross Arena 
7 Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation – Division of Physical Therapy and Department of Internal Medicine – Division of Cardiology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA 
Co-Chair 
Find articles by Ross Arena 
7 , Gerald F Fletcher 
Gerald F Fletcher 
8 Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Jacksonville, FL, USA 
Find articles by Gerald F Fletcher 
8 , Daniel E Forman 
Daniel E Forman 
9 Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA 
Find articles by Daniel E Forman 
9 , Dalane W Kitzman 
Dalane W Kitzman 
10 Department of Medicine, Section on Cardiology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA 
Find articles by Dalane W Kitzman 
10 , Carl J Lavie 
Carl J Lavie 
11 Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, John Ochsner Heart and Vascular Institute, Ochsner Clinical School, The University of Queensland School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA 
12 Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State University System, Baton Rouge, LA, USA 
Find articles by Carl J Lavie 
11, 12 , Jonathan Myers 
Jonathan Myers 
13 Division of Cardiology, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA 
Find articles by Jonathan Myers 
13 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 Department of Medical Sciences, Cardiology, I.R.C.C.S. San Donato Hospital, University of Milan, San Donato Milanese, P.za Malan, 2, 20097, Milan, Italy 
2 Department of Cardiology, University Leipzig–Heart Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany 
3 Department of Cardiology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium 
4 Department of Prevention and Sports Medicine, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany; Munich Heart Association, Munich, Germany 
5 Exercise Pathophysiology Laboratory, Cardiac Rehabilitation Division, S. Maugeri Foundation IRCCS, Scientific Institute of Veruno, Veruno (NO), Italy 
6 Research Centre for Cardiovascular and Respiratory Rehabilitation, Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Leuven, Belgium 
7 Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation – Division of Physical Therapy and Department of Internal Medicine – Division of Cardiology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA 
8 Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Jacksonville, FL, USA 
9 Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA 
10 Department of Medicine, Section on Cardiology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA 
11 Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, John Ochsner Heart and Vascular Institute, Ochsner Clinical School, The University of Queensland School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA 
12 Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State University System, Baton Rouge, LA, USA 
13 Division of Cardiology, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA 
* 
Corresponding author. Tel: 39 02 52774966, Fax: 39 02 52774966, marco.guazzi@unimi.it 
Roles 
Marco Guazzi : Co-Chair 
Ross Arena : Co-Chair 
Issue date 2012 Oct 30. 
Keywords: AHA Scientific Statements, exercise testing 
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp . A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page. 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC4777325  NIHMSID: NIHMS760459  PMID: 22952317 
The publisher's version of this article is available at Circulation 
Introduction 
From an evidence-based perspective, cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPX) is a well-supported assessment technique in both the United States (US) and Europe. The combination of standard exercise testing (ET) (ie, progressive exercise provocation in association with serial electrocardiograms [ECG], hemodynamics, oxygen saturation, and subjective symptoms) and measurement of ventilatory gas exchange amounts to a superior method to: 1) accurately quantify cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF), 2) delineate the physiologic system(s) underlying exercise responses, which can be applied as a means to identify the exercise-limiting pathophysiologic mechanism(s) and/or performance differences, and 3) formulate function-based prognostic stratification. Cardiopulmonary ET certainly carries an additional cost as well as competency requirements and is not an essential component of evaluation in all patient populations. However, there are several conditions of confirmed, suspected, or unknown etiology where the data gained from this form of ET is highly valuable in terms of clinical decision making. 1 
Several CPX statements have been published by well-respected organizations in both the US and Europe. 1 – 5 Despite these prominent reports and the plethora of pertinent medical literature which they feature, underutilization of CPX persists. This discrepancy is at least partly attributable to the fact that the currently available CPX consensus statements are inherently complex and fail to convey succinct, clinically centered strategies to utilize CPX indices effectively. Likewise, current CPX software packages generate an overwhelming abundance of data, which to most clinicians are incomprehensible and abstract. 
Ironically, in contrast to the protracted scientific statements and dense CPX data outputs, the list of CPX variables that have proven clinical application is concise and uncomplicated. Therefore, the goal of this writing group is to present an approach of CPX in a way that assists in making meaningful decisions regarding a patient’s care. Experts from the European Association for Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation and American Heart Association have joined in this effort to distill easy-to-follow guidance on CPX interpretation based upon current scientific evidence. This document also provides a series of forms that are designed to highlight the utility of CPX in clinical decision-making. Not only will this improve patient management, it will also catalyze uniform and unambiguous data interpretation across laboratories on an international level. 
The primary target audience of this position paper is clinicians who have limited orientation with CPX but whose caregiving would be enhanced by familiarity and application of this assessment. The ultimate goal is to increase awareness of the value of CPX and to increase the number of healthcare professionals who are able to perform clinically meaningful CPX interpretation. Moreover, this document will hopefully lead to an increase in appropriate patient referrals to CPX with enhanced efficiencies in patient management. For more detailed information on CPX, including procedures for patient preparation, equipment calibration, and conducting the test, readers are encouraged to review other publications that address these and other topics in great detail. 1 – 5 
What Is Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing? 
Despite advances in technologies related to diagnostic testing and the popularity of imaging techniques, assessment of exercise responses provides critical enhancement of the evaluation of patients with or suspected of having cardiovascular (CV) or pulmonary disease. 6 The measurement of CRF from ET has many clinical applications, including diagnosis, evaluation of therapy, risk stratification, and to guide physical activity. While exercise tolerance is commonly estimated from treadmill or bicycle cycle ergometer work rate, CPX is a specialized subtype of ET that provides a more accurate and objective measure of CRF. CPX relies on the measurement of ventilatory gases during exercise, ie, a non-invasive procedure that involves the acquisition of expired ventilation and concentrations of oxygen (O 2 ) and carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) during progressive exercise. Admittedly, there are potential “patient difficulties” associated with CPX (trepidation with the testing itself, mouthpiece/nose clip/mask difficulties, perception of limits in “air” availability, etc.). However, when added to standard ET, the direct non-invasive measurement of ventilation and expired gases permits the most accurate and reproducible quantification of CRF, a grading of the etiology and severity of impairment, and an objective assessment of the response to an intervention. 7 , 8 Moreover, over the last two decades, a particularly large volume of research has been directed toward the utility of CPX as a prognostic tool; these studies have established CPX as a scientifically sound and therefore clinically valuable method for accurately estimating prognosis in various disease states. 1 , 9 , 10 As will be described in this document, studies performed on the clinical applications of CPX have had an important influence on the functional assessment of patients with confirmed/suspected CV and pulmonary disease as well as those with certain confirmed/suspected musculoskeletal disorders. 
Although still underutilized, CPX has gained popularity not only due to the recognition of its clear value in the functional assessment of patients with CV, pulmonary, and musculoskeletal disease/disorders, but also because of technological advances (eg, rapid response analyzers and computer-assisted data processing) which have made this modality easier to use. Once largely under the domain of the physiologist or specialized center, CPX currently has the potential to be used for a wide spectrum of clinical applications. The basic CPX responses, O 2 consumption 
( V O 2 ) , minute ventilation (VE), and CO 2 production 
( V CO 2 ) , are now easily obtainable in time-down spreadsheet format from most systems, providing a platform for straightforward data processing and interpretation. While standard ET has long been considered the gatekeeper to more expensive and invasive procedures (eg, angiography, bypass surgery, transplantation, other medical management decisions), gas exchange measurements during exercise have been demonstrated to enhance the decision-making process. CPX responses have been demonstrated to be valuable in supplementing other clinical information to optimize risk stratification for cardiac transplantation listing, medical device therapy (eg, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator and cardiac resynchronization therapy), consideration for lung resection or lung transplantation, and for a variety of pre-surgical evaluations. 1 , 7 , 9 – 13 Because markers of ventilatory efficiency have emerged as particularly powerful prognostic markers, risk stratification paradigms that include these indices have also been proposed in recent years. 1 , 13 
Defining Key Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing Variables 14 – 23 
The volume of data automatically generated by the software packages of CPX systems can be somewhat daunting to clinicians who do not have extensive experience with this form of ET. Moreover, the clinical significance of many of these variables, numerically and/or graphically depicted, has not been thoroughly vetted through original research. In contrast, the list of variables most pertinent in current clinical practice, and which are well substantiated by original research, is relatively concise. Key CPX variables, derived from both ventilatory expired gas analysis data and standard ET monitoring, are listed in Table 1 . The intent of this table is to identify key CPX variables and to provide only succinct descriptions or their significance and normal values/responses; more detailed accounts are provided elsewhere and the reader is encouraged to review these documents for additional details. 1 – 4 , 24 Of particular note, aerobic capacity is defined as peak 
V O 2 as opposed to maximal 
V O 2 in this document as the former designation is most often used in patient populations with suspected/confirmed pathophysiological processes. All of the variables listed in Table 1 are included in the one-page, universal CPX reporting form ( Appendix 1 ). While some of these variables warrant assessment in all patients undergoing CPX, such as peak 
V O 2 and the peak respiratory exchange ratio (RER), others, such as the 
VE / V CO 2 slope and exercise oscillatory ventilation (EOV) are condition specific. A more refined identification of condition-specific CPX variables is described in subsequent sections and their respective appendixes. The writing group hopes that this approach improves the ease by which the most pertinent data is identified and utilized by clinicians performing and interpreting CPX. Moreover, the majority of these variables are automatically included in reporting forms generated by current CPX system software packages. 
Table 1. 
Identification and Defining Normal Responses for Key CPX Variables 
CPX Variable 
Description/Significance 
Normal Value/Response 
Peak 
V O 2 (mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 ) 
• Highest O 2 uptake obtained during exercise 
• Commonly designated as “peak” value in patient populations described in this document 
• Expressed as a 10–60 s averaged value depending on the ET protocol (ie, shorter averaging interval for protocols with shorter stages and longer averaging interval for protocols with longer stages) 1 
• Response influenced by central (CV and/or pulmonary) and peripheral (skeletal muscle) function 
• Broadly reflects disease severity in a number of patient populations including HF, HCM, PAH secondary PH, COPD, ILD 
• Universal prognostic marker 
• Wide range influenced by age and sex: ≈80–15 mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 in young elite athlete and apparently healthy 80-year-old female, respectively 11 ; normal age-related decline related to decrease in central and peripheral performance across the lifespan; normal sex-related differences largely influenced by difference in maximal cardiac output 
• Reporting peak 
V O 2 as a percent-predicted value using equations provided in Table 2 recommended to account for age and sex differences 
• Percent-predicted values should be ≥100% 
V O 2 at VT (mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 ) 
• Submaximal 
V O 2 where there is a dislinear rise in VE and 
V CO 2 
• Generally associated with anaerobic threshold 
• Represents upper limit of ET workloads that can be sustained for a prolonged period 
• Valuable in setting intensity for exercise prescription in a highly individualized manner 
• ≈50–65% of peak 
V O 2 21 
• Influenced by genetic predisposition and chronic aerobic training 
Peak RER 
• Defined as the 
V CO 2 / V O 2 ratio 
• Expressed as a 10–60 s averaged value depending on exercise protocol (ie, shorter averaging interval for protocols with shorter stages and longer averaging interval for protocols with longer stages) 
• As exercise progresses to higher intensities, 
V CO 2 outpaces 
V O 2 , increasing the ratio 
• Currently is the best non-invasive indicator of exercise effort 
• Peak value ≥1.10 widely accepted as excellent exercise effort 1 
VE/
V CO 2 slope 
• Relationship between VE, plotted on the y -axis, and 
V CO 2 plotted on the x -axis; both variables in L · min −1 
• Most commonly calculated using all ET data 7 
• Represents matching of ventilation and perfusion within the pulmonary system 
• Broadly reflects disease severity as well as prognosis in a number of patient populations including HF, HCM, PAH/secondary PH, COPD, ILD 
• <30 considered normal with slight increase with advanced age possible 
EOV 
• No universal definition currently available 
• Most commonly defined as an oscillatory pattern at rest that persists for ≥60% of the exercise test at an amplitude of ≥15% of the average resting value 1 , 16 
• Recommend using 10 s averaged VE data for plotting 
• Reflects advanced disease severity and poor prognosis in patients with HF 
• This is not a normal ventilatory response to exercise under any circumstances (See Figure 2 ) 
P ET CO 2 (mm Hg) at rest and during exercise 
• Also represents matching of ventilation and perfusion within the pulmonary system and cardiac function 
• Broadly reflects disease severity in a number of patient populations including HF, HCM, PAH/secondary PH, COPD, ILD 
• Rest: 36–42 mm Hg 
• Increases between 3 and 8 mm Hg by VT 
• Decrease following VT secondary to increased ventilation response 
VE / V O 2 at peak exercise 
• Expressed as a 10–60 s averaged value depending on the exercise protocol (ie, shorter averaging interval for protocols with shorter stages and longer averaging interval for protocols with longer stages) 
• Reflects ventilatory cost of O 2 uptake at peak ET 
• Has diagnostic utility in patients with suspected mitochondrial myopathy 
• ≤40 
• 50 = upper limit of normal response 22 
Δ Q / Δ V O 2 slope 
• Relationship between Q , plotted on the y -axis, and 
V O 2 plotted on the x -axis; both variables in L · min −1 
• Additional equipment needed to measure Q ; through foreign gas rebreathing technique 1 
• Reflects the relationship between O 2 delivery and utilization in exercising skeletal muscle 
• Has diagnostic utility in patients with suspected mitochondrial myopathy if anemia is ruled out 
• ≈5 
VE/MVV 
• Ratio between VE at maximal exercise and MVV obtained at rest; both variables in L · min −1 
• Although prediction equations are available (FEV 1 × 40 23 ), MVV should be directly measured 
• Has diagnostic utility in determining if unexplained exertional dyspnea is related to a pulmonary mechanism 
• ≤0.80 
FEV 1 (L · min −1 ) and PEF (L · min −1 ) 
• Components of pulmonary function testing battery 
• Predicted values automatically generated by CPX unit software packages; influenced by age, sex and body habitus 
• Has diagnostic utility in determining if unexplained exertional dyspnea is related to a pulmonary mechanism, particularly exercise-induced bronchospasm 
• When relevant, should be assessed prior to and following CPX for comparative purposes 
• <15% reduction from pre to post CPX for both variables 
O 2 pulse trajectory (mL O 2 · beat −1 ) 
• O 2 pulse defined as the ratio between 
V O 2 (mL O 2 · min −1 ) and HR (bpm) 
• Non-invasively reflects stroke volume response to exercise 
• Has diagnostic utility in patients with suspected myocardial ischemia (ie, exercise-induced left ventricular dysfunction) 
• Continual linear rise throughout exercise with possible plateau approaching maximal exertion (See Figure 1 ) 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W trajectory (mL · min −1 · W −1 ) 
• Plot of the relationship between 
V O 2 ( y -axis in mL · min −1 ) and workload ( x -axis in Watts) 
• Lower extremity ergometer should be used as exercise mode when assessed 
• Has diagnostic utility in patients with suspected myocardial ischemia (ie, exercise-induced left ventricular dysfunction) 
• Continual linear rise throughout ET (See Figure 1 ) 
• Average slope, calculated with all exercise data, is 10 mL · min −1 · W −1 
Exercise HR (bpm) 
• In patients not prescribed a beta-blocking agent; provides insight into chronotropic competence and cardiac response to exercise 
• Peak HR should not be used as the primary gauge of subject effort given its wide variability 19 , 20 
• Increase ~10 beats per 3.5 mL O 2 · kg −1 · min −1 increase in 
V O 2 , achieve at least 85% of age-predicted maximal HR with good effort 
HRR at 1 min (beats) 
• Difference between maximal exercise HR and HR 1 min into recovery 
• Provides insight into speed of parasympathetic reactivation 
• >12 beats 
Exercise BP (mm Hg) 
• Provides insight into CV response to exercise and left ventricular afterload 
• SBP increase ~10 mm Hg per 3.5 mL O 2 · kg −1 · min −1 increase in 
V O 2 
• Upper range of normal maximal SBP is ~210 mm Hg for males and ~190 mm Hg for females 
• DBP remains the same or slightly decreases 
SpO 2 (%) 
• Non-invasive estimate of arterial hemoglobin saturation 
• Has diagnostic utility in determining if unexplained exertional dyspnea is related to a pulmonary mechanism 
• Desaturation common in patients with COPD, ILD, PAH/secondary PH as disease severity advances 
• ≥95% at rest and throughout exercise 
• Should not decrease >5% (absolute value) 
ECG 
• Insight into stability of cardiac rhythm 
• Identifies baseline abnormalities and exercise-induced ischemia 
• Minimal waveform changes 
• No significant deviation from normal sinus rhythm 
Subjective symptoms 
• Used to determine subjects perception of symptoms limiting exercise 
• Rating of perceived exertion (ie, Borg scale 15 ) as well as dyspnea and angina (using symptom specific scales 17 ) should be quantified using separate scales with unique verbal anchors 
• Unusual dyspnea as primary reason for test termination (ie, 4/4: severely difficult, patient cannot continue 17 ) shown to indicate increased adverse event risk in patients assessed for myocardial ischemia 14 and HF 18 
• Limiting factor muscular fatigue with no significant dyspnea or angina 
Open in a new tab 
CPX, cardiopulmonary exercise testing; 
V O 2 , oxygen consumption; ET, exercise testing; VT, ventilatory threshold; VE, minute ventilation; 
V CO 2 , carbon dioxide production; RER, respiratory exchange ratio; EOV, exercise oscillatory ventilation; P ET CO 2 , partial pressure of end-tidal carbon dioxide; HF, heart failure; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension; PH, pulmonary hypertension; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ILD, interstitial lung disease; Q , cardiac output; MVV, maximal voluntary ventilation; PEF, peak expiratory flow; FEV 1 , forced expiratory volume in 1 s; O 2 , oxygen; W, watt; HR, heart rate; bpm, beats per minute; HRR, heart rate recovery; BP, blood pressure; SBP, systolic blood pressure; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SpO 2 , saturation of peripheral oxygen; ECG, electrocardiogram. 
Depending on system configuration, standard ET measures, such as hemodynamics and heart rate (HR), will either be reported alongside ventilatory expired gas analysis data or reported separately. In either situation, the majority of essential data is readily obtained. O 2 pulse and change in 
V O 2 /change in Watt (
Δ V O 2 / Δ W ) plots are often generated by customary CPX software systems. If this is not the case, the plots can be easily generated using the exercise data reported in time-down spreadsheet format. Examples of normal and abnormal O 2 pulse and 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W plots are illustrated in Figure 1 . 
Figure 1. 
Open in a new tab 
Normal (dashed line) and abnormal (solid line) example of oxygen pulse and 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W plots. 
V O 2 , oxygen consumption; W, watts; O 2 , oxygen. 
While VE data are graphically depicted, determination of EOV must be performed manually at this time. Given the importance of determining EOV in heart failure (HF), the writing group anticipates that the presence or absence of this abnormality, according to universally adopted criteria, will be automatically quantified by future CPX system software packages. The most frequently used criteria currently to define EOV are listed in Table 1 . 16 There is initial evidence to indicate that this set of EOV criteria provides more robust prognostic insight compared with other methods. 25 For present clinical applications, the writing group recommends rest and exercise VE data be graphically depicted using 10-second averaged samples. This averaging interval allows for the removal of breath-by-breath signal noise while preventing excessive data smoothing and loss of the physiological phenomena that is brought about by averaging over longer intervals (ie, data used for graphic illustration listed as ≥30 second averaging). A normal ventilatory pattern is contrasted to EOV in Figure 2 . 
Figure 2. 
Open in a new tab 
Examples of normal ventilatory pattern (top panel) and exercise oscillatory ventilation pattern (bottom panel). VE, minute ventilation. 
Lastly, when the additional assessment of non-invasive cardiac output ( Q ) is performed (eg, CPX for suspected mitochondrial myopathy), the 
Δ Q / Δ V O 2 slope can be easily determined from the ET data in time-down spreadsheet format. 
Universal Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing Reporting Form 
The ability to collect all relevant CPX data in a concise and organized manner is essential for meaningful data interpretation and clinical utilization. The universal CPX reporting form included as Appendix 1 provides clinicians with the ability to collect relevant ET data that may subsequently be used for interpretation according to a patient’s specific condition/test indication. It should be noted that some of the variables in the CPX reporting form will be collected irrespective of the reason for ET. This includes peak 
V O 2 , percent-predicted peak 
V O 2 , 
V O 2 at ventilatory threshold (VT), peak RER, HR, blood pressure (BP), ECG and subjective symptom data. To calculate percent-predicted peak 
V O 2 , the writing group proposes using the equations put forth by Wasserman and Hansen, 26 , 27 which are listed in Table 2 . These equations account for several influencing factors including body habitus, mode of exercise, and sex. The aforementioned variables are relevant to all patients undergoing CPX because of their ability to universally reflect prognosis, maximal and submaximal functional capacity, exercise effort, and exertional physiology. 28 , 29 The collection of other CPX variables included in the universal CPX reporting form are dictated by test indication and described in subsequent sections and appendixes. 
Table 2. 
Predicted Peak Oxygen Consumption Equations 
Wasserman/Hansen Equations a 
Sedentary Male 
Sedentary Female 
Step 1: Calculate 
Step 1; Calculate 
Cycle factor=50.72−0.372 (age) 
Cycle factor=22.78−0.17 (age) 
Predicted weight=0.79 (height)−60.7 
Predicted weight=0.65 (height)−42.8 
Step 2: Classify weight 
Step 2: Classify weight 
Measured weight=predicted weight 
Measured weight= predicted weight 
Step 3: Select equation 
Step 3: Select equation 
Measured weight<Predicted weight 
Measured weight<Predicted weight 
Peak 
V O 2 (mL · min −1 )=[(Predicted weight+Actual weight)/2]×cycle factor 
Peak 
V O 2 (mL · min −1 )=[(Predicted weight+Actual weight +86)/2]×cycle factor 
Measured weight=Predicted weight 
Measured weight= Predicted weight 
Peak 
V O 2 (mL · min −1 )=Measured weightredicted cycle factor 
Peak 
V O 2 (mL · min −1 )=(Measured weight+43)×cycle factor 
Measured weight>Predicted weight 
Measured weight>Predicted weight 
Peak 
V O 2 (mL · min −1 )=(Predicted weight×cycle factor)+6 ×(Measured weight−predicted weight) 
Peak 
V O 2 (mL · min −1 )=(Predicted weight+43)×cycle factor+6 ×(Measured weight−predicted weight) 
Step 4: Mode of exercise consideration 
Step 4: Mode of exercise consideration 
If treadmill used for test 
If treadmill used for test 
Multiply predicted 
V O 2 from step 3×1.11 
Multiply predicted 
V O 2 from step 3×1.11 
Open in a new tab 
V O 2 , oxygen consumption. 
a 
Height in cm and weight in kg. 
Unique Condition-Related Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing Variables According to Test Indication 
There are several suspected/confirmed conditions where performance of a CPX would provide clinically valuable information on diagnosis, prognosis, and/or therapeutic efficacy. However, the volume of scientific evidence supporting the value of CPX is heterogeneous across the conditions identified in subsequent sections. While the clinical use of CPX is firmly established in patients with systolic HF and unexplained exertional dyspnea, additional research, to varying degrees, is needed to further bolster support for CPX in the other patient populations identified in this document. This is not to suggest that a clinical justification for CPX cannot be made for each of the conditions listed below. Moreover, the unique condition-related CPX variables proposed for analysis are based on a sound physiological rationale, expert consensus, and current scientific evidence. The writing group feels that, based on expert opinion and currently available evidence, CPX provides valuable clinical information in all of the conditions listed in subsequent sections. Each of the following sections is accompanied by a condition-specific evaluation chart ( Appendixes 2 – 8 ). These charts include key CPX variables for each test indication in a color-coded format. Responses in the green zone indicate a normal response for a given variable, while responses in the yellow and red zones indicate progressively greater abnormalities. An interpretation, based on CPX performance for key variables, is included at the end of each chart. The intent of these condition-specific charts is to greatly simplify CPX data interpretation, thereby improving clinical utility. 
Systolic Heart Failure 
The majority of research assessing the clinical application of CPX has been performed within the systolic HF population. Beginning in the 1980’s with the landmark work by Weber et al, 30 followed in 1991 with the classic investigation by Mancini et al, 31 a wealth of literature has been put forth that convincingly demonstrates the ability of key CPX variables to predict adverse events and gauge disease severity. 1 , 7 , 32 , 33 Peak 
V O 2 and the 
VE / V CO 2 slope are currently the most studied CPX variables in patients with systolic HF and both demonstrate strong independent prognostic value. While there is evidence to indicate the 
VE / V CO 2 slope is a stronger univariate predictive marker compared to peak 
V O 2 , there is substantial evidence to indicate that a multivariate approach improves prognostic accuracy. 7 Under current medical management strategies, a 
VE / V CO 2 slope ≥45 and a peak 
V O 2 <10.0 mL O 2 · kg −1 · min −1 are indicative of a particularly poor prognosis over the 4-year period following CPX. 34 Other CPX variables have emerged in recent years that appear to further refine prognostic resolution. Specifically, EOV and the partial pressure of end-tidal CO 2 (P ET CO 2 ) during rest and exercise have both demonstrated strong prognostic value in patients with systolic HF. 16 , 35 – 37 Given these variables are readily available, their inclusion for prognostic assessment purposes is recommended. Lastly, there is some evidence to indicate the assessment of percent-predicted peak 
V O 2 may provide prognostic information, 38 – 40 although it is not clear if such information supersedes/compliments the prognostic strength measured peak 
V O 2 . Current evidence indicates that a percent-predicted peak 
V O 2 value falling below 50% indicates a poor prognosis in patients with HF. 38 Research assessing the clinical value of percent-predicted peak 
V O 2 assessment in patients with HF should continue. However, given the disparity in the volume of supporting evidence for the prognostic value of measured peak 
V O 2 vs percent-predicted peak 
V O 2 , we currently recommend the actual peak 
V O 2 value being considered in this patient population to gauge disease severity and prognosis. The prognostic and diagnostic stratification chart for patients with systolic HF is provided in Appendix 2 . The assessment of peak 
V O 2 , the 
VE / V CO 2 slope, presence/absence of EOV, and rest/exercise P ET CO 2 should all be assessed. As values for these variables progress to the red zone, disease severity worsens and the likelihood of major adverse events (ie, death, HF decompensation to the refractory stage) becomes increasingly likely. The risk for softer endpoints, such as hospitalization due to HF, is also likely to increase as variables progress to the red zone. With respect to transplant candidacy, peak 
V O 2 and 
VE / V CO 2 slope values in the red zone should be considered primary criteria for eligibility. Numerous investigations have demonstrated the aforementioned CPX variables respond favorably to pharmacological (ie, sildenafil, angiotensin receptor blockade, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition), surgical (ie, cardiac resynchronization therapy, left ventricular assist device implantation and heart transplantation) and lifestyle (ie, exercise training) interventions appropriate for patients with systolic HF. 7 , 41 – 43 Therefore, when CPX abnormalities are detected a review of the patient’s clinical management strategy is recommended in order to determine whether titration of current interventions or the implementation of new interventions is warranted. In addition, standard ET variables should be included in the assessment as they may provide further information on clinical stability and prognosis. An abnormal hemodynamic and/or ECG response, as well as an abnormally low HR recovery (HRR) at one minute post-ET and report of unusual dyspnea (ie, 4/4: severely difficult, patient cannot continue 17 ) as the primary subjective symptom eliciting test termination, provide further evidence of poor prognosis and greater disease severity. 18 , 29 , 44 , 45 
Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction and Congenital Heart Disease 
Several studies are now available that support the use of CPX for gauging the level of diastolic dysfunction and assessing prognosis in patients with HF-preserved ejection fraction (HF-PEF). 46 – 48 The 
VE / V CO 2 slope and EOV both appear to hold the prognostic value in patients with HF-PEF at a level comparable with that found in patients with systolic HF. Moreover, several investigations similarly support the prognostic importance of CPX in the congenital heart disease population. 49 – 51 Even so, additional research is needed in these patient populations to further elucidate the clinical value of CPX. At this time, the writing group recommends the same reporting chart be used for patients with systolic HF, HF-PEF and congenital heart disease ( Appendix 2 ). 
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy 
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing has promising utility in regard to the assessment of patients with suspected/confirmed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Ventilatory expired gas anlaysis during ET can be used to demarcate functional limitations, with diagnostic and prognostic implications. While the 2002 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association ET guidelines 52 cite HCM as a relative contraindication to ET, many investigators have subsequently highlighted that the technique is safe. 53 – 55 Not only can peak 
V O 2 be used as criterion by which to guide HCM management, it can also serve to distinguish left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) associated with HCM from LVH stemming from relatively more innocuous etiologies. Athletes may, for example, have physiological hypertrophy induced by physical activity. In this context, CPX can be applied to differentiate physiological hypertrophy from LVH in HCM simply on the basis of ET performance. While athletes achieve peak 
V O 2 ’s that typically exceed predicted values, only 1.5% of HCM patients have peak 
V O 2 exceeding predicted values, 56 providing a convenient way to help recognize HCM in young adults who may have LVH but who are asymptomatic and have not been diagnosed with the condition. Measures of ventilatory efficiency, specifically the 
VE / V CO 2 slope and P ET CO 2 , may also be valuable in patients with HCM as abnormalities in these variables have been associated with increased pulmonary pressures as a consequence of advanced LVH-induced diastolic dysfunction. 57 Moreover, recent evidence indicates aerobic capacity and ventilatory efficiency are prognostic markers in minimally symptomatic patients with obstructive HCM. 58 As a provocative exercise stimulus, CPX also provides an important assessment of ECG and hemodynamics. A blunted (≤20 mm Hg increased systolic BP) or hypotensive (exercise systolic BP < resting values) exercise BP response are also common and indicate an increased risk of sudden death. 59 , 60 Moreover, prognostic implications are even worse when abnormal hemodynamic responses are coupled to a low peak 
V O 2 . 61 While exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias are comparatively rare, they may also be associated with high prognostic risks in some patients. 62 The prognostic and diagnostic stratification chart for patients with confirmed or suspected HCM is provided in Appendix 3 . Given the range of peak 
V O 2 values is likely to be wide in this patient population, a percent-predicted value, which has recently demonstrated prognostic value in this population, 58 should be included in the assessment. A progressive decline in percent-predicted values, from green to red, is indicative of worsening disease severity and prognosis. Abnormalities in standard hemodynamic (ie, systolic blood pressure) and ECG (ie, onset of ventricular arrhythmias) variables, progressing to the red zone, are further indication or worsening disease severity and increased risk for adverse events. As values for the 
VE / V CO 2 slope and P ET CO 2 progress from green to red, the likelihood of secondary pulmonary hypertension (PH), induced by HCM, is increased. 
Unexplained Exertional Dyspnea 
CPX possesses the unique ability to comprehensively assess the independent and integrated exertional responses of the CV and pulmonary systems. Moreover, the majority of current CPX systems have the capability to perform pulmonary function testing. Therefore, in patients presenting with unexplained exertional dyspnea, CPX is considered an important assessment to determine the mechanism of exercise intolerance. 1 , 52 When CPX is utilized for this indication, a primary goal should be to reproduce the patient’s exertional symptoms in order to optimally detect any coinciding physiologic abnormalities. The diagnostic stratification chart for patients with unexplained exertional dyspnea is provided in Appendix 4 . The 
VE / V CO 2 slope, percent-predicted peak 
V O 2 , P ET CO 2 and the peak exercise VE/maximal voluntary ventilation (MVV) ratio are primary CPX variables for this assessment. Maximal voluntary ventilation should be directly measured prior to exercise as opposed to estimated using forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV 1 ). Moreover, pulmonary function tests should be performed prior to and following CPX to determine FEV 1 and peak expiratory flow (PEF). 63 – 67 Following CPX, FEV 1 and PEF should be measured at 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 15 and 20 minutes, as responses for these variables typically worsen several minutes into recovery when exercise induced bronchospasm (EIB) is present. 67 In addition to the standard hemodynamic and ECG monitoring procedures, pulse oximetry (SpO 2 ) should also be assessed at rest, throughout ET and into recovery. Given the range of peak 
V O 2 values is likely to be wide in this patient population, a percent-predicted value should be included in the assessment. A progressive decline in percent-predicted values, from green to red, indicates that the physiologic mechanism resulting in exertional dyspnea is having a greater impact on functional capacity. Abnormalities in the 
VE / V CO 2 slope and P ET CO 2 , particularly progressing to the red zone, indicate ventilation-perfusion abnormalities induced by pulmonary vasculopathy 68 , 69 as a potential mechanism for exertional symptoms. Patients with ventilation-perfusion abnormalities may also present with a reduced SpO 2 , and, in such instances, this finding portends advanced pathophysiology. Isolated abnormalities (ie, red zone) in VE/MVV, FEV 1 and PEF are indicative of a pulmonary mechanism for the patient’s unexplained exertional dyspnea. For FEV 1 and PEF responses in the red zone, EIB should be suspected and a bronchodilator trial may be warranted. While both FEV 1 and PEF have been recommended for the assessment of EIB, FEV 1 is frequently assessed in isolation. 65 , 66 Thus, a decrease in FEV 1 >15% post exercise, irrespective of the PEF response, is sufficient to suspect EIB. 67 Detection of hemodynamic and/or ECG abnormalities that coincide with reproduced exertional dyspnea are indicative of a CV mechanism for the patient’s unexplained symptoms. Unique to CPX for this indication, a hypertensive response to exercise that coincides with exertional dyspnea and exercise intolerance may be an early indicator of HF-PEF. 70 , 71 
Suspected or Confirmed Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension or Secondary Pulmonary Hypertension 
Although not currently a standard clinical indication for CPX, the body of evidence supporting the use of this form of ET in patients with suspected or confirmed pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) and secondary PH is growing at an impressive rate. 68 , 69 , 72 – 82 A key value of CPX in detecting potential pulmonary vasculopathy, or gauging disease severity once a diagnosis has been made, is the ability of this exercise approach to non-invasively quantify ventilation-perfusion abnormalities. Specifically, abnormalities in the 
VE / V CO 2 slope and P ET CO 2 are strongly suggestive of pulmonary vasculopathy whose etiology is either PAH or secondary PH as a consequence of other primary conditions such as HF, HCM, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), interstitial lung disease (ILD) or systemic connective tissue diseases. Moreover, there is emerging evidence to suggest key CPX variables portend prognostic value in patients with PAH. The prognostic and diagnostic stratification chart for patients with suspected or confirmed PAH or secondary PH is provided in Appendix 5 . Peak 
V O 2 , the 
VE / V CO 2 slope and P ET CO 2 are primary CPX variables in patients with suspected or confirmed PAH or secondary PH. Patients suffering from pulmonary vasculopathy, regardless of the mechanism, typically present with significantly compromised aerobic capacity. Thus, reporting peak 
V O 2 as an actual value, using the Weber classification system, 30 is warranted. In those patients without a confirmed diagnosis, the likelihood of pulmonary vasculopathy increases as values for the 
VE / V CO 2 slope and P ET CO 2 progress from green to red. In patients with a confirmed diagnosis of PAH/secondary PH, progressively worsening abnormalities of the aforementioned ventilatory efficiency variables as well as aerobic capacity are indicative of increasing disease severity. Moreover, worsening responses in these primary CPX variables are indicative of increased risk for adverse events. With respect to mode of testing, there is evidence to suggest ventilatory efficiency abnormalities are more pronounced during treadmill ET compared to cycle ergometry. 83 Therefore, treadmill CPX may be optimal when assessing patients with suspected or confirmed pulmonary vasculopathy. In addition, patients with advanced PAH/secondary PH often present with an abnormal reduction in SpO 2 . Lastly, abnormal hemodynamic and/or ECG responses further compound concerns over increasing disease severity and prognosis in these patients. 
Confirmed Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease or Interstitial Lung Disease 
The literature supporting the use of CPX in patients with confirmed COPD or ILD is beginning to increase, producing compelling results in support of this form of ET for these patient populations. Several investigations have demonstrated that peak 
V O 2 is predictive of adverse events in patients with COPD 84 , 85 and ILD. 86 , 87 Like patients with HF, a peak 
V O 2 <10 mLO 2 · kg −1 · min −1 portends a particularly poor prognosis. The prognostic ability of peak 
V O 2 in patients with pulmonary disease has led the American College of Chest Physicians to recommend that CPX be used pre-surgically in lung resection candidates to assess postsurgical risk. 88 Initial evidence also indicates the 
VE / V CO 2 slope is a significant post-surgical prognostic marker in patients with COPD undergoing lung resection. 89 Additionally, the ability of CPX to gauge ventilatory efficiency is valuable in screening for secondary PH in patients with COPD and ILD. 90 , 91 As the 
VE / V CO 2 slope progressively increases and P ET CO 2 progressively decreases above and below their normal values, respectively, the presence of secondary PH becomes more likely. The prognostic and diagnostic stratification chart for patients with COPD and ILD is provided in Appendix 6 . Peak 
V O 2 , the 
VE / V CO 2 slope and P ET CO 2 are primary CPX variables for both COPD and ILD patients. As values for these variables progress to the red zone, there is an increased risk for adverse events and greater likelihood of secondary PH. Additionally, standard exercise variables progressing to the red zone compound the concern for poor prognosis in these patients. 
Suspected Myocardial Ischemia 
Standard graded/incremental ET procedures are a well-accepted and valuable clinical assessment tool in patients at high risk for myocardial ischemia. 6 , 52 , 92 The use of ventilatory expired gas analysis for patients undergoing ET for suspected myocardial ischemia is not commonplace in the clinical setting at this time. In recent years, however, several investigations have demonstrated the potential diagnostic utility of CPX in this setting. 93 , 94 Recent studies have found that the real-time change in the O 2 pulse and 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W trajectories are most valuable when using CPX to assess for exercise-induced myocardial ischemia. Under normal physiologic conditions, both of these relationships progressively rise during maximal ET. However, left-ventricular dysfunction induced by myocardial ischemia causes both the O 2 pulse and 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W trajectories to prematurely flatten or decline (See Figure 1 ). In a landmark study, Belardinelli et al 95 performed CPX in 202 patients with a confirmed diagnosis of coronary heart disease (CHD), using 2-day stress/rest gated SPECT myocardial scintigraphy as the gold standard for myocardial ischemia. Using logistic regression, flattening of the O 2 pulse and 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W R trajectories were independent predictors of exercise-induced myocardial ischemia. The sensitivity and specificity for O 2 pulse + 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W flattening as criteria for exercise-induced myocardial ischemia were 87% and 74%, respectively. Comparatively, ECG criteria for exercise-induced myocardial ischemia, defined as the onset of 1.0 mm horizontal ST segment depression in at least two adjacent leads, produced a sensitivity and specificity of 46% and 66%, respectively. Of particular note, the addition of O 2 pulse and 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W trajectory assessments helped to rule out ischemia in a significant portion of individuals for whom the ECG was falsely positive. As a technical note, the majority of investigations validating the clinical applications of CPX for patients with suspected myocardial ischemia to this point, including the landmark investigation by Belardinelli et al, 95 used a lower extremity bicycle ergometry as the mode of testing. Thus, additional research should be conducted to determine if the diagnostic utility of CPX for myocardial ischemia is present when a treadmill is the testing mode. The diagnostic stratification chart for patients with suspected myocardial ischemia is provided in Appendix 7 . Assessment of the O 2 pulse and 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W trajectories are primary CPX variables. As values for these variables progress to the red zone, the likelihood of exercise-induced myocardial ischemia increases. Given that the range of peak 
V O 2 values is likely to be wide in patients undergoing CPX for this indication, a percent-predicted value should be included in the assessment. A progressive decline in percent-predicted values, from green to red, is indicative of poorer aerobic fitness and possibly increased coronary artery disease severity. Previous research has demonstrated lower percent-predicted aerobic fitness values to be indicative of poor prognosis. 96 As with all ET procedures, standard hemodynamic and ECG variables should be assessed in patients with suspected myocardial ischemia. Abnormalities in these measures progressing to the red zone further increase the likelihood of exercise-induced myocardial ischemia and provide prognostic insight. 29 Lastly, evidence suggests patients with suspected myocardial ischemia who report unusual dyspnea (ie, 4/4: severely difficult, patient cannot continue 17 ) as the primary reason for exercise limitations have a poorer prognosis compared to those whose primary limiting symptom is lower extremity fatigue or angina. 14 While research demonstrating the value of CPX in this area is promising, additional investigations are needed to further substantiate CPX for this purpose, particularly in cohorts with suspected myocardial ischemia and no prior workup bias. 
Suspected Mitochondrial Myopathy 
A number of genetic abnormalities exist which can lead to diminished CRF and a host of other exertional abnormalities uniquely captured by CPX. 22 , 97 The degree of impairment in peak 
V O 2 appears to correlate to the severity of genetic mutation. 22 , 98 Moreover, patients with mitochondrial myopathies have an elevated 
VE / V O 2 ratio at peak exercise, as the ventilatory cost of 
V O 2 dramatically rises due to aerobic inefficiency by affected skeletal muscle. The ability to noninvasively quantify Q during CPX in an accurate manner is now possible through foreign gas rebreathing methods. 1 Using this technique, the relationship between Q ( y -axis) and 
V O 2 ( x -axis) during ET are plotted, generating a slope value. In normal circumstances, where O 2 utilization and delivery are well-matched, the 
Δ Q / Δ V O 2 slope is 5 L/min. In subjects with mitochondrial myopathies, this slope is much higher as oxygen delivery far exceeds the capacity for utilization. 22 The diagnostic stratification chart for patients with suspected mitochondrial myopathy is provided in Appendix 8 . Assessment of the 
Δ Q / Δ V O 2 slope and peak 
VE / V O 2 are primary CPX variables. As values for these variables progress to the red zone, the likelihood of a mitochondrial myopathy increases. Moreover, the degree of abnormality in the 
Δ Q / Δ V O 2 slope and peak 
VE / V O 2 response is indicative of the degree of mitochondrial mutation load. Given the range of peak 
V O 2 values is likely to be wide in patients undergoing CPX for this indication, a percent-predicted value should be included in the assessment. A progressive decline in percent-predicted values, from green to red, when coinciding with an abnormal 
Δ Q / Δ V O 2 slope and peak 
VE / V O 2 , is likewise indicative of an increasingly higher mitochondrial mutation load. When these variables are abnormal, a muscle biopsy would be warranted to obtain a definitive diagnosis. Additionally, standard hemodynamic and ECG variables should be assessed in patients with suspected mitochondrial myopathy, as abnormalities in these measures are universally indicative of CV abnormalities and increased adverse event risk. 29 
Directions for Future Research 
The current statement provides recommendations for CPX data interpretation based upon currently available scientific evidence and expert consensus. However, there are other CPX variables that may emerge as clinically important measures in a number of the patient populations described herein. Examples of CPX variables demonstrating potential value are the oxygen uptake efficiency slope, 99 – 101 circulatory power 102 and 
V O 2 onset 103 , 104 and recovery 105 kinetics. Moreover, additional research is needed to further increase support for the use of CPX in certain patient populations as previously mentioned. Additional investigations into the value of CPX in females also seem warranted across all patient populations that would benefit from this form of ET. Lastly, future investigations are needed to determine if other patient populations would benefit from CPX as a component of their clinical assessment. For example, there is some initial data to indicate CPX may provide valuable information in patients with atrial fibrillation, a condition associated with ventilatory and functional abnormalities. 106 , 107 This writing group encourages continued research into the clinical utility of CPX across all patient populations where a viable case can be made for this form of ET, addressing specific questions in need of further analysis. Future investigations in this area will lead to additional refinement of CPX utilization and data interpretation as well as improve the clinical value of this assessment technique. 
Conclusions 
CPX is well recognized as the gold standard aerobic ET assessment. The use of CPX is well-established in the clinical setting for both patients with systolic HF, undergoing a pre-transplant assessment, and individuals with unexplained exertional dyspnea. 6 , 52 The evidence supporting the use of CPX in patients with confirmed or suspected PAH and secondary PH is also rapidly expanding and a strong case for the application of this ET assessment in this population can now be made. There is also emerging evidence to demonstrate CPX elicits clinically valuable information in a number of other patient populations, which are described in this document. Irrespective of the reason for the ET assessment, the utility of CPX currently suffers from an inability to easily interpret the most useful information in a way that is evidence based and specific to test indication. The present document attempts to rectify this issue by coalescing expert opinion and current scientific evidence and creating easily interpretable CPX charts that are indication-specific. It is the hope of the writing group that this document will expand the appropriate use of CPX by simplifying data interpretation, thereby increasing the clinical value of the data obtained. 
Abbreviations 
BP 
Blood pressure 
CHD 
Coronary heart disease 
CO 2 
Carbon dioxide 
COPD 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
CPX 
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing 
CRF 
Cardiorespiratory fitness 
CV 
Cardiovascular 
ECG 
Electrocardiogram 
EIB 
Exercise induced bronchospasm 
EOV 
Exercise oscillatory ventilation 
ET 
Exercise testing 
FEV 1 
Forced expiratory volume in one second 
HCM 
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
HF 
Heart failure 
HF-PEF 
Heart failure-preserved ejection fraction 
HR 
Heart rate 
HRR 
Heart rate recovery 
ILD 
Interstitial lung disease 
LVH 
Left ventricular hypertrophy 
MVV 
Maximal voluntary ventilation 
O 2 
Oxygen 
PAH 
Pulmonary arterial hypertension 
PEF 
Peak expiratory flow 
P ET CO 2 
Partial pressure of end-tidal carbon dioxide 
PH 
Pulmonary hypertension 
Q 
Cardiac output 
RER 
Respiratory exchange ratio 
SpO 2 
Pulse oximetry 
US 
United States 
VE 
Minute ventilation 
V CO 2 
Carbon dioxide production 
V O 2 
Oxygen consumption 
VT 
Ventilatory threshold 
Appendix 1. Universal CPX Reporting Form (Complete All Boxes That Apply for Given ET Indication) 
Exercise modality: [ ] Treadmill [ ] Lower extremity ergometer 
Protocol: 
Peak V O2 (mL O 2 ·kg −1 min −1 ) V O2 at VT (mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 ) 
Per cent-predicted peak V O2 (%) a Peak RER 
VE / V CO 2 slope EOV [ ] Yes [ ] No 
P ET CO 2 (mmHg) Resting: 
Increase during ET: 
VE/V O2 at peak ET 
AQ / A V O 2 
b 
VE/MVV c 
PEF(L/min):Pre-ET Post-ET 
O 2 pulse trajectory d 
[ ] Continual rise throughout ET [ ] Early and sustained plateau [ ] Decline 
AV O2 /AW trajectory d 
[ ] Continual rise throughout ET [ ] Early and sustained plateau 
[ ] Decline 
Resting HR (b.p.m.) Peak HR (b.p.m.) 
Resting BP (mmHg) Peak BP (mmHg) 
Resting pulse oximetry (%) 
Peak pulse oximetry (%) 
Percent of age-predicted maximal HR e HRR at 1 min (beats) 
Maximal workload [ ] Treadmill speed/grade: [ ] Cycler ergometer Watts: 
ECG criteria 
[ ] No arrhythmias/Ectopy/ST segment changes [ ] Arrhythmias/Ectopy/ST segment changes: not exercise limiting [ ] 
Arrhythmias/Ectopy/ST segment changes: exercise limiting 
ECG description 
Subjective symptoms (check box for primary termination criteria) 
RPE [ ] Angina [ ] Dyspnoea [ ] 
Additional notes 
Open in a new tab 
CPX, cardiopulmonary exercise testing; ET, exercise testing; 
V O 2 , oxygen consumption; VT, ventilator threshold; RER, respiratory exchange ratio; 
VE / V QO 2 , minute ventilation/carbon dioxide production; EOV, exercise oscillatory ventilation; P E TCO2, partial pressure of end-tidal carbon dioxide production; 
VE / V O 2 , minute ventilation/oxygen consumption; VE/MVV, peak minute ventilation/maximal voluntary ventilation; 
AQ / A V O 2 , change in cardiac output/change in oxygen consumption; PEF, peak expiratory flow; O 2 , oxygen; A
V O 2 / AW , change in oxygen consumption/change in Watts; HR, heart rate; BP, blood pressure; HRR, heart rate recovery; ECG, electrocardiogram; RPE, rating of perceived exertion 
a 
Use equations proposed by Wasserman. 
b 
Requires additional equipment of assess Q response to exercise through non-invasive rebreathing technique. 
c 
Directly measure MVV at baseline. 
d 
Requires O 2 pulse and A
V O 2 /AW plot from initiation to end of ET. If these variables required for assessment, electronically braked cycle ergometer should be used for testing. 
e 
Use equation: (peak HR/220-age) * 100. 
Appendix 2. Prognostic and Diagnostic Stratification for Patients With Heart Failure 
Primary CPX variables 
VE / V CO 2 slope 
Peak 
V O 2 a 
EOV 
P ET CO 2 
Ventilatory class I 
VE / V CO 2 slope <30.0 
Weber class A 
Peak 
V O 2 >20.0 ml O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 
Not present 
Resting P ET CO 2 
≥33.0 mmHg 
3–8 mmHg increase during ET 
Ventilatory class II 
VE / V CO 2 slope 30.0–35.9 
Weber class B 
Peak 
V O 2 = 16.0–20.0 mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 
Ventilatory class III 
VE / V CO 2 slope 36.0–44.9 
Weber class C 
Peak 
V O 2 = 10.0–15.9 mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 
Present 
Resting P ET CO 2 
<33.0 mmHg 
<3 mmHg increase during exercise 
Ventilatory class IV 
VE / V CO 2 slope ≥45.0 
Weber class D 
Peak 
V O 2 <10.0 ml O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 
Standard ET variables 
Haemodynamics 
ECG 
HRR 
Rise in systolic BP during ET 
No sustained arrhythmias, ectopic foci, and/or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery 
>12 beats at 1 min recovery 
Flat systolic BP response during exercise 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: did not lead to test termination 
≤12 beats at 1 min recovery 
Drop in systolic BP during ET 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: led to test termination 
Patient reason for test termination 
Lower extremity muscle fatigue 
Angina 
Dyspnoea 
Interpretation 
• All variables in green: excellent prognosis in next 1–4 years (≥90% event free) 
– Maintain medical management and retest in 4 years. 
• Greater number of CPX and standard ET variables in red/yellow/orange indicative of progressively worse prognosis. 
– All CPX variables in red: risk for major adverse event extremely high in next 1–4 years (>50%). 
• Greater number of CPX and standard ET variables in red/yellow/orange indicative of increasing HF disease severity. 
– All CPX variables in red: expect significantly diminished cardiac output, elevated neurohormones, higher potential for secondary PH. 
• Greater number of CPX and standard ET variables in red/yellow/orange warrants strong consideration of more aggressive medical management and surgical options. 
Open in a new tab 
VE / V CO 2 , minute ventilation/carbon dioxide production; 
V O 2 , oxygen consumption; EOV, exercise oscillatory ventilation; P ET CO 2 , partial pressure of end-tidal carbon dioxide; BP, blood pressure; CPX, cardiopulmonary exercise test; ECG, electrocardiogram; ET, exercise test; HRR, heart rate recovery; RER, respiratory exchange ratio. 
a 
Peak 
V O 2 valid if peak RER is at least 1.00 or test terminated secondary to abnormal haemodynamic or ECG exercise response. 
Appendix 3. Prognostic and Diagnostic Stratification for Patients With Confirmed or Suspected HCM 
Primary CPX variables 
VE / V CO 2 slope 
Per cent-predicted peak 
V O 2 a 
P ET CO 2 apex during ET b 
Ventilatory class I 
VE / V CO 2 slope <30.0 
≥ 100% predicted 
> 37 mmHg 
Ventilatory class II 
VE / V CO 2 slope 30.0–35.9 
75–99% predicted 
36–30 mmHg 
Ventilatory class III 
VE / V CO 2 slope 36.0–44.9 
50–75% predicted 
29–20 mmHg 
Ventilatory class IV 
VE / V CO 2 slope ≥45.0 
<50% predicted 
<20 mmHg 
Standard ET variables 
Haemodynamics 
ECG 
Rise in systolic BP during ET 
No sustained arrhythmias, ectopic foci, and/or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery 
Flat systolic BP response during ET 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: did not lead to test termination 
Drop in systolic BP during ET 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: led to test termination 
Interpretation 
• Progressively higher 
VE / V CO 2 slope and lower per cent-predicted peak 
V O 2 and peak P ET CO 2 indicative of greater HCM severity. 
– CPX variables progressing from yellow to orange to red increase the likelihood of increased pulmonary pressure. 
• Haemodynamic and ECG responses in yellow and red indicative of increasing risk for sudden cardiac death. 
Open in a new tab 
VE / V CO 2 , minute ventilation/CO 2 production; 
V O 2 , O 2 consumption; P ET CO 2 apex, partial pressure of end-tidal CO 2 ; BP, blood pressure; CPX, cardiopulmonary exercise test; ECG, electrocardiogram; ET, exercise test; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; VT, ventilatory threshold. 
a 
Peak 
V O 2 valid if peak respiratory exchange ratio is at least 1.00 or test terminated secondary to abnormal haemodynamic or ECG exercise response. Per cent-predicted values derived from formulas proposed by Wasserman. 
b 
P ET CO 2 apex is achieved at submaximal levels during a progressive exercise test; typically immediately proceeds VT. 
Appendix 4. Diagnostic Stratification for Patients With Unexplained Exertional Dyspnea 
Primary CPX variables 
VE / V CO 2 slope 
Percent-predicted peak 
V O 2 a 
P ET CO 2 
VE/MVV b 
Ventilatory class I 
VE/ 
V CO 2 slope <30.0 
≥100% predicted 
Resting P ET CO 2 36–42 mmHg 
3–8 mmHg increase during ET 
> 0.80 
Ventilatory class II 
VE / V CO 2 slope 30.0–35.9 
75–99% predicted 
Ventilatory class III 
VE / V CO 2 slope 36.0–44.9 
50–75% predicted 
Resting P ET CO 2 <36 mmHg 
<3 mmHg increase during ET 
≤0.80 
Ventilatory class IV 
VE / V CO 2 slope ≥45.0 
<50% predicted 
Primary PFT variables: FEV 1 and PEF c 
No change from pre- to post-CPX 
≥15% reduction from pre- to post-CPX 
Standard ET variables 
Haemodynamics 
ECG 
Pulse oximetry 
Rise in systolic BP during ET: 10 mmHg/3.5 mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 increase in 
V O 2 
No sustained arrhythmias, ectopic foci, and/or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery 
No change in SpO 2 from baseline 
Flat response or drop in systolic BP during ET Or 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: did not lead to test termination 
>5% decrease in SpO 2 from baseline 
Excessive rise in systolic BP during exercise: ≥20 mmHg/3.5 mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 increase in 
V O 2 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: led to test termination 
Interpretation 
• Progression of per cent predicted peak 
V O 2 from green to red reflects degree of functional impairment irrespective of mechanism. 
• As 
VE / V CO 2 slope progresses from yellow to orange to red and P ET CO 2 progresses to red, consider exertion-induced increase in pulmonary pressure as a mechanism. 
• Pulse oximetry progression to red indicative of ventilation-perfusion mismatch. 
• VE/MVV, FEV 1 and PEF in red indicative of pulmonary mechanism; worsening FEV 1 and PEF response through first several minutes of recovery suggestive of EIB; FEV 1 response in the red, irrespective of PEF response, also suggestive of EIB. 
• Haemodynamic and/or ECG response in red indicative of CV mechanism. 
Open in a new tab 
VE / V CO 2 , minute ventilation/CO 2 production; 
V O 2 , O 2 consumption; P ET CO 2 , partial pressure of end-tidal CO 2 ; VE/MVV, minute ventilation at peak exercise/maximal voluntary ventilation (maximal voluntary ventilation should be directly measured prior to ET); PFT, pulmonary function test; FEV 1 , forced expiratory volume in one second; PER peak expiratory flow; BP, blood pressure; CPX, cardiopulmonary exercise test; CV, cardiovascular; ECG, electrocardiogram; ET, exercise test; RER, respiratory exchange ratio; SpO 2 , saturation of peripheral O 2 ; EIB, exercise induced bronchospasm. 
a 
Peak 
V O 2 valid if peak RER is at least 1.00 or test terminated secondary to abnormal haemodynamic or ECG exercise response. Percent-predicted values derived from formulas proposed by Wasserman. 
b 
MVV should be directly measured prior to CPX; the majority of CPX systems allow for MW measurement. 
c 
Following CPX, measurement of FEV 1 and PEF should be conducted at 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 15, and 20 min. 
Appendix 5. Prognostic and Diagnostic Stratification for Patients With Suspected or Confirmed PAH/Secondary PH 
Primary CPX variables 
VE / V CO 2 slope 
Peak 
V O 2 a 
P ET CO 2 apex during exercise b 
Ventilatory class I 
VE / V CO 2 slope <30.0 
Weber class A 
Peak 
V O 2 > 20.0 mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 
> 37 mmHg 
Ventilatory class II 
VE / V CO 2 slope 30.0–35.9 
Weber class B 
Peak 
V O 2 = 16.0–20.0 mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 
36–30 mmHg 
Ventilatory class III 
VE / V CO 2 slope 36.0–44.9 
Weber class C 
Peak 
V O 2 = 10.0–15.9 mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 
29-20 mmHg 
Ventilatory class IV 
VE / V CO 2 slope >45.0 
Weber class D 
Peak 
V O 2 <10.0 mL O 2 ·kg −l ·min −1 
<20mmHg 
Standard ET variables 
Haemodynamics 
ECG 
Pulse oximetry 
Rise in systolic BP during ET 
No sustained arrhythmias, ectopic foci, and/or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery 
No change in SpO 2 from baseline 
Flat systolic BP response during ET 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: did not lead to test termination 
>5% decrease in SpO 2 from baseline 
Drop in systolic BP during ET 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: led to test termination 
Interpretation 
• All variables in green: indicative of good prognosis. 
– Maintain medical management and retest in 4 years. 
• Greater number of CPX and standard ET variables in red/yellow/orange indicative of progressively worse prognosis. 
– All CPX variables in red: risk for major adverse event extremely high in next 1–4 years. 
• Greater number of CPX and standard ET variables in red/yellow/orange indicative of increasing severity of pulmonary vasculopathy. 
– All CPX variables in red: expect significantly increased pulmonary arterial pressure. 
• Greater number of CPX and standard ET variables in red/yellow/orange warrants strong consideration of more aggressive medical management. 
Open in a new tab 
VE / V CO 2 . minute ventilation/CO 2 production; 
V O 2 , O 2 consumption, P ET CO 2 , partial pressure of end-tidal CO 2 ; BP, blood pressure; CPX, cardiopulmonary exercise test; ECG, electrocardiogram; ET, exercise test; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension; PH, pulmonary hypertension; RER, respiratory exchange ratio; SpO 2 , saturation of peripheral O 2 ; VT, ventilatory threshold. 
a 
Peak 
V O 2 valid if peak RER is at least 1.00 or test terminated secondary to abnormal haemodynamic or ECG exercise response. 
b 
P ET CO 2 apex achieved at submaximal levels; typically immediately proceeds VT. 
Appendix 6. Prognostic and Diagnostic Stratification for Patients With COPD or ILD 
VE / V CO 2 slope 
Peak 
V O 2 a 
P ET CO 2 
Ventilatory class I 
VE / V CO 2 slope <30.0 
Weber class A 
Peak 
V O 2 >20.0mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 
Resting P ET CO 2 ≥33.0 mmHg 
3–8 mmHg increase during ET 
Ventilatory class II 
VE / V CO 2 slope 30.0–35.9 
Weber class B 
Peak 
V O 2 = 16.0–20.0 mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 
Ventilatory class III 
VE / V CO 2 slope 36.0–44.9 
Weber class C 
Peak 
V O 2 = 10.0–15.9 mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 
Resting P ET CO 2 <33.0 mmHg 
3–8 mmHg increase during ET 
Ventilatory class IV 
VE / V CO 2 slope ≥45.0 
Weber class D 
Peak 
V O 2 <10.0 mL O 2 ·kg −1 ·min −1 
Standard ET variables 
Haemodynamics 
ECG 
HRR 
Pulse oximetry 
Rise in systolic BP during ET 
No sustained arrhythmias, ectopic foci, and/or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery 
>12 beats at 1 min recovery 
No change in SpO 2 from baseline 
Flat systolic BP response during ET 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: did not lead to test termination 
≤12 beats at 1 min recovery 
>5% decrease in SpO 2 from baseline 
Drop in systolic BP during ET 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: led to test termination 
Interpretation 
• All variables in green: excellent prognosis in next 1–4 years. 
– Maintain medical management and retest in 4 years. 
• Greater number of CPX and standard exercise test variables in red/yellow/orange indicative of progressively worse prognosis. 
– All CPX variables in red: risk for major adverse event extremely high in next 1–4 
• Greater number of CPX and standard ET variables in red/yellow/orange indicative of increasing interstitial lung disease severity. 
– As 
VE / V CO 2 slope and P ET CO 2 progress to red, likelihood of secondary PH increases. 
• Greater number of CPX and standard ET variables in red/yellow/orange warrants strong consideration of more aggressive medical management and surgical options. 
Open in a new tab 
VE / V CO 2 , minute ventilation/CO 2 production; 
V O 2 , oxygen Consumption; P ET CO 2 : partial pressure of end-tidal CO 2 ; BP, blood pressure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CPX, cardiopulmonary exercise test; ECG, electrocardiogram; ET, exercise test; HRR, heart rate recovery; ILD, interstitial lung disease; PH, pulmonary hypertension; RER, respiratory exchange ratio; SpO 2 , saturation of peripheral O 2 . 
a 
Peak 
V O 2 valid if peak RER is at least 1.00 or test terminated secondary to abnormal haemodynamic or ECG exercise response. 
Appendix 7. Diagnostic Stratification for Patients With Suspected Myocardial Ischemia 
Primary CPX variables 
O 2 pulse trajectory b 
Per cent-predicted peak 
V O 2 a 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W trajectory b 
Continual rise throughout ET with possible plateau approaching maximal exertion 
≥100% predicted 
Continual rise throughout ET 
Early and sustained plateau 
75–99% predicted 
Early and sustained plateau 
50–75% predicted 
Early plateau then decline 
<50% predicted 
Early plateau then decline 
Standard exercise test variables 
Haemodynamics 
ECG 
Rise in systolic BP during ET 
No sustained arrhythmias, ectopic foci, and/or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery 
Flat systolic BP response during ET 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: did not lead to test termination 
Drop in systolic BP during ET 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: led to test termination 
Patient reason for test termination 
Lower extremity muscle fatigue 
Angina 
Dyspnoea 
Interpretation 
• Progression of per cent-predicted peak 
V O 2 from green to red indicative of progressively higher level of ischaemia and functional decline. 
• O 2 pulse and 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W trajectory progressing to red indicative of myocardial ischaemia in appropriately screened patients (i.e. baseline signs/symptoms/risk factors suggesting increased coronary artery disease risk). 
• Haemodynamic and ECG responses in yellow and red indicative of abnormal exercise response and further support myocardial ischemia in appropriately screened patients (i.e. baseline signs/symptoms/risk factors suggesting increased CHD risk). 
Open in a new tab 
O 2 pulse, oxygen pulse; 
V O 2 , oxygen consumption; 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W , change in oxygen consumption/change in Watts; BP, blood pressure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CPX, cardiopulmonary exercise test; ECG, electrocardiogram; ET, exercise test; ILD, interstitial lung disease; PH, pulmonary hypertension; RER, respiratory exchange ratio. 
a 
Per cent-predicted peak 
V O 2 valid if peak RER is at least 1.00 or test terminated secondary to abnormal hemodynamic or ECG exercise response. Per cent-predicted values derived from formulas proposed by Wasserman 
b 
Requires O 2 pulse and 
Δ V O 2 / Δ W plot from initiation to end of exercise test. If these variables required for assessment, electronically braked cycle ergometer should be used for testing. 
Appendix 8. Diagnostic Stratification for Patients With Suspected Mitochondrial Myopathy 
Primary CPX variables 
Δ Q / Δ V O 2 
Per cent-predicted peak 
V O 2 a 
Peak 
VE / V O 2 
≈5 
≥ 100% predicted 
≈40 
75–99% predicted 
50 = upper limit of normal 
≥ 7 
50–75% predicted 
>50 
<50% predicted 
Standard ET variables 
Haemodynamics 
ECG 
Rise in systolic BP during ET 
No sustained arrhythmias, ectopic foci, and/or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery 
Flat systolic BP response during ET 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: did not lead to test termination 
Drop in systolic BP during ET 
Altered rhythm, ectopic foci, and or ST segment changes during ET and/or in recovery: led to test termination 
Interpretation 
• Progression of per cent-predicted peak 
V O 2 from green to red indicative of progressively higher level of mitochondrial dysfunction. 
•
Δ Q / Δ V O 2 and peak 
VE / V O 2 in red indicative of mitochondrial myopathy; consider muscle biopsy to obtain definitive diagnosis. 
• Although not diagnostic for mitochondrial myopathy, haemodynamic and ECG responses in yellow and red universally indicative of abnormal ET response. 
Open in a new tab 
Δ Q / Δ V O 2 , change in cardiac output/change in O 2 consumption; measurement requires additional equipment of assess Q response to ET through non-invasive rebreathing technique; 
V O 2 , O 2 consumption; 
VE / V O 2 , minute Ventilation/O 2 consumption; BP, blood pressure; CPX, cardiopulmonary exercise test; ECG, electrocardiogram; ET, exercise test; RER, respiratory exchange ratio. 
a 
Per cent-predicted peak 
V O 2 valid if peak RER is at least 1.00 or ET terminated secondary to abnormal haemodynamic or ECG exercise response. Per cent-predicted values derived from formulas proposed by Wasserman. 
Disclosures 
Writing Group Disclosures. 
Writing Group 
Member 
Employment 
Research 
Grant 
Other Research 
Support 
Speakers’ 
Bureau/Honoraria 
Expert Witness 
Ownership Interest 
Consultant/Advisory 
Board 
Other 
Marco Guazzi, Co-Chair 
University of Milano, San Paolo Hospital 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Ross Arena, Co-Chair 
University of New Mexico 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Volker Adams 
Heart Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Viviane Conraads 
Antwerp University Hospital 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Gerald Fletcher 
Mayo Clinic Jacksonville 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Daniel E. Forman 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Martin Halle 
University, TU Munich 
None 
None 
Roche * ; Berlin-Chemie/Menarini * ; MSD * ; Astra-Zeneca * ; BMS * 
Health insurance company, TK, Germany * 
None 
Consultant for Sanofi-Aventis * 
None 
Dalane W. Kitzman 
Wake Forest University 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Stock options † ; Stock ownership † 
None 
None 
Carl J. Lavie 
University of Queensland School of Medicine 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Alessandro Mezzani 
S. Maugeri Foundation, Scientific Institute of Veruno, Italy 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Jonathan Myers 
VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Stanford University 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Luc Vanhees 
University of Leuven; Leuven, Belgium 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Open in a new tab 
* 
Modest. 
† 
Significant. 
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all writing group members are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “Significant” if (a) the person receives $10,000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10,000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “Modest” if it is less than “Significant” under the preceding definition. 
Reviewer Disclosures. 
Reviewer 
Employment 
Research 
Grant 
Other Research 
Support 
Speakers’ 
Bureau/Honoraria 
Expert 
Witness 
Ownership 
Interest 
Consultant/Advisory 
Board 
Other 
Lawrence P. Cahalin 
University of Miami 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Paul J. Chase 
LeBauer Cardiovascular Research Foundation 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
U. Corrà 
Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri, IRCCS Centro Medico di Veruno 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Massimo Piepoli 
AUSL Pacienza 
None 
None 
AstraZeneca * ; Bayer * ; Chiesi * 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Jean-Paul Schmid 
Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation, University Hospital (Inselspital), Bern, Switzerland 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Salim S. Virani 
Baylor College of Medicine 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Mark A. Williams 
Creighton University 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Open in a new tab 
* 
Modest. 
This table represents the relationships of reviewer that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “Significant” if (a) the person receives $10,000 or more during any 12 month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10,000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “Modest” if it is less than “Significant” under the preceding definition. 
The European Society of Cardiology/European Association for Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation and the American Heart Association make every effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest. 
This document was approved by the European Society of Cardiology/European Association for Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation June 27, 2012, and by the American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee June 5, 2012. 
Copies: This document is available on the World Wide Web sites of the European Society of Cardiology ( www.escardio.org ) and the American Heart Association (my.americanheart.org). A copy of the document is available at http://my.americanheart.org/statements by selecting either the “By Topic” link or the “By Publication Date” link. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com . 
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines development, visit http://my.americanheart.org/statements and select the “Policies and Development” link. 
References 
1. Balady GJ, Arena R, Sietsema K, et al. Clinician’s guide to cardiopulmonary exercise testing in adults: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2010;122:191–225. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3181e52e69. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Piepoli MF, Corra U, Agostoni PG, et al. Statement on cardiopulmonary exercise testing in chronic heart failure due to left ventricular dysfunction: recommendations for performance and interpretation Part II: How to perform cardiopulmonary exercise testing in chronic heart failure. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2006;13:300–311. doi: 10.1097/00149831-200606000-00003. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Piepoli MF, Corra U, Agostoni PG, et al. Statement on cardiopulmonary exercise testing in chronic heart failure due to left ventricular dysfunction: recommendations for performance and interpretation. Part I: definition of cardiopulmonary exercise testing parameters for appropriate use in chronic heart failure. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2006;13:150–164. doi: 10.1097/01.hjr.0000209812.05573.04. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Piepoli MF, Corra U, Agostoni PG, et al. Statement on cardiopulmonary exercise testing in chronic heart failure due to left ventricular dysfunction: recommendations for performance and interpretation Part III: Interpretation of cardiopulmonary exercise testing in chronic heart failure and future applications. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2006;13:485–494. doi: 10.1097/00149831-200602000-00003. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. ATS/ACCP statement on cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003;167:211–277. doi: 10.1164/rccm.167.2.211. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Gibbons RJ, Balady GJ, Beasley JW, et al. ACC/AHA guidelines for exercise testing: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee on Exercise Testing) J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;30:260–311. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(97)00150-2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Arena R, Myers J, Guazzi M. The clinical and research applications of aerobic capacity and ventilatory efficiency in heart failure: an evidence-based review. Heart Fail Rev. 2008;13:245–269. doi: 10.1007/s10741-007-9067-5. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Arena R, Lavie CJ, Milani RV, Myers J, Guazzi M. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension: an evidence-based review. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010;29:159–173. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2009.09.003. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. Mezzani A, Agostoni P, Cohen-Solal A, et al. Standards for the use of cardiopulmonary exercise testing for the functional evaluation of cardiac patients: a report from the Exercise Physiology Section of the European Association for Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2009;16:249–267. doi: 10.1097/HJR.0b013e32832914c8. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. Palange P, Ward SA, Carlsen KH, et al. Recommendations on the use of exercise testing in clinical practice. Eur Respir J. 2007;29:185–209. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00046906. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. Arena R, Myers J, Williams MA, et al. Assessment of functional capacity in clinical and research settings: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association Committee on Exercise, Rehabilitation, and Prevention of the Council on Clinical Cardiology and the Council on Cardiovascular Nursing. Circulation. 2007;116:329–343. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.184461. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Brunelli A, Belardinelli R, Refai M, et al. Peak oxygen consumption during cardiopulmonary exercise test improves risk stratification in candidates to major lung resection. Chest. 2009;135:1260–1267. doi: 10.1378/chest.08-2059. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. Arena R, Myers J, Abella J, et al. Development of a ventilatory classification system in patients with heart failure. Circulation. 2007;115:2410–2417. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.686576. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. Abidov A, Rozanski A, Hachamovitch R, et al. Prognostic significance of dyspnea in patients referred for cardiac stress testing. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1889–1898. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa042741. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Borg GA. Psychophysical bases of perceived exertion. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1982;14:377–381. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. Corra U, Giordano A, Bosimini E, et al. Oscillatory ventilation during exercise in patients with chronic heart failure: clinical correlates and prognostic implications. Chest. 2002;121:1572–1580. doi: 10.1378/chest.121.5.1572. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. Myers J, Arena R, Franklin B, et al. Recommendations for clinical exercise laboratories: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2009;119:3144–3161. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192520. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
18. Chase P, Arena R, Myers J, et al. Prognostic usefulness of dyspnea versus fatigue as reason for exercise test termination in patients with heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2008;102:879–882. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.05.031. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
19. Pinkstaff S, Peberdy MA, Kontos MC, Finucane S, Arena R. Quantifying exertion level during exercise stress testing using percentage of age-predicted maximal heart rate, rate pressure product, and perceived exertion. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010;85:1095–1100. doi: 10.4065/mcp.2010.0357. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
20. Jain M, Nkonde C, Lin B, Walker A, Wackers F. 85% of maximal age-predicted heart rate is not a valid endpoint for exercise treadmill testing. J Nucl Cardiol. 2011;18:1026–1035. doi: 10.1007/s12350-011-9454-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
21. Arena R, Sietsema KE. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing in the clinical evaluation of patients with heart and lung disease. Circulation. 2011;123:668–680. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.914788. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
22. Taivassalo T, Dysgaard Jensen T, Kennaway N, DiMauro S, Vissing J, Haller RG. The spectrum of exercise tolerance in mitochondrial myopathies: a study of 40 patients. Brain. 2003;126:413–423. doi: 10.1093/brain/awg028. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
23. Campbell SC. A comparison of the maximum voluntary ventilation with the forced expiratory volume in one second: an assessment of subject cooperation. J Occup Med. 1982;24:531–533. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
24. Wasserman K, Hansen JE, Sue DY, Whipp BJ. Principles of Exercise Testing and Interpretation. 4th. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger; 2005. [ Google Scholar ] 
25. Ingle L, Isted A, Witte KK, Cleland JGF, Clark AL. Impact of different diagnostic criteria on the prevalence and prognostic significance of exertional oscillatory ventilation in patients with chronic heart failure. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2009;16:451–456. doi: 10.1097/HJR.0b013e32832a4f54. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
26. Hansen JE, Sue DY, Wasserman K. Predicted values for clinical exercise testing. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1984;129:S49–S55. doi: 10.1164/arrd.1984.129.2P2.S49. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
27. Wasserman K, Hansen JE, Sue DY, Stringer W, Whipp BJ. Normal Values. In: Weinberg R, editor. Principles of Exercise Testing and Interpretation. 4th. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 2005. pp. 160–182. [ Google Scholar ] 
28. Arena R, Myers J, Guazzi M. The clinical significance of aerobic exercise testing and prescription: from apparently healthy to confirmed cardiovascular disease. Am J Lifestyle Med. 2008;2:519–536. [ Google Scholar ] 
29. Arena R, Myers J, Guazzi M. The future of aerobic exercise testing in clinical practice: is it the ultimate vital sign? Future Cardiol. 2010;6:325–342. doi: 10.2217/fca.10.21. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
30. Weber KT, Janicki JS, McElroy PA. Determination of aerobic capacity and the severity of chronic cardiac and circulatory failure. Circulation. 1987;76:VI40–VI45. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
31. Mancini DM, Eisen H, Kussmaul W, Mull R, Edmunds LH, Jr, Wilson JR. Value of peak exercise oxygen consumption for optimal timing of cardiac transplantation in ambulatory patients with heart failure. Circulation. 1991;83:778–786. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.83.3.778. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
32. Poggio R, Arazi HC, Giorgi M, Miriuka SG. Prediction of severe cardiovascular events by VE/Vco2 slope versus peak Vo2 in systolic heart failure: A meta-analysis of the published literature. Am Heart J. 2010;160:1004–1014. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2010.08.037. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
33. Corra U, Piepoli MF. Official document on cardiopulmonary exercise testing in chronic heart failure due to left ventricular dysfunction–recommendations for performance and interpretation. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2007;68:6–12. doi: 10.4081/monaldi.2007.464. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
34. Arena R, Myers J, Abella J, et al. Defining the optimal prognostic window for cardiopulmonary exercise testing in patients with heart failure. Circ Heart Fail. 2010;3:405–411. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.109.906446. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
35. Guazzi M, Arena R, Ascione A, Piepoli M, Guazzi MD. Exercise oscillatory breathing and increased ventilation to carbon dioxide production slope in heart failure: an unfavorable combination with high prognostic value. Am Heart J. 2007;153:859–867. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2007.02.034. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
36. Arena R, Guazzi M, Myers J. Prognostic value of end-tidal carbon dioxide during exercise testing in heart failure. Int J Cardiol. 2007;117:103–108. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2006.04.058. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
37. Arena R, Myers J, Abella J, et al. The partial pressure of resting end-tidal carbon dioxide predicts major cardiac events in patients with systolic heart failure. Am Heart J. 2008;156:982–988. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2008.06.024. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
38. Arena R, Myers J, Abella J, et al. Determining the Preferred Percent-Predicted Equation for Peak Oxygen Consumption in Patients With Heart Failure. Circ Heart Fail. 2009;2:113–120. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.108.834168. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
39. Osada N, Chaitman BR, Miller LW, et al. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing identifies low risk patients with heart failure and severely impaired exercise capacity considered for heart transplantation [see comments] J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;31:577–582. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(97)00533-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
40. Stelken AM, Younis LT, Jennison SH, et al. Prognostic value of cardiopulmonary exercise testing using percent achieved of predicted peak oxygen uptake for patients with ischemic and dilated cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27:345–352. doi: 10.1016/0735-1097(95)00464-5. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
41. Simon MA, Kormos RL, Gorcsan J, III, et al. Differential exercise performance on ventricular assist device support. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2005;24:1506–1512. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2004.11.054. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
42. Guazzi M, Arena R. The impact of pharmacotherapy on the cardiopulmonary exercise test response in patients with heart failure: a mini review. Curr Vasc Pharmacol. 2009;7:557–569. doi: 10.2174/157016109789043955. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
43. Wasserman K, Sun XG, Hansen JE. Effect of biventricular pacing on the exercise pathophysiology of heart failure. Chest. 2007;132:250–261. doi: 10.1378/chest.06-2872. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
44. Arena R, Myers J, Abella J, et al. The prognostic value of the heart rate response during exercise and recovery in patients with heart failure: influence of beta-blockade. Int J Cardiol. 2010;138:166–173. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2008.08.010. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
45. Bilsel T, Terzi S, Akbulut T, Sayar N, Hobikoglu G, Yesilcimen K. Abnormal heart rate recovery immediately after cardiopulmonary exercise testing in heart failure patients. Int Heart J. 2006;47:431–440. doi: 10.1536/ihj.47.431. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
46. Guazzi M, Myers J, Arena R. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing in the clinical and prognostic assessment of diastolic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:1883–1890. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.07.051. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
47. Guazzi M, Myers J, Peberdy MA, Bensimhon D, Chase P, Arena R. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing variables reflect the degree of diastolic dysfunction in patients with heart failure-normal ejection fraction. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2010;30:165–172. doi: 10.1097/HCR.0b013e3181d0c1ad. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
48. Guazzi M, Myers J, Peberdy MA, Bensimhon D, Chase P, Arena R. Exercise oscillatory breathing in diastolic heart failure: prevalence and prognostic insights. Eur Heart J. 2008;29:2751–2759. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehn437. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
49. Dimopoulos K, Okonko DO, Diller GP, et al. Abnormal ventilatory response to exercise in adults with congenital heart disease relates to cyanosis and predicts survival. Circulation. 2006;113:2796–2802. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.594218. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
50. Inuzuka R, Diller GP, Borgia F, et al. Comprehensive use of cardiopulmonary exercise testing identifies adults with congenital heart disease at increased mortality risk in the medium term/clinical perspective. Circulation. 2012;125:250–259. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.058719. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
51. Giardini A, Hager A, Lammers AE, et al. Ventilatory efficiency and aerobic capacity predict event-free survival in adults with atrial repair for complete transposition of the great arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53:1548–1555. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.02.005. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
52. Gibbons RJ, Balady GJ, Timothy BJ, et al. ACC/AHA 2002 guideline update for exercise testing: summary article: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Update the 1997 Exercise Testing Guidelines) Circulation. 2002;106:1883–1892. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000034670.06526.15. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
53. Sharma S, Firoozi S, McKenna WJ. Value of exercise testing in assessing clinical state and prognosis in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cardiol Rev. 2001;9:70–76. doi: 10.1097/00045415-200103000-00005. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
54. Bunch TJ, Chandrasekaran K, Ehrsam JE, et al. Prognostic significance of exercise induced arrhythmias and echocardiographic variables in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol. 2007;99:835–838. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2006.10.046. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
55. Drinko JK, Nash PJ, Lever HM, Asher CR. Safety of stress testing in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol. 2004;93:1443–1444. A12. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2004.02.054. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
56. Sharma S, Elliott PM, Whyte G, et al. Utility of metabolic exercise testing in distinguishing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy from physiologic left ventricular hypertrophy in athletes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36:864–870. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(00)00816-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
57. Arena R, Owens DS, Arevalo J, et al. Ventilatory efficiency and resting hemodynamics in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2008;40:799–805. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e31816459a1. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
58. Sorajja P, Allison T, Hayes C, Nishimura RA, Lam CSP, Ommen SR. Prognostic utility of metabolic exercise testing in minimally symptomatic patients with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol. 2012 doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.01.363. In press. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
59. Morise AP. Exercise testing in nonatherosclerotic heart disease: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, valvular heart disease, and arrhythmias. Circulation. 2011;123:216–225. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.914762. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
60. Elliott PM, Poloniecki J, Dickie S, et al. Sudden death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: identification of high risk patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36:2212–2218. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(00)01003-2. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
61. Ciampi Q, Betocchi S, Losi MA, et al. Abnormal blood-pressure response to exercise and oxygen consumption in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Nucl Cardiol. 2007;14:869–875. doi: 10.1016/j.nuclcard.2007.08.003. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
62. Gimeno JR, Tome-Esteban M, Lofiego C, et al. Exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias and risk of sudden cardiac death in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:2599–2605. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehp327. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
63. Clark MV. Defining Asthma. In: Gartside M, editor. Asthma: A Clinician’s Guide. Sudbury: Jones and Bartlett Learning; 2011. pp. 15–34. [ Google Scholar ] 
64. Kukafka DS, Ciccolella D, D’Alonzo GE, et al. Exercise-induced Bronchospasm in High School Athletes via a Free Running Test. Chest. 1998;114:1613–1622. doi: 10.1378/chest.114.6.1613. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
65. Rundell KW, Wilber RL, Szmedra L, Jenkinson DM, Mayers LB, Im J. Exercise-induced asthma screening of elite athletes: field versus laboratory exercise challenge. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2000;32:309–316. doi: 10.1097/00005768-200002000-00010. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
66. Rundell KW, Jenkinson DM. Exercise-induced bronchospasm in the elite athlete. Sports Med. 2002;32:583–600. doi: 10.2165/00007256-200232090-00004. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
67. Clinical exercise testing with reference to lung diseases: indications, standardization and interpretation strategies. ERS Task Force on Standardization of Clinical Exercise Testing. European Respiratory Society. Eur Respir J. 1997;10:2662–2689. doi: 10.1183/09031936.97.10112662. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
68. Yasunobu Y, Oudiz RJ, Sun XG, Hansen JE, Wasserman K. End-tidal PCO2 abnormality and exercise limitation in patients with primary pulmonary hypertension. Chest. 2005;127:1637–1646. doi: 10.1378/chest.127.5.1637. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
69. Dumitrescu D, Oudiz RJ, Karpouzas G, et al. Developing pulmonary vasculopathy in systemic sclerosis, detected with non-invasive cardiopulmonary exercise testing. PLoS One. 2010;5:e14293. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014293. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
70. Borlaug BA, Nishimura RA, Sorajja P, Lam CS, Redfield MM. Exercise hemodynamics enhance diagnosis of early heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail. 2010;3:588–595. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.109.930701. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
71. Borlaug BA, Paulus WJ. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:670–679. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq426. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
72. Arena R, Lavie CJ, Milani RV, Myers J, Guazzi M. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension: an evidence-based review. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010;29:159–173. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2009.09.003. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
73. Arena R. Detecting abnormal pulmonary hemodynamics with cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43:982. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e31820e5fb3. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
74. Arena R. Exercise testing and training in chronic lung disease and pulmonary arterial hypertension. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2011;53:454–463. doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2011.02.003. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
75. Arena R, Guazzi M, Myers J, Grinnen D, Forman DE, Lavie CJ. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing in the assessment of pulmonary hypertension. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2011;5:281–293. doi: 10.1586/ers.11.4. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
76. Hansen JE, Sun XG, Yasunobu Y, et al. Reproducibility of cardiopulmonary exercise measurements in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension. Chest. 2004;126:816–824. doi: 10.1378/chest.126.3.816. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
77. Hansen JE, Ulubay G, Chow BF, Sun XG, Wasserman K. Mixed-expired and end-tidal CO2 distinguish between ventilation and perfusion defects during exercise testing in patients with lung and heart diseases. Chest. 2007;132:977–983. doi: 10.1378/chest.07-0619. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
78. Oudiz RJ, Roveran G, Hansen JE, Sun XG, Wasserman K. Effect of sildenafil on ventilatory efficiency and exercise tolerance in pulmonary hypertension. Eur J Heart Fail. 2007;9:917–921. doi: 10.1016/j.ejheart.2007.06.013. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
79. Sun X, Hansen JE, Oudiz RJ, Wasserman K. Gas Exchange Detection of Exercise-Induced Right-to-Left Shunt in Patients with Primary Pulmonary Hypertension. Circulation. 2002;105:54–60. doi: 10.1161/hc0102.101509. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
80. Sun XG, Hansen JE, Oudiz RJ, Wasserman K. Exercise pathophysiology in patients with primary pulmonary hypertension. Circulation. 2001;104:429–435. doi: 10.1161/hc2901.093198. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
81. Ting H, Sun XG, Chuang ML, Lewis DA, Hansen JE, Wasserman K. A noninvasive assessment of pulmonary perfusion abnormality in patients with primary pulmonary hypertension. Chest. 2001;119:824–832. doi: 10.1378/chest.119.3.824. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
82. Miller A, Brown LK, Sloane MF, Bhuptani A, Teirstein AS. Cardiorespiratory responses to incremental exercise in sarcoidosis patients with normal spirometry. Chest. 1995;107:323–329. doi: 10.1378/chest.107.2.323. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
83. Valli G, Vizza CD, Onorati P, et al. Pathophysiological adaptations to walking and cycling in primary pulmonary hypertension. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2008;102:417–424. doi: 10.1007/s00421-007-0600-y. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
84. Oga T, Nishimura K, Tsukino M, Sato S, Hajiro T. Analysis of the factors related to mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: role of exercise capacity and health status. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003;167:544–549. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200206-583OC. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
85. Hiraga T, Maekura R, Okuda Y, et al. Prognostic predictors for survival in patients with COPD using cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging. 2003;23:324–331. doi: 10.1046/j.1475-0961.2003.00514.x. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
86. Fell CD, Liu LX, Motika C, et al. The prognostic value of cardiopulmonary exercise testing in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009;179:402–407. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200802-241OC. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
87. Miki K, Maekura R, Hiraga T, et al. Impairments and prognostic factors for survival in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Respir Med. 2003;97:482–490. doi: 10.1053/rmed.2002.1469. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
88. Colice GL, Shafazand S, Griffin JP, Keenan R, Bolliger CT. Physiologic evaluation of the patient with lung cancer being considered for resectional surgery: ACCP evidenced-based clinical practice guidelines 2nd edition) Chest. 2007;132:161S–177S. doi: 10.1378/chest.07-1359. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
89. Torchio R, Guglielmo M, Giardino R, et al. Exercise ventilatory inefficiency and mortality in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease undergoing surgery for non-small-cell lung cancer. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2010;38:14–19. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2010.01.032. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
90. Holverda S, Bogaard HJ, Groepenhoff H, Postmus PE, Boonstra A, Vonk-Noordegraaf A. Cardiopulmonary exercise test characteristics in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and associated pulmonary hypertension. Respiration. 2008;76:160–167. doi: 10.1159/000110207. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
91. Glaser S, Noga O, Koch B, et al. Impact of pulmonary hypertension on gas exchange and exercise capacity in patients with pulmonary fibrosis. Respiratory Medicine. 2009;103:317–324. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.08.005. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
92. Fletcher GF, Balady GJ, Amsterdam EA, et al. Exercise standards for testing and training: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2001;104:1694–1740. doi: 10.1161/hc3901.095960. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
93. Pinkstaff S, Peberdy MA, Fabiato A, Finucane S, Arena R. The clinical utility of cardiopulmonary exercise testing in suspected or confirmed myocardial ischemia. Am J Lifestyle Med. 2010;4:327–348. [ Google Scholar ] 
94. Dominguez-Rodriguez A, Abreu-Gonzalez P, Avanzas P, Gomez MA, Padron AL, Kaski JC. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing for the assessment of exercise capacity in patients with cardiac syndrome X. Int J Cardiol. 2012;154:85–87. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2011.10.077. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
95. Belardinelli R, Lacalaprice F, Carle F, et al. Exercise-induced myocardial ischaemia detected by cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Eur Heart J. 2003;24:1304–1313. doi: 10.1016/s0195-668x(03)00210-0. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
96. Kim ES, Ishwaran H, Blackstone E, Lauer MS. External prognostic validations and comparisons of age- and gender-adjusted exercise capacity predictions. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:1867–1875. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.08.003. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
97. Jeppesen TD, Schwartz M, Olsen DB, Vissing J. Oxidative capacity correlates with muscle mutation load in mitochondrial myopathy. Ann Neurol. 2003;54:86–92. doi: 10.1002/ana.10594. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
98. Tarnopolsky M. Exercise testing as a diagnostic entity in mitochondrial myopathies. Mitochondrion. 2004;4:529–542. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2004.07.011. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
99. Baba R, Nagashima M, Goto M, et al. Oxygen intake efficiency slope: a new index of cardiorespiratory functional reserve derived from the relationship between oxygen consumption and minute ventilation during incremental exercise. Nagoya J Med Sci. 1996;59:55–62. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
100. Davies LC, Wensel R, Georgiadou P, et al. Enhanced prognostic value from cardiopulmonary exercise testing in chronic heart failure by non linear analysis: oxygen uptake efficiency slope. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:684–690. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehi672. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
101. Pinkstaff S, Peberdy MA, Kontos MC, Fabiato A, Finucane S, Arena R. Usefulness of decrease in oxygen uptake efficiency slope to identify myocardial perfusion defects in men undergoing myocardial ischemic evaluation. Am J Cardiol. 2010;106:1534–1539. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2010.07.034. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
102. Cohen-Solal A, Tabet JY, Logeart D, Bourgoin P, Tokmakova M, Dahan M. A non-invasively determined surrogate of cardiac power ’circulatory power’) at peak exercise is a powerful prognostic factor in chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2002;23:806–814. doi: 10.1053/euhj.2001.2966. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
103. Taniguchi Y, Ueshima K, Chiba I, et al. A New Method Using Pulmonary Gas-Exchange Kinetics To Evaluate Efficacy of {beta}-Blocking Agents in Patients With Dilated Cardiomyopathy. Chest. 2003;124:954–961. doi: 10.1378/chest.124.3.954. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
104. Alexander NB, Dengel DR, Olson RJ, Krajewski KM. Oxygen-Uptake VO2) Kinetics and Functional Mobility Performance in Impaired Older Adults. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2003;58:M734–M739. doi: 10.1093/gerona/58.8.m734. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
105. Giardini A, Donti A, Specchia S, et al. Recovery kinetics of oxygen uptake is prolonged in adults with an atrial septal defect and improves after transcatheter closure. Am Heart J. 2004;147:910–914. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2003.11.013. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
106. Guazzi M, Belletti S, Tumminello G, Fiorentini C, Guazzi MD. Exercise hyperventilation, dyspnea sensation, and ergoreflex activation in lone atrial fibrillation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004;287:H2899–H2905. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00455.2004. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
107. Agostoni P, Emdin M, Corra U, et al. Permanent atrial fibrillation affects exercise capacity in chronic heart failure patients. Eur Heart J. 2008;29:2367–2372. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehn361. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (809.7 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
