Resistant Hypertension: Detection, Evaluation, and Management: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Hypertension 
. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2019 May 22. 
Published in final edited form as: Hypertension. 2018 Nov;72(5):e53–e90. doi: 10.1161/HYP.0000000000000084 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Resistant Hypertension: Detection, Evaluation, and
Management 
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
Robert M Carey 
Robert M Carey , MD, FAHA 
Chair 
Find articles by Robert M Carey 
, David A Calhoun 
David A Calhoun , MD, FAHA 
Vice Chair 
Find articles by David A Calhoun 
, George L Bakris 
George L Bakris , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by George L Bakris 
, Robert D Brook 
Robert D Brook , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by Robert D Brook 
, Stacie L Daugherty 
Stacie L Daugherty , MD, MSPH 
Find articles by Stacie L Daugherty 
, Cheryl R Dennison-Himmelfarb 
Cheryl R Dennison-Himmelfarb , PhD, MSN, FAHA 
Find articles by Cheryl R Dennison-Himmelfarb 
, Brent M Egan 
Brent M Egan , MD 
Find articles by Brent M Egan 
, John M Flack 
John M Flack , MD, MPH, FAHA 
Find articles by John M Flack 
, Samuel S Gidding 
Samuel S Gidding , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by Samuel S Gidding 
, Eric Judd 
Eric Judd , MD, MS 
Find articles by Eric Judd 
, Daniel T Lackland 
Daniel T Lackland , DrPH, FAHA 
Find articles by Daniel T Lackland 
, Cheryl L Laffer 
Cheryl L Laffer , MD, PhD, FAHA 
Find articles by Cheryl L Laffer 
, Christopher Newton-Cheh 
Christopher Newton-Cheh , MD, MPH, FAHA 
Find articles by Christopher Newton-Cheh 
, Steven M Smith 
Steven M Smith , PharmD, MPH, BCPS 
Find articles by Steven M Smith 
, Sandra J Taler 
Sandra J Taler , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by Sandra J Taler 
, Stephen C Textor 
Stephen C Textor , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by Stephen C Textor 
, Tanya N Turan 
Tanya N Turan , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by Tanya N Turan 
, William B White 
William B White , MD, FAHA 
Find articles by William B White 
, American Heart Association Professional/Public Education and
Publications Committee of the Council on Hypertension; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Genomic and Precision Medicine; Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; Stroke Council 
Author information 
Copyright and License information 
Roles 
Robert M Carey : MD, FAHA , Chair 
David A Calhoun : MD, FAHA , Vice Chair 
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement,
and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express
permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining
permission are located at https://www.heart.org/permissions . A link to the
“Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears in the second
paragraph ( https://www.heart.org/en/about-us/statements-and-policies/copyright-request-form ). 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC6530990  NIHMSID: NIHMS1016897  PMID: 30354828 
The publisher's version of this article is available at Hypertension 
Abstract 
Resistant hypertension (RH) is defined as above-goal elevated blood
pressure (BP) in a patient despite the concurrent use of 3 antihypertensive drug
classes, commonly including a long-acting calcium channel blocker, a blocker of
the renin-angiotensin system (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or
angiotensin receptor blocker), and a diuretic. The antihypertensive drugs should
be administered at maximum or maximally tolerated daily doses. RH also includes
patients whose BP achieves target values on ≥4 antihypertensive
medications. The diagnosis of RH requires assurance of antihypertensive
medication adherence and exclusion of the “white-coat effect”
(office BP above goal but out-of-office BP at or below target). The importance
of RH is underscored by the associated risk of adverse outcomes compared with
non-RH. This article is an updated American Heart Association scientific
statement on the detection, evaluation, and management of RH. Once
antihypertensive medication adherence is confirmed and out-of-office BP
recordings exclude a white-coat effect, evaluation includes identification of
contributing lifestyle issues, detection of drugs interfering with
antihypertensive medication effectiveness, screening for secondary hypertension,
and assessment of target organ damage. Management of RH includes maximization of
lifestyle interventions, use of long-acting thiazide-like diuretics
(chlorthalidone or indapamide), addition of a mineralocorticoid receptor
antagonist (spironolactone or eplerenone), and, if BP remains elevated, stepwise
addition of antihypertensive drugs with complementary mechanisms of action to
lower BP. If BP remains uncontrolled, referral to a hypertension specialist is
advised. 
Keywords: AHA Scientific Statements, antihypertensive agents, hypertension, hypertension resistant to conventional therapy 
Hypertension is the world’s leading risk factor for cardiovascular disease
(CVD), stroke, disability, and death. Even with steady improvement during the past 30
years in hypertension awareness, treatment, and control rates, a large proportion of
hypertensive adults, despite conscientious clinical management, still fail to achieve
their recommended blood pressure (BP) treatment targets on 3 antihypertensive
medications or require ≥4 medications to achieve their targets. These
individuals, designated as having treatment-resistant hypertension (RH), remain at
increased risk for target organ damage, morbidity, and mortality despite ongoing
antihypertensive drug therapy. 
New recommendations for the detection, evaluation, and management of hypertension
have been published in the 2017 American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association (AHA) clinical practice guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation,
and management of high BP in adults. 1 
Among its recommendations, the 2017 guideline reduces both the BP threshold for
initiating antihypertensive therapy to ≥130/80 mm Hg for adults with existing CVD
or 10-year atherosclerotic CVD risk ≥10% and the BP goal of treatment to
<130/80 mm Hg for most individuals. These recommendations affect the BP threshold
for diagnosis of RH and thus will increase its prevalence in the hypertensive
population. The current scientific statement is consistent with the 2017 American
College of Cardiology/AHA guideline. 1 
In 2008, the AHA issued its first scientific statement on RH that included
recommendations for diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment. 2 Since 2008, a large number of studies of RH have
improved our understanding of its pathogenesis, evaluation, and treatment. This first
revision of the AHA scientific statement 2 is intended to place this new evidence into the context of our
understanding of RH from prior literature and to identify gaps in knowledge requiring
additional research in the future. 
Definitions of RH 
RH is defined as the BP of a hypertensive patient that remains elevated above
goal despite the concurrent use of 3 antihypertensive agents of different classes,
commonly including a long-acting calcium channel blocker (CCB), a blocker of the
renin-angiotensin system (angiotensin-converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitor or
angiotensin receptor blocker [ARB]), and a diuretic. All agents should be
administered at maximum or maximally tolerated doses and at the appropriate dosing
frequency. Albeit arbitrary with respect to the number of medications required, RH
is defined in this manner to identify patients who are at higher risk for morbid CVD
events and death. Moreover, they are more likely to have medication adverse effects,
more likely to have a secondary cause of hypertension compared with hypertensive
patients without drug resistance, and may benefit from special diagnostic or
therapeutic approaches to control their BP. RH also includes patients whose BP
achieves target values on ≥4 antihypertensive medications, a condition that
has been referred to in the literature as controlled RH. Thus, the term RH refers to
hypertension with both uncontrolled and controlled BP, depending on the number of
antihypertensive agents used. 
Errors in BP measurement can account for the misdiagnosis of RH. The
preparation of the patient, environmental conditions, cuff size, and technique of BP
measurement can have a substantial influence on BP results. 1 , 3 In
particular, inherent BP variability dictates that diagnostic BP recordings include
an average of at least 2 readings obtained on at least 2 separate
occasions. 1 , 3 Therefore, before the diagnosis of RH is
made, it is critical to ensure accurate BP measurement. Similarly, out-of-office BP
and self-monitored BP require proper technique. 1 , 2 , 4 BP should be measured at any site according
to current guidelines. 1 
The “white-coat effect” is defined as office BP above goal but
out-of-office BP levels measured by ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM) (or, if ABPM is
unavailable, by home BP monitoring) below goal in a patient on ≥3
antihypertensive agents. The risk of CVD complications in patients with a white-coat
effect is similar to the risk in hypertensive patients with controlled BP. 5 – 7 Out-of-office BP monitoring is generally required to make
the diagnosis of true RH. 
Nonadherence in taking prescribed antihypertensive medications must also be
excluded before RH is diagnosed. Medication nonadherence is highly prevalent in
patients with apparent RH. 8 , 9 It has been estimated that as many
as 50% to 80% of hypertensive patients prescribed antihypertensive medications
demonstrate suboptimal adherence. 10 This relatively high proportion with nonadherence that may
mimic RH is related, at least in part, to the large pill burden, dosing complexity,
expense, high frequency of adverse reactions with multidrug antihypertensive
regimens, poor patient-clinician relationship, and clinician inertia with reduced
insistence on adherence when patients are consistently nonadherent. 11 Exclusion of nonadherence should
include frank and nonjudgmental clinician-patient discussion, monitoring of
prescription refills and pill counts, and, if available, biochemical assay of drugs
or their metabolites in urine or plasma. 
In summary, the definition of RH has been modified from that of the 2008 AHA
scientific statement in 4 important ways: (1) BP should be measured and the BP
threshold for diagnosis and treatment goals should be in accord with current
clinical practice guidelines 1 ; (2)
patients should be taking ≥3 antihypertensive agents, commonly including a
long-acting CCB, a blocker of the renin-angiotensin system (ACE inhibitor or ARB),
and a diuretic at maximum or maximally tolerated doses; (3) patients with the
white-coat effect should not be included in the definition of RH; and (4) the
diagnosis of RH requires the exclusion of antihypertensive medication
nonadherence. 
Prevalence of RH 
As stated, RH requires patient adherence to prescribed medications and that
the uncontrolled subset has elevated BP outside the office setting. The term
apparent treatment RH (aTRH) is used when ≥1 of the following data elements
are missing: medication dose, adherence, or out-of-office BP; thus, pseudoresistance
cannot be excluded. 12 Among
treated adults with hypertension, prevalent aTRH occurs in ≈12% to 15% of
population-based 13 – 16 and 15% to 18% of clinic-based
reports. 17 – 20 Prevalent aTRH occurs in a higher
percentage of the population- and clinic-based samples when an at-risk group is
selected, for example, patients with treated hypertension and chronic kidney disease
(CKD). 16 , 19 The higher prevalence of aTRH among treated
hypertensive adults in clinical trials (34%−39%) is likely explained by the
selection of patients with demographic and comorbidity characteristics that place
them at high risk for the fatal and nonfatal CVD outcomes of interest. 21 – 26 Moreover, in population- and clinic-based studies, some RH
cases may go unrecognized because patients are not prescribed ≥3 drugs at
maximal doses despite uncontrolled BP. In contrast, clinical trials usually include
forced titration schemes that unmask RH by reducing the prevalence of suboptimal
treatment. 12 
The prevalence of aTRH estimated from selected population-based,
clinic-based, and clinical trial-based reports is shown in Table 1 (for details, see the Data Supplement ). 
Table 1. 
Prevalence of aTRH in Adults With Treated Hypertension as Reported From
Selected Population-, Clinic-, and Intervention-Based Studies 
Population Based 
Time Period 
n 
Uncontrolled With ≥3 BP
Medications, % 
Controlled With ≥4 BP Medications,
% 
aTRH, % 
NHANES 13 
1988–1994 
2755 
8.3 
1.1 
9.4 
NHANES 13 
1999–2004 
3031 
8.8 
2.9 
11.7 
NHANES 14 
2003–2008 
3710 
12.8 
NHANES 13 
2005–2008 
2586 
9.7 
4.8 
14.5 
REGARDS 15 
2003–2007 
14 731 
9.1 
5.0 
14.1 
REGARDS 16 (CKD) * 
2003–2007 
3134 
28.1 
Clinic based 
EURIKA 17 (diabetes mellitus) 
2009–2010 
5220 
13.0 † 
3.1 
16.1 
Spanish ABPM 18 
2004–2009 
68 045 
12.2 
2.6 
14.8 
CRIC (CKD) 19 ‡ 
2003–2008 
3939 
21.2 
19.2 
40.4 
South Carolina 20 § 
2007–2010 
468877 
9.5 
8.4 
17.9 
Clinical trials 
ALLHAT 21 
1994–2002 ∥ 
14 684 
11.5 
1.2 
12.7 
ASCOT 22 
1998–2005 
19 527 
48.5 
ACCOMPLISH 25 
2003–2006 ¶ 
10 704 
39 
INVEST 26 
1997–2003 # 
17 190 
25.1 
12.6 
37.8 
Open in a new tab 
Uncontrolled aTRH is defined as BP ≥140 mm Hg systolic
and/or ≥90 mm Hg diastolic on ≥3 BP medications. Controlled
aTRH is defined as BP <140 mm Hg systolic and <90 mm Hg
diastolic on ≥4 BP medications unless otherwise specified. 
ABPM indicates Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring Registry;
ACCOMPLISH, Avoiding Cardiovascular Events Through Combination Therapy in
Patients Living With Systolic Hypertension; ALLHAT, Antihypertensive and
Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial; ASCOT,
Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcome Trial; aTRH, apparent treatment-resistant
hypertension; BP, blood pressure; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CRIC, Chronic
Renal Insufficiency Cohort; EURIKA, European Study on
Cardiovascular Risk Prevention and Management in Usual Daily Practice;
INVEST, International Verapamil-Trandolapril Study; NHANES, National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey; and REGARDS, Reasons for Geographic and
Racial Differences in Stroke. 
* 
Mean estimated glomerular filtration rate in adults with CKD and
aTRH: 60.8 mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73
m −2 . 
† 
aTRH defined as BP >130/>80 mm Hg. 
‡ 
Mean estimated glomerular filtration rate in adults with CKD and
aTRH: 38.9 mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73
m −2 . 
§ 
Includes untreated hypertensive patients. 
∥ 
Excluded 7628 patients with uncontrolled hypertension on <3
BP medications. 
¶ 
Prevalent uncontrolled aTRH estimated from report on BP control 6
months after randomization. 
# 
Excluded 5386 treated participants with BP <130/<80
mm Hg. 
Prognosis of RH 
Observational studies using the 2008 criteria have shown that patients with
RH are at higher risk for poor outcomes compared with patients without RH. 23 , 27 – 30 In a
retrospective study of >200 000 patients with incident hypertension, those
with RH were 47% more likely to suffer the combined outcomes of death, myocardial
infarction, heart failure, stroke, or CKD over the median 3.8 years of
follow-up. 23 Differences
in CVD events in this study were driven largely by a higher risk for the development
of CKD. 23 In another study of
>400 000 patients, compared with patients without RH, patients with RH had a
32% increased risk of developing end-stage renal disease, a 24% increased risk of an
ischemic heart event, a 46% increased risk of heart failure, a 14% increased risk of
stroke, and a 6% increased risk of death. 29 Prospective studies using ABPM have suggested an almost
2-fold increased risk of CVD events in patients with true RH compared with those
with hypertension responsive to treatment. 30 – 33 Together,
these studies suggest that RH is associated with an increased risk of adverse
outcomes and represents an important public health problem. 
RH is associated with worse outcomes among patients with some comorbid
conditions. In patients with CKD, RH is associated with higher risk of myocardial
infarction, stroke, peripheral arterial disease, heart failure, and all-cause
mortality compared with patients without RH. 19 Similarly, in patients with ischemic heart disease, RH is
associated with higher rates of adverse events, including death, myocardial
infarction, and stroke. 26 , 34 , 35 Conversely, RH is not associated with increased adverse
clinical events in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction and
may lower the risk for heart failure-related rehospitalization. 36 
Among patients with RH, lower BP is associated with reduced risk for some
cardiovascular events. 28 , 37 In the REGARDS study (Reasons for Geographic
and Racial Differences in Stroke), uncontrolled RH was associated with a 2-fold
increased risk of coronary heart disease compared with controlled RH. Control status
was not associated with differences in stroke or mortality. 28 In another study of >118 000 treated
hypertensive adults, including >40 000 individuals with RH and 460 000
observation-years, BP control was associated with significantly lower rates of
incident stroke and coronary heart disease with no difference in rates of incident
heart failure. 37 BP control
reduced the risk of incident stroke, coronary heart disease, or heart failure by 13%
among those with RH compared with a 31% lower risk of these outcomes among patients
without RH. 37 Although BP control
is associated with a lower risk for some CVD outcomes, it is possible that the
benefit of BP lowering may be less in patients with RH compared with patients with
non-RH. 
Patient Characteristics 
Demographic correlates of RH include black race, older age, and male
sex. 38 RH is characterized
by the variable clustering of distinct demographics, comorbidities, physiological
aberrations, and metabolic abnormalities. However, these factors are not mutually
exclusive because, in fact, they can be substantially interdependent (eg, nondipping
or reverse dipping BP and sympathetic nervous system overactivity, visceral obesity,
and excess aldosterone). 
Multiple comorbidities have been associated with RH. Obesity, 39 – 41 left ventricular hypertrophy, 42 albuminuria, 14 , 43 
diabetes mellitus, 14 , 38 , 39 
CKD, 38 , 39 , 44 
higher Framingham 10-year risk score, 39 and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) 45 , 46 
are more common in RH than non-RH. Very high proportions (60%−84%) of
individuals with RH have sleep apnea. 33 , 47 – 49 Other sleep abnormalities are also manifest
in RH (relative to those with controlled hypertension or normotensives), including
shorter sleep duration, reduced sleep efficiency, and less rapid eye movement
sleep. 50 
Physiological aberrations in RH include vascular disease/dysfunction as
evidenced by high rates of peripheral 39 and carotid artery atherosclerosis, 42 impaired endothelial function, 51 , 52 reduced arterial compliance, and raised systemic vascular
resistance, 40 all of which
may be more pronounced in RH compared with non-RH. The normal nocturnal decline in
BP is also attenuated in a high proportion (43%−65%) of individuals with
RH. 32 , 53 , 54 
The attenuated nocturnal decline in BP is even more pronounced in uncontrolled
compared with controlled RH. 52 
Nondipping ambulatory BP in individuals with RH has been linked to reduced heart
rate variability, a marker of sympathetic nervous system overactivity. 53 Reverse dipping, in which
nocturnal BP paradoxically rises, may be associated with increased subclinical organ
damage and possibly CVD events. Reverse dipping is also associated with increased
sympathetic nervous system activity at night. 55 In adults with severe uncontrolled RH and self-reported
sleep apnea in the SYMPLICITY HTN-3 trial (Renal Denervation in Patients With
Uncontrolled Hypertension), renal denervation lowered office systolic BP (SBP) more
effectively relative to sham controls at 6 months (−17.0 mm Hg versus
−6.3 mm Hg; P <0.01). 56 Renal denervation did not lower office SBP
in patients without sleep apnea. 
RH has also been linked to metabolic derangements, including
hyperuricemia, 17 
aldosterone excess, 47 and
suppressed circulating renin levels (≈60% of those with RH have suppressed
renin levels). 57 In general, RH is
characterized by exquisite salt sensitivity of BP. Reducing dietary sodium intake to
levels significantly below the level of usual intake in Western societies (eg, 50
mmol/d) promptly and impressively lowered BP in many individuals with RH. 58 Moreover, the severity of sleep
apnea in those with RH is positively related to dietary sodium intake, at least in
those with hyperaldosteronism. 49 
Plasma osmolality-adjusted copeptin concentrations, a surrogate marker for
vasopressin release, are almost twice as high in individuals with RH compared with
those with nonresistant, controlled BP. 59 
There are distinct patterns of antihypertensive drug prescribing and
administration in individuals with RH. Suboptimal antihypertensive drug regimens
substantively contribute to the likelihood of being diagnosed with RH. 41 , 60 , 61 Accordingly, drug
treatment regimens in RH infrequently include either spironolactone or
chlorthalidone, 2 highly effective BP-lowering agents, in this high-risk group of
hypertensives. 60 , 61 Bedtime dosing of once-daily
antihypertensive agents (relative to morning or twice-daily dosing) appears to
significantly affect diurnal BP patterns because there are fewer patients with
nondipping of BP and >24-hour BP control and higher rates of nocturnal
normalization of BP 62 with this
dosing strategy. 
Genetics/Pharmacogenetics 
BP has a genetic basis, as evidenced by its heritability in family-based
studies, 63 – 65 with estimates for long-term
average BP that as much as 50% to 60% of BP variability can be attributed to
additive genetic factors. 66 
However, there has been limited study of the heritability of RH or of the
BP-lowering response to specific antihypertensive agents. A disproportionately
higher prevalence of RH among blacks 67 , 68 has been
suggested to reflect a contribution by genetic factors, but environmental or
psychosocial determinants of BP control are also possible. 69 
Common genetic variants influencing BP have been identified at >300
independent loci but require scores to hundreds of thousands of individuals for
their detection. 70 – 91 These genetic variants typically
have effects on the order of 1.0-mm Hg SBP and 0.5-mm Hg diastolic BP per BP-raising
allele. Individually, these variants explain ≤0.1% of BP variability and, in
aggregate, only 3% of total BP variance. This is consistent with the complex nature
of BP regulation, involving multiple compensatory systems such as vascular tone,
sodium excretion and plasma volume, autonomic nervous system function, and
myocardial performance, as well as many as-yet unknown factors. 
The majority of genetic studies of RH have been limited to candidate genes
and have lacked adequate sample sizes to survive the multiple testing burden across
the many such candidate gene studies performed. 92 – 96 Much
larger studies of well-characterized individuals with RH and of individuals before
and after treatment with specific antihypertensive therapies are needed to better
define the role of common and rare genetic variation in causing RH and modulation of
drug response. For a more detailed discussion of genetics and pharmacogenetics in
RH, please see the Data
Supplement . 
Diagnosing RH 
Identifying and Correcting Medication Nonadherence 
Overview 
The term adherence is defined as remaining attached
(to the medication regimen) and is distinct from
compliance, which means submitting to a request, wish,
or demand. Medication adherence is an important determinant of hypertension
control. However, a quarter of patients who are newly initiated on
antihypertensive therapy fail to fill their initial prescription. 97 , 98 During the first year of treatment, the average
patient has possession of antihypertensive medications only 50% of the time,
and only 1 in 5 patients has sufficiently high adherence to achieve the
benefits observed in clinical trials. 98 , 99 
Nevertheless, the trend to improved BP control (<140/90 mm Hg) rates
among those on antihypertensive treatment to >70% suggests that
recent strategies to improve antihypertensive medication adherence and care
have been successful. 100 
Assessing and ensuring optimal medication adherence are essential
steps in the evaluation and management of patients with RH. By definition,
these patients are taking ≥3 antihypertensive drugs, and information
on the level of adherence to the prescribed regimen is crucial to guide
clinical reasoning and decision making. A major criterion of success is the
ability of the patient to follow the recommendations on a daily basis
(adherence) and to stay on therapy (persistence), with the latter aspect
most critical in clinical practice. 101 In fact, the diagnosis of RH is predicated on the
patient’s adherence to the prescribed regimen, and failure to
identify inadequate adherence contributes to overestimation of the
prevalence of “true” RH. Adequate adherence necessary for
patients to experience benefit from full exposure to prescribed
pharmacological therapy is generally defined as taking at least 80% of
doses, although the scientific basis for this cutoff is unclear. 102 Although data are
limited, a review of studies of medication adherence in aTRH identified
rates of nonadherence in this population ranging from 7% using pharmacy
refill records in a managed care population to >60% using serum drug
levels in a referral clinic. 102 
Assessment of Adherence 
Identification of patients with inadequate adherence among those
with aTRH will avoid unnecessary and potentially harmful treatment
intensification and allow implementation of strategies to improve adherence
and more cost-effective allocation of health resources. Furthermore,
assessment of change in adherence as a major potential confounder is
essential in trials assessing new treatment modalities of RH. 103 Thus, a systematic
approach with reliable, practical methods for measuring medication adherence
would facilitate providers’ abilities to optimize their
antihypertensive regimens. 
Although counterintuitive, 1 analysis found that the SBP response to
therapeutic intensification for uncontrolled hypertension was not different
across quintiles of adherence. 104 Specifically, SBP fell an average of 2.1 mm Hg in
the highest adherence quintile (≥98% adherence) and 2.4 mm Hg in the
lowest adherence quintile (<80% adherence; mean, 62%) with each
therapeutic intensification. Clinicians are less likely to intensify
medications when their assessment suggests that the patient is nonadherent.
However, clinician assessment of adherence is poor. 105 Thus, although work continues to
optimize methods for assessing medication adherence, clinicians should be
cautious when deciding against therapeutic intensification in a patient with
uncontrolled hypertension whom they perceive to be nonadherent. It is
important for providers to use effective strategies for improving adherence
such as those described subsequently. 
Because of the complex and dynamic nature of adherence, it is
difficult to measure, particularly by any single assessment. Clinician
impression and techniques such as pill count often are inaccurate. However,
increasingly reliable and sophisticated indirect and direct methods are
available for assessing medication adherence. 106 Indirect methods, including patient
self-report medication adherence assessment tools such as the Morisky
Medication Adherence Scale 107 and the Hill-Bone Compliance Scale, 108 have demonstrated
predictive validity in a variety of hypertensive populations and identify
adherence risk factors that can be used to tailor messages targeting
improved adherence. Using a nonthreatening, nonaccusatory approach, which
requires excellent communication skills, is preferred when interviewing
patients about adherence. An example is the following: “When taking
multiple medications, it is common to miss doses throughout the week. How
many times do you miss taking your BP medication in a week?” 
Pharmacy databases for medication possession and refills provide a
valid measure of adherence. Measurement of pharmacodynamic parameters (eg,
heart rate for β-blockers, lack of rise of plasma renin activity
[PRA] for renin-angiotensin inhibitors,
N-acetyl -seryl-aspartyl-lysyl-proline measurements for ACE
inhibitors) may have limited specificity. Direct methods include witnessed
drug intake, the Medication Event Monitoring System, and drug monitoring in
body fluids. Witnessed medication taking followed by monitoring of effect on
BP has been effective in identifying suspected nonadherence in trials of
novel treatment modalities, although this approach has not been widely used
in general practice. Medication Event Monitoring System monitoring of the
date and time that a medication bottle is opened and closed has superior
sensitivity compared with other methods, although ingestion of the
medication is not confirmed. Urine or blood measurement of drug or
metabolites with mass spectroscopy reliably determines whether a drug is
present or absent but does not determine whether it was taken regularly or
at a therapeutic level. A novel approach, urine fluorometry, recently was
reported as a safe, easy, and reliable method to assess adherence. 109 In addition, a new
technology moving toward clinical application involves a sensor in the pill
that emits a signal on interacting with gastric acid, which is detected by a
sensor on the skin. 110 
There is no gold standard for measuring adherence. Indirect methods
such as pill count, self-report, and prescription refill data are simple,
inexpensive, and widely used. However, they can easily be manipulated to
overestimate adherence. A direct method such as urine or blood measurement
of drug or metabolites is considered more robust but is relatively
expensive, is of limited availability, and does not perfectly reflect level
of adherence. All methods have limitations, and ideally, accurate assessment
of adherence should involve a combination of approaches. 
Multisystem Intervention to Improve Adherence 
Factors contributing to poor adherence are myriad and multilevel.
Barriers to adherence exist at the levels of patient (eg, multiple comorbid
conditions, resource constraints, suboptimal health literacy, lack of
involvement in the treatment decision-making process), clinician (eg,
prescription of complex drug regimens, communication barriers, ineffective
communication of information about adverse effects, provision of care by
multiple providers, clinician inertia), and healthcare system (eg, office
visit time limitations, limited access to care, lack of team-based
approaches and health information technology). 107 Because barriers to medication
adherence are complex and varied, solutions to improve adherence at the
population level must be multifactorial. 108 , 111 , 112 
Several systematic reviews and meta-analyses have assessed the
impact of interventions, including modification of antihypertensive therapy,
on adherence to antihypertensive medications. 112 – 120 Evidence specific to improving adherence in the RH
population is sparse. However, evidence-based approaches effective in the
general hypertension population can be applied. No single intervention is
uniquely effective, and a sustained approach using multiple strategies,
including health system solutions and those that target the individual
patient’s barriers to adherence, is likely to be most effective.
Interventions demonstrated to be effective in improving adherence are
outlined here and organized by health system, clinician, and patient
levels. 
Health system-level interventions to improve the quality of
hypertension care, medication adherence, and BP control use
multidisciplinary team-based care. 121 A variety of patient-centered, team-based
hypertension care models have been demonstrated to increase the proportion
of individuals with controlled BP. 121 – 125 
An effective, multifaceted approach often includes systems support for
clinical decision making (ie, treatment algorithms), collaboration between
clinician and patient, medication adherence, BP monitoring, and patient
self-management. 126 , 127 
Further systems-level support such as use of electronic health records,
registries, clinical decision support (ie, treatment algorithms),
technology-based remote monitoring, self-management support tools, and
monitoring of performance augments and intensifies team-based care
efforts. 128 – 132 
Effective strategies for improving adherence to antihypertensive
medications include (1) using agents that are dosed once daily over those
that require multiple daily doses and using fixed-dose combination agents
when available 113 , 116 – 120 , 133 ; (2) using low-cost and generic antihypertensives,
particularly when cost of care is a barrier 134 (patients with RH often have
multiple chronic conditions requiring pharmacotherapy); and (3)
consolidating refills, that is, minimizing the number of trips to the
pharmacy to obtain all prescribed medications. 134 
Patient-centered care and patient engagement in deciding which
antihypertensive medications are included in their treatment regimen
(patient-centered decision making) improve adherence. 135 , 136 In addition, a patient-centered approach to
consider overall adverse effect profile and preferential use of agents that
are well tolerated may help. Medication adherence scales may be
useful. 107 , 108 Many clinicians may
benefit from training to enhance communication skills and to increase
cultural competence in their interactions with patients. 
At the individual patient level, it is essential to educate
patients, their families, and caregivers about hypertension, the
consequences of hypertension, and the possible adverse effects of
medications. An informed patient is better able to collaborate to establish
shared goals of therapy and a plan of care. To maintain contact with
patients for ongoing follow-up and monitoring, telehealth or mobile
communication approaches may be helpful. 132 , 137 Patients must integrate pill taking into their
routine activities of daily living with the use of adherence support tools
such as reminders, pillboxes, packaging, or other aids. Individual barriers
to adherence such as low health literacy can be difficult to identify in a
busy practice setting. Moreover, only 12% of US adults have the health
literacy skills needed to manage the demands of our complex health
system. 138 The
Health Literacy Universal Precautions Toolkit recommends assuming that all
patients may have difficulty understanding and creating an environment with
supportive systems where all patients receive written and oral communication
in plain language that promotes empowerment and self-management. 138 Key recommendations
include using visual, interactive education and providing a medication list
or pictorial medication schedule. Another approach, the teach-back method,
offers clinicians a nonthreatening way to confirm whether patients
understand what has been explained to them. If a patient understands, he/she
is able to “teach back” the information accurately. Motivation
interventions are also effective in supporting medication adherence and
lifestyle modification efforts. 139 The creation of an encouraging, blame-free
environment in which patients are recognized for progress toward treatment
goals, empowered to ask questions, and given “permission” to
answer questions related to their treatment honestly is essential to
identify and address nonadherence. 
Poor BP Measurement Technique 
Inaccurate measurement of BP can result in the appearance of treatment
resistance. In a study comparing standard triage BP measurements by clinic staff
with an automated device obtaining up to 6 BP measurements 1 minute apart while
the patient was alone and seated in a quiet room, triage SBPs were a median of
17 mm Hg higher, and the difference was highest in the group of patients with
initial SBPs >160 mm Hg. 140 In this study of patients referred for RH, inaccurate BP
measurement was estimated at 33%. 140 
Certain aspects of BP measurement technique have been standardized with
the widespread acceptance of oscillometric devices to measure BP in the
hospital, workplace, and home. For example, potential measurement confounders
such as observer bias, end-digit preference, and the presence of an auscultatory
gap are not an issue with nonauscultatory methods. 3 However, cuff size, body and arm
positions, and measurement environment are common features of auscultatory and
oscillometric methods that affect the accuracy of BP measurement. Proper BP
measurement technique entails (1) preparing the individual by emptying a full
urinary bladder and then sitting with legs uncrossed and back, arm, and feet
supported in a quiet room, ideally 5 minutes before the first reading is
obtained; (2) choosing a BP cuff with a bladder length of at least 80% and width
of at least 40% of the arm circumference; (3) placing the cuff directly on the
skin of the upper arm at the level of the heart on the supported arm; and (4)
obtaining a minimum of 2 readings 1 minute apart. 1 , 3 
Cuff-measured BP may differ from intra-arterial pressure. Severe
arterial stiffness or medial calcification of the brachial artery may result in
an inaccurate detection of Korotkoff sounds when BP is measured with the
auscultatory method. The inappropriately elevated cuff pressure in patients with
severe arterial disease has been called pseudohypertension. 141 The degree to which arterial stiffness
or brachial artery calcification affects BP measurement with oscillometric
devices has not been established but is suspected to be less pronounced. In
addition, the auscultatory method has been shown to overestimate diastolic BP
among hypertensive individuals, likely unrelated to calcified
arteries. 142 
White-Coat Effect 
The white-coat effect is the observation of repeated BP elevations in the
office with controlled or significantly lower BP outside the office in a
hypertensive patient on medication. The white-coat effect has been attributed to an
alerting reflex triggered by the healthcare provider or the clinic environment that
activates the sympathetic nervous system. 143 Some degree of BP rise is seen with in-office measurement
in the majority of people; however, the white-coat effect can be magnified in
individuals diagnosed with hypertension, women, and older individuals. 144 A clinically significant
white-coat effect may be present in 28% to 39% of individuals with aTRH by office BP
measurement. 18 , 32 , 145 
Short duration of hypertension and the absence of diabetes mellitus or CKD are also
associated with pseudoresistance from a white-coat effect. 
In RH populations, the CVD risk of overdiagnosing RH from the white-coat
effect is comparable to that in treated controlled hypertensive patients. 31 In a Brazilian cohort of patients
with RH, ambulatory BP was an independent predictor of all-cause mortality and a
composite outcome of CVD events, whereas office BP showed no prognostic
value. 32 These findings
are consistent with outcome studies in the general population. An analysis of the
International Database on Ambulatory Blood Pressure in Relation to Cardiovascular
Outcomes, which included >12 000 participants from across the world, found
that after age was accounted for, the white-coat effect did not contribute to CVD
risk. 7 Recognizing the risk
disparity between white-coat-related BP elevation and RH, randomized clinical trials
in RH have excluded patients whose BP is controlled by measurement with either ABPM
or home BP monitoring. 20 , 145 
The white-coat effect can be easily identified by 24-hour ABPM. However,
ABPM is not readily available in all countries and, because of limitations in
insurance reimbursement, is not even commonly used in the United States. 146 Oscillometric digital devices
that can automatically record 3 to 6 BP measurements without a clinician in the
examination room are now available for clinical use, a process called automated
office BP. BP measurement by automated office BP attenuates the white-coat effect.
Self-measured home BPs (with appropriate instruction in the BP measurement
technique) correlate with average daytime BPs measured by 24-hour ABPM and can be
used to identify the white-coat effect. 146 However, it is important to consider that individuals may
alter their BP logs or underreport high or low BP values. In general, upper arm
cuff-based home BP monitors are preferred over wrist BP monitors. Although wrist
monitors may be convenient, particularly for obese patients who require very large
cuff sizes, they have the potential for measurement error in individuals with
arrhythmias, during arm movement, or when the wrist is not placed at heart
level. 1 , 3 Finger BP monitors are not recommended
because of error and artifactual readings. Although BP control is <130/80 mm
Hg in the office, control by 24-hour ABPM is defined as <125/75 mm Hg. 
Treatment Inertia 
Suboptimal antihypertensive therapy accounts for a large subset of patients
not achieving BP targets ( Figure 1 ). 140 During 2007 to 2010, only 49.6%
of patients with uncontrolled aTRH identified in a community-based practice network
in the United States were prescribed an optimal antihypertensive regimen. 20 More than 90% of the 84 193
patients with aTRH were appropriately prescribed a diuretic; however,
antihypertensive medications were administered at <50% of their maximally
recommended dose in 42.1% of patients with uncontrolled aTRH. Patients who were more
likely to be prescribed an optimal regimen were black or were diagnosed with CKD,
diabetes mellitus, or coronary heart disease. 20 
Figure 1. 
Open in a new tab 
Estimated prevalence of each of the causes of pseudoresistant
hypertension. BP indicates blood pressure. Modified from Bhatt et al 140 with permission from the
American Society of Hypertension. Copyright © 2016, American Society of
Hypertension. *Indicates reference 102 .
†indicates references 20 and 140 . ‡indicates references 18 , 32 , and 145 . 
Overcoming clinician treatment inertia can be accomplished through an
integrated health system model of care. Hypertension control rates exceed the
national average in the Kaiser Permanente and Veterans Affairs health systems, where
the approach to BP control is systematic and multidisciplinary. Identifying patients
with hypertension, standardizing BP measurements, and using a stepwise treatment
algorithm have led to an increase in BP control rates from 54% in 2004 to 84% in
2010 in the Kaiser Permanente Southern California health system. 147 
Lifestyle Factors 
The 2017 American College of Cardiology/AHA clinical practice guideline for
the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high BP in adults provides
a detailed discussion of the relationships between several lifestyle factors and
high BP. 1 The following sections
focus specifically on the role of behavioral activities in the pathogenesis of
RH. 
Obesity 
Excess body fat ranks among the most important factors responsible for the
increasing prevalence of hypertension. 148 Visceral adiposity in particular plays a fundamental role
in causing high BP through a variety of mechanisms culminating in enhanced salt
sensitivity, vascular dysfunction, and activation of the sympathetic nervous system
and renin-angiotensin system. 148 , 149 Mounting evidence further
supports the importance of heightened mineralocorticoid activity in RH. 149 – 151 
Recent findings from the NHANES (National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey) of 13 375 hypertensive adults demonstrate that body mass index (BMI)
≥30 kg/m 2 approximately doubles the risk for aTRH. 13 In 14 461 patients with RH in the
Spanish Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring Registry, a BMI ≥30
kg/m 2 was also an independent risk factor for RH (odds ratio, 1.62;
95% CI, 1.32–1.99). 152 
Even among 3367 hypertensives with CKD, increasing levels of obesity were
independently associated with higher risks of aTRH, ranging from an odds ratio of
1.52 (BMI ≥30 kg/m 2 ) to 2.26 (BMI ≥40
kg/m 2 ). 19 
Finally, in a large data set (>470 000) from the Kaiser Permanente Southern
California health system, obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m 2 ) was also found
to be an independent risk factor for RH (odds ratio, 1.62; 95% CI,
1.42–1.51). 38 
Although obesity has the potential to promote spurious elevations in BP (eg, use of
a smaller-than-optimal BP cuff), 148 these findings nonetheless strongly support a direct role for
excess adiposity in promoting RH. 
Dietary Sodium 
Higher dietary sodium intake is incontrovertibly linked to increases in
arterial BP. 153 – 155 However, relatively large interindividual
variations exist in “salt sensitivity” of BP. The mechanisms are
complex and likely involve a host of responses beyond excess volume retention,
including vascular dysfunction, arterial stiffness, sympathetic activation, impaired
renin-angiotensin axis suppression, mineralocorticoid receptor activation, and
immune cell modulation. 156 , 157 
It is more difficult to precisely quantify the importance of excess dietary
sodium specifically in regard to causing RH for several reasons, including the
complexities in accurately characterizing routine intake in the relevant
populations. 158 However,
a number of recently published studies suggest a role. Among 279 patients with RH,
brain natriuretic peptide was higher and PRA was lower than in control patients,
supporting a component of relative volume excess (although 24-hour urinary sodium
levels were not increased). 159 In
a study of 204 patients with true RH confirmed by ambulatory monitoring, one-third
displayed evidence for excess sodium intake (ie, 24-hour urine levels >200
mEq). 160 Further indirect
evidence can be derived from large population studies in which chronic renal
insufficiency, a well-established cause of heightened salt sensitivity of BP, has
been repetitively linked to aTRH. 13 , 38 , 152 Perhaps the most compelling support comes
from the few clinical trials demonstrating marked reductions in BP among patients
with RH following a reduced sodium diet. 58 , 161 
Alcohol 
Alcohol intake has been linked to increases in BP and the risk for
developing hypertension. 162 – 164 The
dose-response association may differ between men (linear) and women (J
shaped) 164 and can be
modified by metabolic genes. 163 
Nonetheless, heavy alcohol intake (>30–50 g/d) is a well-established
risk factor for hypertension. 165 
Physical Inactivity 
Both reduced physical activity and lower physical fitness are independent
risk factors for hypertension. 166 – 171 Graded
inverse associations between activity and fitness level with the risk for developing
high BP have been shown in young adults, 168 men, 169 
and women. 170 There is further
evidence that a sedentary lifestyle itself (eg, more television watching)
independently promotes the onset of hypertension. 167 , 172 
Conversely, there is a paucity of studies that have reported associations between
physical inactivity and RH. Along with other poor lifestyle factors, self-reported
inactivity was not predictive of RH among patients in the REGARDS cohort. 173 On the other hand, indirect
support for the important role of activity comes from a randomized study
demonstrating that a thrice-weekly treadmill walking exercise program for 8 to 12
weeks significantly lowered daytime ambulatory BP (6±12/3±7 mm Hg;
P =0.03) among 50 treated patients with RH. 173 
Dietary Pattern and Other Risk Factors 
The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) eating pattern is well
established to reduce BP, by 6.7/3.5 mm Hg in a recent meta-analysis. 174 , 175 Nonetheless, as with other lifestyle factors in the
REGARDS cohort, a low DASH diet questionnaire score was not independently associated
with aTRH. 166 Further studies are
needed to clarify the precise role of poor diet in the pathogenesis of RH.
Psychosocial stressors (eg, occupational stress, low social support), negative
personality traits (anxiety, anger, depression), and reduced sleep duration/quality
have also been associated with high BP 176 – 178 ;
however, data linking them specifically to RH are lacking. Finally, a variety of
environmental exposures, including loud noises (eg, traffic), colder temperatures
(eg, winter), higher altitudes, and air pollutants, promote high BP. 179 Future studies are required to
elucidate the potential impact of these commonly encountered environmental factors
on RH. 
Drug-Related RH 
Several classes of pharmacologic agents can increase BP and contribute to
drug-induced RH ( Table 2 ). However, the
effects of these agents are found to be highly individualized, with the majority of
individuals manifesting little or no effect and others demonstrating severe
elevations in BP levels. 
Table 2. 
Drugs and Other Substances With Potential to Induce or Exacerbate
Elevated BP and Hypertension 
NSAIDs 
Oral contraceptives 
Sympathomimetic 
Cyclosporine, tacrolimus 
Erythropoietin 
VEGF inhibitors 
Alcohol 
Cocaine 
Amphetamines 
Antidepressants 
Glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids 
Open in a new tab 
BP indicates blood pressure; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs; and VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor. 
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents 
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) increase BP by reducing
the production of prostaglandins E 2 and I 2 , leading to
reduced vasodilation and sodium excretion. With their widespread use, NSAIDs are
considered one of the most common offending agents affecting BP
control. 180 , 181 In general, all nontopical
NSAIDs in doses adequate to reduce inflammation and pain can affect BP levels in
both normotensive and hypertensive individuals. 182 The results of meta-analyses have
indicated that the average increase in mean arterial pressure is highly
variable, with a range of reports from 2 to 5 mm Hg. 183 Furthermore, NSAIDs affect the
treatment effect of several antihypertensive medication classes, including
diuretics, ACE inhibitors, ARBs, and β-blockers. 184 , 185 It is important to note that antihypertensive medication
interactions have typically not been shown with CCBs, 186 and the effect of NSAID use on
α- and β-blocker efficacy might also be minimal. 187 
Although the effect of NSAIDs on the incidence of hypertension has been
reported as described earlier, there are significant variations in the magnitude
of changes in BP in hypertensive patients taking antihypertensive
medications. 188 – 192 
Several studies found no effect of NSAIDs on BP in patients who were using
diuretics. 193 – 195 The SBP increase with NSAIDs
in ACE inhibitor users ranged from 5 to 10 mm Hg. 196 – 199 The inhibition of prostaglandins by NSAIDs is proposed
as the mechanism that explains the loss of the BP-lowering effect of ACE
inhibitors. 200 , 201 
BP effects from the use of NSAIDs vary by type, with selective COX-2
(cyclooxygenase-2) inhibitors such as celecoxib having less BP effect than
traditional NSAIDs. 192 , 202 The BP effect 188 – 190 appears to be dose-dependent, involving
the inhibition of COX-2 in the kidneys, with a reduction in sodium excretion and
an increase in intravascular volume. 186 In contrast, low-dose aspirin does not have
COX-2–inhibiting or BP-increasing effects, as indicated by results from
the HOT study (Hypertension Optimal Treatment). 191 However, these conclusions cannot be
extrapolated to larger doses of aspirin. 
Oral Contraceptives and Hormone Replacement 
Oral contraceptives raise BP and induce hypertension by increasing
angiotensin biosynthesis. 203 , 204 The Nurses’ Health
Study of >60 000 normotensive women followed up for 4 years found that
women using oral contraceptives had an 80% higher risk of developing
hypertension compared with women not using oral contraception agents. 205 However, only 41.5 cases of
hypertension per 10 000 person-years could be attributed to oral contraceptive
use, and this number rapidly declined with cessation of therapy. Similarly,
another study in hypertensive women reported that women taking oral
contraceptives had more severe hypertension and poorer BP control rates than
women using other contraceptive methods. 206 The type of oral contraceptives is important, with
combined oral contraceptives (progestin and estradiol) associated with BP
elevations at greater rates than lower-dose estradiol-only and progestin-only
oral contraceptives. 207 , 208 Epidemiological studies of
high-dose estrogen use found mean elevations in SBP of 3 to 6 mm Hg, with
≈5% of women developing new hypertension. 209 Cessation of estrogen use typically
leads to a return to baseline BP within 2 to 12 months, but proteinuria may
persist. 209 , 210 The mechanism responsible
for the hypertensive effect of oral contraceptives may involve the
renin-angiotensin system because estrogen stimulates the production of
angiotensinogen. 211 
Postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy uses much lower estrogen
doses than oral contraceptives, combined with progestin for women with an intact
uterus. Estrogen replacement therapy and hormone replacement therapy appear to
have a neutral effect on BP, as illustrated by the following observations from 2
large randomized trials. The Women’s Health Initiative, a randomized
placebo-controlled trial, assessed the effect of estrogen-progestin replacement
on outcomes in postmenopausal women 211 and found that at 5.2 years hormone replacement
therapy produced only a small increase (1.5 mm Hg) in SBP compared with
placebo. 212 Similar
findings were noted in the PEPI trial (Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin
Interventions) in which estrogen replacement therapy, with or without
progestins, did not affect BP after 3 years. 213 
Sympathomimetic Amines 
Sympathetic amines increase BP by activation of the sympathetic nervous
system. The association of sympathomimetic amines with dose-related increases in
BP has been well established. 214 , 215 Although
sympathomimetic-induced hypertension may not be clinically significant in
healthy patients, these BP levels can be concerning in individuals with comorbid
conditions. 214 – 217 Sympathomimetic amines
include amphetamines and similar compounds such as pseudoephedrine and
ephedrine. Historically, these compounds were contained in some over-the-counter
cough and cold preparations and appetite suppressants, with several, most
notably phenylpropanolamine, taken off the current market. 
Immunosuppressive Agents 
Cyclosporine 
Cyclosporine and tacrolimus increase BP by inducing systemic and
renal vasoconstriction and sodium retention. Hypertension is reported in the
majority of patients undergoing renal, hepatic, or heart transplantation
treated with cyclosporine. 218 Cyclosporine is associated with enhanced renal
vasoconstriction leading to volume-dependent (low renin)
hypertension. 219 , 220 Cyclosporine-induced
hypertension is usually treated with vasodilatory CCBs. Although diuretics
are effective treatment, they may exacerbate prerenal azotemia. Another
immunosuppressive agent, tacrolimus, is thought to have some hypertensive
effects. 
Other Agents 
Recombinant Human Erythropoietin 
Recombinant human erythropoietin can increase BP by complex
mechanisms in a dose-dependent fashion, resulting in hypertension in 20% to
33% of recipients. 221 
Long-term use of erythropoietin promotes vascular smooth muscle cell growth,
vascular remodeling, and medial hypertrophy, with maintained elevated
BP. 222 , 223 Erythropoietin-induced hypertension
can be controlled with antihypertensive medications, often with a single
agent. 224 
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors 
In patients being treated for malignancies, antineoplastic drugs
that target the VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) pathway have
emerged as inducers of hypertension. 225 – 227 
As an example, hypertension frequently developed in patients receiving
treatment with VEGF inhibitors. 228 Multiple mechanisms are proposed, including a
reduction of nitric oxide and prostacyclin bioavailability, an increase of
systemic vascular resistance, and vascular stiffness, which has been
observed in animals treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors of
VEGF. 229 – 237 
Cocaine 
Tachycardia and BP elevation are common clinical manifestations of
cocaine use. 238 BP
elevation is caused by increased central sympathetic outflow and blockade of
neuronal norepinephrine reuptake, resulting in neurotransmitter accumulation
in the synaptic cleft with resulting intense sympathetic
activation. 239 
Amphetamines 
Amphetamines increase norepinephrine production, augmenting
sympathetic nervous system activation. The complications of amphetamines are
comparable to those of cocaine and include hypertension and
tachycardia. 240 
Methylphenidate has been implicated in the development of hypertension in
children treated for attention deficit disorder. 241 Mescaline has effects very similar
to those of amphetamines and can increase BP. 240 
Antidepressants 
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors may lead to severely elevated BP in
individuals who consume foods containing tyramine. 242 , 243 Although the drugs themselves can exacerbate
hypertension by increasing the half-life of norepinephrine at sympathetic
nerve terminals, the effect is often magnified when amine precursors are
also consumed. 243 
Tranylcypromine is the most likely of the agents to raise BP compared with
moclobemide and brofaromine. 244 , 245 
Tricyclic antidepressants have been found to increase BP in patients with
panic disorders. 246 
Likewise, dose-dependent increases in BP have been reported in patients
receiving therapeutic doses of venlafaxine. 247 Severe hypertension has also been
identified in patients treated with antidepressants such as
fluoxetine. 248 
Sleep Disorders and Pseudopheochromocytoma 
Sleep Deprivation and Pseudopheochromocytoma 
Contributing causes of RH are sleep disorders and a related problem
called pseudopheochromocytoma. The term, which originated in 1999, describes a
pheochromocytoma-like syndrome. Once true pheochromocytoma is excluded, one
should consider pseudopheochromocytoma, a syndrome characterized by the presence
of paroxysmal hypertension with 3 distinct features: abrupt elevation of BP,
equally abrupt onset of distressful physical symptoms, and absence of reported
fear or panic at the onset of attacks. 249 The original description involved patients with a
history of emotional trauma from an event that they had denied; many improved
with antidepressant therapy, β-blockers, and counseling. Since that
report, there have been numerous case reports of pseudopheochromocytoma with a
recent update summarizing the syndrome. 250 
A related problem in many people with pseudopheochromocytoma is poor
sleep quality. Poor sleep quality, if long term, yields the same symptomology of
paroxysmal hypertension and elevated BP, especially during the afternoon and
evening hours. Poor sleep quality is not the result of just OSA but a host of
sleep disorders, including restless leg syndrome and insomnia of various
causes. 251 Many
times, these different sleep disorders coexist and prevent the patient from
achieving proper sleep. 
The mechanism of poor sleep quality contributing to elevated BP and
paroxysmal bouts of very high BP relates to activation of both the sympathetic
nervous system and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. 252 – 255 Sympathetic activity is also increased
in sleep deprivation, restless leg syndrome, and OSA. 252 – 254 To further support this in RH, data from a post hoc
analysis of the SYMPLICITY HTN-3 trial evaluated the effect of renal denervation
versus sham control on office and ambulatory (including nocturnal) SBP in
patients with OSA. Compared with sham control, renal denervation reduced the
6-month office SBP in subjects with OSA. 56 
Patients without OSA who suffer from sleep deprivation, defined as less
than a minimum of 6 hours of uninterrupted sleep, also have increased
sympathetic activity. In this case, it is a consequence of reduced time in
non-rapid eye movement or slow-wave sleep that also affects the nocturnal dip in
BP. 252 This supports
the hypothesis that disturbed non-rapid eye movement sleep quantity or quality
is a mechanism by which sleep deprivation or restless leg syndrome leads to an
increase in sympathetic tone. 
SBP, diastolic BP, and heart rate increase the day after a
sleep-deprived night compared with the day after a normal sleep; urinary
excretion of norepinephrine is also increased. 56 , 253 – 256 In
addition, BP, heart rate, and peripheral vascular resistance progressively
decrease in non-rapid eye movement sleep. Thus, any deterioration in sleep
quality or quantity may be associated with an increase in nocturnal BP, which
could contribute to the development of poor hypertension control. 
In contrast to reduced sleep time and quality, the increase in
sympathetic activity associated with OSA is a function of intermittent hypoxia;
the short-term rise in BP parallels the severity of oxygen desaturation at
night. 256 , 257 Indeed, increased sympathetic activity
is seen in both animal models subjected exclusively to intermittent
hypoxia 258 and
healthy human volunteers exposed to intermittent hypoxia in a
“tent.” 259 Respiratory event-related intermittent hypoxia is caused
not only by overactivity of the adrenergic system but also by the
renin-angiotensin system, as further supported by a meta-analysis. 255 It is also important to note
that OSA-associated hypertension is only slightly reduced by continuous positive
airway pressure (CPAP) treatment. 260 Nevertheless, addressing sleep disorders or sleep
habits is relevant when considering the risk of either developing or controlling
preexistent hypertension. 
Poor BP control is strongly associated with OSA, especially in those
patients with an apnea/hypopnea index of at least 30 events per hour. 261 Correction of sleep apnea
with CPAP reduces BP in those who are adherent; however, because the SBP
reduction is only from 2 to 5 mm Hg, adjunctive medications are almost always
needed. 260 Use of
ARBs and some β-blockers, 262 as well as central α-agonists such as clonidine or
guanfacine, a longer-acting agent with comparable activity, at bedtime improves
BP control. 263 Failure to
achieve a sufficient amount of time in the deep stages of sleep increases the
risk of developing hypertension. 
The relationship between self-reported sleep duration and prevalent
hypertension follows a U-shaped association with the nadir of the U being
between 7 and 8 hours of uninterrupted sleep per night. 256 , 264 , 265 As sleep
time is either reduced or increased from this range, there is higher prevalence
of hypertension. 56 , 266 Moreover, sleep duration of <5
hours is associated with incident hypertension in subjects <60 years of
age, whereas sleep duration of >9 hours per night is associated with
incident hypertension in subjects >60 years. These early observations
have been further confirmed with larger, more recent studies and
meta-analyses. 256 , 264 , 267 , 268 
In summary, sleep quality and duration are critically important in the
control of BP in RH. Clinicians should ask frequently about sleep quality and
duration because they clearly affect BP control by activating both the
sympathetic and renin-angiotensin systems and will further mitigate against
controlling BP in RH. Many of these patients will have elevated heart rate
disproportionate to their BP, a clinical clue that may be related to sleep
quality. 269 , 270 In this setting, reinstating
proper sleep patterns is critical, as is using agents that block the systems
involved in the problem. Note that if the patient is receiving diuretics and is
not adherent to a low-sodium diet, this will produce nocturnal micturition and
result in interrupted sleep. Moreover, diuretics increase sympathetic tone;
spironolactone blunts this activation, but ARBs do not. 271 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea 
OSA is extremely common in patients with RH, with prevalence rates as
high as 70% to 90%, and when present, OSA is often severe. 272 – 277 The high occurrence of OSA in patients with RH has
been attributed to increased fluid retention and accompanying upper airway
edema, as suggested by studies positively relating the presence and severity of
OSA to aldosterone excess and high dietary sodium intake. 47 , 49 , 277 – 279 The role of aldosterone in
promoting OSA is additionally supported by studies demonstrating that
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists reduce the severity of OSA in patients
with RH. 280 – 282 Other studies implicate excessive
accumulation of fluid centrally, including in the neck, as an important
contributor to OSA severity in patients with RH by demonstrating increased
shifting of fluid from the lower extremities into the upper body during supine
sleep. 283 This
central accumulation of fluid has been shown to contribute to upper airway edema
with associated increases in upper airway resistance, thereby worsening
OSA. 284 , 285 This effect is blunted by
intensification of diuretic therapy, including the use of
spironolactone. 286 
Treatment of patients with OSA and RH with CPAP induces significant but
generally modest reductions in BP. In a randomized evaluation of treatment of
moderate to severe OSA with CPAP versus no CPAP in patients with RH, treatment
with CPAP reduced mean 24-hour SBP and diastolic BP by 3.1 and 3.2 mm Hg,
respectively. 287 The
treatment effect, however, was larger with increasing CPAP adherence. When
analyzed separately, patients using CPAP at least 4 hours per night had
reductions in 24-hour SBP and diastolic BP of 4.4 and 4.1 mm Hg, respectively,
and reductions in nocturnal SBP and diastolic BP of 7.1 and 4.1 mm Hg,
respectively. 287 
However, a well-conducted randomized controlled trial recently demonstrated that
CPAP plus usual care, compared with usual care alone, did not prevent CVD events
in patients with moderate to severe OSA and established CVD. 288 
Routine evaluation by polysomnography is not indicated for all patients
with RH. However, given the high prevalence of often severe OSA in patients with
RH and the potential benefit of CPAP to enhance BP control, clinicians should
vigorously screen such patients for symptoms of OSA (loud snoring, frequent
nocturnal arousals, witnessed apnea, and excessive daytime sleepiness) and have
a low threshold for referral for definitive evaluation and treatment. 
Secondary Hypertension: Diagnosis and Management 
Primary Aldosteronism 
Primary aldosteronism is defined as a group of disorders in which
aldosterone production is inappropriately high, relatively autonomous, and
independent of the renin-angiotensin system and in which aldosterone secretion
is not suppressed by sodium loading. 289 The disorder includes hypertension caused by volume
expansion and sympathetic nervous system activation, hypokalemia, metabolic
alkalosis, and advanced cardiovascular and renal disease. Because of the toxic
effects of aldosterone on heart and blood vessels, primary aldosteronism is
accompanied by a major increase in CVD and events compared with those observed
in primary hypertension, including stroke (4.2-fold), myocardial infarction
(6.5-fold), and atrial fibrillation (12.1-fold). 290 Primary aldosteronism is also
associated with left ventricular hypertrophy, diastolic dysfunction and heart
failure, large artery stiffness, oxidative stress, widespread tissue
inflammation and fibrosis, and increased resistance vessel remodeling compared
with primary hypertension. 291 – 293 
The majority of studies indicate that primary aldosteronism is a
particularly common cause of RH. Observational studies from many different
countries have demonstrated a prevalence rate of primary aldosteronism of
≈20% in patients with confirmed RH. 57 , 160 , 294 – 296 This relatively high prevalence contrasts with the
≈8% overall prevalence of primary aldosteronism in primary
hypertension. 289 
However, the prevalence of confirmed primary aldosteronism among 1656
hypertensive Chinese patients with RH was only 7.1%, indicating significant
variation in prevalence in different populations. 297 When considering the frequency of
primary aldosteronism, it is important not simply to accept a positive plasma
aldosterone:renin ratio as diagnostic of the disease but to confirm the results
of this screening test with 1 of 4 recommended confirmatory tests. 289 In the Chinese study, saline
infusion was performed in all patients to confirm the diagnosis. 297 
Given the relatively high prevalence of primary aldosteronism in
patients with RH, all such patients should be screened. 289 Screening for primary aldosteronism
should be conducted with the ratio of plasma aldosterone concentration to PRA
(aldosterone/renin ratio [ARR]) from a blood sample obtained in the morning with
the patient in a seated position for at least 30 minutes before
sampling. 289 , 298 A positive screening test
requires an ARR of >30 or >20 if plasma aldosterone concentration
is ≥16 ng/dL. 289 The
validity of the screening test depends critically on appropriate preparation of
the patient before the test. Hypokalemia, which reduces aldosterone secretion,
should be corrected with oral K+ supplements before testing. Pharmacological
agents that markedly affect plasma ARR (spironolactone, eplerenone, and
high-dose amiloride) should be withdrawn at least 1 month before
testing. 289 It is
also important to recognize that antihypertensive medications other than
spironolactone, eplerenone, and amiloride can alter screening test results. For
example, β-adrenergic receptor blockers, central
α 2 -receptor agonists, and renin inhibitors suppress PRA, and
ACE inhibitors, ARBs, non-potassium-sparing diuretics, and dihydropyridine CCBs
increase PRA, thus altering plasma ARR values. If the initial screening test
results are not convincing, these medications can be selectively withdrawn for
at least 2 weeks while BP is controlled with other agents that do not influence
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system such as slow-release verapamil,
hydralazine, or an α 1 -adrenergic receptor antagonist
(prazosin, doxazosin, or terazosin). 289 
If the screening test for primary aldosteronism is positive, the patient
is usually referred for further evaluation to an endocrinologist or hypertension
specialist. Further steps include administration of a confirmatory test (saline
suppression test, oral salt-loading test, captopril test, or fludrocortisone
suppression test). If primary aldosteronism is confirmed with one of these
tests, subtype classification is usually performed with adrenal venous sampling.
Patients with unilateral disease (50%; aldosterone-producing adenoma or, much
less frequently, unilateral hyperplasia) respond to unilateral laparoscopic
adrenalectomy with complete cure (≈50%) or improvement (≈50%) in
BP control. Patients with bilateral disease (idiopathic hyperaldosteronism)
usually have marked improvement in hypertension control with spironolactone or
eplerenone. 289 
Renal Parenchymal Disease 
CKD is both a cause and a complication of poorly controlled
hypertension. Reduced kidney function results in impaired salt excretion,
overactivation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, increased
sympathetic nervous system activity, and altered medication efficacy. Treatment
resistance in patients with CKD is undoubtedly related in large part to
increased sodium and fluid retention and consequential intravascular volume
expansion. An excess of total body salt and water limits the efficacy of
antihypertensive medication classes that lack a natriuretic effect. In addition,
salt may have a direct effect on the vasculature, hastening arteriosclerosis and
blunting the vascular response to medication. 
As the population ages, the prevalence of CKD is estimated to rise, and
correspondingly, the number of individuals with RH will increase. From data from
NHANES 1999 to 2010, the lifetime risk of developing (or “progressing
to”) moderate-stage CKD from normal baseline kidney function is 54% (age,
30–49 years), 52% (age, 50–64 years), and 42% (age ≥65
years). 299 An
alternative simulation for a 30-year-old individual estimated a residual
lifetime risk of 59.1% for estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)
<60 mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73
m −2 . 300 Although most of the CKD population will ultimately
require antihypertensive drug therapy (30.2% with stage 1 CKD increasing to
78.9% with stage 4 CKD), achievement of current BP goals (≤130/80 mm Hg)
declines with higher CKD stage from 49.5% at stage 1 to 30.2% at stage 4
(overall rate, 44.6%) despite greater use of antihypertensive medications. Even
when a higher goal of ≤140/90 mm Hg was used, only 66.5% overall reached
this target. 301 
Difficulty controlling BP in late stages of CKD was also seen in CRIC
(Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort), in which 88% of participants had stage 3
or 4 CKD. Of the 86% with hypertension, 67% were controlled to <140/90 mm
Hg and 46% were controlled to <130/80 mm Hg, with a higher prevalence of
uncontrolled hypertension in those with lower eGFR. 302 , 303 aTRH was present in 40% and was associated with higher
cardiovascular event rates and mortality whether BP was uncontrolled
(≥140/90 mm Hg) with 3 antihypertensive agents (52.5%) or controlled with
≥4 agents (47.5%). 19 
aTRH was more common in patients with lower eGFR, including 22.3% with eGFR
>60 mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73 m −2 ,
39.4% with eGFR of 0 to 60 mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73
m −2 , and 54.2% in those with eGFR <30
mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73 m −2 . This
trend was quantified as 14% higher odds of having aTRH for every
5–mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73 m −2 
decrease in eGFR (adjusted odds ratio, 1.14; 95% CI, 1.10–1.17). Doubling
of proteinuria was associated with a higher likelihood of aTRH with an adjusted
odds ratio of 1.28 (95% CI, 1.16–1.42). aTRH was common among CRIC
participants, although 72% were receiving nephrology care. 
Other data confirm that even when patients with CKD were followed up in
nephrology clinics, <15% had their BP controlled to <130/80 mm Hg
and <40% achieved a BP of <140/90 mm Hg despite the use of 3
different antihypertensive agents. 304 In ALLHAT (Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering
Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial), CKD as indicated by a serum creatinine
of >1.5 mg/dL was a strong predictor of failure to achieve goal BP. Thus,
patients with CKD and aTRH are at higher risk for CVD events and renal events
(50% decrease in eGFR or incident end-stage renal disease) compared with
patients with CKD without aTRH. 67 
Evaluation of the patient with CKD and RH includes consideration of
other secondary causes that may coexist, including renal artery stenosis,
primary aldosteronism, or other endocrine causes. Special attention should be
focused on appropriate dietary sodium restriction because reduced salt intake
may improve the efficacy of antihypertensive medications. Effective control
generally requires a diuretic in the regimen with evolution to more potent
agents, either thiazidetype agents at higher doses or loop diuretics, as renal
function declines. 
Renal Artery Stenosis 
Hypertension accelerated or worsened by renal artery stenosis remains
among the most common causes of RH, particularly in older age groups. 305 Among a series of 4494
patients referred to hypertension specialty clinics, 12.7% had secondary causes
overall, of which 35% were associated with occlusive renovascular
disease. 306 More
recent series indicate that 24% of older subjects (mean age, 71 years) with RH
have significant renal arterial disease. 307 Most cases are caused by atherosclerotic disease, but
the syndrome of renovascular hypertension can result from other less common
obstructive lesions, including a variety of fibromuscular dysplasias, renal
artery dissection or infarction, Takayasu arteritis, radiation fibrosis, and
renal artery obstruction from aortic endovascular stent grafts. Renal artery
stenosis is recognized to produce a wide spectrum of manifestations ranging from
an incidental, asymptomatic finding to accelerated hypertension and renal
insufficiency. The latter often reflects disease progression. 308 Moderate degrees of
renovascular hypertension most often can be managed with medical therapy,
particularly with the use of agents that block the renin-angiotensin system (ACE
inhibitors/ARBs), as several prospective randomized trials have
demonstrated. 309 , 310 As a result, current
practice has shifted to optimizing antihypertensive drug therapy as the primary
treatment for patients with identified renal artery stenosis before embarking on
complex imaging or interventional strategies. Most patients with renovascular
disease tolerate ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy without adverse renal
effects, 311 but a
modest fraction (10%−20%) will develop an unacceptable rise in serum
creatinine, particularly with volume depletion. 312 A subset of medically treated patients
develop progressive disease syndromes with worsening hypertension, renal
insufficiency, or circulatory congestion (“flash pulmonary
edema”), which carry high mortality risks. Observational series have
repeatedly demonstrated that BP control and mortality can be improved
substantially after successful revascularization. 313 , 314 Post hoc analysis of the CORAL trial (Cardiovascular
Outcomes With Renal Artery Lesions) data suggests a mortality benefit of
revascularization compared with medical therapy for atherosclerotic renal artery
stenosis in patients without proteinuria. 315 
Management of renal artery stenosis can be particularly challenging when
bilateral lesions are present because there are considerable risks both with
intervention and if intervention is not performed. Diagnosis of this disorder
depends on clinical suspicion and consideration for arterial imaging for
subjects with unexplained progressive hypertension or renal dysfunction. Duplex
imaging to identify increased peak systolic velocity in the renal arteries is
most commonly used, often with confirmation by computed tomography angiography
or magnetic resonance angiography before invasive studies. Although initial
treatment usually includes systematically advancing medical therapy, restoring
main renal artery patency with endovascular stenting is also likely to reduce
arterial BP, albeit with a residual requirement for antihypertensive drug
therapy. 316 The most
reliable predictor for effective BP reduction after revascularization remains a
short duration of pressure elevation. 
Medical treatment options for renal artery stenosis have been enhanced
with the availability of effective blockade of the renin-angiotensin system and
potent CCBs. Large data registries indicate that ACE inhibitor or ARB treatment
in patients with identified renal artery stenosis confers a long-term mortality
benefit. 317 Those
individuals who experience a rise in creatinine during ACE inhibitor or ARB
treatment usually tolerate restarting the medication after successful
revascularization. The rise in serum creatinine during treatment in patients
with renal artery stenosis or CKD is often transient and related to sluggish
renal autoregulation when BP falls, with the fall being even greater if
intravascular volume drops with diuretics or renin-angiotensin system blockers,
which dilate the renal efferent more than the afferent arteriole. Patients
failing antihypertensive drug therapy or those with bilateral renal artery
disease with loss of renal function or episodes of pulmonary edema should be
considered for revascularization. 318 Most patients with RH and atherosclerotic renal artery
stenosis failing medical therapy can be treated with endovascular procedures
such as stenting. Restenosis may develop in 15% to 24% of treated patients but
may not always be associated with worsening hypertension or kidney
function. 319 Surgical
revascularization is reserved most often for subjects with complex anatomy or
associated aortic disease. 
Pheochromocytoma/Paraganglioma 
The chromaffin cell tumors, pheochromocytoma (adrenal catecholamine
producing, 90%) and paraganglioma (extra-adrenal, sympathetic/parasympathetic
derived, 10%), are rare even in the hypertensive population, with a prevalence
estimated at 0.01% to 0.2%. The prevalence is likely higher in patients referred
for RH (eg, up to 4%). 320 
Symptoms include paroxysmal hypertension (which may be sustained in up to 50% of
those with high norepinephrine production or orthostatic in
epinephrine-predominant tumors) associated with headache, palpitations, pallor,
and piloerection (“cold sweat”). Given the high morbidity and
mortality of not treating these tumors, the usual 3-year delay in diagnosis, and
the fact that one-third are inherited, it is essential to consider the diagnosis
in anyone referred for RH. 
The screening test of choice for pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma is
measurement of circulating catecholamine metabolites. Catechol 0-methyl
transferase releases normetanephrine and metanephrine from the tumors, measured
as plasma free (sensitivity, 96%−100%; specificity, 89%−98%) or
urinary fractionated (sensitivity, 86%−97%; specificity, 86%−95%)
metanephrines. 321 
Hypertensive patients frequently have elevated levels of catecholamine
metabolites, especially in the presence of obesity and OSA and with the use of
certain drugs such as tricyclic antidepressants. The levels are usually
<4 times the upper limit of normal, but assessment should be repeated. If
still elevated, they can be further evaluated as false positives by
clonidine-suppression testing, with 100% specificity and 96% sensitivity of
failure to reduce plasma metanephrines by 40%. 322 
Imaging should be pursued only after biochemical evidence for a
pheochromocytoma has been obtained. The recent Endocrine Society guideline
recommends starting with computed tomography, with magnetic resonance imaging as
an alternative and metaiodobenzylguanidine scanning to further evaluate
suspected metastatic disease. 323 Once the tumor has been confirmed, the patient should be
prepared to undergo surgery by an experienced team (endocrinologist or
hypertension specialist, surgeon, and anesthesiologist). Treatment with
α-adrenergic blockade, a high-sodium diet, and fluid intake are
recommended for at least a week before surgery to prevent intraoperative BP
instability and to reverse volume contraction from
pressure-natriuresis. 323 Postoperatively, patients should be followed up for the
possibility of recurrence or metastasis, especially with the inherited
forms. 
Cushing Syndrome 
Cushing syndrome is a relatively uncommon endocrine disorder caused by
chronic excessive glucocorticoid exposure from endogenous or exogenous sources.
This leads to a constellation of classic symptoms (mood disorders, menstrual
irregularities, muscle weakness) and signs (weight gain, abdominal striae,
hirsutism, dorsal and supraclavicular fat, fragile skin). Glucose abnormalities
and hypertension are also common; thus, the disorder mimics a severe form of the
metabolic syndrome. Although a variety of relatively small cohort studies
suggest that high BP is highly prevalent (often exceeding 80%), 324 , 325 the overall frequency of hypertension, mild or severe,
among patients with Cushing syndrome remains to be accurately characterized.
Since the earlier AHA statement, 2 there has also been little progress in better understanding
the degree to which Cushing syndrome plays a role in RH. However, the available
evidence does not support it as a common cause. In a recent study of 423
individuals with RH, a systematic evaluation for Cushing syndrome found no overt
cases. 326 This
suggests that although high BP (perhaps even severe forms) may be common among
patients with Cushing syndrome, it is unlikely that it is prevalent in the
overall population of patients with RH. This is likely principally a result of
its rarity; however, the possibility should be recognized that some unknown
percentage of patients with RH may be undiagnosed given the high prevalence of
the metabolic syndrome, potentially masking occult disease. 
Detailed guidelines on whom to screen, the diagnostic algorithm, and the
treatment of patients with various forms of Cushing syndrome have been
published. 327 , 328 Given the high risk for CVD
events, the guidelines explicitly recognize the importance of aggressively
treating hypertension. 328 
Prior reviews outlining the underlying mechanisms of high BP in Cushing
syndrome 324 , 325 suggest that blocking the
mineralo-corticoid actions of excess cortisol that increase renal sodium
absorption with agents such as spironolactone or eplerenone is likely a sensible
strategy. However, it is also recognized the hypercortisolism can promote
hypertension through a variety of additional pathways (eg, activating the
renin-angiotensin system, sensitizing the vasculature to catecholamines, and
impairing endogenous nitric oxide bioavailability). 324 , 325 The optimal antihypertensive regimen in patients with
Cushing syndrome therefore remains to be adequately described; there have been
no randomized controlled trials in this area. Nevertheless, it is probable that
excessive activation of mineralocorticoid receptors plays a prominent role and
thus adequate diuretic therapy will likely prove to be a cornerstone of
successful therapy. Further details on the overall treatment and surgical
management of Cushing syndrome are provided in the recent guidelines. 328 
Coarctation of the Aorta 
Patients with operated coarctation of the aorta are likely to have
hypertension in adulthood and are at risk for premature CVD, including
myocardial infarction, aortic aneurysm (ascending or descending), stroke, and
heart failure. 329 – 331 Lifetime BP load is likely
higher in patients with repaired coarctation compared with those with normal
aortas because they have an exaggerated BP response to exercise. This response
may also predict future hypertension. 332 All patients with a history of coarctation repair and
hypertension should be evaluated for residual aortic arch obstruction with
computed tomography angiography, particularly if a gradient between the right
arm and leg is present and other sequelae of surgery such as descending aortic
aneurysm are present. 331 If
hypertension is resistant to treatment, surgical or catheter-based intervention
should be considered if the risk/benefit ratio for the contemplated procedure is
favorable. Because persistent hypertension may be secondary to increased
sympathetic tone, β-blockers may be most useful for BP control. 333 Antihypertensive therapy
typically also includes an ACE inhibitor or an ARB. 
Other Causes of Secondary Hypertension 
In addition to the above, other unusual/rare endocrine causes of
secondary hypertension are included in Table
3 . 
Table 3. 
Other Endocrine Causes of Secondary Hypertension 
Disorder 
Major Clinical Findings 
Physical Examination 
Screening Tests 
Additional/Confirmatory Tests 
Hypothyroidism 
Dry skin; cold intolerance; constipation;
hoarseness; weight gain 
Delayed ankle reflex; periorbital puffiness;
coarse skin; cold skin; slow movement; goiter 
High TSH; low or normal fT4 
Hyperthyroidism 
Warm, moist skin; heat intolerance;
nervousness; tremulousness; insomnia; weight loss; diarrhea; proximal
muscle weakness 
Lid lag; fine tremor of the outstretched
hands; warm, moist skin 
Low TSH; high or normal fT4 and T3 
Radioactive iodine uptake and scan 
Hypercalcemia and primary
hyperparathyroidism 
Hypercalcemia 
Usually none 
Serum calcium 
Serum parathyroid hormone 
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (excess
DOC) 
Hypertension and hypokalemia; virilization
(11-β-OH deficiency); incomplete masculinization in males and
primary amenorrhea in females (17-α-OH deficiency) 
Signs of virilization (11β) or
incomplete masculinization (17α) 
Hypertension and hypokalemia with low or
normal aldosterone and renin 
11-β-OH: elevated DOC, 11-deoxycortisol
and androgens; 17-α-OH: decreased androgens and estrogen;
elevated DOC and corticosterone 
Other mineralocorticoid excess syndromes
caused by DOC 
Early-onset hypertension, hypokalemia 
Arrhythmias (with hypokalemia) 
Low aldosterone and renin 
DOC; urinary cortisol metabolites; genetic
testing 
Acromegaly 
Acral features; enlarging shoe, glove, or hat
size; headache; visual disturbances; diabetes mellitus 
Acral features; large hands and feet; frontal
bossing 
Serum growth hormone ≥1 ng/mL during
oral glucose load 
Elevated age- and sex-matched IGF-1 level; MRI
scan of the pituitary 
Open in a new tab 
DOC indicates deoxycorticosterone; fT4, free thyroxine; IGF-1,
insulin-like growth factor-1; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; OH,
hydroxylase; T3, triiodothyronine; and TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone. 
Evaluation of RH 
The evaluation of patients with RH should be directed toward confirmation of
true treatment resistance, identification of causes contributing to resistance
(including secondary causes of hypertension), and documentation of complications of
the hypertensive disease process (see the evaluation algorithm in Figure 2 ). Assessment for treatment adherence and use of
ABPM (or home BP monitoring if ABPM is unavailable) are needed to confirm RH. True
RH usually has multiple causes, including excessive dietary salt intake, obesity,
CKD, and OSA. Assessment for comorbidities and hypertensive complications is
relevant because it will influence antihypertensive therapy in terms of the class of
pharmacological agent selected and BP goals. 334 
Figure 2. 
Open in a new tab 
Algorithm depicting the evaluation of resistant hypertension. ACEI
indicates angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin receptor
blocker; and BP, blood pressure. 
Medical History 
Documentation of the duration, severity, and behavior of the
hypertension is important, along with adherence to medical appointments and
antihypertensive treatment, clinical and adverse event responses to prior
antihypertensive medications, and current prescription and over-the-counter
medications that may elevate BP or interfere with antihypertensive drug effects.
In the clinical setting, accurate medication adherence is not usually
self-reported. Hence, clinicians must diplomatically inquire about how often
patients might miss their medication doses per week, whether adverse effects
might be playing a role in nonadherence, or whether patients have financial
challenges affecting their ability to pay out-of-pocket expenses for their
antihypertensive drugs. 
The medical interview should also be directed toward identifying
secondary causes of hypertension (for details, see the Secondary Hypertension: Diagnosis and Management 
section). 
Physical Examination 
The examination of patients with RH should be oriented toward
ascertainment of target organ damage and possible secondary causes. BP should be
measured as described previously. The presence of vascular disease, including in
the retina, should be pursued with fundoscopic evaluation and careful
examination of the quality of peripheral and carotid pulses and auscultation for
bruits. Although not specific, abdominal bruits increase the possibility that
obstructive renal artery disease exists. BP should be measured in both arms and
in the thigh (in patients <30 years of age) if aortic occlusive disease
or aortic coarctation is suspected. If the thigh SBP is >10 mm Hg lower
than the arm SBP while the patient is supine, imaging studies for coarctation
should be performed. 3 
Hypercortisolism may be suspected in patients with obesity, diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, depression, and bone loss accompanied by abdominal striae,
“moon” facies, and intrascapular fat deposition. 
Out-of-Office BP Monitoring 
Disparities between in-office and out-of-office BP should be
adjudicated. 334 – 339 
Unattended automated office measurements, self-measurements (home or work), and
ABPM have utility in determining whether there might be a white-coat effect that
creates the appearance of treatment resistance. Of these methods, ABPM is the
most objective and robust means to define the white-coat effect because it has
been shown to be a stronger predictor of CVD morbidity and mortality than clinic
measurements 340 and
has received recommendations for use in the diagnosis of hypertension in both
the United Kingdom and the United States. 1 , 341 , 342 
A white-coat effect (office BP above goal but ambulatory BP below goal)
should be considered in patients with normal or lower self-measured BP, in those
lacking target organ involvement (eg, retinopathy, CKD, left ventricular
hypertrophy), and when there are symptoms of excessive antihypertensive therapy.
If a white-coat effect is confirmed, out-of-office measurements (ambulatory or
self-measured values if ABPM is not available) should be used to confirm the
achievement of BP goals and to adjust drug therapy. 339 , 343 
Biochemical Evaluation 
Laboratory examination of the patient with RH should include a basic
metabolic profile (serum sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, glucose,
blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine), urinalysis, and a paired morning plasma
aldosterone and PRA to screen for primary aldosteronism. Interpretation of the
ARR is diminished in the setting of certain antihypertensive agents such as
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (raise aldosterone levels) or direct
renin inhibitors and β-adrenergic- blocking drugs (lower renin levels).
The ratio is an effective screening test because it has a high negative
predictive value for screening of primary aldosteronism. 344 , 345 The specificity for a high ARR is low as a result of the
common occurrence of low-renin states (eg, volume expansion, dietary salt excess
or sensitivity). A high ratio (> 20) when the serum aldosterone is
>16 ng/dL and PRA is <0.6 ng/mL per hour is suggestive of primary
aldosteronism, particularly in a patient taking an ACE inhibitor or ARB (these
drugs elevate the PRA; hence, if renin is still suppressed, it increases the
sensitivity of the ratio), but further assessments are required to confirm the
diagnosis. 
Measurement of plasma metanephrines or 24-hour urinary metanephrines is
an effective screening test for patients in whom paraganglioma or
pheochromocytoma is suspected. 346 
Noninvasive Imaging 
Imaging for the evaluation of renal artery stenosis in patients with RH
should be reserved for those with a high likelihood of renovascular disease:
young patients in whom fibromuscular dysplasia could be present and older
patients with a history of smoking or vascular disease who have increased risk
for atherosclerosis. Calculation of aortic and renal artery velocities by duplex
ultrasonography of the renal arteries is the usual initial test and is preferred
over computerized tomography and magnetic resonance angiography as a screening
tool, particularly when patients have CKD (eg, eGFR <60
mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73 m −2 ). Direct
renal arteriography in the absence of suspicious noninvasive imaging is not
recommended. Abdominal imaging of the adrenal glands by high-resolution
computerized tomography or magnetic resonance imaging is indicated only if there
is biochemical evidence of hormonally active tumors (eg, elevated aldosterone,
catecholamines, or cortisol). 
Management of RH 
An algorithm for managing RH is depicted in Figure 3 . 
Figure 3. 
Open in a new tab 
Algorithm depicting the management of resistant hypertension. BP
indicates blood pressure; CCB, calcium channel blocker; and RAS,
renin-angiotensin system. *These diuretics maintain efficacy down to estimated
glomerular filtration rates (eGFRs) of 30
mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73 m −2 . **Use
caution if eGFR is <30 mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73
m −2 . ***Requires concomitant use of a β-blocker and
diuretic. ****Requires the concomitant use of a β-blocker and loop
diuretic. 
Lifestyle Interventions 
Weight Loss 
Weight-reducing diets are well established to lower BP among patients
with hypertension, by 4.5/3.2 mm Hg in the most recent meta-analysis. 347 On the other hand, the
effect of pharmacologically aided weight loss is mixed, with some medications
showing modest benefits (eg, orlistat), whereas others (sibutramine) may even
raise BP. 348 Although obesity
clearly increases the risk for RH, trials demonstrating the efficacy of weight
loss among these patients are lacking. Guidelines consistently promulgate a
healthy lifestyle (including caloric restriction), aiming for a >5% to
−10% body weight loss among overweight and obese adults to help lower
BP. 1 , 174 These same recommendations should also
apply to patients with RH (despite the lack of published studies among these
patients), particularly in light of the fact that weight loss can lead to the
successful withdrawal of medications, thereby easing hypertension
control. 174 , 348 However, it is important to
note that the long-term persistence of weight loss (>1 year) and the
associated BP reduction are poorly described and warrant future
investigation. 
Dietary Salt Restriction 
A reduced-sodium diet is well proven to decrease BP. 174 , 349 In a recent meta-analysis, an estimated 1-g
(43.5-mmol) reduction in daily sodium intake produces a 2.1− and
1.2–mm Hg decrease in SBP among hypertensive and normotensive patients,
respectively. 349 In
addition to hypertensives, other subgroups of individuals (eg, those with
CKD 350 and obesity,
blacks) are often more sensitive and can derive particularly robust benefits
from sodium restriction. 153 , 155 In patients with RH, 2
recent small studies have demonstrated the efficacy of a reduced dietary sodium
intake for BP lowering. 58 , 161 In 12 patients with true RH
(taking 3.4±0.5 antihypertensive medications), a low-sodium (50 mmol/d)
versus a high-sodium (250 mmol/d) diet resulted in a profound reduction in
average office BP (−22.7/−9.1 mm Hg) over a 7-day
period. 58 The
low-sodium diet also led to significant reductions in daytime, nocturnal, and
24-hour BP levels (−20.1/−9.8 mm Hg). In a 6-week-long
double-blind placebo-controlled crossover trial of 20 patients with stage 3 to 4
CKD, many of whom had RH (average, 3.2 ± 1.1 antihypertensive
medications), a low-sodium (75 mmol/24-hour urine) versus a high-sodium (168
mmol/24-hour urine) diet significantly reduced 24-hour ambulatory BP
(−9.7/−3.9 mm Hg). 161 
At present, debate remains about the optimal intake of sodium for the
prevention of CVD morbidity and mortality. 153 – 155 , 349 There is concern that a
U-shaped relationship may exist, with the greatest risk reductions being
achieved by following only moderate restriction in sodium intake of 173 to 217
mmol/d (4–5 g/d) despite the fact that BP continues to decrease in a
linear fashion with even further reductions to <65 mmol/d (1.5
g/d). 349 It has been
posited that sympathetic nervous system and renin-angiotensin system activation
may counter the health benefits derived from the additional BP lowering at the
lower range of sodium intake <130 mmol/d (3 g/d). AHA
recommendations 155 
have continued to promulgate that an ideal daily sodium intake is <65
mmol/d (1.5 g/d), particularly among high-risk populations. Moreover, it is
possible that the meta-analysis findings do not apply specifically to
individuals with RH and that the additional BP lowering achieved through sodium
restriction may offset putative risks of achieving low levels of sodium intake.
Evidence-based recommendations on the optimal sodium intake among patients with
RH must await more definitive clinical trial data. For the time being, the
available studies (albeit of short-term duration) support that sodium
restriction, even to low levels <65 to 100 mmol/d (1.5–3.0 g/d),
yields significant linear reductions in BP among patients with high BP 153 – 155 , 349 and RH. 58 , 161 Therefore,
it seems prudent to continue to support the prior AHA recommendations for
patients with RH 1 to reduce
daily sodium intake to <100 mmol/d (2.3 g/d) and to consider more
stringent restrictions to <65 mmol/d (1.5 g/d) on a case-by-case basis.
Future trials testing the efficacy of this approach, particularly over
longer-term durations (>6–12 months), are vital. 
DASH Diet and Other Dietary Factors 
A DASH-style eating pattern, 174 , 175 alcohol
restriction to <10 g/d (women) and <20 g/d (men), 162 – 165 and a variety of other dietary
modifications 174 can
each yield significant reductions in BP among patients with hypertension. Diet
intervention trials specifically among patients with RH are absent. In light of
their safety and proven efficacy to lower BP in the general hypertensive
population, patients with RH should follow the established dietary
recommendations promoted by the AHA 1 , 351 and American
Society of Hypertension, as outlined in detail elsewhere. 174 Caution should be exercised in adopting
a potassium-rich DASH diet in patients with more advanced (stage 4 and 5) CKD
because these individuals are at risk for severe hyperkalemia and its
consequences. 
Exercise 
Numerous clinical trials demonstrate that exercise can effectively
lower BP, particularly among patients with preexisting hypertension. 352 , 353 In the largest meta-analysis to date, BP was lowered
by 8.3/5.2 mm Hg over several weeks by a variety of endurance (aerobic) exercise
programs in patients with hypertension. 353 Moreover, dynamic resistance exercise was also shown
to reduce BP by 1.8/3.2 mm Hg among hypertensive patients. As previously
outlined, a treadmill walking exercise program in 1 study was safe and effective
for lowering BP in patients with RH. 173 A recent small pilot study (n=16) also demonstrated
that a water-based aerobic exercise program may be safe and effective for
lowering BP in this population. 354 Although limited data are available, it seems appropriate
that patients with RH should follow current exercise recommendations as promoted
by numerous expert guidelines, including the 2017 American College of
Cardiology/AHA guideline, 1 to
reduce BP. In general, this involves ≥150 min/wk (in 3–5 sessions
of 30–40 minutes) of moderate to intense aerobic activity, optimally
supplemented with 2 to 3 sessions of light resistance training per week. Because
RH is more common in obese and older adults, some may be unable to achieve
moderate to intense aerobic activity. Low-intensity physical activity, 6 minutes
hourly over an 8-hour period, in sedentary individuals lowered BP (14/8 mm Hg)
and can improve metabolic syndrome variables. 355 – 359 Moreover, evidence suggests that low-intensity
physical activity may be similarly as effective as moderate to intense physical
activity in preventing type 2 diabetes mellitus, 360 which is a concern in nondiabetic
adults with RH. 
Alternative Approaches 
In a recent scientific statement from the AHA, the evidence supporting
the BP-lowering efficacy of alternative approaches was reviewed. 361 Although many treatments had
inadequate scientific support (eg, acupuncture, yoga), several modalities,
including transcendental meditation, device-guided slow breathing, and isometric
handgrip exercise, were felt to hold promise for clinical practice. More recent
evidence continues to support the efficacy of isometric handgrip in particular.
The latest meta-analysis demonstrates that isometric handgrip, typically
performed for 12 minutes 3 to 5 times per week, lowers BP by 5.2/3.9 mm
Hg. 362 However, no
trials among patients with RH have been performed. The usefulness of any
alternative approach as an adjuvant to control BP in this population requires
further investigation. Furthermore, the efficacy of intervening on other
lifestyle factors that have been linked to high BP or RH, such as improving
sleep quality and mitigating environmental triggers (eg, cold, noise,
pollution), remains unknown. 
A least 1 ongoing randomized clinical trial (TRIUMPH [Triple Pill vs
Usual Care Management for Patients With Mild-to-Moderate Hypertension]) is
investigating the effectiveness of an intense multifaceted lifestyle
intervention program versus routine care in patients with RH. 363 
Pharmacological Treatment of RH 
General Principles 
Once all identifiable forms of hypertension, particularly endocrine
causes, have been excluded and contributions from the white-coat effect (office
BP at least 20/10 mm Hg higher than home or ABPM measurements) and masked
uncontrolled hypertension (office BP measurements suggesting adequate BP control
but out-of-office readings elevated above goal) are considered, therapeutic
approaches for improved BP control in RH can begin. Three mechanistically
complementary antihypertensive agents, commonly including a long-acting CCB, a
blocker of the renin-angiotensin system (ACE inhibitor or ARB), and a diuretic,
should already be prescribed and taken by the patient to ensure a proper
diagnosis of RH ( Figure 3 , step 1).
Hydrochlorothiazide does not induce a predictable natriuresis below an GFR of 45
mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73 m −2 , but
chlorthalidone induces natriuresis down to an eGFR of 30
mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73 m −2 .
Thiazide or thiazide-like diuretics are appropriate down to an eGFR of 25 to 30
mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73
m −2 . 364 Below this eGFR level or in hypoalbuminemic states (ie,
serum albumin < 3.0 g/L), a long-acting loop diuretic such as torsemide
should be used over shorter-acting agents such as bumetanide or
furosemide. 365 These
3 separate pharmacological classes of antihypertensive agents must be given at
maximally tolerated doses such as amlodipine 10 mg, chlorthalidone 25 mg, and
one of the ACE inhibitors or ARBs at maximal dose. 366 Suboptimal medication regimens are
common in patients with hypertension resistant to antihypertensive
therapy. 21 , 60 , 367 
Specific Therapeutic Regimens 
Because most cases of RH are linked to either volume excess, especially
in CKD, or high sympathetic tone, establishment of the pathogenesis will
optimally facilitate the choice of the fourth drug. In addition, ensuring that
the most effective antihypertensive agent from certain pharmacological classes
is selected is important when a fourth agent is added ( Table 4 ). 
Table 4. 
Specific Clinical Issues Associated With Treatment Resistance * 
Issue Associated With Treatment
Resistance 
Management Consideration(s) 
Volume control, edema resolution 
Thiazide→chlorthalidone→loop
diuretic 
Heart rate control inadequate 
β-Blocker,
α,β-blocker, verapamil, diltiazem 
Renin and aldosterone levels low 
Low-salt diet, avoid nighttime shift work,
amiloride 
Renin low, aldosterone normal to high
normal 
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist 
Would split dosing of medications improve
control? 
Evaluate BP pattern according to home and
ambulatory BP monitoring 
Medication adherence questionable 
Initiate indirect or direct methods to
detect nonadherence; if nonadherence is documented (partial or
complete), discuss frankly, nonjudgmentally with patient and family 
Pattern of BP response to medications
outside clinician visit times unknown 
Identify meal effects on BP, duration of
medication effect, relationship of BP to side effects using
out-of-office BP monitoring 
Sleep disordered breathing; significant
anxiety associated with highly variable hypertension 
Initiate nondrug strategies concurrently
with or separately from antihypertensive drug therapy 
Open in a new tab 
BP indicates blood pressure. 
* 
Modified from White et al 334 with permission from the American Society of
Hypertension. 
Diuretic choices ( Figure 3 , step
2, and Table 4 ) are important because
volume excess and failure to adhere to low-sodium diets are very common causes
of RH. The diuretics with the greatest evidence base for reducing cardiovascular
outcomes are the thiazide-like diuretics chlorthalidone and
indapamide. 368 , 369 Comparative studies show an
additional SBP reduction of 7 to 8 mm Hg simply by switching from
hydrochlorothiazide to the same daily dose of chlorthalidone. 370 – 372 
Recent reports document the efficacy of mineralocorticoid receptor
blockade ( Figure 3 , step 3, and Table 4 ) to improve BP in patients with
RH. 373 – 377 In patients who are not
overtly volume overloaded but who have evidence of low renin status or salt
sensitivity of BP, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (spironolactone or
eplerenone) are more successful than α- or β-blockers. 373 , 377 Spironolactone has the advantage of once-daily
administration and can be initiated at doses of as little as 12.5 to 25 mg
daily. However, the use of spironolactone as a fourth drug is limited by
tolerability issues in some patients, including the development of hyperkalemia
in those with CKD with an eGFR <45
mL⋅min −1 ⋅1.73 m −2 or baseline
serum potassium >4.5 mEq/L. 378 Approximately 70% of adults with RH are candidates for
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists based on eGFR and serum K + ,
yet only a small fraction receive these effective agents. 379 With prolonged use at higher doses,
gynecomastia and erectile dysfunction in men and menstrual irregularities in
women may limit the use of spironolactone. In such cases, eplerenone may be used
successfully. 380 
Because of its shorter half-life compared with spironolactone, eplerenone should
be administered twice daily for optimal effect. 
The choice of ARB may also be important. Studies comparing various ARBs
demonstrate clear advantages of certain agents in BP reduction over others.
Specifically, 24-hour ABPM studies demonstrate that azilsartan medoximil
provides on average an additional 4 to 8 mm Hg further SBP reduction over other
ARBs (eg, valsartan and olmesartan) or the ACE inhibitor ramipril. 381 – 383 
Dihydropyridine CCBs such as amlodipine and nifedipine extended release
are the most studied in the setting of hypertension. Other drugs in this class
such as nicardipine and isradipine are administered 2 or 3 times daily and do
not lend themselves to optimal adherence in RH. Some data suggest that
long-acting formulations of nifedipine may have slightly greater
antihypertensive actions than amlodipine but are associated with more
edema. 384 – 386 Nondihydropyridine CCBs such
as verapamil also may be useful, but the evidence supporting their use in RH is
limited. 
Alteration of the dosing times (eg, to include a nocturnal dose) or
using divided doses of drugs with half-lives of <12 to 15 hours may also
improve BP control even when the drug theoretically has a pharmacodynamic effect
of up to 24 hours in duration. 387 , 388 Dosing at
night of certain agents, for example, guanfacine, also helps reduce adverse
effects such as drowsiness and may aid in sleeping. 
The choice of a fifth drug (to add) depends on sympathetic drive as
assessed in part by heart rate ( Figure 3 ,
step 4). In 2 post hoc analyses from large outcome trials, patients with heart
rates >80 bpm had higher mortality. 389 , 390 Thus,
agents such as β-blockers or, if medically contraindicated, central
α−2 agonists such as transdermal clonidine or guanfacine should be
considered ( Figure 3 , step 4). Clonidine
tablets should be avoided because of the need for frequent administration and
the risk of rebound hypertension during periods of nonadherence and after
discontinuation. 
If BP is still not controlled with the above-described measures, the
addition of hydralazine should be considered and combined with nitrates in cases
of heart failure 391 , 392 ( Figure 3 , step 5). Nitrates are preferred in this
setting because they help restore calcium (Ca 2+ ) cycling and cardiac
contractile performance and control superoxide production in isolated
cardiomyocytes. 393 
Moreover, hydralazine reduces nitrate tolerance in this setting. 394 Note that hydralazine causes
increased sympathetic tone and sodium avidity and therefore should be used in
the presence of background appropriate diuretic and β-blocker therapy
( Figure 3 , step 5). Total daily doses
of hydralazine should be <150 mg to avoid drug-induced systemic lupus
erythematosus. 
Lastly, minoxidil may be tried if hydralazine fails ( Figure 3 , step 6). Minoxidil is not well tolerated. It
induces hirsutism, which in women can lead to discontinuation of the agent.
Minoxidil must be given a minimum of twice daily and causes profound sodium
avidity with fluid retention and increased sympathetic tone. Thus, a loop
diuretic and β-blocker are required in virtually all cases. In this
setting, however, minoxidil lowers BP effectively in most cases. 395 
Hypertension Specialist 
The American Hypertension Specialists Certification Program has
developed criteria for physicians to become Certified Hypertension Specialists
(physicians only) and Certified Hypertension Clinicians (physicians and allied
health providers). The requirements for both certification programs may be found
at online. 396 
Hypertension specialists and clinicians have greater experience and
knowledge managing the RH patient compared with most healthcare professionals.
Retrospective studies have demonstrated improved BP control by hypertension
specialists for patients referred for uncontrolled hypertension. 366 , 397 When BP control is not progressing the way the primary
care provider thinks it should, the patient should be referred. 
Device-Based Treatment of RH 
Human sympathetic nervous system dysfunction plays an important role in the
development and progression of hypertension, heart failure, and CKD. 398 , 399 In the 1940s, surgical sympathectomy demonstrated dramatic
improvement in BP control and accompanying reduction in cardiac size, improved renal
function, and a decrease in the rate of cerebrovascular events before the
availability of antihypertensive drugs. 400 These successes were soon diminished by the occurrence of
severe orthostatic hypotension, as well as erectile dysfunction and bowel and
bladder incontinence, and the increasing availability of antihypertensive agents
that eventually led to the general discontinuation of lumbar sympathectomy in
clinical practice by the mid-1970s. Nevertheless, these early studies formed the
basis for research on modern devices for the treatment of RH, the majority of which
reduce sympathetic nervous system outflow. 
Renal Nerve Ablation 
Renal nerve ablation has been studied and used in clinical practice
outside the United States for several years; hence, until recently, most data
reported on its effects have come from centers in Australia and Europe. Early
studies in this field were quite promising and showed large reductions of clinic
BP in patients failing to be controlled with 4 or 5 antihypertensive
drugs. 401 , 402 However, these studies were
uncontrolled, and most did not study ambulatory BP as the primary end point.
Later research showed that in uncontrolled studies, effect sizes using ABPM were
much less (one-third) than the changes measured in the clinic setting. 403 
The first sham-controlled prospective randomized study in the field of
renal ablation therapy, SYMPLICITY HTN-3, showed little to no effect of renal
denervation therapy in a severely drug treatment-resistant population. 404 The failure of this most
rigorously designed randomized sham-control study to meet the efficacy end
points raised several methodological concerns, including alterations in patient
behavior in adherence to their multidrug pharmacological regimens and inadequate
denervation resulting from technical failure of the catheter, the interventional
proceduralist, or both. 405 
The methodological concerns arising from SYMPLICITY HTN-3 have led to
several new catheters and new trial designs to evaluate the efficacy of more
extensive renal denervation. Several studies are ongoing, but there are no
conclusions at present. Data from animal studies clearly document a reduction in
norepinephrine spillover rate and lowering of BP with both radiofrequency and
ultrasonic catheters to induce renal artery denervation. Post hoc analyses from
SYMPLICITY HTN-3 suggest that BP fell in patients with more complete ablation
compared with those with lesser degrees of renal nerve ablation. In addition,
the DENERHTN trial (Renal Denervation for Hypertension) recently demonstrated a
statistically significant reduction in daytime ambulatory SBP (−5.9 mm
Hg; P =0.03) in patients on 3 antihypertensive drugs randomized
to renal denervation versus those on 4 antihypertensive drugs. 406 At present, renal
denervation procedures to treat RH have been discontinued in most countries
unless patients are in research programs. 
More recent data from the SPYRAL HTN-OFF MED study using a different
catheter providing more extensive renal denervation showed a significant
reduction in BP. 407 However,
the patients enrolled in this study did not have RH, and at best, this
represents a proof-of-principle study demonstrating the role of the renal
sympathetic nervous system in hypertension. 
Carotid Baroreceptor Activation Therapy 
Carotid baroreceptor activation therapy is a system that consists of
baroreflex activation leads placed adjacent to the carotid sinus, an implantable
pulse generator, and an external programming system. This modality
electronically activates baroreceptors that signal the brain to orchestrate a
multisystemic response for disorders associated with sympathetic overactivity
such as hypertension, heart failure, and arrhythmias. 408 , 409 Consequences of carotid sinus stimulation include reduced
sympathetic nervous system activity and enhanced vagal activity. Hence, the
heart rate slows, allowing greater left ventricular filling time and reducing
cardiac workload and energy demands. In addition, arterial dilation occurs,
reducing cardiac afterload and improving renal blood flow, which augments
natriuresis. The degree of stimulation can be titrated in ≈4-minute
periods to meet individual patient hemodynamic requirements. 
The first results from a large randomized trial in 322 participants
with RH 410 failed to meet the
primary end point of the trial, a composite of 5 individual efficacy and safety
end points. However, the device was considered safe and efficacious long term in
RH. This has led to refinements of the device and further research with
single-sided catheters and a new Rheos system. 408 
The MobiusHD carotid bulb expansion device is a small endovascular
implantable device that works by stretching the carotid artery at the bulb and
activates baroreceptors to lower BP. Studies in Europe, CALM-FIM_EUR 411 (Controlling and Lowering
Blood Pressure With the MOBIUSHD), which was completed, and in the United
States, CALM-FIM_US, 412 which
is ongoing, should provide results in 1 to 2 years. CALM-FIM_EUR has recently
demonstrated in patients with RH that endovascular baroreflex amplification with
the MobiusHD device substantially lowered BP with an acceptable safety
profile. 413 
Devices on the Horizon for RH 
In addition to renal nerve ablation therapy and baroreceptor activation
therapy, other novel experimental devices are being explored for the treatment of RH
with varying degrees of success and experience in patients. To date, most of the
studies with these devices are uncontrolled and have small sample sizes. These
include the central arteriovenous anastomosis ROX coupler device, 414 the ReCor endovascular
ultrasonic renal denervation device, 415 and median nerve stimulation that uses an electro-acupuncture
technique to reduce sympathetic outflow. 416 
In conclusion, device therapy for RH is investigational at present. Future
research and development is encouraged because novel devices that are effective may
be applicable to patients who are refractory to drug therapy or who have difficulty
tolerating efficacious drugs. 405 
Research Challenges and Needs 
Knowledge of the prevalence of true RH that accounts for inaccurate BP
measurement, white-coat effect, and medication nonadherence is urgently needed.
Reducing the BP target in the general hypertensive population will no doubt increase
the prevalence of RH. Coupled with the documentation of prevalence, the prognosis of
RH needs to be reconfirmed. It is probable that the characteristics of patients with
RH may change with refinement of the definition using lower BP thresholds. Better
understanding of the optimal BP target for RH is needed. 
The pathophysiology of RH is not always clear in individual patients and
urgently needs elucidation. This includes environmental influences, especially the
role of dietary salt intake and the salt sensitivity of BP. 417 Despite the sophisticated genetics
technologies available today, the genetic basis for hypertension and RH continues to
defy clear understanding. Except for the rare monogenetic causes, the
pathophysiology of primary hypertension appears to be governed by a multiplicity of
genes, each contributing only weak effects. Potential phenotypes to be explored by
genetic analysis include RH at a young age, obesity-induced hypertension,
salt-sensitive hypertension, and hypertension related to dysregulation of selected
hormonal systems such as the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and the
sympathetic nervous system. Identifying specific phenotypes of RH, which could be
explored in greater depth for genetic contributions, would likely enhance our
understanding of the origins of this complex disease process. 
Once the prevalence of true RH is known, strategies for prevention should
be considered. These might include earlier pharmacological treatment in the life
course of those at high risk for RH and to prevent comorbidities that might make
hypertension more difficult to treat such as vascular stiffening, arteriolar
hypertrophy, and loss of renal function. Nonpharmacological strategies might include
behavioral and sleep interventions. 
Currently, the approach to BP control in RH has focused on the addition or
substitution of drugs or drug classes based on meaningful pharmacological principles
that are only partially successful in true RH. Future research should seek to
improve personalized antihypertensive drug selection in patients with RH. For
example, pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics are expected to provide a more
rational and targeted approach to treatment. However, a prerequisite is to define in
selected populations the role of genetic/genomic variation in BP responses to
different pharmacological classes. This will take large well-controlled studies in
which the participants are as well characterized phenotypically as possible. In the
meantime, the development of new classes of pharmacological agents will be important
to improve the currently limited selection of drug alternatives in RH. It will also
be important to broaden the approach to treatment to better ways of effecting
long-term beneficial lifestyle change, detecting and reversing nonadherence, and
using team-based care and telehealth to reduce BP. Alternative approaches such as
improving sleep quality may also help reduce the prevalence of RH. 
Several studies suggest that the benefits of BP control are less in
patients with RH than those without RH. The reason for the lesser efficacy of
hypertension control in RH is unclear but could be related to differences in the
24-hour BP profile (eg, less nocturnal dipping or greater BP variability),
differences in pathophysiological mechanisms, or greater degrees of subclinical
target organ injury. 
The role of device-based sympatholytic treatments, as with renal
denervation and baroreceptor stimulation, awaits clarification. Although previously
approved and used in different countries worldwide, validation of true benefit has
not been confirmed in rigorous, double-blind comparisons with sham intervention.
Such studies are ongoing with preliminary results expected in 2018. If independent
benefit is confirmed, incorporation of device-based therapies into current treatment
algorithms based on lifestyle and pharmacological therapies would be
appropriate. 
Disclosures 
Writing Group Disclosures 
Writing Group Member 
Employment 
Research Grant 
Other Research Support 
Speakers’ Bureau/
Honoraria 
Expert Witness 
Ownership Interest 
Consultant/ Advisory Board 
Other 
Robert M. Carey 
University of Virginia Health
System 
NIH (2 research grants on signaling
mechanisms of salt sensitivity of blood pressure and
hypertension) † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
University of Virginia (professor of
medicine) † 
David A. Calhoun 
University of Alabama at
Birmingham 
ReCor Medical † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Novartis * ; Mitsubishi Tanabe * 
None 
George L. Bakris 
University of Chicago, ASH
Comprehensive Hypertension Center 
Bayer (International PI on renal
outcome trial FIDELIO; all monies go to University of
Chicago) * ;
Janssen (on steering committee of renal outcome trial CREDENCE;
all monies go to University of Chicago) * ; Vascular Dynamics (National
Clinical Trial Steering Committee Member; all monies go to
University of Chicago Medicine) † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Merck * ; NovoNordisk * 
None 
Robert D. Brook 
University of Michigan Medical
School 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Stacie L. Daugherty 
University of Colorado School of
Medicine 
AHA † ; NHLBI (R01 grant) † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Cheryl R. Dennison-Himmelfarb 
Johns Hopkins University School of
Nursing 
Helene Fuld Health Trust (payment to
her institution [JHU]) † ; NIH (payment to her institution
[JHU]) † 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses
Association (member Board of Director [unpaid]) * 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Johns Hopkins University (professor;
associate dean for research) † 
Brent M. Egan 
University of South Carolina School
of Medicine-Greenville Care Coordination Institute 
None 
None 
Merck Sorono * 
None 
Pfizer (immediate family
members) † 
Medtronic * 
None 
John M. Flack 
Southern Illinois University School
of Medicine 
Bayer (CKD/CVD prevention) † ; Glaxo
Smith-Kline (CKD) † ; Indorsia, Quantam Genomics, ReCor Medical
(hypertension) † ; Vascular Dynamics (resistant
hypertension) † 
American College of Physicians
(Board of Regents) † ; American Hypertension Specialist
Certification Program (president) † 
None 
None 
None 
Back Beat Hypertension * ; Forest
(unpaid) * ;
NuSirt Bipharma (unpaid) * 
None 
Samuel S. Gidding 
Dr Samuel Gidding Familial
Hypercholesterolemia Foundation Advocacy 
NIH (research grant on which
hypertension is studied) † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Eric Judd 
University of Alabama at Birmingham
School of Medicine 
Baxter (PI for UAB site in
prismacitrate 18 clinical trial) * ; Bayer (PI for UAB site in
FIDELIO clinical trial) * ; NIH (recipient of a K23 grant from NIDDK) † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Daniel T. Lackland 
Medical University of South
Carolina 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Cheryl L. Laffer 
Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine 
NHLBI (coinvestigator on
HL129941 –02) * 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
NHLBI (coinvestigator on
HL129941 –02 grant) * 
Christopher Newton-Cheh 
Massachusetts General Hospital/
Harvard Medical School, Cardiovascular Research Center and
Center for Human Genetic Research 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Steven M. Smith 
University of Florida College of
Pharmacy 
NHLBI (K01 Career Development Award
[2018–2023]) † 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Sandra J. Taler 
Mayo Clinic 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Stephen C. Textor 
Mayo Clinic 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Tanya N. Turan 
Medical University of South
Carolina, MUSC Stroke Center 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Boehringer ingelheim † ;Pfizer † 
None 
William B. White 
University of Connecticut, School of
Medicine 
None 
None 
None 
Abbvie, inc † 
None 
Novartis Pharmaceuticals, inc * 
None 
Open in a new tab 
This table represents the relationships of writing group
members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived
conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire,
which all members of the writing group are required to complete and
submit. A relationship is considered to be
“significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or
more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the
person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of
the voting stock or share of the entity or owns $10 000 or more of
the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to
be “modest” if it is less than
“significant” under the preceding definition. 
* 
Modest. 
† 
Significant. 
Reviewer Disclosures 
Reviewer 
Employment 
Research Grant 
Other Research Support 
Speakers’
Bureau/Honoraria 
Expert Witness 
Ownership Interest 
Consultant/ Advisory Board 
Other 
Frank C. Brosius 
University of Arizona 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Philip B. Gorelick 
Michigan State University 
None 
None 
DSMB for LCZ 696 in heart failure
patients for preservation of cognition * ; AbbVie (member, cardiovascular
adjudication committee for SONAR study of blood pressure control
in diabetic renal disease) * 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Donald D. Heistad 
University of Iowa 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Rhian M. Touyz 
University of Glasgow (United
Kingdom) 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
None 
Open in a new tab 
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that
may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of
interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all
reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is
considered to be “significant” if (a) the person
receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more
of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or
more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or
more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is
considered to be “modest” if it is less than
“significant” under the preceding definition. 
* 
Modest. 
Supplementary Material 
Supp 
NIHMS1016897-supplement-Supp.pdf (253.3KB, pdf) 
Footnotes 
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual
or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside
relationship or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of
the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required
to complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships
that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: The expert peer review of
AHA-commissioned documents (eg, scientific statements, clinical practice
guidelines, systematic reviews) is conducted by the AHA Office of Science
Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines development, visit
http://professional.heart.org/statements . Select the
“Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click
“Publication Development.” 
References 
1. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, Casey DE Jr, Collins KJ, Dennison Himmelfarb C, DePalma SM, Gidding S, Jamerson KA, Jones DW, MacLaughlin EJ, Muntner P, Ovbiagele B, Smith SC Jr, Spencer CC, Stafford RS, Taler SJ, Thomas RJ, Williams KA Sr, Williamson JD, Wright JT Jr. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA
guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high
blood pressure in adults: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines
[published correction appears in Hypertension.
2018;71:e140-e144].
Hypertension.
2018;71:e13–e115.
doi: 10.1161/HYP.0000000000000065 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Calhoun DA, Jones D, Textor S, Goff DC, Murphy TP, Toto RD, White A, Cushman WC, White W, Sica D, Ferdinand K, Giles TD, Falkner B, Carey RM. Resistant hypertension: diagnosis, evaluation, and
treatment: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association
Professional Education Committee of the Council for High Blood Pressure
Research. Hypertension.
2008;51:1403–1419.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.108.189141 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Pickering TG, Hall JE, Appel LJ, Falkner BE, Graves J, Hill MN, Jones DW, Kurtz T, Sheps SG, Roccella EJ. Recommendations for blood pressure measurement in humans
and experimental animals, part 1: blood pressure measurement in humans: a
statement for professionals from the Subcommittee of Professional and Public
Education of the American Heart Association Council on High Blood Pressure
Research. Circulation.
2005;111:697–716.
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000154900.76284.F6 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Parati G, Stergiou GS, Asmar R, Bilo G, de Leeuw P, Imai Y, Kario K, Lurbe E, Manolis A, Mengden T, O’Brien E, Ohkubo T, Padfield P, Palatini P, Pickering TG, Redon J, Revera M, Ruilope LM, Shennan A, Staessen JA, Tisler A, Waeber B, Zanchetti A, Mancia G; ESH Working Group on Blood Pressure Monitoring.
European Society of Hypertension practice guidelines for home
blood pressure monitoring. J Hum Hypertens.
2010;24:779–785.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2010.54 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. Mancia G, Bombelli M, Brambilla G, Facchetti R, Sega R, Toso E, Grassi G. Long-term prognostic value of white coat hypertension:
an insight from diagnostic use of both ambulatory and home blood pressure
measurements. Hypertension.
2013;62:168–174.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.00690 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Stergiou GS, Asayama K, Thijs L, Kollias A, Niiranen TJ, Hozawa A, Boggia J, Johansson JK, Ohkubo T, Tsuji I, Jula AM, Imai Y, Staessen JA; on behalf of the International Database on HOme blood pressure
in relation to Cardiovascular Outcome (IDHOCO) Investigators.
Prognosis of white-coat and masked hypertension:
International Database of HOme blood pressure in relation to Cardiovascular
Outcome. Hypertension.
2014;63:675–682.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.02741 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Franklin SS, Thijs L, Asayama K, Li Y, Hansen TW, Boggia J, Jacobs L, Zhang Z, Kikuya M, Björklund-Bodegård K, Ohkubo T, Yang WY, Jeppesen J, Dolan E, Kuznetsova T, Stolarz-Skrzypek K, Tikhonoff V, Malyutina S, Casiglia E, Nikitin Y, Lind L, Sandoya E, Kawecka-Jaszcz K, Filipovský J, Imai Y, Wang JG, O’Brien E, Staessen JA; IDACO Investigators. The cardiovascular
risk of white-coat hypertension. J Am Coll
Cardiol.
2016;68:2033–2043.
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.08.035 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Hameed MA, Tebbit L, Jacques N, Thomas M, Dasgupta I. Non-adherence to antihypertensive medication is very
common among resistant hypertensives: results of a directly observed therapy
clinic. J Hum Hypertens.
2016;30:83–89.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2015.38 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. Schulz M, Krueger K, Schuessel K, Friedland K, Laufs U, Mueller WE, Ude M. Medication adherence and persistence according to
different antihypertensive drug classes: a retrospective cohort study of
255,500 patients. Int J Cardiol.
2016;220:668–676.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.06.263 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. Elliott WJ. What factors contribute to the inadequate control of
elevated blood pressure?
J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich).
2008;10(suppl
1):20–26. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. van der Laan DM, Elders PJM, Boons CCLM, Beckeringh JJ, Nijpels G, Hugtenburg JG
Factors associated with antihypertensive medication nonadherence:
a systematic review. J Hum Hypertens.
2017;31:687–694.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2017.48 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Pimenta E, Calhoun DA. Resistant hypertension: incidence, prevalence, and
prognosis. Circulation.
2012;125:1594–1596.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.097345 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. Egan BM, Zhao Y, Axon RN, Brzezinski WA, Ferdinand KC. Uncontrolled and apparent treatment resistant
hypertension in the United States, 1988–2008.
Circulation.
2011:124;1046–1058. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. Persell SD. Prevalence of resistant hypertension in the United
States, 2003–2008. Hypertension.
2011:57;1076–1080. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Diaz KM, Booth JN 3rd, Calhoun DA, Irvin MR, Howard G, Safford MM, Muntner P, Shimbo D. Healthy lifestyle factors and risk of cardiovascular
events and mortality in treatment-resistant hypertension: the Reasons for
Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke study.
Hypertension.
2014;64:465–471.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.114.03565 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. Tanner RM, Calhoun DA, Bell EK, Bowling CB, Gutiérrez OM, Irvin MR, Lackland DT, Oparil S, Warnock D, Muntner P. Prevalence of apparent treatment-resistant hypertension
among individuals with CKD. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol.
2013;8:1583–1590.
doi: 10.2215/CJN.00550113 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. Borghi C, Tubach F, De Backer G, Dallongeville J, Guallar E, Medina J, Perk J, Roy C, Banegas JR, Rodriguez-Artalejo F, Halcox JP. Lack of control of hypertension in primary
cardiovascular disease prevention in Europe: results from the EURIKA
study. Int J Cardiol.
2016;218:83–88.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.05.044 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
18. de la Sierra A, Segura J, Banegas JR, Gorostidi M, de la Cruz JJ, Armario P, Oliveras A, Ruilope LM. Clinical features of 8295 patients with resistant
hypertension classified on the basis of ambulatory blood pressure
monitoring. Hypertension.
2011:57;898–902. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
19. Thomas G, Xie D, Chen HY, Anderson AH, Appel LJ, Bodana S, Brecklin CS, Drawz P, Flack JM, Miller ER 3rd, Steigerwalt SP, Townsend RR, Weir MR, Wright JT Jr, Rahman M; CRIC Study Investigators. Prevalence and prognostic
significance of apparent treatment resistant hypertension in chronic kidney
disease: report from the Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort
Study. Hypertension.
2016;67:387–396.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.06487 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
20. Egan BM, Zhao Y, Li J, Brzezinski WA, Todoran TM, Brook RD, Calhoun DA. Prevalence of optimal treatment regimens in patients
with apparent treatment-resistant hypertension based on office blood
pressure in a community-based practice network.
Hypertension.
2013;62:691–697.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.01448 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
21. Muntner P, Davis BR, Cushman WC, Bangalore S, Calhoun DA, Pressel SL, Black HR, Kostis JB, Probstfield JL, Whelton PK, Rahman M; for the ALLHAT Collaborative Research Group.
Treatment-resistant hypertension and the incidence of
cardiovascular disease and end-stage renal disease: results from the
Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial
(ALLHAT). Hypertension.
2014;64:1012–1021.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.114.03850 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
22. Gupta AK, Nasothimiou EG, Chang CL, Sever PS, Dahlof B, Poulter NR; ASCOT Investigators. Baseline
predictors of resistant hypertension in the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac
Outcome Trial (ASCOT): a risk score to identify those at
high-risk. J Hypertens.
2011;29:2004–2013.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32834a8a42 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
23. Daugherty SL, Powers JD, Magid DJ, Tavel HM, Masoudi FA, Margolis KL, O’Connor PJ, Selby JV, Ho PM. Incidence and prognosis of resistant hypertension in
hypertensive patients. Circulation.
2012;125:1635–1642.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.068064 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
24. Jamerson K, Weber MA, Bakris GL, Dahlof B, Pitt B, Shi V, Hester A, Gupte J, Gatlin M, Velazquez EJ; ACCOMPLISH Trial Investigators.
Benazepril plus amlodipine or hydrochlorothiazide for
hypertension in high-risk patients. N Engl J
Med.
2008;359:2417–2428.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0806182 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
25. Jamerson K, Bakris GL, Dahlof B, Pitt B, Velazquez E, Gupte J, Lefkowitz M, Hester A, Shi V, Kjeldsen SE, Cushman W, Papademetriou V, Weber M; ACCOMPLISH Investigators. Exceptional
early blood pressure control rates: the ACCOMPLISH trial.
Blood Press.
2007;16:80–86.
doi: 10.1080/08037050701395571 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
26. Smith SM, Gong Y, Handberg E, Messerli FH, Bakris GL, Ahmed A, Bavry AA, Pepine CJ, Cooper-Dehoff RM. Predictors and outcomes of resistant hypertension among
patients with coronary artery disease and hypertension.
J Hypertens.
2014;32:635–643.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000000051 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
27. Hung CY, Wang KY, Wu TJ, Hsieh YC, Huang JL, Loh el-W, Lin CH. Resistant hypertension, patient characteristics, and
risk of stroke. PLoS One.
2014;9:e104362. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0104362 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
28. Irvin MR, Booth JN 3rd, Shimbo D, Lackland DT, Oparil S, Howard G, Safford MM, Muntner P, Calhoun DA. Apparent treatment-resistant hypertension and risk for
stroke, coronary heart disease, and all-cause mortality.
J Am Soc Hypertens.
2014;8:405–413.
doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2014.03.003 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
29. Sim JJ, Bhandari SK, Shi J, Reynolds K, Calhoun DA, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Jacobsen SJ. Comparative risk of renal, cardiovascular, and mortality
outcomes in controlled, uncontrolled resistant, and nonresistant
hypertension. Kidney Int.
2015;88:622–632.
doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.142 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
30. Tsioufis C, Kasiakogias A, Kordalis A, Dimitriadis K, Thomopoulos C, Tsiachris D, Vasileiou P, Doumas M, Makris T, Papademetriou V, Kallikazaros I, Bakris G, Stefanadis C. Dynamic resistant hypertension patterns as predictors of
cardiovascular morbidity: a 4-year prospective study.
J Hypertens.
2014;32:415–422.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000000023 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
31. Pierdomenico SD, Lapenna D, Bucci A, Di Tommaso R, Di Mascio R, Manente BM, Caldarella MP, Neri M, Cuccurullo F, Mezzetti A. Cardiovascular outcome in treated hypertensive patients
with responder, masked, false resistant, and true resistant
hypertension. Am J Hypertens.
2005;18:1422–1428.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjhyper.2005.05.014 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
32. Salles GF, Cardoso CR, Muxfeldt ES. Prognostic influence of office and ambulatory blood
pressures in resistant hypertension. Arch Intern
Med.
2008;168:2340–2346.
doi: 10.1001/archinte.168.21.2340 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
33. Muxfeldt ES, Cardoso CR, Salles GF. Prognostic value of nocturnal blood pressure reduction
in resistant hypertension. Arch Intern Med.
2009;169:874–880.
doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2009.68 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
34. Smith SM, Huo T, Delia Johnson B, Bittner V, Kelsey SF, Vido Thompson D, Noel Bairey Merz C, Pepine CJ, Cooper-Dehoff RM. Cardiovascular and mortality risk of apparent resistant
hypertension in women with suspected myocardial ischemia: a report from the
NHLBI-sponsored WISE Study. J Am Heart
Assoc. 2014;3:e000660.
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000660 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
35. Bangalore S, Fayyad R, Laskey R, Demicco DA, Deedwania P, Kostis JB, Messerli FH; Treating to New Targets Steering Committee and
Investigators. Prevalence, predictors, and outcomes
in treatment-resistant hypertension in patients with coronary
disease. Am J Med.
2014;127:71–81.e1.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2013.07.038 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
36. Jin CN, Liu M, Sun JP, Fang F, Wen YN, Yu CM, Lee AP. The prevalence and prognosis of resistant hypertension
in patients with heart failure. PLoS One.
2014;9:e114958. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0114958 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
37. Egan BM, Kai B, Wagner CS, Henderson JH, Chandler AH, Sinopoli A. Blood pressure control provides less cardiovascular
protection in adults with than without apparent treatment-resistant
hypertension. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich).
2016;18:817–824.
doi: 10.1111/jch.12773 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
38. Sim JJ, Bhandari SK, Shi J, Liu IL, Calhoun DA, McGlynn EA, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Jacobsen SJ. Characteristics of resistant hypertension in a large,
ethnically diverse hypertension population of an integrated health
system. Mayo Clin Proc.
2013;88:1099–1107.
doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2013.06.017 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
39. Acharya T, Tringali S, Singh M, Huang J. Resistant hypertension and associated comorbidities in a
Veterans Affairs population. J Clin Hypertens
(Greenwich).
2014;16:741–745.
doi: 10.1111/jch.12410 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
40. Bakhtar O, Ference BA, Hedquist LA, Levy PD, Flack JM. Relationship of resistant hypertension and treatment
outcomes with total arterial compliance in a predominantly African American
hypertensive cohort. J Clin Hypertens
(Greenwich).
2012;14:618–622.
doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7176.2012.00653.x [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
41. Holecki M, Duława J, Chudek J. Resistant hypertension in visceral
obesity. Eur J Intern Med.
2012;23:643–648.
doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2012.04.012 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
42. Cuspidi C, Macca G, Sampieri L, Michev I, Salerno M, Fusi V, Severgnini B, Meani S, Magrini F, Zanchetti A. High prevalence of cardiac and extracardiac target organ
damage in refractory hypertension. J
Hypertens.
2001;19:2063–2070. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
43. Oliveras A, Armario P, Hernández-Del Rey R, Arroyo JA, Poch E, Larrousse M, Roca-Cusachs A, de la Sierra A. Urinary albumin excretion is associated with true
resistant hypertension. J Hum Hypertens.
2010;24:27–33.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2009.35 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
44. Oliveras A, de la Sierra A. Resistant hypertension: patient characteristics, risk
factors, co-morbidities and outcomes. J Hum
Hypertens.
2014;28:213–217.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2013.77 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
45. Demede M, Pandey A, Zizi F, Bachmann R, Donat M, McFarlane SI, Jean-Louis G, Ogedegbe G. Resistant hypertension and obstructive sleep apnea in
the primary-care setting. Int J Hypertens.
2011;2011:340929. doi:
10.4061⁄2011/340929 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
46. Bhandari SK, Shi J, Molnar MZ, Rasgon SA, Derose SF, Kovesdy CP, Calhoun DA, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Jacobsen SJ, Sim JJ. Comparisons of sleep apnoea rate and outcomes among
patients with resistant and nonresistant hypertension.
Respirology.
2016;21:1486–1492.
doi: 10.1111/resp.12840 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
47. Gonzaga CC, Gaddam KK, Ahmed MI, Pimenta E, Thomas SJ, Harding SM, Oparil S, Cofield SS, Calhoun DA. Severity of obstructive sleep apnea is related to
aldosterone status in subjects with resistant hypertension.
J Clin Sleep Med.
2010;6:363–368. [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
48. Pedrosa RP, Drager LF, Gonzaga CC, Sousa MG, de Paula LK, Amaro AC, Amodeo C, Bortolotto LA, Krieger EM, Bradley TD, Lorenzi-Filho G. Obstructive sleep apnea: the most common secondary cause
of hypertension associated with resistant hypertension.
Hypertension.
2011;58:811–817.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.179788 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
49. Pimenta E, Stowasser M, Gordon RD, Harding SM, Batlouni M, Zhang B, Oparil S, Calhoun DA. Increased dietary sodium is related to severity of
obstructive sleep apnea in patients with resistant hypertension and
hyperaldosteronism. Chest.
2013;143:978–983.
doi: 10.1378/chest.12-0802 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
50. Friedman O, Bradley TD, Ruttanaumpawan P, Logan AG. Independent association of drug-resistant hypertension
to reduced sleep duration and efficiency. Am J
Hypertens.
2010;23:174–179.
doi: 10.1038/ajh.2009.220 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
51. De la Sierra A, Larrousse M, Oliveras A, Armario P, Hernàndez-del Rey R, Poch E,Roca-Cusachs A. Abnormalities of vascular function in resistant
hypertension. Blood Press.
2012;21:104–109. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
52. Quinaglia T, Martins LC, Figueiredo VN, Santos RC, Yugar-Toledo JC, Martin JF, Demacq C, Pimenta E, Calhoun DA, Moreno H Jr. Nondipping pattern relates to endothelial dysfunction in
patients with uncontrolled resistant hypertension. J
Hum Hypertens.
2011;25:656–664.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2011.43 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
53. Salles GF, Ribeiro FM, Guimarâes GM, Muxfeldt ES, Cardoso CR. A reduced heart rate variability is independently
associated with a blunted nocturnal blood pressure fall in patients with
resistant hypertension. J Hypertens.
2014;32:644–651.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000000068 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
54. Kansui Y, Matsumura K, Kida H, Sakata S, Ohtsubo T, Ibaraki A, Kitazono T
Clinical characteristics of resistant hypertension evaluated by
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. Clin Exp
Hypertens.
2014;36:454–458.
doi: 10.3109/10641963.2013.846360 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
55. Cuspidi C, Sala C, Tadic M, Gherbesi E, De Giorgi A, Grassi G, Mancia G. Clinical and prognostic significance of a reverse
dipping pattern on ambulatory monitoring: an updated review.
J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich).
2017;19:713–721.
doi: 10.1111/jch.13023 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
56. Kario K, Bhatt DL, Kandzari DE, Brar S, Flack JM, Gilbert C, Oparil S, Robbins M, Townsend RR, Bakris G. Impact of renal denervation on patients with obstructive
sleep apnea and resistant hypertension: insights from the SYMPLICITY HTN-3
trial. Circ J.
2016;80:1404–1412.
doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-16-0035 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
57. Eide IK, Torjesen PA, Drolsum A, Babovic A, Lilledahl NP. Low-renin status in therapy-resistant hypertension: a
clue to efficient treatment. J Hypertens.
2004;22:2217–2226. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
58. Pimenta E, Gaddam KK, Oparil S, Aban I, Husain S, Dell’Italia LJ, Calhoun DA. Effects of dietary sodium reduction on blood pressure in
subjects with resistant hypertension.
Hypertension.
2009;54:475–481. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
59. Mendes M, Dubourg J, Blanchard A, Bergerot D, Courand PY, Forni V, Frank M, Bobrie G, Menard J, Azizi M. Copeptin is increased in resistant
hypertension. J Hypertens.
2016;34:2458–2464.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000001106 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
60. Hwang AY, Dave C, Smith SM. Trends in antihypertensive medication use among US
patients with resistant hypertension, 2008 to 2014.
Hypertension.
2016;68:1349–1354.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.116.08128 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
61. Grigoryan L, Pavlik VN, Hyman DJ. Characteristics, drug combinations and dosages of
primary care patients with uncontrolled ambulatory blood pressure and high
medication adherence. J Am Soc Hypertens.
2013;7:471–476.
doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2013.06.004 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
62. Hermida RC, Ríos MT, Crespo JJ, Moyá A, Domínguez-Sardiña M, Otero A, Sánchez JJ, Mojón A, Fernández JR, Ayala DE; Hygia Project Investigators. Treatment-time regimen of
hypertension medications significantly affects ambulatory blood pressure and
clinical characteristics of patients with resistant
hypertension. Chronobiol Int.
2013;30:192–206.
doi: 10.3109/07420528.2012.701460 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
63. Hottenga JJ, Boomsma DI, Kupper N, Posthuma D, Snieder H, Willemsen G, de Geus EJ. Heritability and stability of resting blood
pressure. Twin Res Hum Genet.
2005;8:499–508.
doi: 10.1375/183242705774310123 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
64. Snieder H, Harshfield GA, Treiber FA. Heritability of blood pressure and hemodynamics in
African- and European-American youth.
Hypertension.
2003;41:1196–1201.
doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000072269.19820.0D [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
65. Kupper N, Willemsen G, Riese H, Posthuma D, Boomsma DI, de Geus EJ. Heritability of daytime ambulatory blood pressure in an
extended twin design. Hypertension.
2005;45:80–85.
doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000149952.84391.54 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
66. Levy D, DeStefano AL, Larson MG, O’Donnell CJ, Lifton RP, Gavras H, Cupples LA, Myers RH. Evidence for a gene influencing blood pressure on
chromosome 17: genome scan linkage results for longitudinal blood pressure
phenotypes in subjects from the Framingham Heart Study.
Hypertension.
2000;36:477–483. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
67. Cushman WC, Ford CE, Cutler JA, Margolis KL, Davis BR, Grimm RH, Black HR, Hamilton BP, Holland J, Nwachuku C, Papademetriou V, Probstfield J, Wright JT Jr, Alderman MH, Weiss RJ, Piller L, Bettencourt J, Walsh SM; ALLHAT Collaborative Research Group.
Success and predictors of blood pressure control in diverse
North American settings: the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment
to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). J Clin
Hypertens (Greenwich).
2002;4:393–404. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
68. Howard VJ, Tanner RM, Anderson A, Irvin MR, Calhoun DA, Lackland DT, Oparil S, Muntner P. Apparent treatment-resistant hypertension among
individuals with history of stroke or transient ischemic
attack. Am J Med.
2015;128:707–714.e2.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2015.02.008 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
69. Shallcross AJ, Butler M, Tanner RM, Bress AP, Muntner P, Shimbo D, Ogedegbe G, Sims M, Spruill TM. Psychosocial correlates of apparent treatment-resistant
hypertension in the Jackson Heart Study. J Hum
Hypertens.
2017;31:474–478.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2016.100 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
70. Newton-Cheh C, Johnson T, Gateva V, Tobin MD, Bochud M, Coin L, Najjar SS, Zhao JH, Heath SC, Eyheramendy S, Papadakis K, Voight BF, Scott LJ, Zhang F, Farrall M, Tanaka T, Wallace C, Chambers JC, Khaw KT, Nilsson P, van der Harst P, Polidoro S, Grobbee DE, Onland-Moret NC, Bots ML, Wain LV, Elliott KS, Teumer A, Luan J, Lucas G, Kuusisto J, Burton PR, Hadley D, McArdle WL, Brown M, Dominiczak A, Newhouse SJ, Samani NJ, Webster J, Zeggini E, Beckmann JS, Bergmann S, Lim N, Song K, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Waterworth DM, Yuan X, Groop L, Orho-Melander M, Allione A, Di Gregorio A, Guarrera S, Panico S, Ricceri F, Romanazzi V, Sacerdote C, Vineis P, Barroso I, Sandhu MS, Luben RN, Crawford GJ, Jousilahti P, Perola M, Boehnke M, Bonnycastle LL, Collins FS, Jackson AU, Mohlke KL, Stringham HM, Valle TT, Willer CJ, Bergman RN, Morken MA, Döring A, Gieger C, Illig T, Meitinger T, Org E, Pfeufer A, Wichmann HE, Kathiresan S, Marrugat J, O’Donnell CJ, Schwartz SM, Siscovick DS, Subirana I, Freimer NB, Hartikainen AL, McCarthy MI, O’Reilly PF, Peltonen L, Pouta A, de Jong PE, Snieder H, van Gilst WH, Clarke R, Goel A, Hamsten A, Peden JF, Seedorf U, Syvänen AC, Tognoni G, Lakatta EG, Sanna S, Scheet P, Schlessinger D, Scuteri A, Dörr M, Ernst F, Felix SB, Homuth G, Lorbeer R, Reffelmann T, Rettig R, Völker U, Galan P, Gut IG, Hercberg S, Lathrop GM, Zelenika D, Deloukas P, Soranzo N, Williams FM, Zhai G, Salomaa V, Laakso M, Elosua R, Forouhi NG, Völzke H, Uiterwaal CS, van der Schouw YT, Numans ME, Matullo G, Navis G, Berglund G, Bingham SA, Kooner JS, Connell JM, Bandinelli S, Ferrucci L, Watkins H, Spector TD, Tuomilehto J, Altshuler D, Strachan DP, Laan M, Meneton P, Wareham NJ, Uda M, Jarvelin MR, Mooser V, Melander O, Loos RJ, Elliott P, Abecasis GR, Caulfield M, Munroe PB; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium.
Genome-wide association study identifies eight loci
associated with blood pressure. Nat Genet.
2009;41:666–676.
doi: 10.1038/ng.361 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
71. Levy D, Ehret GB, Rice K, Verwoert GC, Launer LJ, Dehghan A, Glazer NL, Morrison AC, Johnson AD, Aspelund T, Aulchenko Y, Lumley T, Köttgen A, Vasan RS, Rivadeneira F, Eiriksdottir G, Guo X, Arking DE, Mitchell GF, Mattace-Raso FU, Smith AV, Taylor K, Scharpf RB, Hwang SJ, Sijbrands EJ, Bis J, Harris TB, Ganesh SK, O’Donnell CJ, Hofman A, Rotter JI, Coresh J, Benjamin EJ, Uitterlinden AG, Heiss G, Fox CS, Witteman JC, Boerwinkle E, Wang TJ, Gudnason V, Larson MG, Chakravarti A, Psaty BM, van Duijn CM. Genome-wide association study of blood pressure and
hypertension. Nat Genet.
2009;41:677–687.
doi: 10.1038/ng.384 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
72. International Consortium for
Blood Pressure Genome-Wide Association, Ehret GB, Munroe PB, Rice KM, Bochud M, Johnson AD, Chasman DI, Smith AV, Tobin MD, Verwoert GC, Hwang SJ, Pihur V, Vollenweider P, O’Reilly PF, Amin N, Bragg-Gresham JL, Teumer A, Glazer NL, Launer L, Zhao JH, Aulchenko Y, Heath S, Sober S, Parsa A, Luan J, Arora P, Dehghan A, Zhang F, Lucas G, Hicks AA, Jackson AU, Peden JF, Tanaka T, Wild SH, Rudan I, Igl W, Milaneschi Y, Parker AN, Fava C, Chambers JC, Fox ER, Kumari M, Go MJ, van der Harst P, Kao WH, Sjögren M, Vinay DG, Alexander M, Tabara Y, Shaw-Hawkins S, Whincup PH, Liu Y, Shi G, Kuusisto J, Tayo B, Seielstad M, Sim X, Nguyen KD, Lehtimäki T, Matullo G, Wu Y, Gaunt TR, Onland-Moret NC, Cooper MN, Platou CG, Org E, Hardy R, Dahgam S, Palmen J, Vitart V, Braund PS, Kuznetsova T, Uiterwaal CS, Adeyemo A, Palmas W, Campbell H, Ludwig B, Tomaszewski M, Tzoulaki I, Palmer ND; CARDIoGRAM Consortium; CKDGen Consortium; KidneyGen Consortium;
EchoGen Consortium; CHARGE-HF Consortium, Aspelund T, Garcia M, Chang YP, O’Connell JR, Steinle NI, Grobbee DE, Arking DE, Kardia SL, Morrison AC, Hernandez D, Najjar S, McArdle WL, Hadley D, Brown MJ, Connell JM, Hingorani AD, Day IN, Lawlor DA, Beilby JP, Lawrence RW, Clarke R, Hopewell JC, Ongen H, Dreisbach AW, Li Y, Young JH, Bis JC, Kähönen M, Viikari J, Adair LS, Lee NR, Chen MH, Olden M, Pattaro C, Bolton JA, Köttgen A, Bergmann S, Mooser V, Chaturvedi N, Frayling TM, Islam M, Jafar TH, Erdmann J, Kulkarni SR, Bornstein SR, Grässler J, Groop L, Voight BF, Kettunen J, Howard P, Taylor A, Guarrera S, Ricceri F, Emilsson V, Plump A, Barroso I, Khaw KT, Weder AB, Hunt SC, Sun YV, Bergman RN, Collins FS, Bonnycastle LL, Scott LJ, Stringham HM, Peltonen L, Perola M, Vartiainen E, Brand SM, Staessen JA, Wang TJ, Burton PR, Soler Artigas M, Dong Y, Snieder H, Wang X, Zhu H, Lohman KK, Rudock ME, Heckbert SR, Smith NL, Wiggins KL, Doumatey A, Shriner D, Veldre G, Viigimaa M, Kinra S, Prabhakaran D, Tripathy V, Langefeld CD, Rosengren A, Thelle DS, Corsi AM, Singleton A, Forrester T, Hilton G, McKenzie CA, Salako T, Iwai N, Kita Y, Ogihara T, Ohkubo T, Okamura T, Ueshima H, Umemura S, Eyheramendy S, Meitinger T, Wichmann HE, Cho YS, Kim HL, Lee JY, Scott J, Sehmi JS, Zhang W, Hedblad B, Nilsson P, Smith GD, Wong A, Narisu N, Stančáková A, Raffel LJ, Yao J, Kathiresan S, O’Donnell CJ, Schwartz SM, Ikram MA, Longstreth WT Jr, Mosley TH, Seshadri S, Shrine NR, Wain LV, Morken MA, Swift AJ, Laitinen J, Prokopenko I, Zitting P, Cooper JA, Humphries SE, Danesh J, Rasheed A, Goel A, Hamsten A, Watkins H, Bakker SJ, van Gilst WH, Janipalli CS, Mani KR, Yajnik CS, Hofman A, Mattace-Raso FU, Oostra BA, Demirkan A, Isaacs A, Rivadeneira F, Lakatta EG,Orru M, Scuteri A, Ala-Korpela M, Kangas AJ, Lyytikäinen LP, Soininen P, Tukiainen T, Würtz P, Ong RT, Dörr M, Kroemer HK, Völker U, Völzke H, Galan P, Hercberg S, Lathrop M, Zelenika D, Deloukas P, Mangino M, Spector TD, Zhai G, Meschia JF, Nalls MA, Sharma P, Terzic J, Kumar MV, Denniff M, Zukowska-Szczechowska E, Wagenknecht LE, Fowkes FG, Charchar FJ, Schwarz PE, Hayward C, Guo X, Rotimi C, Bots ML, Brand E, Samani NJ, Polasek O, Talmud PJ, Nyberg F, Kuh D, Laan M, Hveem K, Palmer LJ, van der Schouw YT, Casas JP, Mohlke KL, Vineis P, Raitakari O, Ganesh SK, Wong TY, Tai ES, Cooper RS, Laakso M, Rao DC, Harris TB, Morris RW, Dominiczak AF, Kivimaki M, Marmot MG, Miki T, Saleheen D, Chandak GR, Coresh J, Navis G, Salomaa V, Han BG, Zhu X, Kooner JS, Melander O, Ridker PM, Bandinelli S, Gyllensten UB, Wright AF, Wilson JF, Ferrucci L, Farrall M, Tuomilehto J, Pramstaller PP, Elosua R, Soranzo N, Sijbrands EJ, Altshuler D, Loos RJ, Shuldiner AR, Gieger C, Meneton P, Uitterlinden AG, Wareham NJ, Gudnason V, Rotter JI, Rettig R, Uda M, Strachan DP, Witteman JC, Hartikainen AL, Beckmann JS, Boerwinkle E, Vasan RS, Boehnke M, Larson MG, Järvelin MR, Psaty BM, Abecasis GR, Chakravarti A, Elliott P, van Duijn CM, Newton-Cheh C, Levy D, Caulfield MJ, Johnson T. Genetic variants in novel pathways influence blood
pressure and cardiovascular disease risk.
Nature.
2011;478:103–109. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
73. Franceschini N, Fox E, Zhang Z, Edwards TL, Nalls MA, Sung YJ, Tayo BO, Sun YV, Gottesman O, Adeyemo A, Johnson AD, Young JH, Rice K, Duan Q, Chen F, Li Y, Tang H, Fornage M, Keene KL, Andrews JS, Smith JA, Faul JD, Guangfa Z, Guo W, Liu Y, Murray SS, Musani SK, Srinivasan S, Velez Edwards DR, Wang H, Becker LC, Bovet P, Bochud M, Broeckel U, Burnier M, Carty C, Chasman DI, Ehret G, Chen WM, Chen G, Chen W, Ding J, Dreisbach AW, Evans MK, Guo X, Garcia ME, Jensen R, Keller MF, Lettre G, Lotay V, Martin LW, Moore JH, Morrison AC, Mosley TH, Ogunniyi A, Palmas W, Papanicolaou G, Penman A, Polak JF, Ridker PM, Salako B, Singleton AB, Shriner D, Taylor KD, Vasan R, Wiggins K, Williams SM, Yanek LR, Zhao W, Zonderman AB, Becker DM, Berenson G, Boerwinkle E, Bottinger E, Cushman M, Eaton C, Nyberg F, Heiss G, Hirschhron JN, Howard VJ, Karczewsk KJ, Lanktree MB, Liu K, Liu Y, Loos R, Margolis K, Snyder M, Psaty BM, Schork NJ, Weir DR, Rotimi CN, Sale MM, Harris T, Kardia SL, Hunt SC, Arnett D, Redline S, Cooper RS, Risch NJ, Rao DC, Rotter JI, Chakravarti A, Reiner AP, Levy D, Keating BJ, Zhu X; Asian Genetic Epidemiology Network Consortium.
Genome-wide association analysis of blood-pressure traits in
African-ancestry individuals reveals common associated genes in African and
non-African populations. Am J Hum Genet.
2013;93:545–554.
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.07.010 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
74. Kato N, Takeuchi F, Tabara Y, Kelly TN, Go MJ, Sim X, Tay WT, Chen CH, Zhang Y, Yamamoto K, Katsuya T, Yokota M, Kim YJ, Ong RT, Nabika T, Gu D, Chang LC, Kokubo Y, Huang W, Ohnaka K, Yamori Y, Nakashima E, Jaquish CE, Lee JY, Seielstad M, Isono M, Hixson JE, Chen YT, Miki T, Zhou X, Sugiyama T, Jeon JP, Liu JJ, Takayanagi R, Kim SS, Aung T, Sung YJ, Zhang X, Wong TY, Han BG, Kobayashi S, Ogihara T, Zhu D, Iwai N, Wu JY, Teo YY, Tai ES, Cho YS, He J. Metaanalysis of genome-wide association studies
identifies common variants associated with blood pressure variation in east
Asians. Nat Genet.
2011;43:531–538.
doi: 10.1038/ng.834 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
75. Fox ER, Young JH, Li Y, Dreisbach AW, Keating BJ, Musani SK, Liu K, Morrison AC, Ganesh S, Kutlar A, Ramachandran VS, Polak JF, Fabsitz RR, Dries DL, Farlow DN, Redline S, Adeyemo A, Hirschorn JN, Sun YV, Wyatt SB, Penman AD, Palmas W, Rotter JI, Townsend RR, Doumatey AP, Tayo BO, Mosley TH Jr, Lyon HN, Kang SJ, Rotimi CN, Cooper RS, Franceschini N, Curb JD, Martin LW, Eaton CB, Kardia SL, Taylor HA, Caulfield MJ, Ehret GB, Johnson T, Chakravarti A, Zhu X, Levy D; International Consortium for Blood Pressure Genome-Wide
Association Studies (ICBP-GWAS). Association of
genetic variation with systolic and diastolic blood pressure among African
Americans: the Candidate Gene Association Resource study.
Hum Mol Genet.
2011;20:2273–2284.
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr092 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
76. Ganesh SK, Chasman DI, Larson MG, Guo X, Verwoert G, Bis JC, Gu X, Smith AV, Yang ML, Zhang Y, Ehret G, Rose LM, Hwang SJ, Papanicolau GJ, Sijbrands EJ, Rice K, Eiriksdottir G, Pihur V, Ridker PM, Vasan RS, Newton-Cheh C, Raffel LJ, Amin N, Rotter JI, Liu K, Launer LJ, Xu M, Caulfield M, Morrison AC, Johnson AD, Vaidya D, Dehghan A, Li G, Bouchard C, Harris TB, Zhang H, Boerwinkle E, Siscovick DS, Gao W, Uitterlinden AG, Rivadeneira F, Hofman A, Willer CJ, Franco OH, Huo Y, Witteman JC, Munroe PB, Gudnason V, Palmas W, van Duijn C, Fornage M, Levy D, Psaty BM, Chakravarti A; Global Blood Pressure Genetics Consortium.
Effects of long-term averaging of quantitative blood pressure
traits on the detection of genetic associations. Am
J Hum Genet.
2014;95:49–65.
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.06.002 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
77. Padmanabhan S, Melander O, Johnson T, Di Blasio AM, Lee WK, Gentilini D, Hastie CE, Menni C, Monti MC, Delles C, Laing S, Corso B, Navis G, Kwakernaak AJ, van der Harst P, Bochud M, Maillard M, Burnier M, Hedner T, Kjeldsen S, Wahlstrand B, Sjögren M, Fava C, Montagnana M, Danese E, Torffvit O, Hedblad B, Snieder H, Connell JM, Brown M, Samani NJ, Farrall M, Cesana G, Mancia G, Signorini S, Grassi G, Eyheramendy S, Wichmann HE, Laan M, Strachan DP, Sever P, Shields DC, Stanton A, Vollenweider P, Teumer A, Völzke H, Rettig R, Newton-Cheh C, Arora P, Zhang F, Soranzo N, Spector TD, Lucas G, Kathiresan S, Siscovick DS, Luan J, Loos RJ, Wareham NJ, Penninx BW, Nolte IM, McBride M, Miller WH, Nicklin SA, Baker AH, Graham D, McDonald RA, Pell JP, Sattar N, Welsh P, Munroe P, Caulfield MJ, Zanchetti A, Dominiczak AF; Global BPgen Consortium. Genomewide
association study of blood pressure extremes identifies variant near UMOD
associated with hypertension. PLoS Genet.
2010;6:e1001177. doi:
10.1371/journal.pgen.1001177 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
78. Salvi E, Kutalik Z, Glorioso N, Benaglio P, Frau F, Kuznetsova T, Arima H, Hoggart C, Tichet J, Nikitin YP, Conti C, Seidlerova J, Tikhonoff V, Stolarz-Skrzypek K, Johnson T, Devos N, Zagato L, Guarrera S, Zaninello R, Calabria A, Stancanelli B, Troffa C, Thijs L, Rizzi F, Simonova G, Lupoli S, Argiolas G, Braga D, D’Alessio MC, Ortu MF, Ricceri F, Mercurio M, Descombes P, Marconi M, Chalmers J, Harrap S, Filipovsky J, Bochud M, Iacoviello L, Ellis J, Stanton AV, Laan M, Padmanabhan S, Dominiczak AF, Samani NJ, Melander O, Jeunemaitre X, Manunta P, Shabo A, Vineis P, Cappuccio FP, Caulfield MJ, Matullo G, Rivolta C, Munroe PB, Barlassina C, Staessen JA, Beckmann JS, Cusi D. Genomewide association study using a high-density single
nucleotide polymorphism array and case-control design identifies a novel
essential hypertension susceptibility locus in the promoter region of
endothelial NO synthase. Hypertension.
2012;59:248–255.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.181990 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
79. Wain LV, Verwoert GC, O’Reilly PF, Shi G, Johnson T, Johnson AD, Bochud M, Rice KM, Henneman P, Smith AV, Ehret GB, Amin N, Larson MG, Mooser V, Hadley D, Dörr M, Bis JC, Aspelund T, Esko T, Janssens AC, Zhao JH, Heath S, Laan M, Fu J, Pistis G, Luan J, Arora P, Lucas G, Pirastu N, Pichler I, Jackson AU, Webster RJ, Zhang F, Peden JF, Schmidt H, Tanaka T, Campbell H, Igl W, Milaneschi Y, Hottenga JJ, Vitart V, Chasman DI, Trompet S, Bragg-Gresham JL, Alizadeh BZ, Chambers JC, Guo X, Lehtimäki T, Kühnel B, Lopez LM, Polasek O, Boban M, Nelson CP, Morrison AC, Pihur V, Ganesh SK, Hofman A, Kundu S, Mattace- Raso FU, Rivadeneira F, Sijbrands EJ, Uitterlinden AG, Hwang SJ, Vasan RS, Wang TJ, Bergmann S, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Laitinen J, Pouta A, Zitting P, McArdle WL, Kroemer HK, Völker U, Völzke H, Glazer NL, Taylor KD, Harris TB, Alavere H, Haller T, Keis A, Tammesoo ML, Aulchenko Y, Barroso I, Khaw KT, Galan P, Hercberg S, Lathrop M, Eyheramendy S, Org E, Sober S, Lu X, Nolte IM, Penninx BW, Corre T, Masciullo C, Sala C, Groop L, Voight BF, Melander O, O’Donnell CJ, Salomaa V, d’Adamo AP, Fabretto A, Faletra F, Ulivi S, Del Greco F, Facheris M, Collins FS, Bergman RN, Beilby JP, Hung J, Musk AW, Mangino M, Shin SY, Soranzo N, Watkins H, Goel A, Hamsten A, Gider P, Loitfelder M, Zeginigg M, Hernandez D, Najjar SS, Navarro P, Wild SH, Corsi AM, Singleton A, de Geus EJ, Willemsen G, Parker AN, Rose LM, Buckley B, Stott D, Orru M, Uda M, van der Klauw MM, Zhang W, Li X, Scott J, Chen YD, Burke GL, Kähönen M, Viikari J, Döring A, Meitinger T, Davies G, Starr JM, Emilsson V, Plump A, Lindeman JH, Hoen PA, König IR, Felix JF, Clarke R, Hopewell JC, Ongen H, Breteler M, Debette S, Destefano AL, Fornage M, Mitchell GF, Smith NL, Holm H, Stefansson K, Thorleifsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U, Samani NJ, Preuss M, Rudan I, Hayward C, Deary IJ, Wichmann HE, Raitakari OT, Palmas W, Kooner JS, Stolk RP, Jukema JW, Wright AF, Boomsma DI, Bandinelli S, Gyllensten UB, Wilson JF, Ferrucci L, Schmidt R, Farrall M, Spector TD, Palmer LJ, Tuomilehto J, Pfeufer A, Gasparini P, Siscovick D, Altshuler D, Loos RJ, Toniolo D, Snieder H, Gieger C, Meneton P, Wareham NJ, Oostra BA, Metspalu A, Launer L, Rettig R, Strachan DP, Beckmann JS, Witteman JC, Erdmann J, van Dijk KW, Boerwinkle E, Boehnke M, Ridker PM, Jarvelin MR, Chakravarti A, Abecasis GR, Gudnason V, Newton-Cheh C, Levy D, Munroe PB, Psaty BM, Caulfield MJ, Rao DC, Tobin MD, Elliott P, van Duijn CM; LifeLines Cohort Study; EchoGen consortium; AortaGen
Consortium; CHARGE Consortium Heart Failure Working Group; KidneyGen
Consortium; CKDGen Consortium; Cardiogenics Consortium; CardioGram.
Genome-wide association study identifies six new loci
influencing pulse pressure and mean arterial pressure.
Nat Genet.
2011;43:1005–1011.
doi: 10.1038/ng.922 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
80. Ganesh SK, Tragante V, Guo W, Guo Y, Lanktree MB, Smith EN, Johnson T, Castillo BA, Barnard J, Baumert J, Chang YP, Elbers CC, Farrall M, Fischer ME, Franceschini N, Gaunt TR, Gho JM, Gieger C, Gong Y, Isaacs A, Kleber ME, Mateo Leach I, McDonough CW, Meijs MF, Mellander O, Molony CM, Nolte IM, Padmanabhan S, Price TS, Rajagopalan R, Shaffer J, Shah S, Shen H, Soranzo N, van der Most PJ, Van Iperen EP, Van Setten J, Van Setten JA, Vonk JM, Zhang L, Beitelshees AL, Berenson GS, Bhatt DL, Boer JM, Boerwinkle E, Burkley B, Burt A, Chakravarti A, Chen W, Cooper-Dehoff RM, Curtis SP, Dreisbach A, Duggan D, Ehret GB, Fabsitz RR, Fornage M, Fox E, Furlong CE, Gansevoort RT, Hofker MH, Hovingh GK, Kirkland SA, Kottke-Marchant K, Kutlar A, Lacroix AZ, Langaee TY, Li YR, Lin H, Liu K, Maiwald S, Malik R, Murugesan G, Newton-Cheh C, O’Connell JR, Onland-Moret NC, Ouwehand WH, Palmas W, Penninx BW, Pepine CJ, Pettinger M, Polak JF, Ramachandran VS, Ranchalis J, Redline S, Ridker PM, Rose LM, Scharnag H, Schork NJ, Shimbo D, Shuldiner AR, Srinivasan SR, Stolk RP, Taylor HA, Thorand B, Trip MD, van Duijn CM, Verschuren WM, Wijmenga C, Winkelmann BR, Wyatt S, Young JH, Boehm BO, Caulfield MJ, Chasman DI, Davidson KW, Doevendans PA, Fitzgerald GA, Gums JG, Hakonarson H, Hillege HL, Illig T, Jarvik GP, Johnson JA, Kastelein JJ, Koenig W, März W, Mitchell BD, Murray SS, Oldehinkel AJ, Rader DJ, Reilly MP, Reiner AP, Schadt EE, Silverstein RL, Snieder H, Stanton AV, Uitterlinden AG, van der Harst P, van der Schouw YT, Samani NJ, Johnson AD, Munroe PB, de Bakker PI, Zhu X, Levy D, Keating BJ, Asselbergs FW; CARDIOGRAM, METASTROKE; LifeLines Cohort Study.
Loci influencing blood pressure identified using a
cardiovascular gene-centric array. Hum Mol
Genet.
2013;22:1663–1678.
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds555 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
81. Ho JE, Levy D, Rose L, Johnson AD, Ridker PM, Chasman DI. Discovery and replication of novel blood pressure
genetic loci in the Women’s Genome Health Study.
J Hypertens.
2011;29:62–69.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283406927 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
82. Johnson AD, Newton-Cheh C, Chasman DI, Ehret GB, Johnson T, Rose L, Rice K, Verwoert GC, Launer LJ, Gudnason V, Larson MG, Chakravarti A, Psaty BM, Caulfield M, van Duijn CM, Ridker PM, Munroe PB, Levy D; on behalf of the Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in
Genomic Epidemiology Consortium; Global BPgen Consortium; Women’s
Genome Health Study. Association of hypertension
drug target genes with blood pressure and hypertension in 86,588
individuals. Hypertension.
2011;57:903–910.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.110.158667 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
83. Johnson T, Gaunt TR, Newhouse SJ, Padmanabhan S, Tomaszewski M, Kumari M, Morris RW, Tzoulaki I, O’Brien ET, Poulter NR, Sever P, Shields DC, Thom S, Wannamethee SG, Whincup PH, Brown MJ, Connell JM, Dobson RJ, Howard PJ, Mein CA, Onipinla A, Shaw-Hawkins S, Zhang Y, Davey Smith G, Day IN, Lawlor DA, Goodall AH; Cardiogenics Consortium, Fowkes FG, Abecasis GR, Elliott P, Gateva V; Global BPgen Consortium, Braund PS, Burton PR, Nelson CP, Tobin MD, van der Harst P, Glorioso N, Neuvrith H, Salvi E, Staessen JA, Stucchi A, Devos N, Jeunemaitre X, Plouin PF, Tichet J, Juhanson P, Org E, Putku M, Sober S, Veldre G, Viigimaa M, Levinsson A, Rosengren A, Thelle DS, Hastie CE, Hedner T, Lee WK, Melander O, Wahlstrand B, Hardy R, Wong A, Cooper JA, Palmen J, Chen L, Stewart AF, Wells GA, Westra HJ, Wolfs MG, Clarke R, Franzosi MG, Goel A, Hamsten A, Lathrop M, Peden JF, Seedorf U, Watkins H, Ouwehand WH, Sambrook J, Stephens J, Casas JP, Drenos F, Holmes MV, Kivimaki M, Shah S, Shah T, Talmud PJ, Whittaker J, Wallace C, Delles C, Laan M, Kuh D, Humphries SE, Nyberg F, Cusi D, Roberts R, Newton-Cheh C, Franke L, Stanton AV, Dominiczak AF, Farrall M, Hingorani AD, Samani NJ, Caulfield MJ, Munroe PB. Blood pressure loci identified with a gene-centric
array. Am J Hum Genet.
2011;89:688–700.
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.10.013 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
84. Takeuchi F, Isono M, Katsuya T, Yamamoto K, Yokota M, Sugiyama T, Nabika T, Fujioka A, Ohnaka K, Asano H, Yamori Y, Yamaguchi S, Kobayashi S, Takayanagi R, Ogihara T, Kato N. Blood pressure and hypertension are associated with 7
loci in the Japanese population.
Circulation.
2010;121:2302–2309.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.904664 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
85. Tomaszewski M, Debiec R, Braund PS, Nelson CP, Hardwick R, Christofidou P, Denniff M, Codd V, Rafelt S, van der Harst P, Waterworth D, Song K, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Zukowska-Szczechowska E, Burton PR, Mooser V, Charchar FJ, Thompson JR, Tobin MD, Samani NJ. Genetic architecture of ambulatory blood pressure in the
general population: insights from cardiovascular gene-centric
array. Hypertension.
2010;56:1069–1076.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.110.155721 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
86. Tragante V, Barnes MR, Ganesh SK, Lanktree MB, Guo W, Franceschini N, Smith EN, Johnson T, Holmes MV, Padmanabhan S, Karczewski KJ, Almoguera B, Barnard J, Baumert J, Chang YP, Elbers CC, Farrall M, Fischer ME, Gaunt TR, Gho JM, Gieger C, Goel A, Gong Y, Isaacs A, Kleber ME, Mateo Leach I, McDonough CW, Meijs MF, Melander O, Nelson CP, Nolte IM, Pankratz N, Price TS, Shaffer J, Shah S, Tomaszewski M, van der Most PJ, Van Iperen EP, Vonk JM, Witkowska K, Wong CO, Zhang L, Beitelshees AL, Berenson GS, Bhatt DL, Brown M, Burt A, Cooper-DeHoff RM, Connell JM, Cruickshanks KJ, Curtis SP, Davey-Smith G, Delles C, Gansevoort RT, Guo X, Haiqing S, Hastie CE, Hofker MH, Hovingh GK, Kim DS, Kirkland SA, Klein BE, Klein R, Li YR, Maiwald S, Newton-Cheh C, O’Brien ET, Onland-Moret NC, Palmas W, Parsa A, Penninx BW, Pettinger M, Vasan RS, Ranchalis JE, Ridker PM, Rose LM, Sever P, Shimbo D, Steele L, Stolk RP, Thorand B, Trip MD, van Duijn CM, Verschuren WM, Wijmenga C, Wyatt S, Young JH, Zwinderman AH, Bezzina CR, Boerwinkle E, Casas JP, Caulfield MJ, Chakravarti A, Chasman DI, Davidson KW, Doevendans PA, Dominiczak AF, FitzGerald GA, Gums JG, Fornage M, Hakonarson H, Halder I, Hillege HL, Illig T, Jarvik GP, Johnson JA, Kastelein JJ, Koenig W, Kumari M, März W, Murray SS, O’Connell JR, Oldehinkel AJ, Pankow JS, Rader DJ, Redline S, Reilly MP, Schadt EE, Kottke-Marchant K, Snieder H, Snyder M, Stanton AV, Tobin MD, Uitterlinden AG, van der Harst P, van der Schouw YT, Samani NJ, Watkins H, Johnson AD, Reiner AP, Zhu X, de Bakker PI, Levy D, Asselbergs FW, Munroe PB, Keating BJ. Gene-centric meta-analysis in 87,736 individuals of
European ancestry identifies multiple blood-pressure-related
loci. Am J Hum Genet.
2014;94:349–360.
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.12.016 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
87. Lu X, Wang L, Lin X, Huang J, Charles Gu C, He M, Shen H, He J, Zhu J, Li H, Hixson JE, Wu T, Dai J, Lu L, Shen C, Chen S, He L, Mo Z, Hao Y, Mo X, Yang X, Li J, Cao J, Chen J, Fan Z, Li Y, Zhao L, Li H, Lu F, Yao C, Yu L, Xu L, Mu J, Wu X, Deng Y, Hu D, Zhang W, Ji X, Guo D, Guo Z, Zhou Z, Yang Z, Wang R, Yang J, Zhou X, Yan W, Sun N, Gao P, Gu D. Genome-wide association study in Chinese identifies
novel loci for blood pressure and hypertension. Hum
Mol Genet.
2015;24:865–874.
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu478 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
88. Liu C, Kraja AT, Smith JA, Brody JA, Franceschini N, Bis JC, Rice K, Morrison AC, Lu Y, Weiss S, Guo X, Palmas W, Martin LW, Chen YD, Surendran P, Drenos F, Cook JP, Auer PL, Chu AY, Giri A, Zhao W, Jakobsdottir J, Lin LA, Stafford JM, Amin N, Mei H, Yao J, Voorman A, Larson MG, Grove ML, Smith AV, Hwang SJ, Chen H, Huan T, Kosova G, Stitziel NO, Kathiresan S, Samani N, Schunkert H, Deloukas P, Li M, Fuchsberger C, Pattaro C, Gorski M, Kooperberg C, Papanicolaou GJ, Rossouw JE, Faul JD, Kardia SL, Bouchard C, Raffel LJ, Uitterlinden AG, Franco OH, Vasan RS, O’Donnell CJ, Taylor KD, Liu K, Bottinger EP, Gottesman O, Daw EW, Giulianini F, Ganesh S, Salfati E, Harris TB, Launer LJ, Dörr M, Felix SB, Rettig R, Völzke H, Kim E, Lee WJ, Lee IT, Sheu WH, Tsosie KS, Edwards DR, Liu Y, Correa A, Weir DR, Völker U, Ridker PM, Boerwinkle E, Gudnason V, Reiner AP, van Duijn CM, Borecki IB, Edwards TL, Chakravarti A, Rotter JI, Psaty BM, Loos RJ, Fornage M, Ehret GB, Newton-Cheh C, Levy D, Chasman DI; CHD Exome+ Consortium; ExomeBP Consortium; GoT2DGenes
Consortium; T2D-GENES Consortium; Myocardial Infarction Genetics and
CARDIoGRAM Exome Consortia; CKDGen Consortium.
Metaanalysis identifies common and rare variants influencing
blood pressure and overlapping with metabolic trait loci.
Nat Genet.
2016;48:1162–1170.
doi: 10.1038/ng.3660 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
89. Surendran P, Drenos F, Young R, Warren H, Cook JP, Manning AK, Grarup N, Sim X, Barnes DR, Witkowska K, Staley JR, Tragante V, Tukiainen T, Yaghootkar H, Masca N, Freitag DF, Ferreira T, Giannakopoulou O, Tinker A, Harakalova M, Mihailov E, Liu C, Kraja AT, Fallgaard Nielsen S, Rasheed A, Samuel M, Zhao W, Bonnycastle LL, Jackson AU, Narisu N, Swift AJ, Southam L, Marten J, Huyghe JR, Stancakova A, Fava C, Ohlsson T, Matchan A, Stirrups KE, Bork-Jensen J, Gjesing AP, Kontto J, Perola M, Shaw-Hawkins S, Havulinna AS, Zhang H, Donnelly LA, Groves CJ, Rayner NW, Neville MJ, Robertson NR, Yiorkas AM, Herzig KH, Kajantie E, Zhang W, Willems SM, Lannfelt L, Malerba G, Soranzo N, Trabetti E, Verweij N, Evangelou E, Moayyeri A, Vergnaud AC, Nelson CP, Poveda A, Varga TV, Caslake M, de Craen AJ, Trompet S, Luan J, Scott RA, Harris SE, Liewald DC, Marioni R, Menni C, Farmaki AE, Hallmans G, Renström F, Huffman JE, Hassinen M, Burgess S, Vasan RS, Felix JF, Uria-Nickelsen M, Malarstig A, Reily DF, Hoek M, Vogt T, Lin H, Lieb W, Traylor M, Markus HF, Highland HM, Justice AE, Marouli E, Lindström J, Uusitupa M, Komulainen P, Lakka TA, Rauramaa R, Polasek O, Rudan I, Rolandsson O, Franks PW, Dedoussis G, Spector TD, Jousilahti P, Männistö S, Deary IJ, Starr JM, Langenberg C, Wareham NJ, Brown MJ, Dominiczak AF, Connell JM, Jukema JW, Sattar N, Ford I, Packard CJ, Esko T, Mägi R, Metspalu A, de Boer RA, van der Meer P, van der Harst P, Gambaro G, Ingelsson E, Lind L, de Bakker PI, Numans ME, Brandslund I, Christensen C, Petersen ER, Korpi-Hyövälti E, Oksa H, Chambers JC, Kooner JS, Blakemore AI, Franks S, Jarvelin MR, Husemoen LL, Linneberg A, Skaaby T, Thuesen B, Karpe F, Tuomilehto J, Doney AS, Morris AD, Palmer CN, Holmen OL, Hveem K, Willer CJ, Tuomi T, Groop L, Käräjämäki A, Palotie A, Ripatti S, Salomaa V, Alam DS, Shafi Majumder AA, Di Angelantonio E, Chowdhury R, McCarthy MI, Poulter N, Stanton AV, Sever P, Amouyel P, Arveiler D, Blankenberg S, Ferrières J, Kee F, Kuulasmaa K, Müller-Nurasyid M, Veronesi G, Virtamo J, Deloukas P, Elliott P, Zeggini E, Kathiresan S, Melander O, Kuusisto J, Laakso M, Padmanabhan S, Porteous D, Hayward C, Scotland G, Collins FS, Mohlke KL, Hansen T, Pedersen O, Boehnke M, Stringham HM, Frossard P, Newton-Cheh C, Tobin MD, Nordestgaard BG, Caulfield MJ, Mahajan A, Morris AP, Tomaszewski M, Samani NJ, Saleheen D, Asselbergs FW, Lindgren CM, Danesh J, Wain LV, Butterworth AS, Howson JM, Munroe PB; CHARGE-Heart Failure Consortium; EchoGen Consortium; METASTROKE
Consortium; GIANT Consortium; EPIC-InterAct Consortium; Lifelines Cohort
Study; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium; Understanding Society
Scientific Group; EPIC-CVD Consortium; CHARGE+ Exome Chip Blood Pressure
Consortium; T2D-GENES Consortium; GoT2DGenes Consortium; ExomeBP Consortium;
CHD Exome+ Consortium. Trans-ancestry meta-analyses
identify rare and common variants associated with blood pressure and
hypertension. Nat Genet.
2016;48:1151–1161.
doi: 10.1038/ng.3654 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
90. Ehret GB, Ferreira T, Chasman DI, Jackson AU, Schmidt EM, Johnson T, Thorleifsson G, Luan J, Donnelly LA, Kanoni S, Petersen AK, Pihur V, Strawbridge RJ, Shungin D, Hughes MF, Meirelles O, Kaakinen M, Bouatia-Naji N, Kristiansson K, Shah S, Kleber ME, Guo X, Lyytikäinen LP, Fava C, Eriksson N, Nolte IM, Magnusson PK, Salfati EL, Rallidis LS, Theusch E, Smith AJP, Folkersen L, Witkowska K, Pers TH, Joehanes R, Kim SK, Lataniotis L, Jansen R, Johnson AD, Warren H, Kim YJ, Zhao W, Wu Y, Tayo BO, Bochud M, Absher D, Adair LS, Amin N, Arking DE, Axelsson T, Baldassarre D, Balkau B, Bandinelli S, Barnes MR, Barroso I, Bevan S, Bis JC, Bjornsdottir G, Boehnke M, Boerwinkle E, Bonnycastle LL, Boomsma DI, Bornstein SR, Brown MJ, Burnier M, Cabrera CP, Chambers JC, Chang IS, Cheng CY, Chines PS, Chung RH, Collins FS, Connell JM, Döring A, Dallongeville J, Danesh J, de Faire U, Delgado G, Dominiczak AF, Doney ASF, Drenos F, Edkins S, Eicher JD, Elosua R, Enroth S, Erdmann J, Eriksson P, Esko T, Evangelou E, Evans A, Fall T, Farrall M, Felix JF, Ferrières J, Ferrucci L, Fornage M, Forrester T, Franceschini N, Duran OHF, Franco-Cereceda A, Fraser RM, Ganesh SK, Gao H, Gertow K, Gianfagna F, Gigante B, Giulianini F, Goel A, Goodall AH, Goodarzi MO, Gorski M, Gräßler J, Groves C, Gudnason V, Gyllensten U, Hallmans G, Hartikainen AL, Hassinen M, Havulinna AS, Hayward C, Hercberg S, Herzig KH, Hicks AA, Hingorani AD, Hirschhorn JN, Hofman A, Holmen J, Holmen OL, Hottenga JJ, Howard P, Hsiung CA, Hunt SC, Ikram MA, Illig T, Iribarren C, Jensen RA, Kähönen M, Kang H, Kathiresan S, Keating BJ, Khaw KT, Kim YK, Kim E, Kivimaki M, Klopp N, Kolovou G, Komulainen P, Kooner JS, Kosova G, Krauss RM, Kuh D, Kutalik Z, Kuusisto J, Kvaløy K, Lakka TA, Lee NR, Lee IT, Lee WJ, Levy D, Li X, Liang KW, Lin H, Lin L, Lindström J, Lobbens S, Männistö S, Müller G, Müller-Nurasyid M, Mach F, Markus HS, Marouli E, McCarthy MI, McKenzie CA, Meneton P, Menni C, Metspalu A, Mijatovic V, Moilanen L, Montasser ME, Morris AD, Morrison AC, Mulas A, Nagaraja R, Narisu N, Nikus K, O’Donnell CJ, O’Reilly PF, Ong KK, Paccaud F, Palmer CD, Parsa A, Pedersen NL, Penninx BW, Perola M, Peters A, Poulter N, Pramstaller PP, Psaty BM, Quertermous T, Rao DC, Rasheed A, Rayner NWNWR, Renström F, Rettig R, Rice KM, Roberts R, Rose LM, Rossouw J, Samani NJ, Sanna S, Saramies J, Schunkert H, Sebert S, Sheu WH, Shin YA, Sim X, Smit JH, Smith AV, Sosa MX, Spector TD, Stančáková A, Stanton A, Stirrups KE, Stringham HM, Sundstrom J, Swift AJ, Syvänen AC, Tai ES, Tanaka T, Tarasov KV, Teumer A, Thorsteinsdottir U, Tobin MD, Tremoli E, Uitterlinden AG, Uusitupa M, Vaez A, Vaidya D, van Duijn CM, van Iperen EPA, Vasan RS, Verwoert GC, Virtamo J, Vitart V, Voight BF, Vollenweider P, Wagner A, Wain LV, Wareham NJ, Watkins H, Weder AB, Westra HJ, Wilks R, Wilsgaard T, Wilson JF, Wong TY, Yang TP, Yao J, Yengo L, Zhang W, Zhao JH, Zhu X, Bovet P, Cooper RS, Mohlke KL, Saleheen D, Lee JY, Elliott P, Gierman HJ, Willer CJ, Franke L, Hovingh GK, Taylor KD, Dedoussis G, Sever P, Wong A, Lind L, Assimes TL, Njøstad I, Schwarz PE, Langenberg C, Snieder H, Caulfield MJ, Melander O, Laakso M, Saltevo J, Rauramaa R, Tuomilehto J, Ingelsson E, Lehtimäki T, Hveem K, Palmas W, März W, Kumari M, Salomaa V, Chen YI, Rotter JI, Froguel P, Jarvelin MR, Lakatta EG, Kuulasmaa K, Franks PW, Hamsten A, Wichmann HE, Palmer CNA, Stefansson K, Ridker PM, Loos RJF, Chakravarti A, Deloukas P, Morris AP, Newton-Cheh C, Munroe PB; CHARGE-EchoGen Consortium; CHARGE-HF Consortium; Wellcome Trust
Case Control Consortium. The genetics of blood
pressure regulation and its target organs from association studies in
342,415 individuals. Nat Genet.
2016;48:1171–1184.
doi: 10.1038/ng.3667 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
91. Hoffmann TJ, Ehret GB, Nandakumar P, Ranatunga D, Schaefer C, Kwok PY, Iribarren C, Chakravarti A, Risch N. Genome-wide association analyses using electronic health
records identify new loci influencing blood pressure
variation. Nat Genet.
2017;49:54–64.
doi: 10.1038/ng.3715 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
92. Yugar-Toledo JC, Martin JF, Krieger JE, Pereira AC, Demacq C, Coelho OR, Pimenta E, Calhoun DA, Júnior HM. Gene variation in resistant hypertension: multilocus
analysis of the angiotensin 1-converting enzyme, angiotensinogen, and
endothelial nitric oxide synthase genes. DNA Cell
Biol.
2011;30:555–564.
doi: 10.1089/dna.2010.1156 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
93. Oliveira-Paula GH, Lacchini R, Coeli-Lacchini FB, Junior HM, Tanus-Santos JE. Inducible nitric oxide synthase haplotype associated
with hypertension and responsiveness to antihypertensive drug
therapy. Gene.
2013;515:391–395.
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.059 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
94. Lynch AI, Irvin MR, Davis BR, Ford CE, Eckfeldt JH, Arnett DK. Genetic and adverse health outcome associations with
treatment resistant hypertension in GenHAT. Int J
Hypertens.
2013;2013:578578. doi:
10.1155/2013/578578 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
95. Fontana V, McDonough CW, Gong Y, El Rouby NM, Sá AC, Taylor KD, Chen YD, Gums JG, Chapman AB, Turner ST, Pepine CJ, Johnson JA, Cooper-DeHoff RM. Large-scale gene-centric analysis identifies
polymorphisms for resistant hypertension. J Am Heart
Assoc. 2014;3:e001398.
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001398 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
96. Newton-Cheh C, Larson MG, Vasan RS, Levy D, Bloch KD, Surti A, Guiducci C, Kathiresan S, Benjamin EJ, Struck J, Morgenthaler NG, Bergmann A, Blankenberg S, Kee F, Nilsson P, Yin X, Peltonen L, Vartiainen E, Salomaa V, Hirschhorn JN, Melander O, Wang TJ. Association of common variants in NPPA and NPPB with
circulating natriuretic peptides and blood pressure.
Nat Genet.
2009;41:348–353.
doi: 10.1038/ng.328 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
97. Holland N, Segraves D, Nnadi VO, Belletti DA, Wogen J, Arcona S. Identifying barriers to hypertension care: implications
for quality improvement initiatives. Dis
Manag.
2008;11:71–77.
doi: 10.1089/dis.2008.1120007 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
98. Gwadry-Sridhar FH, Manias E, Lal L, Salas M, Hughes DA, Ratzki-Leewing A, Grubisic M. Impact of interventions on medication adherence and
blood pressure control in patients with essential hypertension: a systematic
review by the ISPOR medication adherence and persistence special interest
group. Value Health.
2013;16:863–871.
doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2013.03.1631 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
99. Petrilla AA, Benner JS, Battleman DS, Tierce JC, Hazard EH. Evidence-based interventions to improve patient
compliance with antihypertensive and lipid-lowering
medications. Int J Clin Pract.
2005;59:1441–1451.
doi: 10.1111/j.1368-5031.2005.00704.x [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
100. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ, Cushman M, Das SR, de Ferranti S, Després J-P, Fullerton HJ, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, Isasi CR, Jiménez MC, Judd SE, Kissela BM, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Liu S, Mackey RH, Magid DJ, McGuire DK, Mohler ER 3rd, Moy CS, Muntner P, Mussolino ME, Nasir K, Neumar RW, Nichol G, Palaniappan L, Pandey DK, Reeves MJ, Rodriguez CJ, Rosamond W, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A, Turan TN, Virani SS, Woo D, Yeh RW, Turner MB; on behalf of the American Heart Association Statistics
Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart
disease and stroke statistics—2016 update: a report from the American
Heart Association
[published correction appears in Circulation. 2016;133:e599].
Circulation.
2016;133:e38–e360.
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000350 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
101. Burnier M, Wuerzner G. Ambulatory blood pressure and adherence monitoring:
diagnosing pseudoresistant hypertension. Semin
Nephrol.
2014;34:498–505.
doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2014.08.003 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
102. Hyman DJ, Pavlik V. Medication adherence and resistant
hypertension. J Hum Hypertens.
2015;29:213–218.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2014.73 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
103. Berra E, Azizi M, Capron A, Høieggen A, Rabbia F, Kjeldsen SE, Staessen JA, Wallemacq P, Persu A. Evaluation of adherence should become an integral part
of assessment of patients with apparently treatment-resistant
hypertension. Hypertension.
2016;68:297–306.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.116.07464 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
104. Rose AJ, Berlowitz DR, Manze M, Orner MB, Kressin NR. Intensifying therapy for hypertension despite suboptimal
adherence. Hypertension.
2009;54:524–529.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.133389 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
105. Meddings J, Kerr EA, Heisler M, Hofer TP. Physician assessments of medication adherence and
decisions to intensify medications for patients with uncontrolled blood
pressure: still no better than a coin toss. BMC
Health Serv Res.
2012;12:270. doi:
10.1186/1472-6963-12-270 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
106. Eskås PA, Heimark S, Eek Mariampillai J, Larstorp AC, Fadl Elmula FE, Høieggen A. Adherence to medication and drug monitoring in apparent
treatment-resistant hypertension. Blood
Press.
2016;25:199–205.
doi: 10.3109/08037051.2015.1121706 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
107. Morisky DE, Ang A, Krousel-Wood M, Ward HJ. Predictive validity of a medication adherence measure in
an outpatient setting. J Clin Hypertens
(Greenwich).
2008;10:348–354. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] [ Retracted ] 
108. Kim MT, Hill MN, Bone LR, Levine DM. Development and testing of the Hill-Bone Compliance to
High Blood Pressure Therapy Scale. Prog Cardiovasc
Nurs.
2000;15:90–96. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
109. Correa NB, de Faria AP, Ritter AM, Sabbatini AR, Almeida A, Brunelli V, Calhoun DA, Moreno H, Modolo R. A practical approach for measurement of antihypertensive
medication adherence in patients with resistant
hypertension. J Am Soc Hypertens.
2016;10:510–516.e1.
doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2016.03.194 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
110. Proteus Digital Health. U.S.
FDA accepts first digital medicine new drug application for Otsuka
and Proteus Digital Health. http://www.proteus.com/press-releases/u-s-fda-accepts-first-digital-medicine-new-drug-application-for-otsuka-and-proteus-digital-health/ .
September 10, 2015.
Accessed January 5, 2016. 
111. Brown MT, Bussell JK. Medication adherence: WHO cares?
Mayo Clin Proc.
2011;86:304–314.
doi: 10.4065/mcp.2010.0575 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
112. Nieuwlaat R, Wilczynski N, Navarro T, Hobson N, Jeffery R, Keepanasseril A, Agoritsas T, Mistry N, Iorio A, Jack S, Sivaramalingam B, Iserman E, Mustafa RA, Jedraszewski D, Cotoi C, Haynes RB. Interventions for enhancing medication
adherence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2014:CD000011. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
113. Bangalore S, Kamalakkannan G, Parkar S, Messerli FH. Fixed-dose combinations improve medication compliance: a
meta-analysis. Am J Med.
2007;120:713–719.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2006.08.033 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
114. Gwadry-Sridhar FH, Manias E, Lal L, Salas M, Hughes DA, Ratzki-Leewing A, Grubisic M. Impact of interventions on medication adherence and
blood pressure control in patients with essential hypertension: a systematic
review by the ISPOR Medication Adherence and Persistence Special Interest
Group. Value Health.
2013;16:863–871.
doi: 10.1016/j.jval.2013.03.1631 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
115. Peacock E, Krousel-Wood M. Adherence to antihypertensive therapy.
Med Clin North Am.
2017;101:229–245.
doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2016.08.005 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
116. Claxton AJ, Cramer J, Pierce C. A systematic review of the associations between dose
regimens and medication compliance. Clin
Ther.
2001;23:1296–1310. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
117. Gupta AK, Arshad S, Poulter NR. Compliance, safety, and effectiveness of fixed-dose
combinations of antihypertensive agents: a meta-analysis.
Hypertension.
2010;55:399–407.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.139816 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
118. Iskedjian M, Einarson TR, MacKeigan LD, Shear N, Addis A, Mittmann N, Ilersich AL. Relationship between daily dose frequency and adherence
to antihypertensive pharmacotherapy: evidence from a
meta-analysis. Clin Ther.
2002;24:302–316. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
119. Schroeder K, Fahey T, Ebrahim S. How can we improve adherence to blood pressure-lowering
medication in ambulatory care? Systematic review of randomized controlled
trials. Arch Intern Med.
2004;164:722–732.
doi: 10.1001/archinte.164.7.722 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
120. Sherrill B, Halpern M, Khan S, Zhang J, Panjabi S. Single-pill vs free-equivalent combination therapies for
hypertension: a meta-analysis of health care costs and
adherence. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich).
2011;13:898–909.
doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7176.2011.00550.x [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
121. Proia KK, Thota AB, Njie GJ, Finnie RK, Hopkins DP, Mukhtar Q, Pronk NP, Zeigler D, Kottke TE, Rask KJ, Lackland DT, Brooks JF, Braun LT, Cooksey T; Community Preventive Services Task Force. Team-based
care and improved blood pressure control: a community guide systematic
review. Am J Prev Med.
2014;47:86–99.
doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2014.03.004 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
122. Brownstein JN, Chowdhury FM, Norris SL, Horsley T, Jack L Jr, Zhang X, Satterfield D. Effectiveness of community health workers in the care of
people with hypertension. Am J Prev Med.
2007;32:435–447.
doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2007.01.011 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
123. Carter BL, Rogers M, Daly J, Zheng S, James PA. The potency of team-based care interventions for
hypertension: a meta-analysis. Arch Intern
Med.
2009;169:1748–1755.
doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2009.316 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
124. Clark CE, Smith LF, Taylor RS, Campbell JL. Nurse led interventions to improve control of blood
pressure in people with hypertension: systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMJ.
2010;341:c3995. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
125. Santschi V, Chiolero A, Colosimo AL, Platt RW, Taffé P, Burnier M, Burnand B, Paradis G. Improving blood pressure control through pharmacist
interventions: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. J Am Heart Assoc.
2014;3:e000718. doi:
10.1161/JAHA.113.000718 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
126. Brush JE Jr, Handberg EM, Biga C, Birtcher KK, Bove AA, Casale PN, Clark MG, Garson A Jr, Hines JL, Linderbaum JA, Rodgers GP, Shor RA, Thourani VH, Wyman JF. 2015 ACC health policy statement on cardiovascular
team-based care and the role of advanced practice providers.
J Am Coll Cardiol.
2015;65:2118–2136.
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.03.550 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
127. Thomas KL, Shah BR, Elliot-Bynum S, Thomas KD, Damon K, Allen LaPointe NM, Calhoun S, Thomas L, Breathett K, Mathews R, Anderson M, Califf RM, Peterson ED. Check it, change it: a community-based, multifaceted
intervention to improve blood pressure control. Circ
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes.
2014;7:828–834.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.114.001039 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
128. Samal L, Linder JA, Lipsitz SR, Hicks LS. Electronic health records, clinical decision support,
and blood pressure control. Am J Manag
Care.
2011;17:626–632. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
129. Jaffe MG, Lee GA, Young JD, Sidney S, Go AS. Improved blood pressure control associated with a
large-scale hypertension program. JAMA.
2013;310:699–705.
doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.108769 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
130. Jaffe MG, Young JD. The Kaiser Permanente Northern California Story:
improving hypertension control from 44% to 90% in 13 years (2000 to
2013). J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich).
2016;18:260–261.
doi: 10.1111/jch.12803 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
131. Go AS, Bauman MA, Coleman King SM, Fonarow GC, Lawrence W, Williams KA, Sanchez E. An effective approach to high blood pressure control: a
science advisory from the American Heart Association, the American College
of Cardiology, and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention
[published correction appears in Hypertension. 2014;63:e175].
Hypertension.
2014;63:878–885.
doi: 10.1161/HYP.0000000000000003 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
132. Omboni S, Ferrari R. The role of telemedicine in hypertension management:
focus on blood pressure telemonitoring. Curr
Hypertens Rep.
2015;17:535. doi:
10.1007/s11906-015-0535-3 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
133. Yang W, Chang J, Kahler KH, Fellers T, Orloff J, Wu EQ, Bensimon AG. Evaluation of compliance and health care utilization in
patients treated with single pill vs. free combination
antihypertensives. Curr Med Res Opin.
2010;26:2065–2076.
doi: 10.1185/03007995.2010.494462 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
134. Choudhry NK, Denberg TD, Qaseem A; Clinical Guidelines Committee of American College of
Physicians. Improving adherence to therapy and clinical outcomes while
containing costs: opportunities from the greater use of generic medications:
best practice advice from the Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American
College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med.
2016;164:41–49.
doi: 10.7326/M14-2427 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
135. Fowler FJ Jr, Gerstein BS, Barry MJ. How patient centered are medical decisions? Results of a
national survey. JAMA Intern Med.
2013;173:1215–1221.
doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.6172 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
136. Roumie CL, Greevy R, Wallston KA, Elasy TA, Kaltenbach L, Kotter K, Dittus RS, Speroff T. Patient centered primary care is associated with patient
hypertension medication adherence. J Behav
Med.
2011;34:244–253.
doi: 10.1007/s10865-010-9304-6 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
137. Burke LE, Ma J, Azar KMJ, Bennett GG, Peterson ED, Zheng Y, Riley W, Stephens J, Shah SH, Suffoletto B, Turan TN, Spring B, Steinberger J, Quinn CC; on behalf of the American Heart Association Publications
Committee of the Council on Epidemiology and Prevention,
Behavior Change Committee of the Council on Cardiometabolic
Health, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke
Nursing, Council on Functional Genomics and Translational
Biology, Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes
Research, and Stroke Council.
Current science on consumer use of mobile health for
cardiovascular disease prevention: a scientific statement from the American
Heart Association
[published correction appears in Circulation. 2015;132:e233].
Circulation.
2015;132:1157–1213.
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000232 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
138. AHRQ. AHRQ Health
Literacy Universal Precautions Toolkit. https://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/quality-patient-safety/quality-resources/tools/literacy-toolkit/index.html .
Updated November 2016
Accessed January 5,
2017. 
139. Artinian NT, Fletcher GF, Mozaffarian D, Kris-Etherton P, Van Horn L, Lichtenstein AH, Kumanyika S, Kraus WE, Fleg JL, Redeker NS, Meininger JC, Banks J, Stuart-Shor EM, Fletcher BJ, Miller TD, Hughes S, Braun LT, Kopin LA, Berra K, Hayman LL, Ewing LJ, Ades PA, Durstine JL, Houston-Miller N, Burke LE; on behalf of the American Heart Association Prevention
Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Nursing.
Interventions to promote physical activity and dietary
lifestyle changes for cardiovascular risk factor reduction in adults: a
scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation.
2010;122:406–441.
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3181e8edf1 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
140. Bhatt H, Siddiqui M, Judd E, Oparil S, Calhoun D. Prevalence of pseudoresistant hypertension due to
inaccurate blood pressure measurement. J Am Soc
Hypertens.
2016;10:493–499.
doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2016.03.186 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
141. Messerli FH, Ventura HO, Amodeo C. Osler’s maneuver and
pseudohypertension. N Engl J Med.
1985;312:1548–1551.
doi: 10.1056/NEJM198506133122405 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
142. Nielsen PE, Larsen B, Holstein P, Poulsen HL. Accuracy of auscultatory blood pressure measurements in
hypertensive and obese subjects.
Hypertension.
1983;5:122–127. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
143. Grassi G, Turri C, Vailati S, Dell’Oro R, Mancia G. Muscle and skin sympathetic nerve traffic during the
“white-coat” effect.
Circulation.
1999;100:222–225. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
144. Manios ED, Koroboki EA, Tsivgoulis GK, Spengos KM, Spiliopoulou IK, Brodie FG, Vemmos KN, Zakopoulos NA. Factors influencing whitecoat effect.
Am J Hypertens.
2008;21:153–158. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
145. Brown MA, Buddle ML, Martin A. Is resistant hypertension really
resistant?
Am J Hypertens.
2001;14:1263–1269. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
146. Pickering TG, Miller NH, Ogedegbe G, Krakoff LR, Artinian NT, Goff D. Call to action on use and reimbursement for home blood
pressure monitoring: a joint scientific statement from the American Heart
Association, American Society of Hypertension, and Preventive Cardiovascular
Nurses Association. Hypertension.
2008;52:10–29.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.107.189010 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
147. Sim JJ, Handler J, Jacobsen SJ, Kanter MH. Systemic implementation strategies to improve
hypertension: the Kaiser Permanente Southern California
experience. Can J Cardiol.
2014;30:544–552.
doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2014.01.003 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
148. Landsberg L, Aronne LJ, Beilin LJ, Burke V, Igel LI, Lloyd-Jones D, Sowers J. Obesity-related hypertension: pathogenesis,
cardiovascular risk, and treatment: a position paper of The Obesity Society
and the American Society of Hypertension. J Clin
Hypertens (Greenwich).
2013;15:14–33.
doi: 10.1111/jch.12049 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
149. Hall JE, do Carmo JM, da Silva AA, Wang Z, Hall ME. Obesity-induced hypertension: interaction of
neurohumoral and renal mechanisms. Circ
Res.
2015;116:991–1006.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.305697 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
150. Byrd JB, Brook RD. A critical review of the evidence supporting aldosterone
in the etiology and its blockade in the treatment of obesity-associated
hypertension. J Hum Hypertens.
2014;28:3–9.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2013.42 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
151. Calhoun DA, Sharma K. The role of aldosteronism in causing obesity-related
cardiovascular risk. Cardiol Clin.
2010;28:517–527.
doi: 10.1016/j.ccl.2010.04.001 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
152. de la Sierra A, Banegas JR, Oliveras A, Gorostidi M, Segura J, de la Cruz JJ, Armario P, Ruilope LM. Clinical differences between resistant hypertensives and
patients treated and controlled with three or less drugs.
J Hypertens.
2012;30:1211–1216. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
153. O’Donnell M, Mente A, Yusuf S. Sodium intake and cardiovascular health.
Circ Res.
2015;116:1046–1057.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.303771 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
154. He FJ, Li J, Macgregor GA. Effect of longer term modest salt reduction on blood
pressure: Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised
trials. BMJ.
2013;346:f1325. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
155. Whelton PK, Appel LJ, Sacco RL, Anderson CA, Antman EM, Campbell N, Dunbar SB, Frohlich ED, Hall JE, Jessup M, Labarthe DR, MacGregor GA, Sacks FM, Stamler J, Vafiadis DK, Van Horn LV. Sodium, blood pressure, and cardiovascular disease:
further evidence supporting the American Heart Association sodium reduction
recommendations. Circulation.
2012;126:2880–2889.
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e318279acbf [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
156. Blaustein MP, Leenen FH, Chen L, Golovina VA, Hamlyn JM, Pallone TL, Van Huysse JW, Zhang J, Wier WG. How NaCl raises blood pressure: a new paradigm for the
pathogenesis of salt-dependent hypertension. Am J
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol.
2012;302:H1031–H1049.
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00899.2011 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
157. Oh YS, Appel LJ, Galis ZS, Hafler DA, He J, Hernandez AL, Joe B, Karumanchi SA, Maric-Bilkan C, Mattson D, Mehta NN, Randolph G, Ryan M, Sandberg K, Titze J, Tolunay E, Toney GM, Harrison DG. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Working Group
Report on Salt in Human Health and Sickness: building on the current
scientific evidence. Hypertension.
2016;68:281–288.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.116.07415 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
158. Cobb LK, Anderson CA, Elliott P, Hu FB, Liu K, Neaton JD, Whelton PK, Woodward M, Appel LJ; on behalf of the American Heart Association Council on
Lifestyle and Metabolic Health. Methodological
issues in cohort studies that relate sodium intake to cardiovascular disease
outcomes: a science advisory from the American Heart
Association. Circulation.
2014;129:1173–1186.
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000015 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
159. Gaddam KK, Nishizaka MK, Pratt-Ubunama MN, Pimenta E, Aban I, Oparil S, Calhoun DA. Characterization of resistant hypertension: association
between resistant hypertension, aldosterone, and persistent intravascular
volume expansion. Arch Intern Med.
2008;168:1159–1164.
doi: 10.1001/archinte.168.11.1159 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
160. Florczak E, Prejbisz A, Szwench-Pietrasz E, Sliwiński P, Bieleń P, Klisiewicz A, Michałowska I, Warchoł E, Januszewicz M, Kała M, Witkowski A, Więcek A, Narkiewicz K, Somers VK, Januszewicz A. Clinical characteristics of patients with resistant
hypertension: the RESIST-POL study. J Hum
Hypertens.
2013;27:678–685.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2013.32 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
161. McMahon EJ, Bauer JD, Hawley CM, Isbel NM, Stowasser M, Johnson DW, Campbell KL. A randomized trial of dietary sodium restriction in
CKD. J Am Soc Nephrol.
2013;24:2096–2103.
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013030285 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
162. McFadden CB, Brensinger CM, Berlin JA, Townsend RR. Systematic review of the effect of daily alcohol intake
on blood pressure. Am J Hypertens.
2005;18(pt
1):276–286. doi:
10.1016/j.amjhyper.2004.07.020 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
163. Chen L, Smith GD, Harbord RM, Lewis SJ. Alcohol intake and blood pressure: a systematic review
implementing a mendelian randomization approach.
PLoS Med.
2008;5:e52. doi:
10.1371/journal.pmed.0050052 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
164. Briasoulis A, Agarwal V, Messerli FH. Alcohol consumption and the risk of hypertension in men
and women: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Clin Hypertens (Greenwich).
2012;14:792–798.
doi: 10.1111/jch.12008 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
165. Hussain K, Arisari RA, Ferder L. Alcohol-induced hypertension: mechanism and
prevention. World J Cardiol.
2014;26:245–252. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
166. Shimbo D, Levitan EB, Booth JN 3rd, Calhoun DA, Judd SE, Lackland DT, Safford MM, Oparil S, Muntner P. The contributions of unhealthy lifestyle factors to
apparent resistant hypertension: findings from the Reasons for Geographic
And Racial Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) study. J
Hypertens.
2013;31:370–376.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32835b6be7 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
167. Diaz KM, Shimbo D. Physical activity and the prevention of
hypertension. Curr Hypertens Rep.
2013;15:659–668.
doi: 10.1007/s11906-013-0386-8 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
168. Carnethon MR, Evans NS, Church TS, Lewis CE, Schreiner PJ, Jacobs DR Jr, Sternfeld B, Sidney S. Joint associations of physical activity and aerobic
fitness on the development of incident hypertension: coronary artery risk
development in young adults. Hypertension.
2010;56:49–55.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.147603 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
169. Chase NL, Sui X, Lee DC, Blair SN. The association of cardiorespiratory fitness and
physical activity with incidence of hypertension in men.
Am J Hypertens.
2009;22:417–424.
doi: 10.1038/ajh.2009.6 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
170. Forman JP, Stampfer MJ, Curhan GC. Diet and lifestyle risk factors associated with incident
hypertension in women. JAMA.
2009;302:401–411.
doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.1060 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
171. Crump C, Sundquist J, Winkleby MA, Sundquist K. Interactive effects of physical fitness and body mass
index on the risk of hypertension. JAMA Intern
Med.
2016;176:210–216.
doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.7444 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
172. Pouliou T, Ki M, Law C, Li L, Power C. Physical activity and sedentary behaviour at different
life stages and adult blood pressure in the 1958 British
cohort. J Hypertens.
2012;30:275–283.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32834f1915 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
173. Dimeo F, Pagonas N, Seibert F, Arndt R, Zidek W, Westhoff TH. Aerobic exercise reduces blood pressure in resistant
hypertension. Hypertension.
2012;60:653–658.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.197780 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
174. Appel LJ, Giles TD, Black HR, Izzo JL Jr, Materson BJ, Oparil S, Weber MA; American Society of Hypertension Writing Group.
ASH position paper: dietary approaches to lower blood
pressure. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich).
2009;11:358–368.
doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7176.2009.00136.x [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
175. Saneei P, Salehi-Abargouei A, Esmaillzadeh A, Azadbakht L. Influence of Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension
(DASH) diet on blood pressure: a systematic review and meta-analysis on
randomized controlled trials. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc
Dis.
2014;24:1253–1261.
doi: 10.1016/j.numecd.2014.06.008 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
176. Trudel-Fitzgerald C, Gilsanz P, Mittleman MA, Kubzansky LD. Dysregulated blood pressure: can regulating emotions
help?
Curr Hypertens Rep.
2015;17:92. doi:
10.1007/s11906-015-0605-6 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
177. Cuffee Y, Ogedegbe C, Williams NJ, Ogedegbe G, Schoenthaler A. Psychosocial risk factors for hypertension: an update of
the literature. Curr Hypertens Rep.
2014;16:483. doi:
10.1007/s11906-014-0483-3 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
178. Gangwisch JE. A review of evidence for the link between sleep duration
and hypertension. Am J Hypertens.
2014;27:1235–1242.
doi: 10.1093/ajh/hpu071 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
179. Brook RD, Weder AB, Rajagopalan S. “Environmental hypertensionology” the
effects of environmental factors on blood pressure in clinical practice and
research. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich).
2011;13:836–842.
doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7176.2011.00543.x [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
180. Dedier J, Stampfer MJ, Hankinson SE, Willett WC, Speizer FE, Curhan GC. Nonnarcotic analgesic use and the risk of hypertension
in US women. Hypertension.
2002;40:604–608. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
181. Forman JP, Stampfer MJ, Curhan GC. Non-narcotic analgesic dose and risk of incident
hypertension in US women. Hypertension.
2005;46:500–507.
doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000177437.07240.70 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
182. Warner TD, Mitchell JA. COX-2 selectivity alone does not define the
cardiovascular risks associated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. Lancet.
2008;371:270–273.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60137-3 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
183. Johnson AG, Nguyen TV, Day RO. Do nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs affect blood
pressure? A meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med.
1994;121:289–300. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
184. Radack KL, Deck CC, Bloomfield SS. Ibuprofen interferes with the efficacy of
antihypertensive drugs: a randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial
of ibuprofen compared with acetaminophen. Ann Intern
Med.
1987;107:628–635. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
185. Conlin PR, Moore TJ, Swartz SL, Barr E, Gazdick L, Fletcher C, DeLucca P, Demopoulos L. Effect of indomethacin on blood pressure lowering by
captopril and losartan in hypertensive patients.
Hypertension.
2000;36:461–465. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
186. White WB. Cardiovascular effects of the cyclooxygenase
inhibitors. Hypertension.
2007;49:408–418.
doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000258106.74139.25 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
187. Ishiguro C, Fujita T, Omori T, Fujii Y, Mayama T, Sato T. Assessing the effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs on antihypertensive drug therapy using post-marketing surveillance
database. J Epidemiol.
2008;18:119–124. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
188. Whelton A, White WB, Bello AE, Puma JA, Fort JG; SUCCESS-VII Investigators. Effects of celecoxib and
rofecoxib on blood pressure and edema in patients > or =65 years of
age with systemic hypertension and osteoarthritis.
Am J Cardiol.
2002;90:959–963. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
189. White WB, Kent J, Taylor A, Verburg KM, Lefkowith JB, Whelton A. Effects of celecoxib on ambulatory blood pressure in
hypertensive patients on ACE inhibitors.
Hypertension.
2002;39:929–934. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
190. Messerli FH, Sichrovsky T. Does the pro-hypertensive effect of cyclooxygenase-2
inhibitors account for the increased risk in cardiovascular
disease?
Am J Cardiol.
2005;96:872–873.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.05.038 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
191. Zanchetti A, Hansson L, Leonetti G, Rahn KH, Ruilope L, Warnold I, Wedel H. Low-dose aspirin does not interfere with the blood
pressure-lowering effects of antihypertensive therapy.
J Hypertens.
2002;20:1015–1022. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
192. Hörl WH. Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory drugs and the
kidney. Pharmaceuticals (Basel).
2010;3:2291–2321.
doi: 10.3390/ph3072291 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
193. Johnson AG, Simons LA, Simons J, Friedlander Y, McCallum J. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and hypertension in
the elderly: a community-based cross-sectional study.
Br J Clin Pharmacol.
1993;35:455–459. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
194. Davies JG, Rawlins DC, Busson M. Effect of ibuprofen on blood pressure control by
propranolol and bendrofluazide. J Int Med
Res.
1988;16:173–181.
doi: 10.1177/030006058801600302 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
195. Wright JT, McKenney JM, Lehany AM, Bryan DL, Cooper LW, Lambert CM. The effect of high-dose short-term ibuprofen on
antihypertensive control with hydrochlorothiazide.
Clin Pharmacol Ther.
1989;46:440–444. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
196. Polonia J, Boaventura I, Gama G, Camôes I, Bernardo F, Andrade P, Nunes JP, Brandâo F, Cerqueira-Gomes M. Influence of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on
renal function and 24h ambulatory blood pressure-reducing effects of
enalapril and nifedipine gastrointestinal therapeutic system in hypertensive
patients. J Hypertens.
1995;13:925–931. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
197. Morgan TO, Anderson A, Bertram D. Effect of indomethacin on blood pressure in elderly
people with essential hypertension well controlled on amlodipine or
enalapril. Am J Hypertens.
2000;13:1161–1167. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
198. Fogari R, Zoppi A, Carretta R, Veglio F, Salvetti A; Italian Collaborative Study Group. Effect of
indomethacin on the antihypertensive efficacy of
valsartan [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
199. Izhar M, Alausa T, Folker A, Hung E, Bakris GL. Effects of COX inhibition on blood pressure and kidney
function in ACE inhibitor-treated blacks and Hispanics.
Hypertension.
2004;43:573–577.
doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000115921.55353.e0 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
200. Palmer R, Weiss R, Zusman RM, Haig A, Flavin S, MacDonald B. Effects of nabumetone, celecoxib, and ibuprofen on blood
pressure control in hypertensive patients on angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitors. Am J Hypertens.
2003;16:135–139. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
201. MacFarlane LL, Orak DJ, Simpson WM. NSAIDs, antihypertensive agents and loss of blood
pressure control. Am Fam Physician.
1995;51:849–856. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
202. Ruschitzka F, Borer JS, Krum H, Flammer AJ, Yeomans ND, Libby P, Lüscher TF, Solomon DH, Husni ME, Graham DY, Davey DA, Wisniewski LM, Menon V, Fayyad R, Beckerman B, Iorga D, Lincoff AM, Nissen SE. Differential blood pressure effects of ibuprofen,
naproxen, and celecoxib in patients with arthritis: the PRECISION-ABPM
(Prospective Randomized Evaluation of Celecoxib Integrated Safety Versus
Ibuprofen or Naproxen Ambulatory Blood Pressure Measurement)
Trial. Eur Heart J.
2017;38:3282–3292.
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx508 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
203. Prentice RL. On the ability of blood pressure effects to explain the
relation between oral contraceptives and cardiovascular
disease. Am J Epidemiol
1988;127:213–219. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
204. Rosenthal T, Oparil S. Oral contraceptives, hormones replacement therapy, and
hypertension In: Lip G, Hall J, eds. Comprehensive Hypertension. New
York, NY: Elsevier/Mosby;
2007:865–882. [ Google Scholar ] 
205. Chasan-Taber L, Willett WC, Manson JE, Spiegelman D, Hunter DJ, Curhan G, Colditz GA, Stampfer MJ. Prospective study of oral contraceptives and
hypertension among women in the United States.
Circulation.
1996;94:483–489. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
206. Lubianca JN, Faccin CS, Fuchs FD. Oral contraceptives: a risk factor for uncontrolled
blood pressure among hypertensive women.
Contraception.
2003;67:19–24. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
207. White WB, Hanes V, Chauhan V, Pitt B. Effects of a new hormone therapy, drospirenone and
17-beta-estradiol, in postmenopausal women with
hypertension. Hypertension.
2006;48:246–253.
doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000232179.60442.84 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
208. ACOG Committee on Practice
Bulletins-Gynecology. ACOG practice bulletin: No.
73: use of hormonal contraception in women with coexisting medical
conditions: clinical management guidelines for
obstetrician-gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol.
2006;107:1453–1472. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
209. Woods JW. Oral contraceptives and hypertension.
Hypertension.
1988;11(pt
2):II11–II15. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
210. Lim KG, Isles CG, Hodsman GP. Malignant hypertension in women of childbearing age and
its relation to the contraceptive pill. Br Med
J.
1987;294:1057–1059. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
211. Goldhaber SZ, Hennekens CH, Spark RF, Evans DA, Rosner B, Taylor JO, Kass EH. Plasma renin substrate, renin activity, and aldosterone
levels in a sample of oral contraceptive users from a community
survey. Am Heart J.
1984;107:119–122. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
212. Rossouw JE, Anderson GL, Prentice RL, LaCroix AZ, Kooperberg C, Stefanick ML, Jackson RD, Beresford SA, Howard BV, Johnson KC, Kotchen JM, Ockene J; Writing Group for the Women’s Health Initiative
Investigators. Risks and benefits of estrogen plus
progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: principal results from the
Women’s Health Initiative randomized controlled
trial. JAMA.
2002;288:321–333. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
213. Effects of estrogen or
estrogen/progestin regimens on heart disease risk factors in postmenopausal
women: the Postmenopausal Estrogen/ Progestin Interventions (PEPI)
Trial. JAMA.
1995;273:199–208. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
214. Fleming GA. The FDA, regulation, and the risk of
stroke. N Engl J Med.
2000;343:1886–1887.
doi: 10.1056/NEJM200012213432510 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
215. Mersfelder TL. Phenylpropanolamine and stroke: the study, the FDA
ruling, the implications. Cleve Clin J Med.
2001;68:208–209,
213. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
216. Cantu C, Arauz A, Murillo-Bonilla LM, Lopez M, Barinagarrementeria F. Stroke associated with sympathomimetics contained in
over-the-counter cough and cold drugs.
Stroke.
2003;34:1667–1672.
doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000075293.45936.FA [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
217. Kernan WN, Viscoli CM, Brass LM, Broderick JP, Brott T, Feldmann E, Morgenstern LB, Wilterdink JL, Horwitz RI. Phenylpropanolamine and the risk of hemorrhagic
stroke. N Engl J Med.
2000;343:1826–1832.
doi: 10.1056/NEJM200012213432501 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
218. Porter GA, Bennett WM, Sheps SG. Cyclosporine-associated hypertension: National High
Blood Pressure Education Program. Arch Intern
Med.
1990;150:280–283. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
219. Textor SC, Taler SJ, Canzanello VJ. Cyclosporine, blood pressure and
atherosclerosis. Cardiol Rev.
1997;5:141–151. [ Google Scholar ] 
220. Chapman JR, Marcen R, Arias M, Raine AE, Dunnill MS, Morris PJ. Hypertension after renal transplantation: a comparison
of cyclosporine and conventional immunosuppression.
Transplantation.
1987;43:860–864. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
221. Eschbach JW, Abdulhadi MH, Browne JK, Delano BG, Downing MR, Egrie JC, Evans RW, Friedman EA, Graber SE, Haley NR. Recombinant human erythropoietin in anemic patients with
end-stage renal disease: results of a phase III multicenter clinical
trial. Ann Intern Med.
1989;111:992–1000. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
222. Vaziri ND. Mechanism of erythropoietin-induced
hypertension. Am J Kidney Dis.
1999;33:821–828. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
223. Raine AE, Roger SD. Effects of erythropoietin on blood
pressure. Am J Kidney Dis.
1991;18(suppl
2):76–83. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
224. Eschbach JW, Aquiling T, Haley NR, Fan MH, Blagg CR. The long-term effects of recombinant human
erythropoietin on the cardiovascular system. Clin
Nephrol. 1992;38(suppl
1):S98–S103. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
225. Ferrara N, Hillan KJ, Gerber HP, Novotny W. Discovery and development of bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF
antibody for treating cancer. Nat Rev Drug
Discov.
2004;3:391–400.
doi: 10.1038/nrd1381 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
226. Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, Cartwright T, Hainsworth J, Heim W, Berlin J, Baron A, Griffing S, Holmgren E, Ferrara N, Fyfe G, Rogers B, Ross R, Kabbinavar F. Bevacizumab plus irinotecan, fluorouracil, and
leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl
J Med.
2004;350:2335–2342.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa032691 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
227. Shinkaruk S, Bayle M, Laïn G, Déléris G. Vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF), an
emerging target for cancer chemotherapy. Curr Med
Chem Anticancer Agents.
2003;3:95–117. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
228. Sica DA. Angiogenesis inhibitors and hypertension: an emerging
issue. J Clin Oncol.
2006;24:1329–1331.
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.04.5740 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
229. Zhu X, Wu S, Dahut WL, Parikh CR. Risks of proteinuria and hypertension with bevacizumab,
an antibody against vascular endothelial growth factor: systematic review
and meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis.
2007;49:186–193.
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2006.11.039 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
230. Wu S, Chen JJ, Kudelka A, Lu J, Zhu X. Incidence and risk of hypertension with sorafenib in
patients with cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet Oncol.
2008;9:117–123.
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(08)70003-2 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
231. Zhu X, Stergiopoulos K, Wu S. Risk of hypertension and renal dysfunction with an
angiogenesis inhibitor sunitinib: systematic review and
metaanalysis. Acta Oncol.
2009;48:9–17.
doi: 10.1080/02841860802314720 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
232. Kindler HL, Friberg G, Singh DA, Locker G, Nattam S, Kozloff M, Taber DA, Karrison T, Dachman A, Stadler WM, Vokes EE. Phase II trial of bevacizumab plus gemcitabine in
patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. J Clin
Oncol.
2005;23:8033–8040.
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.01.9661 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
233. Hansen-Smith FM, Morris LW, Greene AS, Lombard JH. Rapid microvessel rarefaction with elevated salt intake
and reduced renal mass hypertension in rats. Circ
Res.
1996;79:324–330. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
234. Hutchins PM, Lynch CD, Cooney PT, Curseen KA. The microcirculation in experimental hypertension and
aging. Cardiovasc Res.
1996;32:772–780. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
235. Mourad JJ, des Guetz G, Debbabi H, Levy BI. Blood pressure rise following angiogenesis inhibition by
bevacizumab: a crucial role for microcirculation.
Ann Oncol.
2008;19:927–934.
doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdm550 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
236. Steeghs N, Gelderblom H, Roodt JO, Christensen O, Rajagopalan P, Hovens M, Putter H, Rabelink TJ, de Koning E. Hypertension and rarefaction during treatment with
telatinib, a small molecule angiogenesis inhibitor.
Clin Cancer Res.
2008;14:3470–3476.
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-5050 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
237. Veronese ML, Mosenkis A, Flaherty KT, Gallagher M, Stevenson JP, Townsend RR, O’Dwyer PJ. Mechanisms of hypertension associated with BAY
43–9006. J Clin Oncol.
2006;24:1363–1369.
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.02.0503 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
238. Das G
Cardiovascular effects of cocaine abuse.
Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol.
1993;31:521–528. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
239. Gawin FH, Ellinwood EH Jr. Cocaine and other stimulants: actions, abuse, and
treatment. N Engl J Med.
1988;318:1173–1182.
doi: 10.1056/NEJM198805053181806 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
240. Chiang W, Goldfrank L. The medical complications of drug abuse.
Med J Aust.
1990;152:83–88. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
241. Ballard JE, Boileau RA, Sleator EK, Massey BH, Sprague RL. Cardiovascular responses of hyperactive children to
methylphenidate. JAMA.
1976;236:2870–2874. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
242. Liu LX, Rustgi AK. Cardiac myonecrosis in hypertensive crisis associated
with monoamine oxidase inhibitor therapy. Am J
Med.
1987;82:1060–1064. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
243. Fallon B, Foote B, Walsh BT, Roose SP “Spontaneous” hypertensive episodes with
monoamine oxidase inhibitors. J Clin
Psychiatry.
1988;49:163–165. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
244. Abrams JH, Schulman P, White WB. Successful treatment of a monoamine oxidase
inhibitor-tyramine hypertensive emergency with intravenous
labetalol. N Engl J Med.
1985;313:52. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
245. Guzzardi L
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors In: Haddad LM, Winchester JF, eds. The Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug
Overdose. Philadelphia, PA:
WB Saunders;
1983:496–502. [ Google Scholar ] 
246. Louie AK, Louie EK, Lannon RA. Systemic hypertension associated with tricyclic
antidepressant treatment in patients with panic disorder.
Am J Cardiol.
1992;70:1306–1309. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
247. Thase ME. Effects of venlafaxine on blood pressure: a
meta-analysis of original data from 3744 depressed patients.
J Clin Psychiatry.
1998;59:502–508. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
248. Amsterdam JD, Garcia-Espana F, Fawcett J, Quitkin FM, Reimherr FW, Rosenbaum JF, Beasley C. Blood pressure changes during short-term fluoxetine
treatment. J Clin Psychopharmacol.
1999;19:9–14. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
249. Mann SJ. Severe paroxysmal hypertension (pseudopheochromocytoma):
understanding the cause and treatment. Arch Intern
Med.
1999;159:670–674. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
250. Mann SJ. Labile and paroxysmal hypertension: common clinical
dilemmas in need of treatment studies. Curr Cardiol
Rep. 2015;17:99. doi:
10.1007/s11886-015-0646-0 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
251. Pepin JL, Borel AL, Tamisier R, Baguet JP, Levy P, Dauvilliers Y Hypertension and sleep: overview of a
tight relationship. Sleep Med Rev.
2014;18:509–519.
doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2014.03.003 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
252. Sayk F, Teckentrup C, Becker C, Heutling D, Wellhoner P, Lehnert H, Dodt C. Effects of selective slow-wave sleep deprivation on
nocturnal blood pressure dipping and daytime blood pressure
regulation. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp
Physiol.
2010;298:R191–R197.
doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00368.2009 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
253. Lusardi P, Zoppi A, Preti P, Pesce RM, Piazza E, Fogari R. Effects of insufficient sleep on blood pressure in
hypertensive patients: a 24-h study. Am J
Hypertens. 1999;12(pt
1):63–68. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
254. Gangwisch JE, Heymsfield SB, Boden-Albala B, Buijs RM, Kreier F, Pickering TG, Rundle AG, Zammit GK, Malaspina D. Short sleep duration as a risk factor for hypertension:
analyses of the first National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey. Hypertension.
2006;47:833–839.
doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000217362.34748.e0 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
255. Jin ZN, Wei YX. Meta-analysis of effects of obstructive sleep apnea on
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. J Geriatr
Cardiol.
2016;13:333–343.
doi: 10.11909/j.issn.1671-5411.2016.03.020 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
256. Itani O, Jike M, Watanabe N, Kaneita Y
Short sleep duration and health outcomes: a systematic review,
meta-analysis, and meta-regression. Sleep
Med.
2017;32:246–256.
doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2016.08.006 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
257. Guralnick A, Bakris GL. Approaches for targeting blood pressure control in sleep
disorders. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens.
2012;21:469–474.
doi: 10.1097/MNH.0b013e32835623f5 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
258. Dematteis M, Julien C, Guillermet C, Sturm N, Lantuejoul S, Mallaret M, Lévy P, Gozal E. Intermittent hypoxia induces early functional
cardiovascular remodeling in mice. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med.
2008;177:227–235.
doi: 10.1164/rccm.200702-238OC [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
259. Tamisier R, Pépin JL, Rémy J, Baguet JP, Taylor JA, Weiss JW, Lévy P. 14 Nights of intermittent hypoxia elevate daytime blood
pressure and sympathetic activity in healthy humans.
Eur Respir J.
2011;37:119–128.
doi: 10.1183/09031936.00204209 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
260. Gottlieb DJ, Punjabi NM, Mehra R, Patel SR, Quan SF, Babineau DC, Tracy RP, Rueschman M, Blumenthal RS, Lewis EF, Bhatt DL, Redline S. CPAP versus oxygen in obstructive sleep
apnea. N Engl J Med.
2014;370:2276–2285.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1306766 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
261. Dernaika TA, Kinasewitz GT, Tawk MM. Effects of nocturnal continuous positive airway pressure
therapy in patients with resistant hypertension and obstructive sleep
apnea. J Clin Sleep Med.
2009;5:103–107. [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
262. Weichler U, Herres-Mayer B, Mayer J, Weber K, Hoffmann R, Peter JH. Influence of antihypertensive drug therapy on sleep
pattern and sleep apnea activity.
Cardiology.
1991;78:124–130.
doi: 10.1159/000174776 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
263. Pawlik MT, Hansen E, Waldhauser D, Selig C, Kuehnel TS. Clonidine premedication in patients with sleep apnea
syndrome: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. Anesth Analg.
2005;101:1374–1380.
doi: 10.1213/01.ANE.0000180194.30741.40 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
264. Covassin N, Singh P. Sleep duration and cardiovascular disease risk:
epidemiologic and experimental evidence. Sleep Med
Clin.
2016;11:81–89.
doi: 10.1016/j.jsmc.2015.10.007 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
265. Guo X, Zheng L, Wang J, Zhang X, Zhang X, Li J, Sun Y. Epidemiological evidence for the link between sleep
duration and high blood pressure: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Sleep Med.
2013;14:324–332.
doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.12.001 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
266. Gottlieb DJ, Redline S, Nieto FJ, Baldwin CM, Newman AB, Resnick HE, Punjabi NM. Association of usual sleep duration with hypertension:
the Sleep Heart Health Study. Sleep.
2006;29:1009–1014. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
267. Wang Y, Mei H, Jiang YR, Sun WQ, Song YJ, Liu SJ, Jiang F. Relationship between duration of sleep and hypertension
in adults: a meta-analysis. J Clin Sleep
Med.
2015;11:1047–1056.
doi: 10.5664/jcsm.5024 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
268. St-Onge MP, Grandner MA, Brown D, Conroy MB, Jean-Louis G, Coons M, Bhatt DL; on behalf of the American Heart Association Obesity,
Behavior Change, Diabetes, and
Nutrition Committees of the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health;
Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Council on Clinical
Cardiology; and Stroke Council. Sleep duration and
quality: impact on lifestyle behaviors and cardiometabolic health: a
scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation.
2016;134:e367–e386.
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000444 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
269. Nilsson PM, Nilsson JA, Hedblad B, Berglund G. Sleep disturbance in association with elevated pulse
rate for prediction of mortality: consequences of mental
strain?
J Intern Med.
2001;250:521–529. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
270. Zhong X, Hilton HJ, Gates GJ, Jelic S, Stern Y, Bartels MN, Demeersman RE, Basner RC. Increased sympathetic and decreased parasympathetic
cardiovascular modulation in normal humans with acute sleep
deprivation. J Appl Physiol (1985).
2005;98:2024–2032.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00620.2004 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
271. Raheja P, Price A, Wang Z, Arbique D, Adams-Huet B, Auchus RJ, Vongpatanasin W. Spironolactone prevents chlorthalidone-induced
sympathetic activation and insulin resistance in hypertensive
patients. Hypertension.
2012;60:319–325.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.194787 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
272. Lloberes P, Lozano L, Sampol G, Romero O, Jurado MJ, Rios J, Untoria MD, Tovar JL. Obstructive sleep apnoea and 24-h blood pressure in
patients with resistant hypertension. J Sleep
Res.
2010;19:597–602.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2869.2010.00839.x [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
273. Logan AG, Perlikowski SM, Mente A, Tisler A, Tkacova R, Niroumand M, Leung RS, Bradley TD. High prevalence of unrecognized sleep apnoea in
drug-resistant hypertension. J Hypertens.
2001;19:2271–2277. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
274. Min HJ, Cho YJ, Kim CH, Kim DH, Kim HY, Choi JI, Lee JG, Park S, Cho HJ. Clinical features of obstructive sleep apnea that
determine its high prevalence in resistant hypertension.
Yonsei Med J.
2015;56:1258–1265.
doi: 10.3349/ymj.2015.56.5.1258 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
275. Muxfeldt ES, Margallo VS, Guimarâes GM, Salles GF. Prevalence and associated factors of obstructive sleep
apnea in patients with resistant hypertension. Am J
Hypertens.
2014;27:1069–1078.
doi: 10.1093/ajh/hpu023 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
276. Walia HK, Li H, Rueschman M, Bhatt DL, Patel SR, Quan SF, Gottlieb DJ, Punjabi NM, Redline S, Mehra R. Association of severe obstructive sleep apnea and
elevated blood pressure despite antihypertensive medication
use. J Clin Sleep Med.
2014;10:835–843.
doi: 10.5664/jcsm.3946 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
277. Pratt-Ubunama MN, Nishizaka MK, Boedefeld RL, Cofield SS, Harding SM, Calhoun DA. Plasma aldosterone is related to severity of obstructive
sleep apnea in subjects with resistant hypertension.
Chest.
2007;131:453–459.
doi: 10.1378/chest.06-1442 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
278. Di Murro A, Petramala L, Cotesta D, Zinnamosca L, Crescenzi E, Marinelli C, Saponara M, Letizia C. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in patients with
sleep apnoea: prevalence of primary aldosteronism. J
Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst.
2010;11:165–172.
doi: 10.1177/1470320310366581 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
279. Prejbisz A, Florczak E, Klisiewicz A, Dobrowolski P, Janaszek-Sitkowska H, Bieleń P, Szwench-Pietrasz E, Warchoł-Celińska E, Kołodziejczyk-Kruk S, Janas J, Kabat M, Imiela J, Sliwiński P, Januszewicz A. Relationship between primary aldosteronism and
obstructive sleep apnoea, metabolic abnormalities and cardiac structure in
patients with resistant hypertension. Endokrynol
Pol.
2013;64:363–367.
doi: 10.5603/EP.2013.0019 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
280. Gaddam K, Pimenta E, Thomas SJ, Cofield SS, Oparil S, Harding SM, Calhoun DA. Spironolactone reduces severity of obstructive sleep
apnoea in patients with resistant hypertension: a preliminary
report. J Hum Hypertens.
2010;24:532–537.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2009.96 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
281. Krasińska B, Miazga A, Cofta S, Szczepaniak-Chichel L, Trafas T, Krasiński Z, Pawlaczyk-Gabriel K, Tykarski A. Effect of eplerenone on the severity of obstructive
sleep apnea and arterial stiffness in patients with resistant arterial
hypertension. Pol Arch Med Wewn.
2016;126:330–339.
doi: 10.20452/pamw.3410 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
282. Yang L, Zhang H, Cai M, Zou Y, Jiang X, Song L, Liang E, Bian J, Wu H, Hui R. Effect of spironolactone on patients with resistant
hypertension and obstructive sleep apnea. Clin Exp
Hypertens.
2016;38:464–468.
doi: 10.3109/10641963.2015.1131290 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
283. Friedman O, Bradley TD, Chan CT, Parkes R, Logan AG. Relationship between overnight rostral fluid shift and
obstructive sleep apnea in drug-resistant hypertension.
Hypertension.
2010;56:1077–1082.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.110.154427 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
284. Chiu KL, Ryan CM, Shiota S, Ruttanaumpawan P, Arzt M, Haight JS, Chan CT, Floras JS, Bradley TD. Fluid shift by lower body positive pressure increases
pharyngeal resistance in healthy subjects. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med.
2006;174:1378–1383.
doi: 10.1164/rccm.200607-927OC [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
285. Redolfi S, Arnulf I, Pottier M, Bradley TD, Similowski T. Effects of venous compression of the legs on overnight
rostral fluid shift and obstructive sleep apnea.
Respir Physiol Neurobiol.
2011;175:390–393.
doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2011.01.001 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
286. Kasai T, Bradley TD, Friedman O, Logan AG. Effect of intensified diuretic therapy on overnight
rostral fluid shift and obstructive sleep apnoea in patients with
uncontrolled hypertension. J Hypertens.
2014;32:673–680.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000000047 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
287. Martínez-García MA, Capote F, Campos-Rodríguez F, Lloberes P, Díaz de Atauri MJ, Somoza M, Masa JF, González M, Sacristán L, Barbé F, Durán-Cantolla J, Aizpuru F, Mañas E, Barreiro B, Mosteiro M, Cebrián JJ, de la Peña M, García-Río F, Maimó A, Zapater J, Hernández C, Grau SanMarti N, Montserrat JM; Spanish Sleep Network. Effect of CPAP
on blood pressure in patients with obstructive sleep apnea and resistant
hypertension: the HIPARCO randomized clinical trial.
JAMA.
2013;310:2407–2415.
doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.281250 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
288. McEvoy RD, Antic NA, Heeley E, Luo Y, Ou Q, Zhang X, Mediano O, Chen R, Drager LF, Liu Z, Chen G, Du B, McArdle N, Mukherjee S, Tripathi M, Billot L, Li Q, Lorenzi-Filho G, Barbe F, Redline S, Wang J, Arima H, Neal B, White DP, Grunstein RR, Zhong N, Anderson CS; SAVE Investigators and Coordinators.
CPAP for prevention of cardiovascular events in obstructive
sleep apnea. N Engl J Med.
2016;375:919–931.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1606599 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
289. Funder JW, Carey RM, Mantero F, Murad MH, Reincke M, Shibata H, Stowasser M, Young WF Jr. The management of primary aldosteronism: case detection,
diagnosis, and treatment: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2016;101:1889–1916.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-4061 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
290. Milliez P, Girerd X, Plouin PF, Blacher J, Safar ME, Mourad JJ. Evidence for an increased rate of cardiovascular events
in patients with primary aldosteronism. J Am Coll
Cardiol.
2005;45:1243–1248.
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.01.015 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
291. Savard S, Amar L, Plouin PF, Steichen O. Cardiovascular complications associated with primary
aldosteronism: a controlled cross-sectional study.
Hypertension.
2013;62:331–336.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.01060 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
292. Bernini G, Galetta F, Franzoni F, Bardini M, Taurino C, Bernardini M, Ghiadoni L, Bernini M, Santoro G, Salvetti A. Arterial stiffness, intima-media thickness and carotid
artery fibrosis in patients with primary aldosteronism.
J Hypertens.
2008;26:2399–2405.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32831286fd [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
293. Stehr CB, Mellado R, Ocaranza MP, Carvajal CA, Mosso L, Becerra E, Solis M, García L, Lavandero S, Jalil J, Fardella CE. Increased levels of oxidative stress, subclinical
inflammation, and myocardial fibrosis markers in primary aldosteronism
patients. J Hypertens.
2010;28:2120–2126.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32833d0177 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
294. Gallay BJ, Ahmad S, Xu L, Toivola B, Davidson RC. Screening for primary aldosteronism without
discontinuing hypertensive medications: plasma aldosterone-renin
ratio. Am J Kidney Dis.
2001;37:699–705. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
295. Calhoun DA, Nishizaka MK, Zaman MA, Thakkar RB, Weissmann P. Hyperaldosteronism among black and white subjects with
resistant hypertension. Hypertension.
2002;40:892–896. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
296. Strauch B, Zelinka T, Hampf M, Bernhardt R, Widimsky J Jr. Prevalence of primary hyperaldosteronism in moderate to
severe hypertension in the Central Europe region. J
Hum Hypertens.
2003;17:349–352.
doi: 10.1038/sj.jhh.1001554 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
297. Sang X, Jiang Y, Wang W, Yan L, Zhao J, Peng Y, Gu W, Chen G, Liu W, Ning G. Prevalence of and risk factors for primary aldosteronism
among patients with resistant hypertension in China.
J Hypertens.
2013;31:1465–1471.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e328360ddf6 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
298. Carey RM. Diagnosing and managing primary aldosteronism in
hypertensive patients: a case-based approach. Curr
Cardiol Rep.
2016;18:97. doi:
10.1007/s11886-016-0774-1 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
299. Hoerger TJ, Simpson SA, Yarnoff BO, Pavkov ME, Ríos Burrows N, Saydah SH, Williams DE, Zhuo X. The future burden of CKD in the United States: a
simulation model for the CDC CKD Initiative. Am J
Kidney Dis.
2015;65:403–411.
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.09.023 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
300. Grams ME, Sang Y, Levey AS, Matsushita K, Ballew S, Chang AR, Chow EK, Kasiske BL, Kovesdy CP, Nadkarni GN, Shalev V, Segev DL, Coresh J, Lentine KL, Garg AX; Chronic Kidney Disease Prognosis Consortium.
Kidney-failure risk projection for the living kidney-donor
candidate. N Engl J Med.
2016;374:411–421.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1510491 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
301. Kuznik A, Mardekian J, Tarasenko L. Evaluation of cardiovascular disease burden and
therapeutic goal attainment in US adults with chronic kidney disease: an
analysis of National Health and Nutritional Examination Survey data,
2001–2010. BMC Nephrol
2013;14:132. doi:
10.1186/1471-2369-14-132 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
302. Lash JP, Go AS, Appel LJ, He J, Ojo A, Rahman M, Townsend RR, Xie D, Cifelli D, Cohan J, Fink JC, Fischer MJ, Gadegbeku C, Hamm LL, Kusek JW, Landis JR, Narva A, Robinson N, Teal V, Feldman HI; Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort (CRIC) Study Group.
Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort (CRIC) study: baseline
characteristics and associations with kidney function.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.
2009;4:1302–1311.
doi: 10.2215/CJN.00070109 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
303. Muntner P, Anderson A, Charleston J, Chen Z, Ford V, Makos G, O’Connor A, Perumal K, Rahman M, Steigerwalt S, Teal V, Townsend R, Weir M, Wright JT Jr; Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort (CRIC) Study
Investigators. Hypertension awareness, treatment,
and control in adults with CKD: results from the Chronic Renal Insufficiency
Cohort (CRIC) Study. Am J Kidney Dis.
2010;55:441–451.
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2009.09.014 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
304. Saelen MG, Prøsch LK, Gudmundsdottir H, Dyrbekk D, Helge Hunderi O, Arnesen E, Paulsen D, Skjønsberg H, Os I. Controlling systolic blood pressure is difficult in
patients with diabetic kidney disease exhibiting moderate-to-severe
reductions in renal function. Blood Press.
2005;14:170–176.
doi: 10.1080/08037050510008959 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
305. Hermann SM, Textor SM. Current concepts in the treatment of renovascular
hypertension. Am J Hypertens.
2018;31:139–149. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
306. Anderson GH Jr, Blakeman N, Streeten DH. The effect of age on prevalence of secondary forms of
hypertension in 4429 consecutively referred patients.
J Hypertens.
1994;12:609–615. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
307. Benjamin MM, Fazel P, Filardo G, Choi JW, Stoler RC. Prevalence of and risk factors of renal artery stenosis
in patients with resistant hypertension. Am J
Cardiol.
2014;113:687–690.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2013.10.046 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
308. Textor SC. Progressive hypertension in a patient with
“incidental” renal artery stenosis.
Hypertension.
2002;40:595–600. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
309. Patel SM, Li J, Parikh SA. Renal artery stenosis: optimal therapy and indications
for revascularization. Curr Cardiol Rep.
2015;17:623. doi:
10.1007/s11886-015-0623-7 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
310. Raman G, Adam GP, Halladay CW, Langberg VN, Azodo IA, Balk EM. Comparative effectiveness of management strategies for
renal artery stenosis: an updated systematic review.
Ann Intern Med.
2016;165:635–649.
doi: 10.7326/M16-1053 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
311. Evans KL, Tuttle KR, Folt DA, Dawson T, Haller ST, Brewster PS, He W, Jamerson K, Dworkin LD, Cutlip DE, Murphy TP, D’Agostino RB Sr, Henrich W, Cooper CJ. Use of renin-angiotensin inhibitors in people with renal
artery stenosis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol.
2014;9:1199–1206.
doi: 10.2215/CJN.11611113 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
312. Chrysochou C, Foley RN, Young JF, Khavandi K, Cheung CM, Kalra PA. Dispelling the myth: the use of renin-angiotensin
blockade in atheromatous renovascular disease.
Nephrol Dial Transplant.
2012;27:1403–1409.
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfr496 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
313. Messerli FH, Bangalore S, Makani H, Rimoldi SF, Allemann Y, White CJ, Textor S, Sleight P Flash pulmonary oedema and bilateral renal
artery stenosis: the Pickering syndrome. Eur Heart
J.
2011;32:2231–2235.
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr056 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
314. Ritchie J, Green D, Chrysochou C, Chalmers N, Foley RN, Kalra PA. High-risk clinical presentations in atherosclerotic
renovascular disease: prognosis and response to renal artery
revascularization. Am J Kidney Dis.
2014;63:186–197.
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.07.020 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
315. Murphy TP, Cooper CJ, Pencina KM, D’Agostino R, Massaro J, Cutlip DE, Jamerson K, Matsumoto AH, Henrich W, Shapiro JI, Tuttle KR, Cohen DJ, Steffes M, Gao Q, Metzger DC, Abernethy WB, Textor SC, Briguglio J, Hirsch AT, Tobe S, Dworkin LD. Relationship of albuminuria and renal artery stent
outcomes: results from the CORAL randomized clinical trial (Cardiovascular
Outcomes With Renal Artery Lesions).
Hypertension.
2016;68:1145–1152.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.116.07744 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
316. Weinberg I, Keyes MJ, Giri J, Rogers KR, Olin JW, White CJ, Jaff MR. Blood pressure response to renal artery stenting in 901
patients from five prospective multicenter FDA-approved
trials. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv.
2014;83:603–609.
doi: 10.1002/ccd.25263 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
317. Hackam DG, Duong-Hua ML, Mamdani M, Li P, Tobe SW, Spence JD, Garg AX. Angiotensin inhibition in renovascular disease: a
population-based cohort study. Am Heart J.
2008;156:549–555.
doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2008.05.013 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
318. Parikh SA, Shishehbor MH, Gray BH, White CJ, Jaff MR. SCAI expert consensus statement for renal artery
stenting appropriate use. Catheter Cardiovasc
Interv.
2014;84:1163–1171.
doi: 10.1002/ccd.25559 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
319. Boateng FK, Greco BA. Renal artery stenosis: prevalence of, risk factors for,
and management of in-stent stenosis. Am J Kidney
Dis.
2013;61:147–160.
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2012.07.025 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
320. Martell N, Rodriguez-Cerrillo M, Grobbee DE, López-Eady MD, Fernández-Pinilla C, Avila M, Fernández-Cruz A, Luque M. High prevalence of secondary hypertension and insulin
resistance in patients with refractory hypertension.
Blood Press.
2003;12:149–154. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
321. Schwartz GL. Screening for adrenal-endocrine hypertension: overview
of accuracy and cost-effectiveness. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am.
2011;40:279–294,
vii. doi: 10.1016/j.ecl.2011.02.001 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
322. Eisenhofer G, Goldstein DS, Walther MM, Friberg P, Lenders JW, Keiser HR, Pacak K. Biochemical diagnosis of pheochromocytoma: how to
distinguish true- from false-positive test results.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2003;88:2656–2666.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2002-030005 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
323. Lenders JW, Duh QY, Eisenhofer G, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Grebe SK, Murad MH, Naruse M, Pacak K, Young WF Jr; Endocrine Society. Pheochromocytoma and
paraganglioma: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2014;99:1915–1942.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1498 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
324. Cicala MV, Mantero F. Hypertension in Cushing’s syndrome: from
pathogenesis to treatment.
Neuroendocrinology.
2010;92(suppl
1):44–49. doi:
10.1159/000314315 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
325. Singh Y, Kotwal N, Menon AS. Endocrine hypertension: Cushing’s
syndrome. Indian J Endocrinol Metab.
2011;15(suppl
4):S313–S316. doi:
10.4103/2230-8210.86973 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
326. Martins LC, Conceição FL, Muxfeldt ES, Salles GF. Prevalence and associated factors of subclinical
hypercortisolism in patients with resistant hypertension.
J Hypertens.
2012;30:967–973.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283521484 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
327. Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, Newell-Price J, Savage MO, Stewart PM, Montori VM. The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome: an Endocrine
Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab.
2008;93:1526–1540.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0125 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
328. Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, Murad MH, Newell-Price J, Savage MO, Tabarin A; Endocrine Society. Treatment of
Cushing’s syndrome: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2015;100:2807–2831.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-1818 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
329. Choudhary P, Canniffe C, Jackson DJ, Tanous D, Walsh K, Celermajer DS. Late outcomes in adults with coarctation of the
aorta. Heart.
2015;101:1190–1195.
doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2014-307035 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
330. Canniffe C, Ou P, Walsh K, Bonnet D, Celermajer D. Hypertension after repair of aortic coarctation: a
systematic review. Int J Cardiol.
2013;167:2456–2461.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.09.084 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
331. Vriend JW, Mulder BJ. Late complications in patients after repair of aortic
coarctation: implications for management. Int J
Cardiol.
2005;101:399–406.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2004.03.056 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
332. Luijendijk P, Bouma BJ, Vriend JW, Vliegen HW, Groenink M, Mulder BJ. Usefulness of exercise-induced hypertension as predictor
of chronic hypertension in adults after operative therapy for aortic isthmic
coarctation in childhood. Am J Cardiol.
2011;108:435–439.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2011.03.063 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
333. Moltzer E, Mattace Raso FU, Karamermer Y, Boersma E, Webb GD, Simoons ML, Danser AH, van den Meiracker AH, Roos-Hesselink JW. Comparison of candesartan versus metoprolol for
treatment of systemic hypertension after repaired aortic
coarctation. Am J Cardiol.
2010;105:217–222.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2009.08.674 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
334. White WB, Turner JR, Sica DA, Bisognano JD, Calhoun DA, Townsend RR, Aronow HD, Bhatt DL, Bakris GL. Detection, evaluation and treatment of severe and
resistant hypertension: proceedings from an American Society of Hypertension
Interactive Forum held in Bethesda, MA, U.S.S., October 10th
2013. J Am Soc Hypertens.
2014;8:743–757. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
335. Myers MG, Kaczorowski J, Paterson JM, Dolovich L, Tu K. Thresholds for diagnosing hypertension based on
automated office blood pressure measurements and cardiovascular
risk. Hypertension.
2015;66:489–495.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.05782 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
336. Armstrong D, Matangi M, Brouillard D, Myers MG. Automated office blood pressure: being alone and not
location is what matters most. Blood Press
Monit.
2015;20:204–208.
doi: 10.1097/MBP.0000000000000133 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
337. SPRINT Research Group, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, Whelton PK, Snyder JK, Sink KM, Rocco MV, Reboussin DM, Rahman M, Oparil S, Lewis CE, Kimmel PL, Johnson KC, Goff DC Jr, Fine LJ, Cutler JA, Cushman WC, Cheung AK, Ambrosius WT
A randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood pressure
control. N Engl J Med.
2015;373:2103–2116.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1511939 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
338. Myers MG, Campbell NR. Unfounded concerns about the use of automated office
blood pressure measurement in SPRINT. J Am Soc
Hypertens.
2016;10:903–905.
doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2016.10.003 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
339. Pickering TG, White WB; American Society of Hypertension Writing Group.
When and how to use self (home) and ambulatory blood pressure
monitoring. J Am Soc Hypertens.
2008;2:119–124.
doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2008.04.002 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
340. Verdecchia P, Angeli F, Cavallini C. Ambulatory blood pressure for cardiovascular risk
stratification. Circulation.
2007;115:2091–2093.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.697086 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
341. National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence. Clinical guideline 127: hypertension:
clinical management of primary hypertension in adults.
August
2011. 
http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG127/Guidance .
Accessed December 11,
2016. 
342. Piper MA, Evans CV, Burda BU, Margolis KL, O’Connor E, Whitlock EP. Diagnostic and predictive accuracy of blood pressure
screening methods with consideration of rescreening intervals: a systematic
review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Ann Intern Med.
2015;162:192–204.
doi: 10.7326/M14-1539 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
343. White WB. Ambulatory blood-pressure monitoring in clinical
practice. N Engl J Med.
2003;348:2377–2378.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMp030057 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
344. Nishizaka MK, Pratt-Ubunama M, Zaman MA, Cofield S, Calhoun DA. Validity of plasma aldosterone-to-renin activity ratio
in African American and white subjects with resistant
hypertension. Am J Hypertens.
2005;18:805–812.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjhyper.2005.01.002 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
345. Schwartz GL, Turner ST. Screening for primary aldosteronism in essential
hypertension: diagnostic accuracy of the ratio of plasma aldosterone
concentration to plasma renin activity. Clin
Chem.
2005;51:386–394.
doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2004.041780 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
346. Sawka AM, Jaeschke R, Singh RJ, Young WF Jr. A comparison of biochemical tests for pheochromocytoma:
measurement of fractionated plasma metanephrines compared with the
combination of 24-hour urinary metanephrines and
catecholamines. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2003;88:553–558.
doi: 10.1210/jc.2002-021251 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
347. Semlitsch T, Jeitler K, Berghold A, Horvath K, Posch N, Poggenburg S, Siebenhofer A. Long-term effects of weight-reducing diets in people
with hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev.
2016;3:CD008274. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD008274.pub3 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
348. Siebenhofer A, Jeitler K, Horvath K, Berghold A, Posch N, Meschik J, Semlitsch T. Long-term effects of weight-reducing drugs in people
with hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev.
2016:3:CD007654. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
349. Mente A, O’Donnell M, Rangarajan S, Dagenais G, Lear S, McQueen M, Diaz R, Avezum A, Lopez-Jaramillo P, Lanas F, Li W, Lu Y, Yi S, Rensheng L, Iqbal R, Mony P, Yusuf R, Yusoff K, Szuba A, Oguz A, Rosengren A, Bahonar A, Yusufali A, Schutte AE, Chifamba J, Mann JF, Anand SS, Teo K, Yusuf S; PURE, EPIDREAM and ONTARGET/ TRANSCEND Investigators.
Associations of urinary sodium excretion with cardiovascular
events in individuals with and without hypertension: a pooled analysis of
data from four studies. Lancet.
2016;388:465–475.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30467-6 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
350. McMahon EJ, Campbell KL, Bauer JD, Mudge DW. Altered dietary salt intake for people with chronic
kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2015;18:CD010070. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
351. Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, de Jesus JM, Houston Miller N, Hubbard VS, Lee IM, Lichtenstein AH, Loria CM, Millen BE, Nonas CA, Sacks FM, Smith SC Jr, Svetkey LP, Wadden TA, Yanovski SZ. 2013 AHA/ACC guideline on lifestyle management to reduce
cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines
[published corrections appear in Circulation. 2014;129(suppl
2):S100-S101 and Circulation. 2015;131:e326].
Circulation.
2014;129(suppl
2):S76–S99. doi:
10.1161/01.cir.0000437740.48606.d1 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
352. Pescatello LS, MacDonald HV, Lamberti L, Johnson BT. Exercise for hypertension: a prescription update
integrating existing recommendations with emerging research.
Curr Hypertens Rep.
2015;17:87.
doi: 10.1007/s11900 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
353. Cornelissen VA, Smart NA. Exercise training for blood pressure: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc.
2013;2:e004473. doi:
10.1161/JAHA.112.004473 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
354. Guimaräes GV, Cruz LG, Tavares AC, Dorea EL, Fernandes-Silva MM, Bocchi EA. Effects of short-term heated water-based exercise
training on systemic blood pressure in patients with resistant hypertension:
a pilot study. Blood Press Monit.
2013;18:342–345.
doi: 10.1097/MBP.0000000000000000 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
355. Dempsey PC, Sacre JW, Larsen RN, Straznicky NE, Sethi P, Cohen ND, Cerin E, Lambert GW, Owen N, Kingwell BA, Dunstan DW. Interrupting prolonged sitting with brief bouts of light
walking or simple resistance activities reduces resting blood pressure and
plasma noradrenaline in type 2 diabetes. J
Hypertens.
2016;34:2376–2382.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000001101 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
356. Dempsey PC, Larsen RN, Sethi P, Sacre JW, Straznicky NE, Cohen ND, Cerin E, Lambert GW, Owen N, Kingwell BA, Dunstan DW. Benefits for type 2 diabetes of interrupting prolonged
sitting with brief bouts of light walking or simple resistance
activities. Diabetes Care.
2016;39:964–972.
doi: 10.2337/dc15-2336 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
357. Dunstan DW, Kingwell BA, Larsen R, Healy GN, Cerin E, Hamilton MT, Shaw JE, Bertovic DA, Zimmet PZ, Salmon J, Owen N. Breaking up prolonged sitting reduces postprandial
glucose and insulin responses. Diabetes
Care.
2012;35:976–983.
doi: 10.2337/dc11-1931 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
358. Larsen RN, Kingwell BA, Sethi P, Cerin E, Owen N, Dunstan DW. Breaking up prolonged sitting reduces resting blood
pressure in over-weight/obese adults. Nutr Metab
Cardiovasc Dis.
2014;24:976–982.
doi: 10.1016/j.numecd.2014.04.011 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
359. Pescatello LS, Murphy D, Costanzo D. Low-intensity physical activity benefits blood lipids
and lipoproteins in older adults living at home. Age
Ageing.
2000;29:433–439. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
360. Aune D, Norat T, Leitzmann M, Tonstad S, Vatten LJ. Physical activity and the risk of type 2 diabetes: a
systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis.
Eur J Epidemiol.
2015;30:529–542.
doi: 10.1007/s10654-015-0056-z [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
361. Brook RD, Appel LJ, Rubenfire M, Ogedegbe G, Bisognano JD, Elliott WJ, Fuchs FD, Hughes JW, Lackland DT, Staffileno BA, Townsend RR, Rajagopalan S; on behalf of the American Heart Association
Professional Education Committee of the Council for High Blood Pressure
Research, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke
Nursing, Council on Epidemiology and Prevention,
and Council on Nutrition, Physical
Activity. Beyond medications and diet: alternative
approaches to lowering blood pressure: a scientific statement from the
American Heart Association. Hypertension.
2013;61:1360–1383.
doi: 10.1161/HYP.0b013e318293645f [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
362. Inder JD, Carlson DJ, Dieberg G, McFarlane JR, Hess NC, Smart NA. Isometric exercise training for blood pressure
management: a systematic review and meta-analysis to optimize
benefit. Hypertens Res.
2016;39:88–94.
doi: 10.1038/hr.2015.111 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
363. Blumenthal JA, Sherwood A, Smith PJ, Mabe S, Watkins L, Lin PH, Craighead LW, Babyak M, Tyson C, Young K, Ashworth M, Kraus W, Liao L, Hinderliter A. Lifestyle modification for resistant hypertension: the
TRIUMPH randomized clinical trial. Am Heart
J.
2015;170:986–994.e5.
doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2015.08.006 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
364. Agarwal R, Sinha AD, Pappas MK, Ammous F. Chlorthalidone for poorly controlled hypertension in
chronic kidney disease: an interventional pilot study.
Am J Nephrol.
2014;39:171–182.
doi: 10.1159/000358603 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
365. Goodfriend TL, Ball DL, Oelkers W, Bahr V. Torsemide inhibits aldosterone secretion in
vitro. Life Sci.
1998;63:PL45–PL50. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
366. Garg JP, Elliott WJ, Folker A, Izhar M, Black HR; RUSH University Hypertension Service.
Resistant hypertension revisited: a comparison of two
university-based cohorts. Am J Hypertens.
2005;18(pt
1):619–626. doi:
10.1016/j.amjhyper.2004.11.021 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
367. Kjeldsen SE, Julius S, Dahlöf B, Weber MA. Physician (investigator) inertia in apparent
treatment-resistant hypertension: insights from large randomized clinical
trials: Lennart Hansson Memorial Lecture. Blood
Press.
2015;24:1–6.
doi: 10.3109/08037051.2014.946787 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
368. Roush GC, Sica DA. Diuretics for hypertension: a review and
update. Am J Hypertens.
2016;29:1130–1137.
doi: 10.1093/ajh/hpw030 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
369. DiNicolantonio JJ, Bhutani J, Lavie CJ, O’Keefe JH. Evidence-based diuretics: focus on chlorthalidone and
indapamide. Future Cardiol.
2015;11:203–217.
doi: 10.2217/fca.14.83 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
370. Ernst ME, Carter BL, Goerdt CJ, Steffensmeier JJ, Phillips BB, Zimmerman MB, Bergus GR. Comparative antihypertensive effects of
hydrochlorothiazide and chlorthalidone on ambulatory and office blood
pressure. Hypertension.
2006;47:352–358.
doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000203309.07140.d3 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
371. Khosla N, Chua DY, Elliott WJ, Bakris GL. Are chlorthalidone and hydrochlorothiazide equivalent
blood-pressure-lowering medications?
J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich).
2005;7:354–356. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
372. Bakris GL, Sica D, White WB, Cushman WC, Weber MA, Handley A, Song E, Kupfer S. Antihypertensive efficacy of hydrochlorothiazide vs
chlorthalidone combined with azilsartan medoxomil.
Am J Med.
2012;125:1229.e1–1229.e10.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.05.023 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
373. Williams B, MacDonald TM, Morant S, Webb DJ, Sever P, McInnes G, Ford I, Cruickshank JK, Caulfield MJ, Salsbury J, Mackenzie I, Padmanabhan S, Brown MJ; British Hypertension Society’s PATHWAY Studies
Group. Spironolactone versus placebo, bisoprolol,
and doxazosin to determine the optimal treatment for drug-resistant
hypertension (PATHWAY-2): a randomised, double-blind, crossover
trial. Lancet.
2015;386:2059–2068.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00257-3 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
374. Zhao D, Liu H, Dong P, Zhao J. A meta-analysis of add-on use of spironolactone in
patients with resistant hypertension. Int J
Cardiol.
2017;233:113–117.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.12.158 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
375. Wang C, Xiong B, Huang J. Efficacy and safety of spironolactone in patients with
resistant hypertension: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled
trials. Heart Lung Circ.
2016;25:1021–1030.
doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2016.02.016 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
376. Rosa J, Widimský P, Waldauf P, Lambert L, Zelinka T, Táborský M, Branny M, Toušek P, Petrak O, Čurila K, Bednář F, Holaj R, Štrauch B, Václavík J, Nykl I, Krátká Z, Kocianova E, Jiravský O, Rappová G, Indra T, Widimský J Jr. Role of adding spironolactone and renal denervation in
true resistant hypertension: one-year outcomes of randomized PRAGUE-15
study. Hypertension.
2016;67:397–403.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.06526 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
377. de Souza F, Muxfeldt E, Fiszman R, Salles G. Efficacy of spironolactone therapy in patients with true
resistant hypertension. Hypertension.
2010;55:147–152.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.140988 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
378. Lazich I, Bakris GL . Prediction and management of hyperkalemia across the
spectrum of chronic kidney disease. Semin
Nephrol.
2014;34:333–339.
doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2014.04.008 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
379. Egan BM, Li J. Role of aldosterone blockade in resistant
hypertension. Semin Nephrol.
2014;34:273–284.
doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2014.04.004 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
380. Parthasarathy HK, Ménard J, White WB, Young WF Jr, Williams GH, Williams B, Ruilope LM, McInnes GT, Connell JM, MacDonald TM. A double-blind, randomized study comparing the
antihypertensive effect of eplerenone and spironolactone in patients with
hypertension and evidence of primary aldosteronism.
J Hypertens.
2011;29:980–990.
doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283455ca5 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
381. White WB, Weber MA, Sica D, Bakris GL, Perez A, Cao C, Kupfer S. Effects of the angiotensin receptor blocker azilsartan
medoxomil versus olmesartan and valsartan on ambulatory and clinic blood
pressure in patients with stages 1 and 2 hypertension.
Hypertension.
2011;57:413–420.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.110.163402 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
382. Bakris GL, Sica D, Weber M, White WB, Roberts A, Perez A, Cao C, Kupfer S. The comparative effects of azilsartan medoxomil and
olmesartan on ambulatory and clinic blood pressure.
J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich).
2011;13:81–88.
doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7176.2010.00425.x [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
383. Bönner G, Bakris GL, Sica D, Weber MA, White WB, Perez A, Cao C, Handley A, Kupfer S. Antihypertensive efficacy of the angiotensin receptor
blocker azilsartan medoxomil compared with the angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor ramipril. J Hum Hypertens.
2013;27:479–486.
doi: 10.1038/jhh.2013.6 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
384. Byyny RL, Shannon T, Schwartz LA, Rotolo C, Jungerwirth S. Efficacy and safety of nifedipine coat-core versus
amlodipine in patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension:
comparison of 24-hour mean ambulatory diastolic blood
pressure. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther.
1997;2:77–84.
doi: 10.1177/107424849700200201 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
385. Kuga K, Xu DZ, Ohtsuka M, Aonuma K, Lau AH, Watanabe Y, Ohtsuka K. Comparison of daily anti-hypertensive effects of
amlodipine and nifedipine coat-core using ambulatory blood pressure
monitoring: utility of “hypobaric curve” and “hypobaric
area.” Clin Exp Hypertens.
2011;33:231–239.
doi: 10.3109/10641963.2011.583968 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
386. Tanaka T, Miura S, Tanaka M, Uehara Y, Hirano T, Saku K. Efficacies of controlling morning blood pressure and
protecting the kidneys by treatment with valsartan and nifedipine CR or
valsartan and amlodipine (MONICA study). J Clin Med
Res.
2013;5:432–440.
doi: 10.4021/jocmr1563w [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
387. Sun Y, Yu X, Liu J, Zhou N, Chen L, Zhao Y, Li X, Wang J, Cui L. Effect of bedtime administration of blood-pressure
lowering agents on ambulatory blood pressure monitoring results: a
meta-analysis. Cardiol J.
2016;23:473–481.
doi: 10.5603/CJ.a2016.0027 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
388. Szauder I, Csajági E, Major Z, Pavlik G, Ujhelyi G. Treatment of hypertension: favourable effect of the
twice-daily compared to the once-daily (evening) administration of
perindopril and losartan. Kidney Blood Press
Res.
2015;40:374–385.
doi: 10.1159/000368513 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
389. Julius S, Palatini P, Kjeldsen SE, Zanchetti A, Weber MA, McInnes GT, Brunner HR, Mancia G, Schork MA, Hua TA, Holzhauer B, Zappe D, Majahalme S, Jamerson K, Koylan N. Usefulness of heart rate to predict cardiac events in
treated patients with high-risk systemic hypertension.
Am J Cardiol.
2012;109:685–692.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2011.10.025 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
390. Okin PM, Kjeldsen SE, Julius S, Hille DA, Dahlof B, Devereux RB. Effect of changing heart rate during treatment of
hypertension on incidence of heart failure. Am J
Cardiol.
2012;109:699–704.
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2011.10.026 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
391. Taylor AL, Ziesche S, Yancy C, Carson P, D’Agostino R Jr, Ferdinand K, Taylor M, Adams K, Sabolinski M, Worcel M, Cohn JN; African- American Heart Failure Trial Investigators.
Combination of isosorbide dinitrate and hydralazine in blacks with heart
failure. N Engl J Med.
2004;351:2049–2057.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa042934 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
392. Cohn JN, Johnson G, Ziesche S, Cobb F, Francis G, Tristani F, Smith R, Dunkman WB, Loeb H, Wong M. A comparison of enalapril with hydralazine-isosorbide
dinitrate in the treatment of chronic congestive heart
failure. N Engl J Med.
1991;325:303–310.
doi: 10.1056/NEJM199108013250502 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
393. Dulce RA, Yiginer O, Gonzalez DR, Goss G, Feng N, Zheng M, Hare JM. Hydralazine and organic nitrates restore impaired
excitation-contraction coupling by reducing calcium leak associated with
nitroso-redox imbalance. J Biol Chem.
2013;288:6522–6533.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.412130 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
394. Gogia H, Mehra A, Parikh S, Raman M,Ajit-Uppal J, Johnson JV, Elkayam U. Prevention of tolerance to hemodynamic effects of
nitrates with concomitant use of hydralazine in patients with chronic heart
failure. J Am Coll Cardiol.
1995;26:1575–1580.
doi: 10.1016/0735-1097(95)00368-1 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
395. Sica DA. Minoxidil:an underused vasodilator for resistant or
severe hypertension. J Clin Hypertens.
2004;6:283–287. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
396. Professional Testing
Corporation. American Hypertension Specialist Certification
Program (AHSCP). http://www.ptcny.com/clients/ahscp .
Accessed April 5, 2018. 
397. Elliott WJ, Egen B, Giles TD, Bakris GL, White WB, Sansone TM. Rationale for establishing a mechanism to increase
reimbursement to hypertension specialists. J Clin
Hypertens.
2013;16:397–403. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
398. Parati G, Esler M. The human sympathetic nervous system: its relevance in
hypertension and heart failure. Eur Heart
J.
2012;33:1058–1066.
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs041 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
399. Grassi G, Bertoli S, Seravalle G. Sympathetic nervous system: role in hypertension and in
chronic kidney disease. Curr Opin Nephrol
Hypertens.
2012;21:46–51.
doi: 10.1097/MNH.0b013e32834db45d [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
400. Evelyn KA, Alexander F, Cooper SR. Effect of sympathectomy on blood pressure in
hypertension; a review of 13 years’ experience of the Massachusetts
General Hospital. J Am Med Assoc.
1949;140:592–602. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
401. Worthley SG, Tsioufis CP, Worthley MI, Sinhal A, Chew DP, Meredith IT, Malaiapan Y, Papademetriou V. Safety and efficacy of a multielectrode renal
sympathetic denervation system in resistant hypertension: the EnligHTN I
trial. Eur Heart J.
2013;34:2132–2140.
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht197 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
402. Esler MD, Krum H, Sobotka PA, Schlaich MP, Schmeider RE, Bohm M. Renal sympathetic denervation in patients with treatment
resistant hypertension (the Symplicity HTN-2 Trial): a randomised controlled
trial. Lancet.
2010;376:1903–1909. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
403. Mahfoud F, Ukena C, Schmieder RE, Cremers B, Rump LC, Vonend O, Weil J, Schmidt M, Hoppe UC, Zeller T, Bauer A, Ott C, Blessing E, Sobotka PA, Krum H, Schlaich M, Esler M, Bohm M. Ambulatory blood pressure changes after renal
sympathetic denervation in patients with resistant
hypertension. Circulation.
2013;128:132–140.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.000949 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
404. Bhatt DL, Kandzari DE, O’Neill WW, D’Agostino R, Flack JM, Katzen BT, Leon MB, Liu M, Mauri L, Negoita M, Cohen SA, Oparil S, Rocha-Singh K, Townsend RR, Bakris GL; SYMPLICITY HTN-3 Investigators. A
controlled trial of renal denervation for resistant
hypertension. N Engl J Med.
2014;370:1393–1401.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1402670 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
405. White WB, Galis ZS, Henegar J, Kandzari DE, Victor R, Sica D, Townsend RR, Turner JR, Virmani R, Mauri L. Renal denervation therapy for hypertension: pathways for
moving development forward. J Am Soc
Hypertens.
2015;9:341–350.
doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2015.02.012 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
406. Azizi M, Sapoval M, Gosse P, Monge M, Bobrie G, Delsart P, Midulla M, Mounier-Véhier C, Courand PY, Lantelme P, Denolle T, Dourmap-Collas C, Trillaud H, Pereira H, Plouin PF, Chatellier G; Renal Denervation for Hypertension (DENERHTN)
investigators. Optimum and stepped care standardised
antihypertensive treatment with or without renal denervation for resistant
hypertension (DENERHTN): a multicentre, open-label, randomised controlled
trial. Lancet.
2015;385:1957–1965.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61942-5 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
407. Townsend RR, Mahfoud F, Kandzari DE, Kario K, Pocock S, Weber MA, Ewen S, Tsioufis K, Tousoulis D, Sharp ASP, Watkinson AF, Schmieder RE, Schmid A, Choi JW, East C, Walton A, Hopper I, Cohen DL, Wilensky R, Lee DP, Ma A, Devireddy CM, Lea JP, Lurz PC, Fengler K, Davies J, Chapman N, Cohen SA, DeBruin V, Fahy M, Jones DE, Rothman M, Bohm M; SPYRAL HTN-OFF MED Trial Investigators.
Catheter-based renal denervation in patients with
uncontrolled hypertension in the absence of antihypertensive medications
(SPYRAL HTN-OFF MED): a randomised, sham-controlled, proof-of-concept
trial. Lancet.
2017;390:2160–2170.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32281-X [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
408. Bisognano JD, Kaufman CL, Bach DS, Lovett EG, de Leeuw P; DEBuT-HT and Rheos Feasibility Trial Investigators.
Improved cardiac structure and function with chronic
treatment using an implantable device in resistant hypertension: results
from European and United States trials of the Rheos system.
J Am Coll Cardiol.
2011;57:1787–1788.
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.11.048 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
409. Bakris GL, Nadim MK, Haller H, Lovett EG, Schafer JE, Bisognano JD. Baroreflex activation therapy provides durable benefit
in patients with resistant hypertension: results of long-term follow-up in
the Rheos Pivotal Trial. J Am Soc
Hypertens.
2012;6:152–158.
doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2012.01.003 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
410. Bisognano JD, Bakris G, Nadim MK, Sanchez L, Kroon AA, Schafer J, de Leeuw PW, Sica DA. Baroreflex activation therapy lowers blood pressure in
patients with resistant hypertension: results from the doubleblind,
randomized, placebo-controlled Rheos pivotal trial.
J Am Coll Cardiol.
2011;58:765–773.
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.06.008 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
411. ClinicalTrials.gov.
Controlling and Lowering Blood Pressure With The MOBIUSHD™
(CALM-FIM_EUR). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01911897?term=CALM+FIM+US&rank=1 .
Accessed April 5, 2018. 
412. ClinicalTrials.gov.
Controlling and Lowering Blood Pressure With The MOBIUSHD™
(CALM-FIM_US). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01831895?term=CALM+FIM+US&rank=2 .
Accessed April 5, 2018. 
413. Spiering W, Williams B, Van der Heyden J, van Kleef M, Lo R, Versmissen J, Moelker A, Kroon A, Reuter H, Ansel G, Stone GW, Bates M; CALM-FIM_EUR investigators.
Endovascular baroreflex amplification for resistant
hypertension: a safety and proof-of-principle clinical
study. Lancet.
2017;390:2655–2661.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32337-1 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
414. Lobo MD, Sobotka PA, Stanton A, Cockcroft JR, Sulke N, Dolan E, van der Giet M, Hoyer J, Furniss SS, Foran JP, Witkowski A, Januszewicz A, Schoors D, Tsioufis K, Rensing BJ, Scott B, Ng GA, Ott C, Schmieder RE; ROX CONTROL HTN Investigators. Central
arteriovenous anastomosis for the treatment of patients with uncontrolled
hypertension (the ROX CONTROL HTN study): a randomised controlled
trial. Lancet.
2015;385:1634–1641.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)62053-5 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
415. Mabin T, Sapoval M, Cabane V, Stemmett J, Iyer M. First experience with endovascular ultrasound renal
denervation for the treatment of resistant hypertension.
EuroIntervention.
2012;8:57–61.
doi: 10.4244/EIJV8I1A10 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
416. Li P, Tjen-A-Looi SC, Guo ZL, Longhurst JC. An arcuate-ventrolateral periaqueductal gray reciprocal
circuit participates in electroacupuncture cardiovascular
inhibition. Auton Neurosci.
2010;158:13–23.
doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2010.05.006 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
417. Elijovich F, Weinberger MH, Anderson CA, Appel LJ, Bursztyn M, Cook NR, Dart RA, Newton-Cheh CH, Sacks FM, Laffer CL; on behalf of the American Heart Association Professional and
Public Education Committee of the Council on Hypertension; Council on
Functional Genomics and Translational Biology; and Stroke Council.
Salt sensitivity of blood pressure: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association.
Hypertension.
2016;68:e7–e46.
doi: 10.1161/HYP.0000000000000047 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Associated Data 
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. 
Supplementary Materials 
Supp 
NIHMS1016897-supplement-Supp.pdf (253.3KB, pdf) 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (1.2 MB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
