Updating clinical guidelines with limited evidence: case study of ASH/ISTH pediatric VTE treatment guidelines - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Blood Adv 
. 2025 Aug 11;9(20):5347–5349. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2025017398 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Updating clinical guidelines with limited evidence: case study of ASH/ISTH pediatric VTE treatment guidelines ∗ 
Ali Choaib 
Ali Choaib 
1 Department of Internal Medicine, Evidence-Based Practice and Impact Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 
Find articles by Ali Choaib 
1 , Aseel AlKhader 
Aseel AlKhader 
1 Department of Internal Medicine, Evidence-Based Practice and Impact Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 
Find articles by Aseel AlKhader 
1 , Muayad Azzam 
Muayad Azzam 
1 Department of Internal Medicine, Evidence-Based Practice and Impact Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 
Find articles by Muayad Azzam 
1 , Hassan Kawtharany 
Hassan Kawtharany 
1 Department of Internal Medicine, Evidence-Based Practice and Impact Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 
Find articles by Hassan Kawtharany 
1 , Marisol Betensky 
Marisol Betensky 
2 Division of Haematology, Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
3 Cancer and Blood Disorders Institute, Johns Hopkins All Children’s Hospital, St. Petersburg, FL 
Find articles by Marisol Betensky 
2, 3 , Leslie Raffini 
Leslie Raffini 
4 Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
Find articles by Leslie Raffini 
4 , Rachel Bercovitz 
Rachel Bercovitz 
5 Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL 
Find articles by Rachel Bercovitz 
5 , Sara K Vesely 
Sara K Vesely 
6 Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences, Hudson College of Public Health, Oklahoma City, OK 
Find articles by Sara K Vesely 
6 , Paul Monagle 
Paul Monagle 
7 Department of Clinical Haematology, Royal Children’s Hospital, Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne and Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
8 Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randwick, Australia 
Find articles by Paul Monagle 
7, 8 , Reem A Mustafa 
Reem A Mustafa 
1 Department of Internal Medicine, Evidence-Based Practice and Impact Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 
9 Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 
Find articles by Reem A Mustafa 
1, 9, ∗ 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 Department of Internal Medicine, Evidence-Based Practice and Impact Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 
2 Division of Haematology, Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
3 Cancer and Blood Disorders Institute, Johns Hopkins All Children’s Hospital, St. Petersburg, FL 
4 Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
5 Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL 
6 Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences, Hudson College of Public Health, Oklahoma City, OK 
7 Department of Clinical Haematology, Royal Children’s Hospital, Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne and Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
8 Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randwick, Australia 
9 Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 
∗ 
Correspondence: Reem A. Mustafa, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd MS3002, Kansas City, KS 66160; rmustafa@kumc.edu 
Received 2025 Jun 9; Accepted 2025 Jul 6; Collection date 2025 Oct 28. 
© 2025 American Society of Hematology. Published by Elsevier Inc. Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other rights reserved. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC12597629  PMID: 40779576 
TO THE EDITOR: 
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) poses a significant health risk in both adult and pediatric populations. 1 The incidence of VTE in children has been steadily increasing but remains lower than that of adults. 2 This increase in pediatric VTE cases amplifies the need for evidence-based guidelines to inform optimal management strategies. 
Clinical practice guidelines play a pivotal role in translating the latest scientific evidence into actionable recommendations for clinicians. 3 The development process of evidence-based guidelines for uncommon and rare diseases is particularly challenging due to the relative scarcity of published research. This limitation often necessitates extrapolating data from indirect evidence, which may not accurately reflect the unique pathophysiology and treatment responses observed in the specific population. Nonetheless, guidelines in such fields provide evidence-based recommendations combined with expert consensus to guide clinical decision-making and allows for the identification of research gaps. 
The American Society of Hematology (ASH) published its first set of comprehensive guidelines for pediatric VTE treatment in 2018. During the development of the 2018 guidelines, the panel acknowledged the limited pediatric data and significant reliance on adult data, calling for more research focused specifically on pediatric populations. 4 Multiple studies addressing these gaps were published after the release of the guideline. Recognizing this, ASH/International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH) decided to conduct an update for the pediatric VTE-treatment guidelines in 2024. 5 
The aim of this case study was to describe our experience while updating clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of VTE in pediatric patients, a field with scarce evidence. This is achieved by describing the changes in data informing the ASH recommendations between the 2018 and 2024 versions, focusing on the role of conducting guidelines for rare diseases with limited published literature. 
In this study, we evaluated the changes in evidence between the 2018 ASH and 2024 ASH/ISTH guidelines for treatment of pediatric VTE. Both 2018 and 2024 involved similar methods for evidence synthesis and recommendation grading, such as the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation) approach. 4 We performed a comparative analysis for all prioritized outcomes in terms of the types of studies (eg, randomized controlled trials or observational studies), the number of studies and patients involved, and whether the data originated from adult or pediatric populations We additionally compared the recommendations that were updated noting any changes in direction, strength, or the certainty of evidence assigned. Finally, we identified the recommendations that transitioned from relying on adult comparative data in 2018 to depending solely on pediatric comparative data in 2024. All comparisons were conducted by 2 members of the evidence team for the 2024 iteration, who were involved in all steps of guideline development. We used count and percentages to describe the changes in outcomes and recommendations. 
Nine panel members were members of both the original 2018 guideline panel and the 2024 iteration including the clinical co-chair. In the 2018 iteration 26 recommendations were made, of which 16 were selected to be addressed in the update. From the 16 recommendations, 2 changed in strength (from strong to conditional recommendation), 1 changed in direction (from conditional for the comparison to conditional for the intervention), and 1 changed in certainty of evidence (from very low to low certainty). Details on the changes in recommendations are described in Table 1 . 
Table 1. 
The changes in recommendations between the updated (2024) and original (2018) guideline 
Changes in recommendations 
Number of recommendations (N = 16), n (%) 
Details 
Change in strength 
2 (12.5) 
From strong to conditional for the intervention 
Change in direction 
1 (6.3) 
From conditional for the comparison to conditional for the intervention 
Change in evidence certainty (strength without direction) 
1 (6.3) 
From very low to low certainty of the evidence 
Open in a new tab 
Regarding changes in evidence, 45 outcomes out of 101 (44.5%) relied on higher certainty and more direct evidence. Thirty-two (31.6%) outcomes in 8 recommendations that relied on non-comparative data in the original guideline, relied on comparative data in the update. Four (3.9%) outcomes in three recommendations with no data in the original guidelines now relied on comparative data. Five (4.9%) outcomes in 2 recommendations that relied on adult comparative data in the original guidelines now relied on pediatric comparative data. Lastly, 4 (3.9%) outcomes in one recommendation changed from non-comparative to randomized control trials. Table 2 describes the changes in outcomes. Of the 16 recommendations that were updated, only 2 of 16 recommendations had no changes in the level of certainty of the evidence or directness of the evidence. On average, each recommendation relied on 2.1 additional comparative studies with a mean of 94.5 additional pediatric patients compared to the original 2018 guideline. 
Table 2. 
The changes in evidence per recommendation and per outcome between the updated (2024) and original (2018) guideline 
Changes in evidence 
Number of recommendations (N = 16), n (%) 
Number of outcomes (N = 101), n (%) 
Noncomparative study to NRSI 
8 (50) 
32 (31.6) 
No data to NRSI 
3 (18.8) 
4 (3.9) 
Adult NRSI to pediatric NRSI 
2 (12.5) 
5 (4.9) 
Noncomparative study to RCT 
1 (6.3) 
4 (3.9) 
Open in a new tab 
NRSI, nonrandomized studies of interventions; RCT, randomized controlled trials. 
Of note, one significant change was the consideration of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) as therapeutic options in pediatric populations for all recommendations. In the 2018 guidelines DOACs were considered out of scope since DOAC use outside of trials could not be recommended due to lack of published pediatric specific data. In addition, in the 2024 guidelines, 2 specific recommendations related to DOAC use were included, both of which were informed by major trials that evaluated DOACs vs standard of care in VTE treatment in pediatric populations. 6 , 7 , 8 
Overall, our results showed advancement in the evidence that informed the updated guideline iteration with an increase in the number of pediatric specific comparative studies. These studies were reported after the publication of the 2018 guideline. Additionally, although data were not formally analyzed, numerous studies included in the updated version were conducted by panel members of the 2018 guidelines. The findings from this analysis underscore the importance of continued research efforts to strengthen the evidence base for pediatric VTE management, driven by research recommendations originating from the guideline effort. 
Interestingly, 2 recommendations changed from strong recommendations for the intervention to conditional recommendations for the intervention. This change occurred because of these recommendations being previously driven by adult data; therefore, when primarily pediatric data was utilized certain group/conditions that may not benefit from the intervention were identified leading to this change. 
This case study had a limited scope, focusing exclusively on 1 (ASH) published guidelines. However, we believe it is applicable for all fields of guideline research and appraisal. Examining recommendations from other clinical practice guidelines could provide a more comprehensive perspective on the evolution of evidence. 
The 2024 ASH/ISTH guideline update for pediatric VTE treatment demonstrated a significant shift toward incorporating more pediatric-specific data. Although a limited number of recommendations changed, this progress highlighted that even in fields with scarce evidence, updates are critical to maintain clinical utility. However, persistent research gaps remain, underscoring the importance of continued research efforts. As new research emerges, updating clinical practice guidelines is crucial to ensure that recommendations reflect the most current and reliable evidence even if they do not lead to a change in overall recommendations. 
Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors declare no competing financial interests. 
Acknowledgments 
Acknowledgements: This study was performed as part of the American Society of Hematology/International Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ASH/ISTH) Clinical Practice Guidelines on venous thromboembolism in the pediatric population. This work was funded and supported by the ASH and ISTH. The authors thank the ASH and ISTH staff for their support during the guideline development process. 
Contribution: A.C., A.A., M.A., H.K., M.B., L.R., S.K.V., R.B., P.M., and R.A.M. designed the research; A.C., A.A., M.A., and H.K. analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript; and M.B., L.R., S.K.V., R.B., P.M., and R.A.M. reviewed and edited the manuscript. 
Footnotes 
∗ 
A.C. and A.A. contributed equally to this work. 
Data that support the findings of this study are available upon reasonable request from the corresponding author, Reem Mustafa ( rmustafa@kumc.edu ). 
References 
1. Segal JB, Streiff MB, Hofmann LV, Thornton K, Bass EB. Management of venous thromboembolism: a systematic review for a practice guideline. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146(3):211–222. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-146-3-200702060-00150. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Sharathkumar AA. Changing landscape of anticoagulation therapy in children. Lancet Haematol. 2019;6(10):e490–e491. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(19)30151-6. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Panteli D, Legido-Quigley H, Reichebner C, Ollenschläger G, Schäfer C, Busse R. 2019. Vol. 53. European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies. [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Monagle P, Cuello CA, Augustine C, et al. American Society of Hematology 2018 Guidelines for management of venous thromboembolism: treatment of pediatric venous thromboembolism. Blood Adv. 2018;2(22):3292–3316. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2018024786. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. Monagle P, Azzam M, Bercovitz R, et al. American Society of Hematology/International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis 2024 updated guidelines for treatment of venous thromboembolism in pediatric patients. Blood Adv. 2025;9(10):2587–2636. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2024015328. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Male C, Lensing AWA, Palumbo JS, Palumbo JS, et al. Rivaroxaban compared with standard anticoagulants for the treatment of acute venous thromboembolism in children: a randomised, controlled, phase 3. Lancet Haematol. 2020;7(1):e18–e27. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(19)30219-4. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Halton J, Brandão LR, Luciani M, et al. DIVERSITY Trial Investigators. Dabigatran etexilate for the treatment of acute venous thromboembolism in children (DIVERSITY): a randomised, controlled, open-label, phase 2b/3, non-inferiority trial. Lancet Haematol. 2021;8(1):e22–e33. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(20)30368-9. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Betensky M, Monagle P, Male C, Goldenberg NA. What did we learn (and did not learn) from the pediatric direct oral anticoagulant trials, and how might we better design pediatric anticoagulant trials in the future? Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2023;7(3):100140. doi: 10.1016/j.rpth.2023.100140. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Articles from Blood Advances are provided here courtesy of The American Society of Hematology 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (161.8 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
