Distinguishing ASH clinical practice guidelines from other forms of ASH clinical advice - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Blood Adv 
. 2024 Apr 22;8(11):2960–2963. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2023011102 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Distinguishing ASH clinical practice guidelines from other forms of ASH clinical advice 
Adam Cuker 
Adam Cuker 
1 Department of Medicine and Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
Find articles by Adam Cuker 
1, ∗ , Robert Kunkle 
Robert Kunkle 
2 American Society of Hematology, Washington, DC 
Find articles by Robert Kunkle 
2 , Rachel S Bercovitz 
Rachel S Bercovitz 
3 Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 
Find articles by Rachel S Bercovitz 
3 , Michael Byrne 
Michael Byrne 
4 Tennessee Oncology, Nashville, TN 
Find articles by Michael Byrne 
4 , Benjamin Djulbegovic 
Benjamin Djulbegovic 
5 Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 
Find articles by Benjamin Djulbegovic 
5 , Sandra L Haberichter 
Sandra L Haberichter 
6 Versiti Diagnostic Labs and Blood Research Institute, Milwaukee, WI 
7 Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 
Find articles by Sandra L Haberichter 
6, 7 , Jennifer Holter-Chakrabarty 
Jennifer Holter-Chakrabarty 
8 Department of Medicine, BMT and Cellular Therapy, Stephenson Cancer Center, The University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, OK 
Find articles by Jennifer Holter-Chakrabarty 
8 , Richard Lottenberg 
Richard Lottenberg 
9 Department of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 
Find articles by Richard Lottenberg 
9 , Menaka Pai 
Menaka Pai 
10 Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada 
Find articles by Menaka Pai 
10 , Suely M Rezende 
Suely M Rezende 
11 Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
Find articles by Suely M Rezende 
11 , Matthew D Seftel 
Matthew D Seftel 
12 Canadian Blood Services, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 
Find articles by Matthew D Seftel 
12 , Roy L Silverstein 
Roy L Silverstein 
13 Department of Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin and Versiti Blood Research Institute, Milwaukee, WI 
Find articles by Roy L Silverstein 
13 , Deirdra R Terrell 
Deirdra R Terrell 
14 Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 
Find articles by Deirdra R Terrell 
14 , Matthew C Cheung 
Matthew C Cheung 
15 Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 
Find articles by Matthew C Cheung 
15 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 Department of Medicine and Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
2 American Society of Hematology, Washington, DC 
3 Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 
4 Tennessee Oncology, Nashville, TN 
5 Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 
6 Versiti Diagnostic Labs and Blood Research Institute, Milwaukee, WI 
7 Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 
8 Department of Medicine, BMT and Cellular Therapy, Stephenson Cancer Center, The University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, OK 
9 Department of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 
10 Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada 
11 Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
12 Canadian Blood Services, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 
13 Department of Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin and Versiti Blood Research Institute, Milwaukee, WI 
14 Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 
15 Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 
∗ 
Correspondence: Adam Cuker, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce St, Philadelphia, PA 19104; adam.cuker@pennmedicine.upenn.edu 
Received 2023 Dec 21; Accepted 2024 Mar 1; Collection date 2024 Jun 11. 
© 2024 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other rights reserved. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC11302374  PMID: 38593461 
Abstract 
The American Society of Hematology (ASH) develops a variety of resources that provide guidance to clinicians on the diagnosis and management of blood diseases. These resources include clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) and other forms of clinical advice. Although both ASH CPGs and other forms of clinical advice provide recommendations, they differ with respect to the methods underpinning their development, the principal type of recommendations they offer, their transparency and concordance with published evidence, and the time and resources required for their development. It is crucial that end users be aware of the differences between CPGs and other forms of clinical advice and that producers and publishers of these resources use clear and unambiguous terminology to facilitate their distinction. The objective of this article is to highlight the similarities and differences between ASH CPGs and other forms of ASH clinical advice and discuss the implications of these differences for end users. 
Introduction 
The American Society of Hematology (ASH) produces a wide range of resources that provide guidance to clinicians on the diagnosis and management of blood diseases. These resources include clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) and CPG-derived products (eg, pocket guides, patient versions of guidelines, and teaching slide sets) as well as other forms of clinical advice (eg, How I Treat articles, webinars, frequently asked questions [FAQs], ASH annual meeting education sessions, the ASH Self-Assessment Program, and the Hematology Review Series). 
It may not be clear to all users how these resources differ, particularly with respect to the methods underpinning their development and the recommendations they provide. The purpose of this article is to highlight the similarities and differences between ASH CPGs and other forms of ASH clinical advice and discuss the implications of these differences for end users. 
Methodology 
Methods for the development of ASH CPGs adhere to international standards 1 , 2 , 3 and have been detailed elsewhere. 4 , 5 Key elements include panel formation with diverse stakeholder representation including patients, explicit and transparent conflict of interest (COI) management, identification and prioritization of patient, intervention, comparison, outcome questions, systematic reviews of the evidence, development of recommendations using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluations (GRADE) framework, 6 , 7 public review and commentary, organizational review, and peer review. These attributes distinguish ASH CPGs as methodologically rigorous, transparent, and trustworthy, as defined by standards established by organizations including the National Academy of Medicine (formerly the Institute of Medicine). 2 
Other forms of ASH clinical advice may not incorporate some or all of these elements. For example, How I Treat articles, webinars, FAQs, ASH annual meeting education sessions, the ASH Self-Assessment Program, and the Hematology Review Series are usually based on personal opinion and informal rather than systematic reviews of the evidence; usually include 1 or only a small number of authors who are not necessarily representative of diverse stakeholder interests; usually do not develop recommendations through GRADE or another structured framework; and usually do not seek public feedback before publication or presentation. Although many other forms of ASH clinical advice include disclosure of COI, they may not formalize a mitigation strategy when COIs exist; for example, they may not limit participation or require recusal based on COI as ASH CPGs do. 
Recommendations 
The usable end products of both ASH CPGs and other forms of ASH clinical advice are recommendations. Recommendations are actionable statements intended to guide decision-making about alternative health care options in a specific patient population. Several different types of recommendations are recognized. 8 ASH CPGs and other forms of ASH clinical advice differ with respect to the types of recommendations they include. 
The backbone of ASH CPGs are formal recommendations. Formal recommendations are actionable statements based on systematic reviews of the evidence that name an explicit intervention and comparison and a specific population. Such recommendations include a direction and strength; the former advises an action, whereas the latter is related to the balance of desirable and undesirable consequences and the quality of evidence that informs the recommendation. 8 In addition to formal recommendations, ASH CPGs may include remarks, good practice statements, research-only recommendations, and implementation considerations (defined in Lofti et al 8 ). 
In contrast to ASH CPGs, other forms of ASH clinical advice do not include formal recommendations. Instead, they consist mainly of informal recommendations. Similar to formal recommendations, informal recommendations are actionable and explicitly list a target population and intervention. They may or may not include a comparison, direction, or strength. Unlike formal recommendations, informal recommendations are not based on a systematic review of the evidence, and they do not include rating of the quality of the evidence. 8 Examples of formal and informal recommendations are shown in Table 1 . 
Table 1. 
Examples of formal and informal recommendations 
Type of recommendation 
Example 
Formal recommendation 
For patients with uncomplicated DVT, the (ASH) guideline panel suggests offering home treatment over hospital treatment (conditional recommendation based on low certainty in the evidence of effects). 9 
Informal recommendation 
We suggest that most patients with DVT can be managed as outpatients. 10 
Open in a new tab 
Formal recommendations are actionable statements based on systematic reviews of the evidence that list a specific patient population, intervention, and comparison and include a direction and strength as well as a rating of the quality of the evidence. In the example formal recommendation in the table, the patient population is patients with uncomplicated DVT, the intervention is home treatment, the comparison is hospital treatment, the direction of the recommendation is in favor of home treatment, the strength of the recommendation is conditional or weak, and the quality of the evidence is low. Informal recommendations are also actionable statements that list a specific patient population and intervention, but they may not include a comparison, direction, or strength, and they do not include rating of the quality of evidence nor are they based on a systematic review of the evidence. In the example informal recommendation, the patient population is patients with DVT, and the intervention is home or outpatient treatment. The comparison is not stated but is implied to be inpatient treatment. The direction of the recommendation is in favor of outpatient treatment, but the strength of the recommendation and quality of the evidence are not given. 
DVT, deep vein thrombosis. 
Advantages and disadvantages of ASH CPGs and other forms of ASH clinical advice 
Use of rigorous and explicit methods serve to minimize bias and enhance the transparency of ASH CPGs. These methods result in recommendations that have a clear and predictable relationship to the best available supporting evidence. In contrast, informal recommendations are at risk of bias from selective use of evidence or from COI. For example, Yao et al 11 analyzed 81 CPGs from the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association and the American Society of Clinical Oncology. Of the 908 recommendations based on low-quality evidence in these CPGs, 416 were formal recommendations based on systematic reviews of the evidence, and 492 were informal recommendations based on consensus. Recommendations were classified as discordant if they were strong recommendations with low-quality evidence and inappropriately discordant if they did not satisfy GRADE criteria for issuing a strong recommendation based on low-quality evidence. Informal consensus-based recommendations were more likely than formal evidence-based recommendations to be discordant (odds ratio, 1.9; 95% confidence interval, 1.4-2.7) and inappropriately discordant (odds ratio, 2.5; 95% confidence interval, 1.7-3.5). 11 
A major disadvantage of ASH CPGs is that they tend to be more time consuming to develop than other forms of ASH clinical advice. This vulnerability was particularly relevant early in the COVID-19 medical emergency, a time when there was an urgent need for clinical guidance. Despite the adoption of a rapid approach to guideline development, the first ASH CPG on COVID-19 and anticoagulation was not completed until December 2020 and was not published until February 2021, 12 some 9 to 11 months after COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. At the same time, ASH was able to stand up less rigorous forms of clinical advice such as online FAQs 13 within a matter of weeks. Although the development of CPGs may never be as rapid as some other forms of clinical advice, efforts are needed to further streamline CPG development without compromising methodologic rigor, transparency, or trustworthiness, particularly during medical emergencies. 
CPGs are also more expensive than other forms of clinical advice, often substantially so. Guideline development costs include administrative staff support, travel and meetings, and systematic evidence reviews. Although most organizations including ASH do not publicize their guideline development costs, systematic evidence reviews alone often cost in excess of $100 000. 14 Technological advances, including virtual meeting platforms and systematic reviews supported by machine learning and artificial intelligence, offer the potential to reduce labor and costs associated with CPG development. 
A third disadvantage of CPGs is that they tend to be lengthy and complex. 15 In addition, they often consist of isolated recommendations that are not linked together via pathways or decision trees. Other forms of clinical advice may be more concise and better equipped to articulate a comprehensive diagnostic or management strategy to meet the needs of clinicians. 16 ASH produces CPG-derived products (eg, pocket guides, patient versions of guidelines, and teaching slide sets) to facilitate the implementation of its guidelines and is exploring the incorporation of decision trees in future CPG efforts. 17 
Terminology 
In light of the substantial differences between CPGs and other forms of clinical advice, it is crucial that developers and publishers use clear language and labels to disambiguate these different types of guidance. For example, all ASH CPGs include “ASH guidelines” in the title and are grouped within the Blood Advances website under a CPG article type. 
The label “guidelines” should not be used to describe other forms of clinical advice. Terms that hint at or could easily be confused with CPGs such as “guidance” or “consensus” should also ideally be avoided. Some organizations distinguish “evidence-based” guidelines from “expert-based” or “consensus-based” guidelines. ASH has avoided this nomenclature because it is misguided and misleading. All CPGs should be based on a systematic review of the evidence, even if the evidence is low quality, and all guidelines require expert opinion and consensus building to appraise and interpret such evidence. 18 
Currently, Blood Advances requires that CPG submissions be consistent with the criteria laid out by the Institute of Medicine. 2 
Blood does not list specifications or formal criteria for CPG submissions. Neither journal imposes restrictions on the use of terms such as “guidance” and “consensus.” We recommend that ASH consider standardizing nomenclature across its publication portfolio with the goal of clearly distinguishing CPGs from other forms of clinical advice. 
Conclusion 
ASH CPGs and other forms of ASH clinical advice both provide recommendations for the diagnosis and management of blood diseases but differ with respect to methodology, the primary type of recommendations they provide, their transparency and concordance with the best available evidence, and the time and resources they require ( Table 2 ). It is important for clinicians and other users to distinguish CPGs from other forms of clinical advice and be aware of the differences between these tools when they are applied in clinical practice. Developers and publishers of these products, including ASH, have a responsibility to use clear and unambiguous labels to facilitate this distinction for end users. 
Table 2. 
Comparison of ASH CPGs and other forms of ASH clinical advice 
Diverse stakeholder representation including patients 
COI management 
Identification and prioritization of PICO questions 
Systematic reviews of the evidence 
Development of recommendations using GRADE or another structured framework 
Public review and commentary 
Peer review 
Main type of recommendation 
Transparency and concordance with best available evidence 
Time to develop 
Cost to develop 
ASH CPGs 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Formal 
High 
Mo to y 
High 
Other forms of ASH clinical advice ∗ 
Usually not 
Varies 
Usually not 
Usually not 
Usually not 
Usually not 
Varies 
Informal 
Lower 
Wk to mo 
Low to moderate 
Open in a new tab 
PICO, patient, intervention, comparison, outcome. 
∗ 
Includes but not limited to How I Treat articles, webinars, FAQs, ASH annual meeting education sessions, the ASH Self-Assessment Program, and the Hematology Review Series. 
Conflict-of-interest disclosure: A.C. has served as a consultant for MingSight, New York Blood Center, Sanofi, and Synergy, and has received authorship royalties from UpToDate. R.K. is an employee of the American Society of Hematology. D.R.T. has served as a consultant for Sanofi. All authors except R.K. are members of the ASH Guideline Oversight Subcommittee. The remaining authors declare no competing financial interests. 
Acknowledgments 
Authorship 
Contribution: A.C. and M.C.C. wrote the manuscript; and all other authors critically reviewed and revised the manuscript. 
References 
1. Qaseem A, Forland F, Macbeth F, et al. Guidelines International Network: toward international standards for clinical practice guidelines. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156(7):525–531. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-156-7-201204030-00009. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Institute of Medicine Committee on Standards for Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines . National Academies Press; 2011. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Schunemann HJ, Wiercioch W, Etxeandia I, et al. Guidelines 2.0: systematic development of a comprehensive checklist for a successful guideline enterprise. CMAJ. 2014;186(3):E123–E142. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.131237. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Wiercioch W, Nieuwlaat R, Akl EA, et al. Methodology for the American Society of Hematology VTE guidelines: current best practice, innovations, and experiences. Blood Adv. 2020;4(10):2351–2365. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020001768. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. Panepinto JA, Pai M. The value of clinical practice guidelines in hematology. Blood Adv. 2018;2(22):3196–3197. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2018025395. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ. 2008;336(7650):924–926. doi: 10.1136/bmj.39489.470347.AD. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Schunemann H, Brozek J, Guyatt G, Oxman A, editors. GRADE Working Group. GRADE Handbook. 2013. [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Lotfi T, Hajizadeh A, Moja L, et al. A taxonomy and framework for identifying and developing actionable statements in guidelines suggests avoiding informal recommendations. J Clin Epidemiol. 2022;141:161–171. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2021.09.028. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. Ortel TL, Neumann I, Ageno W, et al. American Society of Hematology 2020 guidelines for management of venous thromboembolism: treatment of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. Blood Adv. 2020;4(19):4693–4738. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020001830. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. Streiff MB, Agnelli G, Connors JM, et al. Guidance for the treatment of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2016;41(1):32–67. doi: 10.1007/s11239-015-1317-0. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. Yao L, Ahmed MM, Guyatt GH, et al. Discordant and inappropriate discordant recommendations in consensus and evidence based guidelines: empirical analysis. BMJ. 2021;375 doi: 10.1136/bmj-2021-066045. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Cuker A, Tseng EK, Nieuwlaat R, et al. American Society of Hematology 2021 guidelines on the use of anticoagulation for thromboprophylaxis in patients with COVID-19. Blood Adv. 2021;5(3):872–888. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020003763. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. American Society of Hematology COVID-19 Resources. https://www.hematology.org/covid-19 
14. Michelson M, Reuter K. The significant cost of systematic reviews and meta-analyses: a call for greater involvement of machine learning to assess the promise of clinical trials. Contemp Clin Trials Commun. 2019;16 doi: 10.1016/j.conctc.2019.100443. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Kann BH, Johnson SB, Aerts HJWL, Mak RH, Nguyen PL. Changes in length and complexity of clinical practice guidelines in oncology, 1996-2019. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(3) doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.0841. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. Djulbegovic B, Hozo I, Lizarraga D, et al. Evaluation of a fast-and-frugal clinical decision algorithm ('pathways') on clinical outcomes in hospitalised patients with COVID-19 treated with anticoagulants. J Eval Clin Pract. 2023;29(1):3–12. doi: 10.1111/jep.13780. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. Djulbegovic B, Hozo I, Cuker A, Guyatt G. Improving current methods of clinical practice guidelines: from guidelines to pathways to fast-and-frugal decision trees and generalized decision curve analysis to develop individualized patient care. J Eval Clin Pract. 2024;30(3):393–402. doi: 10.1111/jep.13953. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
18. Djulbegovic B, Guyatt G. Evidence vs consensus in clinical practice guidelines. JAMA. 2019;322(8):725–726. doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.9751. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Articles from Blood Advances are provided here courtesy of The American Society of Hematology 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (305.5 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
