--- page 1 ---
OPEN
Executive summary of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical
Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease: known
knowns and known unknowns
Adeera Levin 1, Sofia B. Ahmed 2, Juan Jesus Carrero 3, Bethany Foster 4, Anna Francis 5, Rasheeda K. Hall 6,
Will G. Herrington 7, Guy Hill 8, Lesley A. Inker 9,R u¨meyza Kazancıo/C21glu10, Edmund Lamb 11, Peter Lin 12,
Magdalena Madero 13, Natasha McIntyre 14, Kelly Morrow 15,16, Glenda Roberts 17,
Dharshana Sabanayagam 18, Elke Schaeffner 19, Michael Shlipak 20, Rukshana Shroff 21, Navdeep Tangri 22,
Teerawat Thanachayanont 23, Ifeoma Ulasi 24, Germaine Wong 18, Chih-Wei Yang 25, Luxia Zhang 26,
Karen A. Robinson 27, Lisa Wilson 27, Renee F. Wilson 27, Bertram L. Kasiske 28, Michael Cheung 29,
Amy Earley 29 and Paul E. Stevens 30
1Division of Nephrology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada;2Department of Medicine, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada;3Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden;
4Department of Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada;5Department of Medicine, Queensland Children’s Hospital,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia;6Division of Nephrology, Duke School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA;7Nufﬁeld Department
of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK;8Manchester, UK; 9Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA; 10Division of Nephrology, Bezmialem Vakif University, Istanbul, Turkey;11Department of Clinical Biochemistry, East
Kent Hospitals University NHS Foundation Trust, Canterbury, UK;12Director of Primary Care Initiatives, Canadian Heart Research Center,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada;13Division of Nephrology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chavéz, Mexico City, Mexico;14London
Health Sciences Centre-Victoria Hospital, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada;15Department of Nutrition and Exercise Science,
Bastyr University, Kenmore, Washington, USA;16Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, University of Washington, Kenmore, Washington,
USA; 17UW Center for Dialysis Innovation & Kidney Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA;18Western Renal Service, University of
Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia;19Division of Nephrology and Intensive Care Medicine, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany; 20Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA;21Department of
Paediatric Nephrology, UCL Great Ormond Street Hospital Institute of Child Health, London, UK;22Division of Nephrology, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada;23Division of Nephrology, Bhumirajanagarindra Kidney Institute, Bangkok, Thailand;
24Department of Medicine, Ituku-Ozalla Campus, University of Nigeria, Enugu, Nigeria;25Division of Nephrology, Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan; 26Renal Division, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China;27The Johns Hopkins University Evidence-based
Practice Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA;28Hennepin County Medical Center, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA;29KDIGO, Brussels, Belgium; and30Department of Nephrology, Kent Kidney Care Centre, East Kent Hospitals
University NHS Foundation Trust, Canterbury, UK
The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO)
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and
Management of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) updates the
KDIGO 2012 guideline and has been developed with
patient partners, clinicians, and researchers around the
world, using robust methodology. This update, based on a
substantially broader base of evidence than has previously
been available, reﬂects an exciting time in nephrology. New
therapies and strategies have been tested in large and
diverse populations that help to inform care; however, this
guideline is not intended for people receiving dialysis nor
those who have a kidney transplant. The document is
sensitive to international considerations, CKD across the
lifespan, and discusses special considerations in
implementation. The scope includes chapters dedicated to
the evaluation and risk assessment of people with CKD,
management to delay CKD progression and its
complications, medication management and drug
stewardship in CKD, and optimal models of CKD care.
Treatment approaches and actionable guideline
recommendations are based on systematic reviews of
relevant studies and appraisal of the quality of the evidence
and the strength of recommendations which followed the
“Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development,
and Evaluation” (GRADE) approach. The limitations of the
evidence are discussed. The guideline also provides practice
Correspondence: Adeera Levin, St Paul ’s Hospital, University of British
Columbia, 1081 Burrard Street, Room 6010A, Vancouver, British Columbia
V6Z1Y6, Canada. E-mail: alevin@providencehealth.bc.ca; or Paul Stevens,
Kent Kidney Care Centre, Kent and Canterbury Hospital, Ethelbert Road,
Canterbury, Kent CT1 3NG, UK. E-mail:pstevens@nhs.net
The complete KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation
and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease is published inKidney Inter-
national, volume 105, issue 4S, 2024, which is available online atwww.
kidney-international.org.
Received 11 October 2023; revised 27 October 2023; accepted 31
October 2023
KDIGO executive conclusions www.kidney-international.org
684 Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701


--- page 2 ---
points, which serve to direct clinical care or activities for
which a systematic review was not conducted, and it
includes useful infographics and describes an important
research agenda for the future. It targets a broad audience
of people with CKD and their healthcare, while being
mindful of implications for policy and payment.
Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701; https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.kint.2023.10.016
KEYWORDS: chronic kidney disease; CKD; evaluation; guideline; KDIGO;
management
Copyright ª 2023, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO).
Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the International Society of
Nephrology. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
T
his 2024 update of the Kidney Disease: Improving Global
Outcomes (KDIGO) Clinical Practice Guideline for the
Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease
(CKD) heralds a new era in the care of people with kidney
diseases. The majority of statements from the 2012 guideline
have been updated based on current knowledge and practice.
Only 6 statements were retained in their original form in 2012.
There is clear and increasing recognition of CKD as a global
public health problem. The inclusion of people with CKD in
clinical trials has improved substantially, thus generating an
evidence base upon which to recommend care and treatments
that have not previously existed. There are increasing efforts to
improve diagnostic evaluation of cause, with increased so-
phistication of imaging methods, biopsy interrogation, and
genetic evaluation, as well as methods to optimize blood and
urine testing. With advances in technology, such as molecular
diagnostics for tissue samples, integrated omics platforms,
and the use of machine learning/arti ﬁcial intelligence to
explore large databases of both clinical and biological data,
we are truly at the beginning of a new era in nephrology.
This guideline integrates existing and new knowledge to
guide the care of people with CKD. It has been developed by
an international Work Group that included patient partners,
clinicians, and researchers with diverse experience across the
spectrum of populations, a dedicated Evidence Review Team,
and professional KDIGO staff. This clinical practice guideline
includes 2 different types of statements: graded recommen-
dations, which are supported by systematic reviews (i.e.,de
novo reviews conducted by the independent Evidence Review
Team or existing high-quality reviews that have been sys-
tematically identiﬁed), and ungraded practice points, which
serve to direct clinical care or activities for which a systematic
review was not conducted for various reasons (e.g., lack of a
sufﬁcient evidence base or randomized controlled trials that
would be impractical/unethical). Both recommendations and
practice points are intended to help guide clinical practice and
aid in decision-making; thus, collectively are the guideline
statements. They are clearly articulated, actionable, and pre-
sented together so that all guideline statements can be
implemented. The distinction between them is based on the
process by which they are derived, and that process is based
on the framework methodology from the KDIGO Methods
Committee and aligns with other international guideline
groups using the“Grading of Recommendations Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation” (GRADE) methodology.
New developments in the re ﬁnement of evaluation of
glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR), population and individual risk
prediction, and novel treatments have all positively inﬂuenced
the prognosis for people with CKD and are presented here. The
Work Group has aimed to generate a guideline that is both
rigorously devoted to new and existing evidence, and that is
clinically useful. Research recommendations are presented in a
separate section of the document and are intended to guide the
next set of important research questions to inform and improve
the outcomes of people living with CKD. We speciﬁcally urge
the community to be inclusive of people across the lifecycle and
include sex (referring to biological factors including genetics,
sex steroids, physiology, and anatomy), gender (referring to
sociocultural factors such as identity, roles, and relations), and
etiology of CKD as important variables in all studies.
We offer recommendations to clinicians and clinical labo-
ratories to understand and promote the standardization and
accuracy of testing tools including assays and equipment. The
effective use of clinical practice guidelines and, therefore,
effective patient care, including accurate diagnosis and referral
prioritization, clinical research, and public health prioritiza-
tion, requires comparability of laboratory results independent
of time, place, and measurement procedure. Key to this is
establishing precision of testing and between-laboratory
agreement with traceability to accepted international refer-
ence standards wherever available. Therefore, this guidance
document includes standards for laboratory tests. Speciﬁcally,
we focus on creatinine and cystatin C, with the goal of
normalizing access to both tests for increased accuracy of GFR
assessment, and the assessment of urine albumin which is also
critical to risk assessment and care plans.
The guideline is organized into 6 chapters (Tables 1, 4,a n d5
cover Chapters 1–5). In this summary, we outline the key
evidence-based recommendations together with selected prac-
tice points by chapter. Readers are referred to the full guideline
for a comprehensive description of beneﬁts and harms, certainty
of evidence, values and preferences, resource use and costs,
factors affecting implementation, special considerations, and
both general and speciﬁc research recommendations.
Qualifying statements, key concepts, special considerations,
Chronic Kidney Disease Prognosis Consortium (CKD-PC)
Clarifying de ﬁnition and classi ﬁcation. We begin with
acknowledgment that the deﬁnition and classiﬁcation system is
widely accepted by the community. Speciﬁcally, we remind
readers of the difference between the deﬁnition of CKD, which is
inclusive of various markers of kidney damage, and the classi-
ﬁcation system that highlights the importance of the CGA sys-
tem (i.e., Cause/Glomerular ﬁltration rate level/Albuminuria
level) for the purposes of management, treatment, risk assess-
ment, and research. The relative risk of many outcomes (CKD
progression, kidney failure, acute kidney injury, infection,
A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline KDIGO executive conclusions
Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701 685


--- page 3 ---
hospitalizations, cardiovascular mortality, myocardial infarc-
tion, atrialﬁbrillation, stroke, and peripheral vascular disease) is
increased for all people with CKD, whereas absolute risks for
individuals are modiﬁed by age, sex, and other factors. We
highlight the difference between relative and absolute risks (the
latter derived by applying individual risk prediction scores),
acknowledge that there are different risks for different pop-
ulations, and do not support any age-adjusted deﬁnitions of
CKD, as there are no age-adjusted deﬁnitions for diabetes, car-
diovascular disease (CVD), nor hypertension, but rather
recognize that the individual implications of those conditions
for individuals differ by age group.
Screening. Despite the increasing recognition of the true
burden of CKD, there remains controversy and lack of consensus
as to the utility of population screening for CKD
1 or targeted
screening programs2 due to the complexity of the underlying
sociopolitical and resource environment. Public health policy
has a role to play in identifying and addressing risk factors to
prevent CKD, to identify CKD early, and to delay its progression
and associated adverse outcomes. Incorporating evidence-based
treatment of people with CKD with sodium-glucose cotrans-
porter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, together with a systematic review
in people with diabetes and hypertension, suggests that
screening adults for CKD could now be cost-effective.
3,4
International considerations. In low- and middle-income
countries and in the lower sociodemographic quintiles
around the world, there is a large gap between CKD burden and
provision of adequate healthcare. There is limited access to
kidney replacement therapy combined with the rising preva-
lence of diabetes and hypertension and evidence of substantial
sex and gender disparities in access to CKD treatment.
Importantly, slowing CKD progression at early stages should
provide economic beneﬁts and prevent the development of
kidney failure and cardiovascular complications. A systematic
review of care models in low- and middle-income countries
found that those supporting primary care providers or allied
health workers achieved effectiveness in slowing GFR decline,
as opposed to interventions centered on specialty care alone.
5
Where there are resource limitations, it is logical to deploy re-
sources where they will be most cost-effective, for example, to
higher-risk, preventable stages.
Special considerations and updated population data. We
recognize that kidney diseases affect people at different times
and with different impacts across the whole lifespan. Thus,
enabling a personalized approach, considering age, sex, and
gender for diagnosis, risk assessment, and treatment, is critical.
At the extremes of age, the very young and the very old, diag-
nostic procedures, treatment aims, treatment modalities, and
decision-making differ due to differences in prognosis, treat-
ment options, and prioritization. In young and middle-aged
adults, treatment approaches may differ because of speciﬁc
circumstances, such as pregnancy or menopause. Sex (biological
attributes) and gender (sociocultural factors), as well as other
important intersectional factors, including, but not limited to,
geographical location, socioeconomic position, and race/
ethnicity, play important roles in kidney health and disease.
Within the guideline document, we highlight concepts as to
why age, sex, and gender should be considered, and how these
speciﬁcally impact within each of the chapters (seeFigure 1).
Multinational population studies, assessing risks, based on
CKD-PC 2023 analyses,
6 are presented as part of the intro-
ductory chapter to further highlight updated information
demonstrating epidemiological risk across CKD categories on
a population level. The data describe that the association of all
Child/adolescent
• Growth
• Nutrition
• Weight/BSA-based drug dosing
• Neurocognitive development
• Supporting education
• Transition to adult care
• Holistic approach to care for
  the whole family unit
Pregnancy/lactation
• Drug pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics
• Drug teratogenicity
• Risk of CKD progression
•  Increased risk of pregnancy
complications, preterm birth
and small for gestational
age babies
• Fertility
Older adults
• Multidimensionality of
chronic conditions/
multimorbidity
• Frailty (including sarcopenia)
• Cognitive function
• Polypharmacy
• Prioritization
• End-of-life care
Gender
• Gender identity
• Gender roles
• Gender relations
• Institutionalized
gender
Sex
• Menopause
• Contraception
• Differential drug effects
• Differing epidemiology
of risk factors and
complications
Figure 1 | Special considerations for chronic kidney disease (CKD) care across the lifespan.BSA, body surface area.
KDIGO executive conclusions A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline
686 Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701


--- page 4 ---
Table 1 | Recommendations and practice points from Chapters 1 and 2 of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for
Evaluation and Management of CKD
Chapter 1. Evaluation of CKD
1.1 Detection and evaluation of CKD
1.1.1 Detection of CKD
Practice Point 1.1.1.1: Test people at risk for and with chronic kidney disease (CKD) using both urine albumin measurement and assessment of glomerular
ﬁltration rate (GFR).
Practice Point 1.1.1.2: Following incidental detection of elevated urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio (ACR), hematuria, or low estimated GFR (eGFR), repeat
tests to conﬁrm presence of CKD.
1.1.2 Methods for staging of CKD
Recommendation 1.1.2.1: In adults at risk for CKD, we recommend using creatinine-based estimated glomerularﬁltration rate (eGFRcr). If
cystatin C is available, the GFR category should be estimated from the combination of creatinine and cystatin C (creatinine and cystatin C–
based estimated glomerularﬁltration rate [eGFRcr-cys]) (1B).
1.1.3 Evaluation of chronicity
Practice Point 1.1.3.1: Proof of chronicity (duration of a minimum of 3 months) can be established by:
(i) review of past measurements/estimations of GFR;
(ii) review of past measurements of albuminuria or proteinuria and urine microscopic examinations;
(iii) imaging ﬁndings such as reduced kidney size and reduction in cortical thickness;
(iv) kidney pathologicalﬁndings such asﬁbrosis and atrophy;
(v) medical history, especially conditions known to cause or contribute to CKD;
(vi) repeat measurements within and beyond the 3-month point.
Practice Point 1.1.3.2: Do not assume chronicity based upon a single abnormal level for eGFR and ACR, as theﬁnding could be the result of a recent acute
kidney injury (AKI) event or acute kidney disease (AKD).
Practice Point 1.1.3.3: Consider initiation of treatments for CKD atﬁrst presentation of decreased GFR or elevated ACR if CKD is deemed likely due to
presence of other clinical indicators.
1.1.4 Evaluation of cause
Practice Point 1.1.4.1: Establish the cause of CKD using clinical context, personal and family history, social and environmental factors, medications,
physical examination, laboratory measures, imaging, and genetic and pathologic diagnosis (Figure 8
a).
Practice Point 1.1.4.2: Use tests to establish a cause based on resources available (Table 6b).
Recommendation 1.1.4.1: We suggest performing a kidney biopsy as an acceptable, safe, diagnostic test to evaluate cause and guide treatment
decisions when clinically appropriate (2D).
1.2 Evaluation of GFR
1.2.1 Other functions of kidneys besides GFR
Practice Point 1.2.1.1: Use the term“GFR” when referring to the speciﬁc kidney function of glomerularﬁltration. Use the more general term“kidney
function(s)” when dealing with the totality of functions of the kidney.
1.2.2 Guidance to physicians and other healthcare providers
Practice Point 1.2.2.1: Use serum creatinine (SCr) and an estimating equation for initial assessment of GFR (Figure 11c).
Recommendation 1.2.2.1: We recommend using eGFRcr-cys in clinical situations when eGFRcr is less accurate and GFR affects clinical
decision-making (Table 8d)( 1C).
Practice Point 1.2.2.2: Where more accurate ascertainment of GFR will impact treatment decisions, measure GFR using plasma or urinary clearance of an
exogenous ﬁltration marker (Table 9e).
Practice Point 1.2.2.3: Understand the value and limitations in both eGFR and measured glomerularﬁltration rate (mGFR) as well as the variability and
factors that inﬂuence SCr and cystatin C measurements.
Practice Point 1.2.2.4: Interpretation of SCr level requires consideration of dietary intake.
Practice Point 1.2.2.5: Assess the potential for error in eGFR when assessing a change in GFR over time.
Practice Point 1.2.2.6: Consider the use of cystatin C– based estimated glomerularﬁltration rate (eGFRcys) in some speciﬁc circumstances.
Practice Point 1.2.2.7: Understand the implications of differences between eGFRcr and eGFRcys, as these may be informative, in both direction and
magnitude of those differences.
Practice Point 1.2.2.8: Consider timed urine collections for measured creatinine clearance if mGFR is not available and eGFRcr-cys is thought to be
inaccurate.
1.2.3 Guidance to clinical laboratories
Practice Point 1.2.3.1: Implement the laboratory standards of care outlined in Table 11
f to ensure accuracy and reliability when assessing GFR using
creatinine and cystatin C.
Practice Point 1.2.3.2: Given available resources, clinical laboratories may consider the possibility of measurement of both creatinine and cystatin either as
an in-house test or as a referred test.
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations
Practice Point 1.2.3.3: Laboratories measuring creatinine in infants or small children must ensure their quality control process include the lowest end of
the expected range of values for the group of interest.
(Continued on following page)
A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline KDIGO executive conclusions
Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701 687


--- page 5 ---
Table 1 |(Continued) Recommendations and practice points from Chapters 1 and 2 of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice
Guideline for Evaluation and Management of CKD
Chapter 1. Evaluation of CKD
Practice Point 1.2.3.4: Consider the consistent use of enzymatic creatinine assays in children, given the higher relative contribution of non-creatinine
chromogens to measured creatinine in children when using the Jaffe assay, and the high prevalence of icteric and hemolyzed samples in the neonatal
period.
Practice Point 1.2.3.5: An eGFRcr level<90 ml/min per 1.73 m
2 can be ﬂagged as “low” in children and adolescents over the age of 2 years.
1.2.4 Selection of GFR estimating equations
Recommendation 1.2.4.1: We recommend using a validated GFR estimating equation to derive GFR from serumﬁltration markers (eGFR) rather
than relying on the serumﬁltration markers alone (1D).
Practice Point 1.2.4.1: Use the same equation within geographical regions (as deﬁned locally [e.g., continent, country, and region] and as large as
possible). Within such regions, equations may differ for adults and children.
Practice Point 1.2.4.2: Use of race in the computation of eGFR should be avoided.
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations
Practice Point 1.2.4.3: Estimate GFR in children using validated equations that have been developed or validated in comparable populations.
1.3 Evaluation of albuminuria
1.3.1 Guidance for physicians and other healthcare providers
Practice Point 1.3.1.1: Use the following measurements for initial testing of albuminuria (in descending order of preference). In all cases, aﬁrst void in the
morning midstream sample is preferred in adults and children.
(i) urine ACR, or
(ii) reagent strip urinalysis for albumin and ACR with automated reading.
If measuring urine protein, use the following measurements:
(i) urine protein-to-creatinine ratio (PCR),
(ii) reagent strip urinalysis for total protein with automated reading, or
(iii) reagent strip urinalysis for total protein with manual reading.
Practice Point 1.3.1.2: Use more accurate methods when albuminuria is detected using less accurate methods.
/C15 Conﬁrm reagent strip positive albuminuria and/or proteinuria by quantitative laboratory measurement and express as a ratio to urine creatinine
wherever possible (i.e., quantify the ACR or PCR if initial semiquantitative tests are positive).
/C15 Conﬁrm ACR$30 mg/g ($3 mg/mmol) on a random untimed urine with a subsequentﬁrst morning void in the morning midstream urine sample.
Practice Point 1.3.1.3: Understand factors that may affect interpretation of measurements of urine albumin and urine creatinine and order conﬁrmatory
tests as indicated (Table 16g).
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations
Practice Point 1.3.1.4: In children, obtain aﬁrst morning urine sample for initial testing of albuminuria and proteinuria (in descending order of preference):
(i) Both urine PCR and urine ACR,
(ii) Reagent strip urinalysis for total protein and for albumin with automated reading, or
(iii) Reagent strip urinalysis for total protein and for albumin with manual reading.
1.3.2 Guidance to clinical laboratories
Practice Point 1.3.2.1: Implement the laboratory reporting and handling standards outlined in Table 17
h to ensure accuracy and reliability of theﬁndings
when assessing urine samples.
Practice Point 1.3.2.2: Implementation of an external quality assessment scheme/program for urine albumin and creatinine, including calculationof the
ACR, is a preferred practice for laboratories.
1.4 Point-of-care testing
Recommendation 1.4.1: We suggest that point-of-care testing (POCT) may be used for creatinine and urine albumin measurement where access
to a laboratory is limited or providing a test at the point-of-care facilitates the clinical pathway (2C).
Practice Point 1.4.1: Whenever a POCT device is used for creatinine and urine albumin testing, ensure that the same preanalytical, analytical, and
postanalytical quality criteria relating to the specimen collection and performance of the device, including external quality assessment, and the
interpretation of the result is used.
Practice Point 1.4.2: Where a POCT device for creatinine testing is being used, generate an estimate of GFR. Use the equation consistent with that used
within the region.
Practice Point 1.4.3: Where a POCT device is being used for albuminuria testing, the capability of also analyzing creatinine and producing an ACR is
important. Assess the ability of the POCT ACR devices to produce a positive result in 85% of people with signiﬁcant albuminuria (ACR$30 mg/g or$3
mg/mmol), as part of the evaluation and consideration of using the device.
Chapter 2. Risk assessment in people with CKD
2.1 Overview on monitoring for progression of CKD based upon GFR and ACR categories
Practice Point 2.1.1: Assess albuminuria in adults, or albuminuria/proteinuria in children, and GFR at least annually in people with CKD.
Practice Point 2.1.2: Assess albuminuria and GFR more often for individuals at higher risk of CKD progression when measurement will impact therapeutic
decisions.
Practice Point 2.1.3: For people with CKD, a change in eGFR of>20% on a subsequent test exceeds the expected variability and warrants evaluation.
Practice Point 2.1.4: Among people with CKD who initiate hemodynamically active therapies, GFR reductions of>30% on subsequent testing exceed the
expected variability and warrant evaluation.
(Continued on following page)
KDIGO executive conclusions A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline
688 Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701


--- page 6 ---
complications of CKD is incrementally increased with worse
categories of estimated GFR (eGFR) and albuminuria and
include information using both updated eGFR equations for
creatinine alone, as well as those using creatinine and cystatin
C combined.
On this foundation of key concepts and inclusive framework,
we now describe the key statements for each of the chapters.
Chapter 1: Evaluation of CKD
This chapter highlights the importance of detecting CKD
in high-risk populations because CKD is often silent and
patients may be asymptomatic at early stages. The
screening algorithm for the diagnosis of CKD in adults
highlights the use of basic testing methods, and then
details the importance of thorough evaluation for the
cause and accurate assessment of GFR and urine albumin-
to-creatinine ratio (ACR) to appropriately stage people
with CKD. There are special considerations in pediatric
populations and those with advanced age regarding
screening and staging. The evaluation of cause should be
thorough, using all available information (clinical, social,
and family history) and accessible testing (laboratory,
imaging, genetics, and biopsy), given that etiology impacts
prognosis, risk, and choice of therapies. Given that up to
25% of all current CKD registries or study cohorts have
“unknown etiology” documented, there is renewed interest
in enabling clinicians and people with CKD to under-
stand, if possible, the cause of CKD.
The chapter also reminds clinicians that the kidney has
many functions (excretory, endocrine, and metabolic) and
that GFR is one component of excretory function. Under-
standing the best methods by which to evaluate GFR and
when to use estimating equations versus direct measurements
is highlighted.
The recommendations to use the most accurate, validated
equations to estimate GFR, preferably with a combination of
serum creatinine and cystatin C, are important. From both a
patient and provider perspective, acknowledging that serum
creatinine– based equations have limitations that can be
overcome with the use of an additional marker (cystatin C) is
notable and places a high value on accuracy and lower value
on resource utilization associated with the additional
biomarker. The chapter describes the value of using a com-
bined creatinine and cystatin C– based equation in speciﬁc
situations. Table 2highlights clinical circumstances where this
might apply.
7– 23 As we acquire more knowledge and data
about GFR estimating equations using cystatin C versus
creatinine or both, there are now recognized implications of
those differences that need to be understood by clinicians, in
both direction and magnitude.
There are issues related to how best to estimate GFR in
transgender, gender-diverse, or nonbinary individuals where a
Table 1 |(Continued)
Chapter 2. Risk assessment in people with CKD
Practice Point 2.1.5: For albuminuria monitoring of people with CKD, a doubling of the ACR on a subsequent test exceeds laboratory variability and
warrants evaluation.
2.2 Risk prediction in people with CKD
Recommendation 2.2.1: In people with CKD G3–G5, we recommend using an externally validated risk equation to estimate the absolute risk of
kidney failure (1A).
Practice Point 2.2.1: A 5-year kidney failure risk of 3%– 5% can be used to determine need for nephrology referral in addition to criteria based on eGFR or
urine ACR, and other clinical considerations.
Practice Point 2.2.2: A 2-year kidney failure risk of>10% can be used to determine the timing of multidisciplinary care in addition to eGFR-based criteria
and other clinical considerations.
Practice Point 2.2.3: A 2-year kidney failure risk threshold of>40% can be used to determine the modality education, timing of preparation for kidney
replacement therapy (KRT) including vascular access planning or referral for transplantation, in addition to eGFR-based criteria and other clinical
considerations.
Practice Point 2.2.4: Note that risk prediction equations developed for use in people with CKD G3– G5, may not be valid for use in those with CKD G1– G2.
Practice Point 2.2.5: Use disease-speciﬁc, externally validated prediction equations in people with immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) and autosomal
dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD).
2.3 Prediction of cardiovascular risk in people with CKD
Practice Point 2.3.1: For cardiovascular risk prediction to guide preventive therapies in people with CKD, use externally validated models that areeither
developed within CKD populations or that incorporate eGFR and albuminuria.
Practice Point 2.3.2: For mortality risk prediction to guide discussions about goals of care, use externally validated models that predict all-cause mortality
speciﬁcally developed in the CKD population.
CKD, chronic kidney disease; KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes.
aFigure 8 infull guideline.
bTable 6 infull guideline.
cFigure 11 infull guideline.
dTable 8 infull guideline.
eTable 9 infull guideline.
fTable 11 infull guideline.
gTable 16 infull guideline.
hTable 17 infull guideline.
A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline KDIGO executive conclusions
Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701 689


--- page 7 ---
Table 2 | Indications for use of cystatin C
Domain Speci ﬁc clinical condition Cause of decreased accuracy Comments on GFR evaluation
Body habitus and changes in
muscle mass
Eating disorders7 Non-GFR determinants of SCr eGFRcys may be appropriate if no comorbid illness other than reduction in muscle
mass.
Extreme sport/exercise/body builder Non-GFR determinants of SCr eGFRcys may be appropriate if an increase in muscle mass is the only abnormality.
Above-knee amputation
8 Non-GFR determinants of SCr eGFRcys may be appropriate in those without other comorbid conditions. Suggest
eGFRcr-cys in those with comorbid illness.
Spinal cord injury with paraplegia/
paraparesis or quadriplegia/
quadriparesis
Non-GFR determinants of SCr eGFRcys may be appropriate in those without other comorbid illness. Suggest
eGFRcr-cys in those with no comorbid illness.
Class III obesity
a,b Non-GFR determinants of SCr and SCys eGFRcr-cys demonstrated to be most accurate.
Lifestyle Smoking 9– 11 Non-GFR determinants of SCys Minimal data, suggest eGFRcr if no changes to non-GFR determinants of SCr or
comorbid illness.
Diet Low-protein diet Non-GFR determinants of SCr
Minimal data, suggest eGFRcr may be appropriate if no changes to non-GFR
determinants of SCr or no comorbid illness.
Keto diets Non-GFR determinants of SCr
Vegetarian Non-GFR determinants of SCr
High-protein diets and creatine
supplements
Non-GFR determinants of SCr
Illness other than CKD Malnutrition Chronic illness, presumed impact on
non-GFR determinants of SCr and SCys
eGFRcr-cys may be less accurate because of coexistence of malnutrition and
inﬂammation. Suggest using mGFR for treatment decisions based on the level
of GFR.
Cancer
a,12-16 Chronic illness, presumed impact on
non-GFR determinants of SCr and SCys
eGFRcr-cys demonstrated to be most accurate in populations studied but
likelihood of lesser accuracy in more frail people or in cancers with high cell
turnover. Suggest using mGFR for treatment decisions based on the level of GFR.
Heart failure
a,17,18 Chronic illness, presumed impact on
non-GFR determinants of SCr and SCys
Although limited data, eGFRcys appears less biased but all have low accuracy.
Suggest using eGFRcr-cys or eGFRcys for routine GFR evaluation. Suggest
using mGFR for treatment decisions based on the level of GFR.
Cirrhosis
a,19-21 Chronic illness, presumed impact on
non-GFR determinants of SCr and SCys
Although limited data, eGFRcys appears less biased but all have low accuracy.
Suggest using eGFRcr-cys or eGFRcys for routine GFR evaluation. Suggest using
mGFR for treatment decisions based on the level of GFR.
Catabolic consuming diseasesc Chronic illness, presumed impact on
non-GFR determinants of SCr and SCys
Minimal data but eGFRcr-cys may be inaccurate. Suggest using eGFRcr-cys vs.
eGFRcr for routine GFR evaluation. Suggest using mGFR for treatment decisions
based on the level of GFR.
Muscle-wasting diseases
22 Chronic illness, presumed impact on
non-GFR determinants of SCr and SCys
Minimal data. One study shows large bias for both eGFRcr and eGFRcys. Suggest
using eGFRcr-cys for routine GFR evaluation. Suggest using mGFR for treatment
decisions based on the level of GFR.
Medication effects Steroids (anabolic, hormone) Non-GFR determinants of SCr. Effect on
SCys not known
Physiological effect on SCys unknown, suggest eGFRcr-cys.
Decreases in tubular secretion Non-GFR determinants of SCr eGFRcys may be appropriate if medication affects only creatinine and no comorbid
illness. Suggest using mGFR for treatment decisions based on the level of GFR.
Broad spectrum antibiotics that
decrease extrarenal elimination
Non-GFR determinants of SCr eGFRcys may be appropriate if medication affects only creatinine and no comorbid
illness. Suggest using mGFR for treatment decisions based on the level of GFR.
eGFR, estimated glomerularﬁltration rate; eGFRcr, creatinine-based estimated GFR; eGFRcr-cys, creatinine and cystatin C– based estimated GFR; mGFR, measured GFR; SCr, serum creatinine; SCys, serum cystatin C.
aData summarized in Adingwupu OM, Barbosa ER, Palevsky PM, et al. Cystatin C as a GFR estimation marker in acute and chronic illness: a systematic review. Kidney Med. 2023;5:100727.23
bObesity class III varies by region but commonly body mass index>40 or >35 kg/m2.
cCatabolic consuming disease may include tuberculosis, AIDS, hematologic malignancies, and severe skin diseases. There are no data with mGFR to evaluate this directly.
KDIGO executive conclusions A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline
690 Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701


--- page 8 ---
person’s gender identity is different from their sex assigned at
birth, and they may or may not be taking gender hormone–
afﬁrming therapy or puberty-blocking therapies. The calcu-
lation of estimated GFR by creatinine and cystatin C using
either sex constant may be impacted by non-GFR de-
terminants of creatinine, and a holistic approach should be
taken to determine appropriate management anchored to the
muscle mass of the individual and based on their sex hor-
mone conﬁguration and gender identity. Similarly, cystatin
C– based equations may be affected by gender hormone –
afﬁrming therapy. The assessment of gender in the context
of eGFR is therefore an area for shared decision-making and
an evolving area for investigation.
Where more accurate ascertainment of GFR will impact
treatment decisions (e.g., oncology drug dosing, kidney donor
eligibility, etc.), clinicians are encouraged to measure GFR by
established clearance methods of glomerularﬁltration markers
(Table 3).
The chapter addresses and reinforces key points for clinical
laboratories including the implementation of laboratory
standards for reporting, the use of enzymatic assays instead of
Jaffe method for creatinine measurements (given the inter-
ference of many drugs and substances when using the latter),
timing of processing of blood samples, and simultaneous
measurement of creatinine and cystatin C on the same blood
sample. These are all intended to improve consistency and
comparability of laboratory values.
The chapter also recommends using validated GFR esti-
mating equations that should be the same within geographical
regions so that people with CKD and healthcare providers
(HCPs) have access to the same information, derived using
the same methodology.
The evaluation of albuminuria is also addressed in this
chapter, so that clinicians are aware and understand the de-
terminants of albuminuria measurements, which will enable
better interpretation and guide action. Given the established,
consistent strong relationship between the quantity of urine
albumin with both kidney disease and CVD risk, clinicians
are encouraged to pay attention to this measurement. Albu-
minuria measurements may not be available in all regions,
and proteinuria is not the same as albuminuria; clinicians
should appreciate those differences. There are factors that
inﬂuence variability in urine albumin or protein measures, as
there are different ones that impact urine creatinine. Given
that the ratios are used to ascertain risk, understanding
sources of both analytical and biological variability is
important for the interpretation ofﬂuctuations in urine ACR.
The use of point-of-care testing may facilitate access to
earlier diagnosis and care and can be implemented in rural
and remote locations. The value of point-of-care testing for
currently underserved populations cannot be overstated and
should include the capacity for generating creatinine-based
eGFR equations. The point-of-care testing devices used
would ideally measure both blood creatinine and urine for
albumin and creatinine to measure ACR and be standardized
and calibrated with similar rigor as is recommended for
laboratory tests.
Overall, this chapter presents statements that help HCPs to
fully evaluate people with the diagnosis of CKD and provides
data to aid the clinicians and the laboratories to understand
and appreciate nuances of evaluating the common tests for
assessing GFR and albuminuria, and aims to aid in increasing
accuracy of risk assessments to guide therapeutic decision-
making.
Chapter 2: Risk assessment in people with CKD
This chapter addresses the need to monitor the progression of
CKD using both blood and urine tests on a regular basis,
informed by risk of the individual, and contextualized within
healthcare system capacity. It provides guidance for both
monitoring and the interpretation of changes over time that
may prompt additional testing or evaluation. There is an
expected variability in GFR and urine ACR caused by both
biological and analytical factors of the biomarkers used, and
nuances regarding changes with the initiation of therapies and
when/how to further evaluate are also offered.
Importantly, this chapter recommends the use of validated
risk equations to estimate the“absolute” risk of kidney fail-
ure for individual people and offers thresholds by which to
determine referral timing of multidisciplinary care, modality
education, and preparation for transition to kidney replace-
ment therapy, either dialysis or transplantation. The differ-
entiation of “relative risks” as presented in the heatmaps in
the introductory chapter and individual risks, as calculated
using these risk equations, is critical in the context of
improving communication between people with CKD and
HCPs, as well as planning for transitions in care, healthcare
system resource utilization, and potentially for enrollment
into clinical trials. It is noted that there are disease-speciﬁc
tools (for immunoglobulin A nephropathy and polycystic
kidney disease) and evolving tools for predicting events and
mortality in people with CKD. In the era of precision
medicine, the use of validated prediction tools will help tailor
the frequency of visits, bloodwork, timing of educational
Table 3 | Indications for measured glomerularﬁltration rate
Clinical conditions in which eGFRcr-cys is inaccurate or uncertain due to
potential non-GFR determinants of creatinine and cystatin C. This may
include catabolic states, such as serious infections or inﬂammatory
states, high cell turnover as in some cancers, advanced cirrhosis or heart
failure, use of high-dose steroids, or the very frail. SeeFigure 12 in the
full guideline for approach to individual decision-making.
Clinical settings in which greater accuracy is needed than is achieved with
eGFRcr-cys. For example, decisions about simultaneous kidney
transplant at the time of other solid organ transplant, kidney donor
candidacy, and drug dosing if narrow therapeutic index or serious
toxicity (e.g., chemotherapies that are cleared by the kidney).
eGFRcr-cys, creatinine and cystatin C– based estimated GFR; GFR, glomerularﬁltra-
tion rate.
A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline KDIGO executive conclusions
Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701 691


--- page 9 ---
activities, and may inform a better selection of targets of care
to support people and families living with CKD.
Chapter 3: Delaying CKD progression and managing its
complications
Chapter 3 provides a comprehensive discussion of the totality
of treatment strategies required to reduce the risk of both
progression of CKD and its attendant comorbidities (Table 4).
Lifestyle factors that include optimizing physical activity
and weight, the avoidance of tobacco products, as well as
access to trained individuals (renal dietitians or accredited
nutrition providers, pharmacists, psychologists, and others)
are highlighted, with the evidence to support those activities
presented. It is noted that those with speciﬁc needs (children
or frail [older] adults) should have lifestyle counseling based
on capability and values.
There is an extensive review of diets now recommended
for people with CKD, including plant-based diets, and protein
intake in accordance with needs and status. The importance
of not restricting protein in those who are cachexic, sarco-
penic, or undernourished is highlighted. Avoidance of high-
protein intake and the need for close supervision if very low–
protein intake is attempted are all described in detail, again,
underscoring the importance of individualization of care
Healthy diet Weight management
Stop use of
tobacco productsPhysical activity
SGLT2i
continue until dialysis
or transplant
Aim for SBP <120 mm Hg 
RAS inhibitor* at maximum 
tolerated dose (if HTN)
Statin-based therapy
moderate- or
high-intensity statin
Manage hyperglycemia
as per the KDIGO
Diabetes Guideline,
including use of
GLP-1 RA where indicated
Use ns-MRA in
people with diabetes
and an indication
for use
Dihydropyridine CCB
and/or diuretic if
needed to achieve
individualized
BP target
Antiplatelet
agent for
clinical ASCVD
ASCVD risk, lipids
BP
Lifestyle
First-line
drug therapy for
most patients
+
Targeted therapies
for complications
Steroidal MRA if needed
for resistant hypertension
if eGFR ≥45
Ezetimibe, PCSK9i
indicated based on
ASCVD risk and lipids
Manage anemia,
CKD-MBD, acidosis,
and potassium
abnormalities,
where indicated
Use the same principles
to diagnose and manage
ASCVD and atrial fibrillation
as in people without CKD
Regular
risk factor
reassessment
(every 3–6
months)
Figure 2 | Holistic approach to chronic kidney disease (CKD) treatment and risk modiﬁcation. *Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
or angiotensin II receptor blocker should beﬁrst-line therapy for blood pressure (BP) control when albuminuria is present, otherwise
dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (CCB) or diuretic can also be considered; all 3 classes are often needed to attain BP targets. Icons
presented indicate the following beneﬁts: blood pressure cuff¼ blood pressure– lowering; glucometer ¼ glucose-lowering; heart ¼ heart
protection; kidney¼ kidney protection; scale¼ weight management. ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; CKD-MBD, chronic kidney
disease– mineral and bone disorder; eGFR, estimated glomerularﬁltration rate; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist; HTN,
hypertension; KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes; MRA, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; ns-MRA, nonsteroidal
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; PCSK9i, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitor; RAS, renin-angiotensin system; SBP,
systolic blood pressure; SGLT2i, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor. Modiﬁed from Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes Diabetes
Work Group. KDIGO 2022 Clinical Practice Guideline for Diabetes Management in Chronic Kidney Disease.Kidney Int. 2022;102:S1– S127.
24
KDIGO executive conclusions A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline
692 Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701


--- page 10 ---
Table 4 | Recommendations and practice points from Chapter 3 of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for Evaluation
and Management of CKD
Chapter 3. Delaying CKD progression and managing its complications
3.1 CKD treatment and risk modiﬁcation
Practice Point 3.1.1: Treat people with CKD with a comprehensive treatment strategy to reduce risks of progression of CKD and its associated
complications (Figure 17a).
3.2 Lifestyle factors
Practice Point 3.2.1: Encourage people with CKD to undertake physical activity compatible with cardiovascular health, tolerance, and level of frailty;
achieve an optimal body mass index (BMI); and not to use tobacco products. Referral to providers and programs (e.g., psychologists, renal dietitiansor
accredited nutrition providers, pharmacists, physical and occupational therapy, and smoking cessation programs) should be offered where indicated
and available.
3.2.1 Avoiding use tobacco products
[No speciﬁc recommendations or practice points]
3.2.2 Physical activity and optimum weight
Recommendation 3.2.2.1: We recommend that people with CKD be advised to undertake moderate-intensity physical activity for a cumulative
duration of at least 150 minutes per week, or to a level compatible with their cardiovascular and physical tolerance(1D).
Practice Point 3.2.2.1: Recommendations for physical activity should consider age, ethnic background, presence of other comorbidities, and accesst o
resources.
Practice Point 3.2.2.2: People with CKD should be advised to avoid sedentary behavior.
Practice Point 3.2.2.3: For people at higher risk of falls, healthcare providers should provide advice on the intensity of physical activity (low, moderate, or
vigorous) and the type of exercises (aerobic vs. resistance, or both).
Practice Point 3.2.2.4: Physicians should consider advising/encouraging people with obesity and CKD to lose weight.
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations
Practice Point 3.2.2.5: Encourage children with CKD to undertake physical activity aiming for World Health Organization (WHO)-advised levels (i.e., $60
minutes daily) and to achieve a healthy weight.
3.3 Diet
Practice Point 3.3.1: Advise people with CKD to adopt healthy and diverse diets with a higher consumption of plant-based foods compared to animal-
based foods and a lower consumption of ultraprocessed foods.
Practice Point 3.3.2: Use renal dietitians or accredited nutrition providers to educate people with CKD about dietary adaptations regarding sodium,
phosphorus, potassium, and protein intake, tailored to their individual needs, and severity of CKD and other comorbid conditions.
3.3.1 Protein intake
Recommendation 3.3.1.1: We suggest maintaining a protein intake of 0.8 g/kg body weight/d in adults with CKD G3–G5 (2C).
Practice Point 3.3.1.1: Avoid high protein intake (>1.3 g/kg body weight/d) in adults with CKD at risk of progression.
Practice Point 3.3.1.2: In adults with CKD who are willing and able, and who are at risk of kidney failure, consider prescribing, under close supervision, a
very low– protein diet (0.3– 0.4 g/kg body weight/d) supplemented with essential amino acids or ketoacid analogs (up to 0.6 g/kg body weight/d).
Practice Point 3.3.1.3: Do not prescribe low- or very low– protein diets in metabolically unstable people with CKD.
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations
Practice Point 3.3.1.4: Do not restrict protein intake in children with CKD due to the risk of growth impairment. The target protein and energy intake in
children with CKD G2– G5 should be at the upper end of the normal range for healthy children to promote optimal growth.
Older adults
Practice Point 3.3.1.5: In older adults with underlying conditions such as frailty and sarcopenia, consider higher protein and calorie dietary targets.
3.3.2 Sodium intake
Recommendation 3.3.2.1: We suggest that sodium intake be<2 g of sodium per day (or<90 mmol of sodium per day, or<5 g of sodium
chloride per day) in people with CKD(2C).
Practice Point 3.3.2.1: Dietary sodium restriction is usually not appropriate for patients with sodium-wasting nephropathy.
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations
Practice Point 3.3.2.2: Follow age-based Recommended Daily Intake when counseling about sodium intake for children with CKD who have systolic and/
or diastolic blood pressure>90th percentile for age, sex, and height.
3.4 Blood pressure control
Recommendation 3.4.1: We suggest that adults with high BP and CKD be treated with a target systolic blood pressure (SBP) of<120 mm Hg,
when tolerated, using standardized ofﬁce BP measurement(2B).
Practice Point 3.4.1: Consider less intensive BP-lowering therapy in people with frailty, high risk of falls and fractures, very limited life expectancy, or
symptomatic postural hypotension.
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations
Recommendation 3.4.2: We suggest that in children with CKD, 24-hour mean arterial pressure (MAP) by ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
(ABPM) should be lowered to£50th percentile for age, sex, and height(2C).
Practice Point 3.4.2: Monitor BP once a year with ABPM and every 3– 6 months with standardized auscultatory ofﬁce BP in children with CKD.
(Continued on following page)
A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline KDIGO executive conclusions
Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701 693


--- page 11 ---
Table 4 |(Continued) Recommendations and practice points from Chapter 3 of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for
Evaluation and Management of CKD
Chapter 3. Delaying CKD progression and managing its complications
Practice Point 3.4.3: In children with CKD, when ABPM is not available, it is reasonable to target manual auscultatory ofﬁce SBP, obtained in a protocol-
driven standardized setting, of 50th– 75th percentile for age, sex, and height unless achieving this target is limited by signs or symptoms of
hypotension.
3.5 Glycemic control
Please refer to theKDIGO 2022 Clinical Practice Guideline for Diabetes Management in Chronic Kidney Disease24 for speciﬁc recommendations, practice
points, and research recommendations.
3.6 Renin-angiotensin system inhibitors
Recommendation 3.6.1: We recommend starting renin-angiotensin-system inhibitors (RASi) (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor [ACEi] or
angiotensin II receptor blocker [ARB]) for people with CKD and severely increased albuminuria (G1–G4, A3) without diabetes(1B).
Recommendation 3.6.2: We suggest starting RASi (ACEi or ARB) for people with CKD and moderately increased albuminuria (G1–G4, A2)
without diabetes (2C).
Recommendation 3.6.3: We recommend starting RASi (ACEi or ARB) for people with CKD and moderately-to-severely increased
albuminuria (G1–G4, A2 and A3) with diabetes(1B).
Recommendation 3.6.4: We recommend avoiding any combination ofACEi, ARB, and direct renin inhibitor (DRI) therapy in people with
CKD, with or without diabetes(1B).
Practice Point 3.6.1: RASi (ACEi or ARB) should be administered using the highest approveddose that is tolerated to achieve the beneﬁts described
because the proven beneﬁts were achieved in trials using these doses.
Practice Point 3.6.2: Changes in BP, serum creatinine, and serum potassium should be checked within 2– 4 weeks of initiation or increase in the
dose of a RASi, depending on the current GFR and serum potassium.
Practice Point 3.6.3: Hyperkalemia associated with use of RASi can often be managed by measures to reduce the serum potassium levels rather
than decreasing the dose or stopping RASi.
Practice Point 3.6.4: Continue ACEi or ARB therapy unless serum creatinine rises by more than 30% within 4 weeks followinginitiation of treatment
or an increase in dose.
Practice Point 3.6.5: Consider reducing the dose or discontinuing ACEi or ARB in the setting of either symptomatic hypotension or uncontrolled
hyperkalemia despite medical treatment, or to reduce uremic symptoms while treating kidney failure (estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
[eGFR] <15 ml/min per 1.73 m2).
Practice Point 3.6.6: Consider starting people with CKD with normal to mildly increased albuminuria (A1) on RASi (ACEi or ARB) for speciﬁc
indications (e.g., to treat hypertension or heart failure with low ejection fraction).
Practice Point 3.6.7: Continue ACEi or ARB in people with CKD even when the eGFR falls below 30 ml/min per 1.73 m2.
3.7 Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT2i)
Recommendation 3.7.1: We recommend treating patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D), CKD, and an eGFR‡20 ml/min per 1.73 m2 with an
SGLT2i (1A).
Practice Point 3.7.1: Once an SGLT2iis initiated, it is reasonable to continue an SGLT2i even if the eGFR falls below 20 ml/min per 1.73 m2,u n l e s si t
is not tolerated or KRT is initiated.
Practice Point 3.7.2: It is reasonable to withhold SGLT2i during times of prolonged fasting, surgery, or criticalmedical illness (when people may be
at greater risk for ketosis).
Recommendation 3.7.2: We recommend treating adults with CKD with an SGLT2i for the following(1A):
/C15 eGFR ‡20 ml/min per 1.73 m2 with urine ACR‡200 mg/g (‡20 mg/mmol), or
/C15 heart failure, irrespective of level of albuminuria.
Practice Point 3.7.3: SGLT2i initiation or use does not necessitate alteration of frequency of CKD monitoring and the reversible decrease in eGFR on
initiation is generally not an indication to discontinue therapy.
Recommendation 3.7.3: We suggest treating adults with eGFR 20 to 45 ml/min per 1.73 m2 with urine ACR<200 mg/g (<20 mg/mmol) with an
SGLT2i (2B).
3.8 Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRA)
Recommendation 3.8.1: We suggest a nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist with proven kidney or cardiovascular beneﬁt for
adults with T2D, an eGFR>25 ml/min per 1.73 m2, normal serum potassium concentration, and albuminuria (>30 mg/g [>3 mg/mmol])
despite maximum tolerated dose of RAS inhibitor (RASi)(2A).
Practice Point 3.8.1: Nonsteroidal MRA are most appropriate for adults with T2D who are at high risk of CKD progression and cardiovascular events, as
demonstrated by persistent albuminuria despite other standard-of-care therapies.
Practice Point 3.8.2: A nonsteroidal MRA may be added to a RASi and an SGLT2i for treatment of T2D and CKD in adults.
Practice Point 3.8.3: To mitigate risk of hyperkalemia, select people with consistently normal serum potassium concentration and monitor serum
potassium regularly after initiation of a nonsteroidal MRA (Figure 26
b).
Practice Point 3.8.4: The choice of a nonsteroidal MRA should prioritize agents with documented kidney or cardiovascular beneﬁts.
Practice Point 3.8.5: A steroidal MRA may be used for treatment of heart failure, hyperaldosteronism, or refractory hypertension, but may cause
hyperkalemia or a reversible decline in glomerularﬁltration, particularly among people with a low GFR.
3.9 Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RA)
Recommendation 3.9.1: In adults with T2D and CKD who have not achieved individualized glycemic targets despite use of metformin and
SGLT2 inhibitor treatment, or who are unable to use those medications, we recommend a long-acting GLP-1 RA(1B).
Practice Point 3.9.1: The choice of GLP-1 RA should prioritize agents with documented cardiovascular beneﬁts.
(Continued on following page)
KDIGO executive conclusions A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline
694 Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701


--- page 12 ---
Table 4 |(Continued)
Chapter 3. Delaying CKD progression and managing its complications
3.10 Metabolic acidosis
Practice Point 3.10.1: In people with CKD, consider use of pharmacological treatment with or without dietary intervention to prevent development of
acidosis with potential clinical implications (e.g., serum bicarbonate<18 mmol/l in adults).
Practice Point 3.10.2: Monitor treatment for metabolic acidosis to ensure it does not result in serum bicarbonate concentrations exceeding the upper limit
of normal and does not adversely affect BP control, serum potassium, orﬂuid status.
3.11 Hyperkalemia in CKD
3.11.1 Awareness of factors impacting on potassium measurement
Practice Point 3.11.1.1: Be aware of the variability of potassium laboratory measurements as well as factors and mechanisms that may inﬂuence
potassium measurement including diurnal and seasonal variation, plasma versus serum samples, and the actions of medications.
3.11.2 Potassium exchange agents
Practice Point 3.11.2.1: Be aware of local availability or formulary restrictions with regard to the pharmacologic management of nonemergent
hyperkalemia.
3.11.3 Timing to recheck potassium after identifying moderate and severe hyperkalemia in adults
[No speciﬁc recommendations or practice points]
3.11.4 Managing hyperkalemia
[No speciﬁc recommendations or practice points]
3.11.5 Dietary considerations
Practice Point 3.11.5.1: Implement an individualized approach in people with CKD G3– G5 and emergent hyperkalemia that includes dietary and
pharmacologic interventions and takes into consideration associated comorbidities and quality of life (QoL). Assessment and education through a renal
dietitian or an accredited nutrition provider are advised.
Practice Point 3.11.5.2: Provide advice to limit the intake of foods rich in bioavailable potassium (e.g., processed foods) for people with CKD G3– G5 who
have a history of hyperkalemia or as a prevention strategy during disease periods in which hyperkalemia risk may be a concern.
3.12 Anemia
Please refer to theKDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Anemia in Chronic Kidney Diseasepublications for speciﬁc recommendations, selection, and
dosing of speciﬁc therapeutic agents, and research recommendations.
3.13 CKD-Mineral Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD)
Please refer to theKDIGO 2017 Clinical Practice Guideline Update for the Diagnosis, Evaluation, Prevention, and Treatment of Chronic Kidney Disease– Mineral
and Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD) for speciﬁc recommendations, selection, dosing of speciﬁc therapeutic agents, and research recommendations.
3.14 Hyperuricemia
Recommendation 3.14.1: We recommend people with CKD and symptomatic hyperuricemia should be offered uric acid–lowering
intervention (1C).
Practice Point 3.14.1: Consider initiating uric acid– lowering therapy for people with CKD after theirﬁrst episode of gout (particularly where there is no
avoidable precipitant or serum uric acid concentration is>9 mg/dl [535mmol/l]).
Practice Point 3.14.2: Prescribe xanthine oxidase inhibitors in preference to uricosuric agents in people with CKD and symptomatic hyperuricemia.
Practice Point 3.14.3: For symptomatic treatment of acute gout in CKD, low-dose colchicine or intra-articular/oral glucocorticoids are preferablet o
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Practice Point 3.14.4: Nonpharmacological interventions which may help prevent gout include limiting alcohol, meats, and high-fructose corn syrup
intake.
Recommendation 3.14.2: We suggest not using agents to lower serum uric acid in people with CKD and asymptomatic hyperuricemia to delay
CKD progression (2D).
3.15 Cardiovascular disease (CVD) and additional speciﬁc interventions to modify risk
3.15.1 Lipid management
Recommendation 3.15.1.1: In adults aged‡50 years with eGFR<60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 but not treated with chronic dialysis or kidney
transplantation (GFR categories G3a–G5), we recommend treatment with a statin or statin/ezetimibe combination (1A).
Recommendation 3.15.1.2: In adults aged‡50 years with CKD and eGFR‡60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 (GFR categories G1–G2), we recommend
treatment with a statin (1B).
Recommendation 3.15.1.3: In adults aged 18–49 years with CKD but not treated with chronic dialysis or kidney transplantation, we suggest
statin treatment in people with one or more of the following (2A):
/C15 known coronary disease (myocardial infarction or coronary revascularization),
/C15 diabetes mellitus,
/C15 prior ischemic stroke, or
/C15 estimated 10-year incidence of coronary death or nonfatal myocardial infarction>10%.
Practice Point 3.15.1.1: Estimate 10-year cardiovascular risk using a validated risk tool.
Practice Point 3.15.1.2: In people with CKD, choose statin-based regimens to maximize the absolute reduction in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
to achieve the largest treatment beneﬁts.
(Continued on following page)
A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline KDIGO executive conclusions
Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701 695


--- page 13 ---
plans based on the best evidence for different people at
different points in their kidney journey. Salt intake and blood
pressure management are concordant with other guidance
documents, and again caveats for targets in vulnerable or frail
populations are highlighted. Measurements using 24-hour
ambulatory devices are underscored, as is the interpretation
of those readouts for children.
Recommendations for using renin-angiotensin system in-
hibitors, where tolerated, in those with and without diabetes
and in those with moderately high urine albumin excretion
are clearly articulated, as is the value of these medications in
the context of heart failure and CKD. Guidance for reduction
or cessation of medication for those intolerant (due to side
effects or hypotension) is offered, as are reassurances as to
when to maintain people on these agents despite changes in
bloodwork (serum creatinine, potassium, etc.).
There is an abundance of literature on which to base
guidance on the use of SGLT2 inhibitors to both delay CKD
progression and reduce cardiovascular complications. Nu-
ances for those with and without diabetes, heart failure, and
for those with higher and lower urine ACR levels are clearly
articulated. Guidance for the use of mineralocorticoid an-
tagonists (both steroidal and nonsteroidal) is also offered,
given their value in blood pressure management, heart failure
treatment, and delay of progression of CKD in those with and
without diabetes.
The treatment of metabolic acidosis to delay progression
of CKD has not been proven; however, it is recognized that
acidosis can lead to exacerbation of nutritional issues
(anorexia and protein wasting), bone disease, and other
consequences. These can be addressed with both dietary in-
terventions and medications. Suggestions to evaluate the risk-
beneﬁt ratio and goals of therapy are described, and the
threshold for aggressive intervention has been moved to<18
mmol/l from<22 mmol/l in the previous KDIGO guideline.
Hyperkalemia is discussed in terms of frequency of
occurrence, “expected” values for potassium at different levels
of GFR, and treatment strategies, which highlight newer at-
titudes toward dietary advice (avoidance of highly processed
foods, but not of fruits and vegetables), an improved under-
standing of different factors that impact potassium, and tar-
geted therapy based on thorough assessment and context.
Newer data on the value of treating hyperuricemia were
evaluated. No data were found to support targeting hyper-
uricemia in the absence of symptoms (e.g., gout or tophi
formation).
The treatment of common laboratory abnormalities of
hemoglobin, parathyroid hormone, and phosphate follows
current KDIGO guideline documents on these speciﬁc en-
tities. Importantly, tables are provided describing“expected”
values for common laboratory tests by eGFR so that clinicians
may be able to better identify aberrant values that require
additional work-up or review.
A section on cardiovascular risk factor modiﬁcation for
both atherosclerotic disease (myocardial infarction, stroke, and
peripheral vascular disease) and atrial ﬁbrillation is offered
whereby speciﬁc interventions are highlighted and calculation
of risk scores promoted to guide initiation or modiﬁcation of
Table 4 |(Continued) Recommendations and practice points from Chapter 3 of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for
Evaluation and Management of CKD
Chapter 3. Delaying CKD progression and managing its complications
Practice Point 3.15.1.3: In adults with CKD aged 18– 49, a lower (i.e.,<10%) estimated 10-year incidence of coronary death or nonfatal myocardial
infarction may also be appropriate thresholds for initiation of statin-based therapy.
Practice Point 3.15.1.4: Consider prescribing proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK-9) inhibitors to people with CKD who have an indication
for their use.
Practice Point 3.15.1.5: Consider a plant-based“Mediterranean-style” diet in addition to lipid-modifying therapy to reduce cardiovascular risk.
3.15.2 Use of antiplatelet therapy
Recommendation 3.15.2.1: We recommend oral low-dose aspirin for prevention of recurrent ischemic cardiovascular disease events (i.e.,
secondary prevention) in people with CKD and established ischemic cardiovascular disease (1C).
Practice Point 3.15.2.1: Consider other antiplatelet therapy (e.g., P2Y12 inhibitors) when there is aspirin intolerance.
3.15.3 Invasive versus intensive medical therapy for coronary artery disease
Recommendation 3.15.3.1: We suggest that in stable stress-test conﬁrmed ischemic heart disease, an initial conservative approach using
intensive medical therapy is an appropriate alternative to an initial invasive strategy (2D).
Practice Point 3.15.3.1: Initial management with an invasive strategy may still be preferable for people with CKD with acute or unstable coronary disease,
unacceptable levels of angina (e.g., patient dissatisfaction), left ventricular systolic dysfunction attributable to ischemia, or left main disease.
3.16 CKD and atrialﬁbrillation
Practice Point 3.16.1: Follow established strategies for the diagnosis and management of atrialﬁbrillation (Figure 40c).
Recommendation 3.16.1: We recommend use of non–vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants (NOACs) in preference to vitamin K antagonists
(e.g., warfarin) for thromboprophylaxis in atrialﬁbrillation in people with CKD G1–G4 (1C).
Practice Point 3.16.2: NOAC dose adjustment for GFR is required, with caution needed at CKD G4– G5.
Practice Point 3.16.3: Duration of NOAC discontinuation before elective procedures needs to consider procedural bleeding risk, NOAC prescribed, and
level of GFR (Figure 44d).
CKD, chronic kidney disease; KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes.
aFigure 17 infull guideline.
bFigure 26 infull guideline.
cFigure 40 infull guideline.
dFigure 44 infull guideline.
KDIGO executive conclusions A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline
696 Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701


--- page 14 ---
therapy. The use of statins, antiplatelet therapy, and invasive
versus intensive medical therapy is addressed in detail, citing
and interpreting an extensive evidence base.
The chapter emphasizes the need to evaluate people with
CKD comprehensively in order to address both progressive
CKD and its attendant comorbidities in an integrated manner
and draws on literature to support this holistic approach
(Figure 2
24).
Chapter 4: Medical management and drug stewardship in
CKD
This chapter reminds HCPs and people with CKD about the
importance of assessing medications in the context of GFR,
and given that GFR changes over time, it emphasizes the need
for and value of regular reassessment (Table 5). Drugs with
narrow therapeutic windows need to be dosed according to
the most accurate assessment of GFR, which may require
direct measurement.
Understanding of drug metabolism and excretion is poor
in speciﬁc patient groups (children and in persons of child-
bearing age), and the impact of concomitant hormonal
therapy (for any reason, in male or female individuals) is not
known. Thus, we should proceed with caution and ensure
that we gather more data in these areas to better inform care
for diverse individuals across the life spectrum.
Chapter 4 also promotes the concepts of recognizing the
risks of polypharmacy, the potential value of deprescribing,
and the need for good drug stewardship, both for people
with CKD as well as providers. Accessible education and
communication for people with CKD will support efforts at
health literacy but also potentially mitigate issues of non-
adherence. Given the very large number of drugs that people
with CKD are prescribed, this is an important component of
care, ensuring that people are prescribed the right drugs for
the right reasons at the right dose.
Lastly, the chapter highlights new literature that suggests
that intravenous contrast does not carry large risks in people
with CKD and that imaging studies should be performed
based on information they provide and how and if they will
change management. The true low risk of associated acute
kidney injury is highlighted and will require ongoing edu-
cation of all HCPs and people with CKD to enable appro-
priate timely diagnostic imaging.
Chapter 5: Optimal models of care
This chapter addresses the value of referral to nephrology
specialists for comprehensive evaluation and work-up and
the importance of access to multidisciplinary care teams,
while recognizing the associated cost(s) and the nonavail-
ability of multidisciplinary care teams in different regions
(Table 5). There is an emphasis on standardized regular
assessment of symptoms, and the use of validated ques-
tionnaires to help both people with CKD and HCPs
appreciate changes over time and the impact of symptom
management (Figure 3).
The need for planned and extended transitions from pe-
diatric to adult care is highlighted, as is the importance of true
team-based care models. The value of supportive care and
comprehensive conservative management is described for
those who choose not to or who cannot access kidney
replacement therapy. The use of technology, digital platforms,
and tools, including, but not limited to, virtual care, to help
teams and individuals access the totality of the value of the
team and resources is described. We recognize that these
KRT preparation team/
comprehensive conservative care team
Nephrologist,
multidisciplinary care team
Primary care
CKD G5
CKD G4
CKD G3
CKD G2
CKD G1
Preparing
for KRT
Increasing severity of CKD
CV risk reduction
Identify patients at high risk
Discuss
KRT options
Education
Promote
self-management
Prevention and managementof complications
Kidney failure risk
≥40% in 2 years
Kidney failure risk
≥10% 
in 2 years
Kidney failur
e risk
≥3%–5% in 5 years
Kidney failur
e risk
<3%–5% in 5 years
Figure 3 | Optimal care model by increasing severity of chronic kidney disease (CKD). CV, cardiovascular; KRT, kidney replacement
therapy.
A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline KDIGO executive conclusions
Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701 697


--- page 15 ---
Table 5 | Recommendations and practice points from Chapters 4 and 5 of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for
Evaluation and Management of CKD
Chapter 4. Medication management and drug stewardship in CKD
4.1 Medication choices and monitoring for safety
Practice Point 4.1.1: People with CKD may be more susceptible to the nephrotoxic effects of medications. When prescribing such medications to people
with CKD, always consider the beneﬁts versus potential harms.
Practice Point 4.1.2: Monitor eGFR, electrolytes, and therapeutic medication levels, when indicated, in people with CKD receiving medications with
narrow therapeutic windows, potential adverse effects, or nephrotoxicity, both in outpatient practice and in hospital settings.
Practice Point 4.1.3: Review and limit the use of over-the-counter medicines and dietary or herbal remedies that may be harmful for people with CKD.
Practice Point 4.1.4: When prescribing medications to people with CKD who are of child-bearing potential, always review teratogenicity potential and
provide regular reproductive and contraceptive counseling in accordance with the values and preferences of the person with CKD.
4.2 Dose adjustments by level of GFR
Practice Point 4.2.1: Consider GFR when dosing medications cleared by the kidneys.
Practice Point 4.2.2: For most people and clinical settings, validated eGFR equations using SCr are appropriate for drug dosing.
Practice Point 4.2.3: Where more accuracy is required for drug-related decision-making (e.g., dosing due to narrow therapeutic or toxic range), drug
toxicity, or clinical situations where eGFRcr estimates may be unreliable, use of equations that combine both creatinine and cystatin C, or measured
GFR may be indicated.
Practice Point 4.2.4: In people with extremes of body weight, eGFR nonindexed for body surface area (BSA) may be indicated, especially for medications
with a narrow therapeutic range or requiring a minimum concentration to be effective.
Practice Point 4.2.5: Consider and adapt drug dosing in people where GFR, non-GFR determinants of theﬁltration markers, or volume of distribution are
not in a steady state.
4.3 Polypharmacy and drug stewardship
Practice Point 4.3.1: Perform thorough medication review periodically and at transitions of care to assess adherence, continued indication, and potential
drug interactions because people with CKD often have complex medication regimens and are seen by multiple specialists.
Practice Point 4.3.2: If medications are discontinued during an acute illness, communicate a clear plan of when to restart the discontinued medications to
the affected person and healthcare providers, and ensure documentation in the medical record.
Practice Point 4.3.3: Consider planned discontinuation of medications (such as metformin, ACEi, ARBs, and SGLT2i) in the 48– 72 hours prior to elective
surgery or during the acute management of adverse effects as a precautionary measure to prevent complications. However, note that failure to restart
these medications after the event or procedure may lead to unintentional harm (see Practice Point 4.3.2).
4.3.1 Strategies to promote drug stewardship
Practice Point 4.3.1.1: Educate and inform people with CKD regarding the expected beneﬁts and possible risks of medications so that they can identify
and report adverse events that can be managed.
Practice Point 4.3.1.2: Establish collaborative relationships with other healthcare providers and pharmacists and/or use tools to ensure and improve drug
stewardship in people with CKD to enhance management of their complex medication regimens.
4.4 Imaging studies
Practice Point 4.4.1: Consider the indication for imaging studies in accordance with general population indications. Risks and beneﬁts of imaging studies
should be determined on an individual basis in the context of their CKD.
4.4.1 Radiocontrast: intra-arterial and intravenous dye studies
Practice Point 4.4.1.1: Assess the risk for AKI in people with CKD receiving intra-arterial contrast for cardiac procedures using validated tools.
Practice Point 4.4.1.2: The intravenous administration of radiocontrast media can be managed in accordance with consensus statements from the
radiology societies in people with AKI or GFR<60 ml/min per 1.73 m
2 (CKD G3a– G5) undergoing elective investigation.
4.4.2 Gadolinium-containing contrast media
Practice Point 4.4.2.1: For people with GFR<30 ml/min per 1.73 m2 (CKD G4– G5) who require gadolinium-containing contrast media, preferentially offer
them American Colleague of Radiology group II and III gadolinium-based contrast agents.
Chapter 5. Optimal models of care
5.1 Referral to specialist kidney care services
Practice Point 5.1.1: Refer adults with CKD to specialist kidney care services in the circumstances listed in Figure 48.a
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations
Practice Point 5.1.2: Refer children and adolescents to specialist kidney care services in the following circumstances:
/C15 an ACR of 30 mg/g (3 mg/mmol) OR a PCR of 200 mg/g (20 mg/mmol) or more, conﬁrmed on a repeatﬁrst morning void sample, when well and not
during menstruation,
/C15 persistent hematuria,
/C15 any sustained decrease in eGFR,
/C15 hypertension,
/C15 kidney outﬂow obstruction or anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract,
/C15 known or suspected CKD, or
/C15 recurrent urinary tract infection.
5.2 Symptoms in CKD
5.2.1 Prevalence and severity of symptoms
[No speciﬁc recommendations or practice points]
(Continued on following page)
KDIGO executive conclusions A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline
698 Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701


--- page 16 ---
Table 5 |(Continued)
Chapter 5. Optimal models of care
5.2.2 Identiﬁcation and assessment of symptoms
Practice Point 5.2.2.1: Ask people with progressive CKD about uremic symptoms (e.g., reduced appetite, nausea, and level of fatigue/lethargy) at each
consultation using a standardized validated assessment of uremic symptoms tool.
5.2.3 Management of common symptoms for people with CKD
Practice Point 5.2.3.1: Use evidence-informed management strategies to support people to live well with CKD and improve their health-related quality of
life.
Practice Point 5.2.3.2: Screen people with CKD G4– G5, aged>65, poor growth (pediatrics), or symptoms such as involuntary weight loss, frailty, or poor
appetite twice annually for malnutrition using a validated assessment tool.
Practice Point 5.2.3.3: Enable availability of appropriate medical nutrition therapy for people with signs of malnutrition, ideally under the supervision of
renal dietitians or accredited nutrition providers if not available.
5.3 Team-based integrated care
Practice Point 5.3.1: Enable access to a patient-centered multidisciplinary care team consisting of dietary counseling, medication management,
education, and counseling about different KRT modalities, transplant options, dialysis access surgery, and ethical, psychological, and social care for
people with CKD.
Practice Point 5.3.2: Education programs that also involve care partners where indicated are important to promote informed, activated people with CKD.
Practice Point 5.3.3: Consider the use of telehealth technologies including web-based, mobile applications, virtual visiting, and wearable devices in the
delivery of education and care.
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations
5.3.1 Transition from pediatric to adult care
5.3.1.1 Pediatric providers
Practice Point 5.3.1.1.1: Prepare adolescents and their families for transfer to adult-oriented care starting at 11– 14 years of age by using checklists to
assess readiness and guide preparation, and by conducting part of each visit without the parent/guardian present (Figure 55
b).
Practice Point 5.3.1.1.2: Provide a comprehensive written transfer summary, and ideally an oral handover, to the receiving healthcare providers including
all relevant medical information as well as information about the young person’s cognitive abilities and social support (Figure 55b).
Practice Point 5.3.1.1.3: Transfer young people to adult care during times of medical and social stability where possible.
5.3.1.2 Adult providers
Practice Point 5.3.1.2.1: Recognize that young people under 25 years of age with CKD are a unique population at high risk for adverse outcomes at least in
part due to physiologic incomplete brain maturation.
Practice Point 5.3.1.2.2: Encourage young people to informally visit the adult care clinic to which they will be transferred before theﬁrst appointment
(Figure 55b).
Practice Point 5.3.1.2.3: Assess young people with CKD more frequently than older people with the same stage of CKD and, with the agreement of the
young person, include the caregivers or signiﬁcant other of the young person in their care, at least in theﬁrst 1– 3 years following transfer from
pediatric care (Figure 55b).
5.4 Timing the initiation of dialysis
Practice Point 5.4.1: Initiate dialysis based on a composite assessment of a person’s symptoms, signs, QoL, preferences, level of GFR, and laboratory
abnormalities.
Practice Point 5.4.2: Initiate dialysis if the presence of one or more of the following situations is evident (Table 41c). This often but not invariably occurs in
the GFR range between 5 and 10 ml/min per 1.73 m2.
Practice Point 5.4.3: Consider planning for preemptive kidney transplantation and/or dialysis access in adults when the GFR is<15– 20 ml/min per 1.73 m2
or risk of KRT is>40% over 2 years.
Special considerations
Pediatric considerations
Practice Point 5.4.4: In children, in addition to the adult indications for dialysis, poor growth refractory to optimized nutrition, growth hormone, and
medical management is an indication for initiating KRT.
Practice Point 5.4.5: Pursue living or deceased donor preemptive kidney transplantation as the treatment of choice for children in whom there is
evidence of progressive and irreversible CKD. The eGFR at which preemptive transplantation should be undertaken will depend on multiple factors
including the age and size of the child and the rate of progression of kidney failure but will usually be between eGFR 5– 15 ml/min per 1.73 m
2.
5.5 Structure and process of supportive care and comprehensive conservative management
Practice Point 5.5.1: Inform people with CKD about the options for KRT and comprehensive conservative care.
Practice Point 5.5.2: Support comprehensive conservative management as an option for people who choose not to pursue KRT.
Practice Point 5.5.3: Provide access to resources that enable the delivery of advanced care planning for people with a recognized need for end-of-life
care, including those people undergoing comprehensive conservative care.
CKD, chronic kidney disease; KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes; QoL, quality of life.
aFigure 48 infull guideline.
bFigure 55 infull guideline.
cTable 41 infull guideline.
A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline KDIGO executive conclusions
Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701 699


--- page 17 ---
technologies are evolving rapidly so that deﬁnitive evaluation
of the value, harms, and beneﬁts of these is not known.
There is an emphasis on advanced care planning, directed
speciﬁcally to those choosing supportive care, but also
recognizing that all people with chronic diseases do need to
ensure that plans addressing future healthcare states are
known to all.
Conclusion
Research recommendations are offered in the last chapter in
some detail to signpost priority areas for theﬁeld, such as
improving diagnostic and dynamic tests of kidney health and
disease, improving and evaluating the implementation of
validated prediction equations in speci ﬁc situations, and
testing different combinations of disease-modifying drugs
with dietary regimens, to name but a few.
This comprehensive guidance document based on current
best evidence indicates some exciting new approaches to
management strategies and treatment options for people
living with CKD, with the goal of improving symptom
management, disease modi ﬁcation, and offering person-
centered approaches, while also recognizing the heterogene-
ity of CKD. The fact that new therapies exist and others are
being evaluated heralds an exciting time for people living with
kidney diseases, their families, and the HCP .
DISCLOSURE
The development and publication of this guideline were supported
by Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). The
opinions or views expressed in this summary are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reﬂect the opinions or recommendations of
the International Society of Nephrology or Elsevier. Dosages,
indications, and methods of use for products that are referred to in
the supplement by the authors may reﬂect their clinical experience or
may be derived from the professional literature or other clinical
sources. Because of the differences betweenin vitro and in vivo
systems and between laboratory animal models and clinical data in
humans, in vitro and animal data do not necessarily correlate with
clinical results.
AL reports receiving consultancy fees from AstraZeneca*, Bayer*,
Janssen*, Novo Nordisk*, OccuRx*, and Otsuka*; research support
from AstraZeneca*, Boehringer Ingelheim*, Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR)*, GlaxoSmithKline*, National Institutes of
Health (NIH)*, and Otsuka*; speaker honoraria from AstraZeneca*,
Bayer*, and Boehringer Ingelheim*; and funding for the development
of educational presentations for AstraZeneca*, Bayer*, Boehringer
Ingelheim*, and Novo Nordisk*. SBA reports receiving research
receiving support for CIHR*, Heart and Stroke Foundation*, and NIH*;
being a member of the CIHR Institute of Gender and Health Advisory
Board, the Canadian Medical Association Journal Governance Council
(volunteer), the Data Safety Monitoring Board Member for
Adolescent Type 1 diabetes Treatment with sodium-glucose
cotransporter-2 inhibitors for hyperglycEMia & hyPerﬁlTration Trial
(ATTEMPT) trial (trial sponsored by the CIHR and Juvenile Diabetes
Research Foundation Canada) (volunteer); and serving as President-
Elect, Organization for the Study of Sex Differences (volunteer). JJC
reports receiving research support from Amgen, Astellas, AstraZe-
neca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Novo Nordisk,
and Vifor Pharma; speaker honoraria from Abbott, Baxter, and Fre-
senius Kabi; and serving as a board member for AstraZeneca, Baxter,
Fresenius Kabi, and GlaxoSmithKline. BF reports receiving research
support from CIHR* and NIH*, and serving as Chair of the Women in
Transplantation Initiative of The Transplantation Society. RKH reports
receiving consultancy fees from Bayer and United Health Group;
research support from American Society of Nephrology Foundation
for Kidney Research*, National Institute on Aging*, and Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation*; and serving on the Advancing Kidney Health
through Optimal Medication Management (AKHOMM). WGH reports
receiving research support from Boehringer Ingelheim* and Eli Lilly*,
and serving on the Data Monitoring Committee for Bayer (unpaid).
LAI reports receiving consultancy fees from Diamtrix and Tricida*;
and research support from Chinook*, National Kidney Foundation*,
NIH*, Otsuka, and Reata Pharmaceuticals. RK reports receiving
speaker honoraria from Astellas* and Baxter Healthcare*. EL reports
receiving research support from National Institute of Health
Research*. PL reports receiving consultancy fees from AstraZeneca,
Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Janssen, Merck, and Novo
Nordisk; speaker honoraria from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Janssen, Merck, and Novo Nordisk; funding for
development of educational presentations for AstraZeneca, Bayer,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Janssen, Merck, and Novo Nordisk; and
serving as the Associate Editor of Elsevier Online Practice Update
Primary Care. MM reports receiving consultancy fees from AstraZe-
neca, Bayer, and Boehringer Ingelheim; research support from
AstraZeneca*, Bayer*, Boehringer Ingelheim*, Renal Research Insti-
tute*, and Tricida*; speaker honoraria and travel support from
AstraZeneca; and funding for expert testimony for AstraZeneca,
Bayer, and Boehringer Ingelheim. ES reports receiving consultancy
fees from AstraZeneca, research support from Bayer AG* and E.N.D.I.
Stiftung*, speaker honoraria from Verband dt. Nierenzentren, and
serving on the Executive Board of the German Society of Nephrology
and the Editorial Board of National Kidney Foundation. MS reports
receiving research support from Bayer*, NIH (National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute [NHLBI], National Institute on Aging [NIA], and
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
[NIDDK])*, VA Health Services Research & Development*, and VA
Clinical Science Research & Development*; speaker honoraria from
AstraZeneca, Bayer, and Boehringer Ingelheim; and funding for
expert testimony for Hagens Berman International Law Firm. RS re-
ports receiving consultancy fees from AstraZeneca* and Fresenius
Medical Care*, research support from Fresenius Medical Care* and
Vitaﬂo*, and speaker honoraria from Amgen and Fresenius Medical
Care. NT reports receiving consultancy fees from AstraZen-
eca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Otsuka,
ProKidney, and Roche; research support from AstraZeneca*, Bayer*,
Boehringer Ingelheim*, and Janssen*; funding for development of
educational presentations for AstraZeneca; having stock/stock op-
tions from Clinpredict, Klinrisk, Marizyme, ProKidney, Pulsedata, and
Quanta; and a patent for a microﬂuidic device for measuring ACR at
point of care. IU reports receiving speaker honoraria from AstraZen-
eca and Boehringer Ingelheim. LZ reports receiving research support
from AstraZeneca* and Bayer*. All the other authors declared no
competing interests. *Monies paid to institution.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A special debt of gratitude is owed to the following people for their
contribution to this important guideline effort: Melissa Thompson,
Debbie Maizels, Dipal Patel, Troy Gharibani, Xuhao Yang, Verna Lazar,
Jeongmin Hana Kim, Morgan Grams, Michel Jadoul, and Wolfgang
Winkelmayer.
REFERENCES
1. Levin A, Okpechi IG, Caskey FJ, et al. Perspectives on early
detection of chronic kidney disease: the facts, the questions, and
KDIGO executive conclusions A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline
700 Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701


--- page 18 ---
a proposed framework for 2023 and beyond. Kidney Int . 2023;103:
1004 – 1008 .
2. Venuthurupalli SK, Hoy WE, Healy HG, et al. CKD screening and
surveillance in Australia: past, present, and future.Kidney Int Rep. 2017;3:
36– 46.
3. Cusick MM, Tisdale RL, Chertow GM, et al. Population-wide screening for
chronic kidney disease: a cost-effectiveness analysis.Ann Intern Med.
2023;176:788– 797.
4. Komenda P, Ferguson TW, Macdonald K, et al. Cost-effectiveness of
primary screening for CKD: a systematic review.Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;63:
789– 797.
5. Stanifer JW, Von Isenburg M, Chertow GM, Anand S. Chronic kidney
disease care models in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic
review. BMJ Glob Health. 2018;3:e000728.
6. Grams ME, Coresh J, Matsushita K, et al. Estimated glomerularﬁltration
rate, albuminuria, and adverse outcomes: an individual-participant data
meta-analysis. JAMA. 2023;330:1266– 1277.
7. Delanaye P, Cavalier E, Radermecker RP, et al. Cystatin C or creatinine for
detection of stage 3 chronic kidney disease in anorexia nervosa.Nephron
Clin Pract. 2008;110:c158– c163.
8. Thurlow JS, Abbott KC, Linberg A, et al. SCr and SCysC concentrations
before and after traumatic amputation in male soldiers: a case-control
study. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;63:167– 170.
9. Knight EL, Verhave JC, Spiegelman D, et al. Factors inﬂuencing serum
cystatin C levels other than renal function and the impact on renal
function measurement. Kidney Int. 2004;65:1416– 1421.
10. Stevens LA, Schmid CH, Greene T, et al. Factors other than glomerular
ﬁltration rate affect serum cystatin C levels.Kidney Int. 2009;75:652– 660.
11. Wang Y, Adingwupu OM, Shlipak MG, et al. Discrepancies between
creatinine-based and cystatin C– based estimated GFR: interpretation
according to performance compared to measured GFR.Kidney Med.
2023;5:100710.
12. Hingorani S, Pao E, Schoch G, et al. Estimating GFR in adult patients with
hematopoietic cell transplant: comparison of estimating equations with
an iohexol reference standard.Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015;10:601– 610.
13. Matsuoka D, Hirabayashi K, Murase T, et al. Assessment of kidney
function using inulin-based and estimated glomerularﬁltration rates
before and after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in
pediatric patients. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2020;67:e28733.
14. Shibata K, Yasuda Y, Kobayashi R, et al. Renal function evaluation in
patients with cancer who were scheduled to receive carboplatin or S-1.
Clin Exp Nephrol. 2015;19:1107– 1113.
15. Costa E, Silva VT, Gil LA, Caires RA, et al. Assessment of estimated
glomerular ﬁltration rate in a cohort of 1200 cancer patients using serum
creatinine and cystatin C.J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020;31:11.
16. Costa E, Silva VT, Gil LA, Jr, Inker LA, et al. A prospective cross-sectional
study estimated glomerularﬁltration rate from creatinine and cystatin C
in adults with solid tumors.Kidney Int. 2022;101:607– 614.
17. Kervella D, Lemoine S, Sens F, et al. Cystatin C versus creatinine for GFR
estimation in CKD due to heart failure.Am J Kidney Dis. 2017;69:321–
323.
18. Swolinsky JS, Nerger NP, Leistner DM, et al. Serum creatinine and cystatin
C-based estimates of glomerularﬁltration rate are misleading in acute
heart failure. ESC Heart Fail. 2021;8:3070– 3081.
19. De Souza V, Hadj-Aissa A, Dolomanova O, et al. Creatinine- versus
cystatine C-based equations in assessing the renal function of
candidates for liver transplantation with cirrhosis.Hepatology. 2014;59:
1522– 1531.
20. Torre A, Aguirre-Valadez JM, Arreola-Guerra JM, et al. Creatinine versus
cystatin C for estimating GFR in patients with liver cirrhosis.Am J Kidney
Dis. 2015;67:342– 344.
21. Stammler F, Derain-Dubourg L, Lemoine S, et al. Impact of race-independent
equations on estimating glomerularﬁltration rate for the assessment of
kidney dysfunction in liver disease.BMC Nephrol. 2023;24:83.
22. Aldenbratt A, Lindberg C, Johannesson E, et al. Estimation of kidney
function in patients with primary neuromuscular diseases: is serum
cystatin C a better marker of kidney function than creatinine?J Nephrol.
2022;35:493– 503.
23. Adingwupu OM, Barbosa ER, Palevsky PM, et al. Cystatin C as a GFR
estimation marker in acute and chronic illness: a systematic review.
Kidney Med. 2023;5:100727.
24. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes Diabetes Work Group.
KDIGO 2022 Clinical Practice Guideline for Diabetes Management in
Chronic Kidney Disease.Kidney Int. 2022;102:S1– S127.
A Levin et al.: Executive summary of KDIGO 2024 CKD Guideline KDIGO executive conclusions
Kidney International (2024) 105, 684–701 701
