Great debate: myocardial infarction after cardiac surgery must be redefined - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Eur Heart J 
. 2024 Sep 16;45(39):4170–4177. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehae416 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Great debate: myocardial infarction after cardiac surgery must be
redefined 
Mario Gaudino 
Mario Gaudino 
1 
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Weill Cornell Medicine,
New York, NY, USA 
Find articles by Mario Gaudino 
1, # , Allan S Jaffe 
Allan S Jaffe 
2 
Departments of Cardiology and Laboratory Medicine and Pathology and Wayne
and Kathryn Presiel Professor of Cardiovascular Disease Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA 
Find articles by Allan S Jaffe 
2, # , Milan Milojevic 
Milan Milojevic 
3 
Department of Cardiac Surgery and Cardiovascular Research, Dedinje
Cardiovascular Institute, Belgrade, Serbia 
4 
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Erasmus MC,
Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands 
Find articles by Milan Milojevic 
3, 4 , Yader Sandoval 
Yader Sandoval 
5 
Minneapolis Heart Institute, Abbott Northwestern Hospital, Minneapolis
Heart Institute Foundation, Minneapolis, MN,
USA 
Find articles by Yader Sandoval 
5 , Philip J Devereaux 
Philip J Devereaux 
6 
Department of Medicine, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada 
7 
Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada 
8 
Population Health Research Institute,
Perioperative & Surgery, Hamilton, ON, Canada 
Find articles by Philip J Devereaux 
6, 7, 8 , Kristian Thygesen 
Kristian Thygesen 
9 
Department of Cardiological Medicine, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark 
Find articles by Kristian Thygesen 
9 , Patrick O Myers 
Patrick O Myers 
10 
Department of Cardiac Surgery, CHUV-Center Hospitalier Universitaire
Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland 
Find articles by Patrick O Myers 
10 , Jolanda Kluin 
Jolanda Kluin 
11 
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Erasmus MC,
Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands 
Find articles by Jolanda Kluin 
11, ✉ 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Weill Cornell Medicine,
New York, NY, USA 
2 
Departments of Cardiology and Laboratory Medicine and Pathology and Wayne
and Kathryn Presiel Professor of Cardiovascular Disease Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA 
3 
Department of Cardiac Surgery and Cardiovascular Research, Dedinje
Cardiovascular Institute, Belgrade, Serbia 
4 
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Erasmus MC,
Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands 
5 
Minneapolis Heart Institute, Abbott Northwestern Hospital, Minneapolis
Heart Institute Foundation, Minneapolis, MN,
USA 
6 
Department of Medicine, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada 
7 
Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada 
8 
Population Health Research Institute,
Perioperative & Surgery, Hamilton, ON, Canada 
9 
Department of Cardiological Medicine, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark 
10 
Department of Cardiac Surgery, CHUV-Center Hospitalier Universitaire
Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland 
11 
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Erasmus MC,
Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands 
✉ 
Corresponding author. Tel: +31107035411, Email:
j.kluin@erasmusmc.nl 
# 
Mario Gaudino and Allan S Jaffe contributed equally to the study. 
Collection date 2024 Oct 14. 
© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
the European Society of Cardiology. 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted
reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited. 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC11472451  PMID: 39279125 
This article has been corrected. See Eur Heart J. 2024 Oct 11;45(44):4715 . 
Graphical Abstract 
Graphical Abstract. 
Open in a new tab 
Pros and cons of redefining peri-operative myocardial infarction (PMI) to cardiac
troponin (cTn) levels of at least 130–170× 99th percentile upper reference limit
(URL). CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; CK–MB, creatine kinase–myocardial
band; ECG, electrocardiogram; MI, myocardial infarction; UDMI, universal definition
of myocardial infarction. 
Keywords: Perioperative myocardial infarction, Definition, Cardiac surgery, Myocardial injury 
Introduction 
Jolanda Kluin 
It is important to detect peri-operative myocardial infarction (PMI) after cardiac surgery.
First and most importantly to enable identifying patients that are post-operatively at risk
of ongoing infarction and might need either a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or a
reoperation. These are most often patients after coronary bypass surgery. But patients after
other cardiac procedures can also experience ischaemia due to coronary artery problems (e.g.
calcific emboli following decalcification in aortic stenosis/aortic valve replacement
procedures, or injury of the circumflex artery due to a stitch deep in the annulus of the
posterior mitral valve leaflet, placed to implant a mitral ring in mitral valve repair
surgery). A second reason to detect PMI following cardiac surgery is for quality control. In
most national registries, PMI after cardiac surgery is an item of the quality control
registry. Third, in studies, especially in those that compare a surgical procedure [e.g.
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) or surgical aortic valve replacement] with a
transcatheter procedure (e.g. PCI or transcatheter aortic valve replacement), it is
important to distinguish patients with a PMI from those that have ‘general myocardial
injury’ due to the surgical procedure itself. Examples of myocardial injury due to the
surgery itself include mechanical manipulation and cannulation, cardiopulmonary bypass,
cardioplegic arrest, ischaemia–reperfusion injury, peri-operative tachyarrhythmias,
incisions/stitches in the myocardium, ablation (maze procedure), and myocardial resection
(e.g. myectomy in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy surgery). 1 All these procedure-related mechanisms can induce cardiac
enzyme/biomarker release. In most studies comparing CABG with PCI, PMI is part of the
combined endpoint of major adverse cardiac and cerebrovascular events. Examples like the
Evaluation of XIENCE versus Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery for Effectiveness of Left Main
Revascularization (EXCEL) trial show the importance of a correct definition of
PMI. 2 , 3 In this trial, the investigators used an enzyme-based
definition of PMI [creatine kinase–myocardial band (CK–MB) above 10× upper reference limit
(URL)], and it was implied that this detrimentally impacted on those with CABG procedures.
Lastly, PMI might impact long-term outcome. One might say that a definition of PMI is
only/most valid when a PMI, defined accordingly, is associated with long-term mortality
after cardiac surgery. However, mortality is the worst, though not the only important
outcome. An association with morbidity or low quality of life is important as well.
Furthermore, this reasoning will lead to a high threshold to reach the definition of a PMI
since only the larger PMIs are associated with mortality. 4 This will result in underdiagnosis of the smaller though
possibly treatable PMIs that can benefit from post-operative PCI or reoperation. 
Thus, a too low cut-off value for cardiac troponin (cTn) elevation will result in a high
number of false-positive PMIs that can put patients in danger of undergoing a not-indicated
post-operative coronary angiography or reoperation and can falsely derogate CABG or other
cardiac surgery procedure outcomes in trials comparing surgery with transcatheter
procedures. On the other hand, a too high cut-off value for cTn elevation will result in a
high number of false negatives, resulting in erroneously not offering patients a
post-operative coronary angiography or reoperation and a failure to identify institutes with
lower quality of care. 
Currently, several definitions of PMI exist. 
The 4th Universal Definition (4UD) of myocardial infarction (MI) was developed by a
joint task force among major cardiological societies, including the European Society of
Cardiology (ESC), American College of Cardiology, American Heart Association, and World
Heart Federation. The ESC uses the 4UD of MI in their 2018 guidelines. 5 Peri-operative myocardial
infarction associated with CABG (Type 5 MI) is diagnosed when: 
cTn value >10 times the 99th percentile URL during the first 48 h following
CABG, occurring from a normal baseline cTn value (or CK–MB >10 times the 99th
percentile URL if cTn is unavailable). In addition, one of the following elements is
required: 
Development of new pathological Q-waves 
Angiographic documented new graft occlusion or new native coronary artery
occlusion 
Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion
abnormality in a pattern consistent with an ischaemic aetiology 
For cardiac surgeries other than CABG, cTn values should be considered in the
context of the procedure and the extent of the expected procedural-related
myocardial injury. 
Other used PMI definitions come from the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions (SCAI): 
CK–MB ≥10× URL 
CK–MB ≥5× URL and new Q-waves or left bundle branch abnormality (LBBB) 
cTn ≥70 URL 
cTn ≥35 URL and new Q-waves or LBBB 
and the Academic Research Consortium (ARC)-2: 
cTn >35× URL and new Q-waves, angiographic findings, or new regional wall motion
abnormalities 
Most literature on PMI focuses on patients undergoing CABG. A recent study shows that,
following CABG, the 4UD and ARC-2 criteria (cardiac enzyme release plus an additional sign)
remained strong predictors of all-cause mortality at 30 days and 5 years. 5 Isolated cardiac enzyme release
definitions (SCAI) were not associated with PMI relevant to prognosis. In another recent
study, only high peri-operative cTn levels (well above the limit of the PMI definitions) was
associated with lower long-term mortality and morbidity. 6 , 7 
The question remains whether the PMI definition according to the 2018 ESC guidelines (4UD)
is the best we have or if we can do better. For example, it is interesting to see that all
PMI definitions use cut-off values of cardiac enzymes whereas the course of the cardiac
enzymes over time between ‘cardiac injury due to the procedure’ most often is different as
compared with the course of the cardiac enzymes in PMI. Let us ask the experts. 
Contributor Information 
Mario Gaudino, 
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Weill Cornell Medicine,
New York, NY, USA. 
Allan S Jaffe, 
Departments of Cardiology and Laboratory Medicine and Pathology and Wayne
and Kathryn Presiel Professor of Cardiovascular Disease Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
Milan Milojevic, 
Department of Cardiac Surgery and Cardiovascular Research, Dedinje
Cardiovascular Institute, Belgrade, Serbia; 
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Erasmus MC,
Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
Yader Sandoval, 
Minneapolis Heart Institute, Abbott Northwestern Hospital, Minneapolis
Heart Institute Foundation, Minneapolis, MN,
USA. 
Philip J Devereaux, 
Department of Medicine, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada; 
Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; 
Population Health Research Institute,
Perioperative & Surgery, Hamilton, ON, Canada. 
Kristian Thygesen, 
Department of Cardiological Medicine, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark. 
Patrick O Myers, 
Department of Cardiac Surgery, CHUV-Center Hospitalier Universitaire
Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland. 
Jolanda Kluin, 
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Erasmus MC,
Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
Pro 
Mario Gaudino , Philip J Devereaux , Milan Milojevic , Patrick O Myers 
‘Do the best you can until you know better. Then, when you know better, do better.’—Maya
Angelou 
Current definitions of peri-operative myocardial infarction (PMI) after cardiac surgery all
focus on coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery, with no criteria provided for PMI
after non-CABG cardiac surgery procedures. With the only exception being the Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions (SCAI), all the existing PMI definitions
require two key criteria for PMI diagnosis: post-operative cardiac biomarker elevation and
post-operative new electrocardiographic changes. We summarize the available evidence and
demonstrate how biomarker levels and the role of electrocardiographic findings in current
PMI definitions should be updated. For biomarkers, we focus on cardiac troponin (cTn) as
more reflective of current clinical practice and supported by more recent and higher quality
evidence. 
Biomarkers 
The cardiac biomarkers considered in the current PMI definitions are creatine
kinase–myocardial band (CK–MB) and cTn ( Table 1 ). 1–3 
Creatine kinase–myocardial band has been used for decades but has now largely been
replaced by cTn in most health systems. 4 The switch in biomarkers has generated several challenges as most of
the evidence on PMI after cardiac surgery was based on CK–MB, and there are large
variations in post-operative levels and dynamics between the different cTn types and
between different assays for the same cTn type. 5–7 
Table 1. 
Definitions of peri-operative myocardial infarction after coronary artery bypass
surgery in current definitions 
Definition 
Year 
Time after index procedure 
Peak biomarker criteria 
Required supporting evidence 
Fourth UDMI 1 
2018 
Within 48 h 
cTn >10× 99th percentile URL (or CK–MB >10× 99th percentile URL if cTn
unavailable) 
One or more of the following: 
ECG: development of new pathological
Q-waves; OR angiographic: new graft occlusion or new native coronary artery
occlusion; OR imaging: new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion
abnormality in a pattern consistent with an ischaemic aetiology 
ARC-2 2 
2018 
Within 48 h 
cTn ≥35× 99th percentile URL a 
One or more of the following: 
ECG: new significant Q-waves or equivalent;
OR angiographic: flow-limiting angiographic complications; OR imaging: new
substantial loss of myocardium on imaging 
SCAI 3 
2013 
Within 48 h 
CK–MB ≥5× 99th URL (or cTn ≥35× 99th percentile URL) 
New pathologic Q-waves in ≥2 contiguous leads or new persistent LBBB 
CK–MB ≥10× 99th percentile URL (or cTn ≥70× 99th percentile URL) 
None 
Open in a new tab 
ARC, Academic Research Consortium; CK–MB, creatine kinase–myocardial band; cTn,
cardiac troponin; ECG, electrocardiogram; LBBB, left bundle branch abnormality;
SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; UDMI, universal
definition of myocardial infarction; URL, upper reference limit. 
a cTn ≥70× 99th percentile with no supporting evidence is termed
‘significant peri-operative myocardial injury’ rather than myocardial
infarction. 
The evidence on the association between post-operative cardiac biomarker levels and
clinical outcomes has generally been consistent in showing an increase in the risk of
post-operative adverse events with the increase in post-operative biomarker
levels 8–12 ; however, the shape and strength of this association
are poorly defined, making the definition of clinically relevant thresholds highly
problematic. While the finding that any post-operative increase in cardiac biomarkers has
some prognostic relevance is important, from a clinical and practical perspective, it is
critical to define a biomarker cut-off that separates episodes with minor vs. major impact
on post-operative patients’ outcomes and, most importantly, on mortality. Unfortunately
(as acknowledged by the authors), the biomarker thresholds used in current PMI definitions
were chosen arbitrarily, as no rigorous evidence was available when these definitions were
proposed. 1 , 3 
The universal definition requires an increase in peak post-operative cTn of >10× the
upper reference limit (URL) for the diagnosis of PMI, 1 while the Academic Research Consortium (ARC)-2 and SCAI
definitions require an increase of ≥35× URL (≥70× URL in the SCAI definition in absence of
supportive signs of myocardial ischaemia). 2 , 3 
However, in a post hoc analysis of the CABG Off- or On-Pump
Revascularization Study (CORONARY) trial that included 4752 patients with CK–MB data and
1528 patients with non–high-sensitivity cTn data, at 24 and 48 h after surgery, the 10×
URL threshold for cTn was reached by 46% of patients and was not associated with 30-day
mortality (odds ratio 4.0, 95% confidence interval 0.8–19.3). 13 The lower threshold of cTn
associated with mortality was 130× URL. 
More recently, the Vascular Events in Surgery Patients Cohort Evaluation (VISION) Cardiac
Surgery study evaluated the Abbott high-sensitivity cTn assay in 13 862 cardiac surgery
patients. In this large international study, the >10× URL threshold was exceeded in 97%
of cases on the first post-operative day 14 ; 89% of the patients exceeded the ≥35× URL threshold and 75% the ≥70×
URL threshold. The 24 h cTn threshold associated with an increased risk of 30-day
mortality was >210× URL after isolated CABG or aortic valve replacement and was
essentially 500× URL for other cardiac surgeries. Similarly, in a large single-centre
cohort study of over 8200 patients from Austria, the high-sensitivity cTn cut-offs
associated with 30-day mortality varied from 41× URL for aortic valve replacement to 170×
URL for CABG ( Figure
1 ). 15 
Figure 1. 
Open in a new tab 
Peak cardiac troponin thresholds associated with 30-day mortality. The VISION CS
Trial 14 does not
distinguish between coronary artery bypass grafting and aortic valve replacement or
repair, which were included in the same coronary artery bypass grafting group with a
ratio of a nearly 4:1. CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; UDMI, universal
definition of myocardial infarction; URL, upper reference limit; VISION CS, Vascular
Events in Surgery Patients Cohort Evaluation Cardiac Surgery Study. See references
Devereaux 14 (VISION
CS) and Pölzli 15 
(Innsbruck) 
Very limited data exist on the association between cardiac biomarker levels and
post-operative quality of life, but the limited available data suggest that an association
between PMI and quality of life outcomes is seen only for definitions that use high
biomarker thresholds. 16 
In summary, recent data consistently show that the cTn thresholds used in current PMI
definitions are met or exceeded in most cardiac surgery patients and that an association
with adverse post-operative outcomes is only seen at cTn levels which are several times
higher than those used in current PMI definitions. 
Electrocardiographic evidence of myocardial ischaemia 
All the current definitions require additional signs of ischaemia (generally on the
post-operative electrocardiogram) in addition to biomarker elevation for PMI diagnosis.
The only exception is the SCAI definition which does not require additional ischaemic
signs in case of cTn elevation ≥70× URL. 
The evidence on the relationship between post-operative ischaemic electrocardiographic
changes and clinical outcomes is limited and mixed, with several studies reporting a lack
of association. 17 In a study
of 800 patients, post-operative biomarker elevation was significantly associated with left
ventricular dysfunction and mortality independently of the electrocardiographic
findings. 9 
In a review of 30 cardiac surgery studies, new conduction disturbances were reported in
3.4%–55.8% of the patients and were not associated with post-operative survival (relative
risk 1.35, 95% confidence interval 0.85–2.01). 18 
In a sub-analysis of the Coronary Artery Surgery Study, new Q-waves were associated with
post-operative mortality after coronary surgery 19 and an analysis based on data from the Bypass
Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation trial described similar results. 20 However, other series reported
no association between isolated post-operative Q-waves and mortality. 9 , 21 , 22 
ST-segment elevation can be detected in 10%–15% of patients after CABG, and the limited
available evidence does not support an association with post-operative outcomes. 23 , 24 
In summary, there is very limited evidence to support an association between
post-operative electrocardiographic changes and outcome in cardiac surgery patients. The
inclusion of electrocardiography findings as a key part of all current PMI definitions
seems based on extrapolation from what is known in patients with acute coronary syndromes
or coronary artery disease and biologic plausibility, rather than data derived from
cardiac surgery patients. 
Although no prospective validation of those higher cTn levels has yet been published,
current evidence supporting their incorporation in current PMI definition appears
reasonable based on current knowledge. 
Conclusions 
Recent data clearly show that the cTn cut-off adopted by all current PMI definitions is
met in most cardiac surgery patients. In addition, it is clear that new post-operative
electrocardiographic changes are seen in a large proportion of cardiac surgery patients
and their association with clinical outcomes is weak. The low cut-off value for biomarker
elevation and the reliance on electrocardiographic criteria used by current PMI
definitions lead to a large overestimation of the incidence of PMI; this generates
confusion in the interpretation of studies that include PMI in their outcomes and may harm
patients by exposing them to unnecessary diagnostic procedures. The prognostic
significance of PMI as currently defined is unclear, and this leads to uncertainty in
post-operative prognostic stratification. Similar considerations have recently been
published by an expert group of the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic
Surgery. 25 
Thanks to recent studies and important new data, we are now in the position to define the
biomarker threshold for PMI diagnosis based on solid evidence rather than on
arbitrium—this is what we should do as a community. The current evidence rejects currently
used criteria for PMI diagnosis and supports instead the use of a cTn threshold of at
least 130–170× URL in the first 24 h, even in the absence of electrocardiographic evidence
of ischaemia, as the most prognostically relevant criterion for the diagnosis of PMI after
cardiac surgery. 
References 
1. 
Thygesen  K,
Alpert
JS, Jaffe
AS,
Chaitman
BR, Bax
JJ,
Morrow
DA, et al. 
Fourth universal definition of myocardial infarction
(2018). J Am Coll Cardiol
2018;72:2231–64. 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.08.1038
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. 
Garcia-Garcia  HM,
McFadden
EP, Farb
A,
Mehran
R, Stone
GW,
Spertus
J, et al. 
Standardized end point definitions for coronary intervention trials:
the Academic Research Consortium-2 consensus document.
Circulation
2018;137:2635–50. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.029289
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. 
Moussa  ID,
Klein
LW, Shah
B,
Mehran
R, Mack
MJ,
Brilakis
ES, et al. 
Consideration of a new definition of clinically relevant myocardial
infarction after coronary revascularization. J Am Coll
Cardiol
2013;62:1563–70. 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.08.720
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. 
Collinson  P,
Hammerer-Lercher
A,
Suvisaari
J, Apple
FS,
Christenson
RH, Pulkki
K, et al. 
How well do laboratories adhere to recommended clinical guidelines for
the management of myocardial infarction: the CARdiac MArker Guidelines Uptake in
Europe study (CARMAGUE). Clin Chem
2016;62:1264–71. 10.1373/clinchem.2016.259515
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. 
Maynard  SJ. Troponin T or troponin I as cardiac markers in ischaemic
heart disease. Heart
2000;83:371–3. 10.1136/heart.83.4.371
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. 
Schneider  U,
Mukharyamov
M,
Beyersdorf
F, Dewald
O,
Liebold
A, Gaudino
M, et al. 
The value of perioperative biomarker release for the assessment of
myocardial injury or infarction in cardiac surgery. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg
2022;61:735–41. 10.1093/ejcts/ezab493
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. 
Collinson  P. Troponin T or troponin I or CK-MB (or
none?). Eur Heart J
1998;19:N16–24.
[ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. 
Domanski  MJ. Association of myocardial enzyme elevation and survival
following coronary artery bypass graft surgery. JAMA
2011;305:585. 10.1001/jama.2011.99
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. 
Ramsay  J,
Shernan
S, Fitch
J,
Finnegan
P, Todaro
T,
Filloon
T, et al. 
Increased creatine kinase MB level predicts postoperative mortality
after cardiac surgery independent of new Q waves. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg
2005;129:300–6. 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2004.06.005
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. 
Klatte  K,
Chaitman
BR,
Theroux
P, Gavard
JA,
Stocke
K, Boyce
S, et al. 
Increased mortality after coronary artery bypass graft surgery is
associated with increased levels of postoperative creatine kinase-myocardial band
isoenzyme release. J Am Coll Cardiol
2001;38:1070–7. 10.1016/S0735-1097(01)01481-4
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. 
Søraas  CL,
Friis  C,
Engebretsen
KVT,
Sandvik
L,
Kjeldsen
SE,
Tønnessen
T. Troponin
T is a better predictor than creatine kinase-MB of long-term mortality after coronary
artery bypass graft surgery. Am Heart J
2012;164:779–85. 10.1016/j.ahj.2012.05.027
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. 
Kathiresan  S,
Servoss
SJ, Newell
JB,
Trani  D,
MacGillivray
TE,
Lewandrowski
K, et al. 
Cardiac troponin T elevation after coronary artery bypass grafting is
associated with increased one-year mortality. Am J
Cardiol
2004;94:879–81. 10.1016/j.amjcard.2004.06.022
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. 
Belley-Cote  EP,
Lamy  A,
Devereaux
PJ, Kavsak
P,
Lamontagne
F, Cook
DJ, et al. 
Definitions of post-coronary artery bypass grafting myocardial
infarction: variations in incidence and prognostic significance.
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg
2020;57:168–75. 10.1093/ejcts/ezz161
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. 
Devereaux  PJ,
Lamy  A,
Chan
MTV, Allard
RV,
Lomivorotov
VV,
Landoni
G, et al. 
High-sensitivity troponin I after cardiac surgery and 30-day
mortality. N Engl J Med
2022;386:827–36. 10.1056/NEJMoa2000803
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. 
Pölzl  L,
Engler
C,
Sterzinger
P, Lohmann
R,
Nägele
F, Hirsch
J, et al. 
Association of highsensitivity cardiac troponin T with 30-day and
5-year mortality after cardiac surgery. J Am Coll
Cardiol
2023;82:1301–12. 10.1016/j.jacc.2023.07.011
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. 
Gaudino  M,
Di Franco
A, Dimagli
A,
Biondi-Zoccai
G, Rahouma
M, Perezgrovas
Olaria  R, et al.  Correlation between periprocedural myocardial
infarction, mortality, and quality of life in coronary revascularization trials: a
meta-analysis. J Soc Cardiovasc Angiogr Interv
2023;2:100591. 10.1016/j.jscai.2023.100591
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. 
Weidenmann  V,
Robinson
NB, Rong
LQ,
Hameed
I, Naik
A, Morsi
M, et al. 
Diagnostic dilemma of perioperative myocardial infarction after
coronary artery bypass grafting: a review. Int J Surg
2020;79:76–83. 10.1016/j.ijsu.2020.05.036
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
18. 
Kumbhani  DJ,
Sharma
GVRK,
Khuri
SF, Kirdar
JA.
Fascicular conduction disturbances after coronary artery bypass
surgery: a review with a meta-analysis of their long-term
significance. J Card Surg
2006;21:428–34. 10.1111/j.1540-8191.2006.00264.x
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
19. 
Chaitman  B,
Alderman
E,
Sheffield
L, Tong
T,
Fisher
L, Mock
M, et al. 
Use of survival analysis to determine the clinical significance of new
Q waves after coronary bypass surgery. Circulation
1983;67:302–9. 10.1161/01.CIR.67.2.302
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
20. 
Yokoyama  Y,
Chaitman
BR,
Hardison
RM, Guo
P, Krone
R,
Stocke
K, et al. 
Association between new electrocardiographic abnormalities after
coronary revascularization and five-year cardiac mortality in BARI randomized and
registry patients. Am J Cardiol
2000;86:819–24. 10.1016/S0002-9149(00)01099-7
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
21. 
Crescenzi  G,
Bove  T,
Pappalardo
F,
Scandroglio
A, Landoni
G,
Aletti
G, et al. 
Clinical significance of a new Q wave after cardiac
surgery. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg
2004;25:1001–5. 10.1016/j.ejcts.2004.02.030
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
22. 
Mauermann  E,
Bolliger
D, Fassl
J,
Grapow
M, Seeberger
E,
Seeberger
M, et al. 
OP29- the significance of new Q waves in postoperative ECGs after
elective on-pump cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc
Anesth
2017;31:S37–8. 10.1053/j.jvca.2017.02.109 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
23. 
Loeb  HS,
Gunnar
WP, Thomas
DD. Is new
ST-segment elevation after coronary artery bypass of clinical importance in the
absence of perioperative myocardial infarction?  J
Electrocardiol
2007;40:276–81. 10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2006.08.098
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
24. 
Chaitman  B,
Rosen  A,
Williams
D,
Bourassa
M, Aguirre
F, Pitt
B, et al. 
Myocardial infarction and cardiac mortality in the Bypass Angioplasty
Revascularization Investigation (BARI) randomized trial.
Circulation
1997;96:2162–70. 10.1161/01.CIR.96.7.2162
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
25. 
Gaudino  M,
Flather
M,
Capodanno
D,
Milojevic
M, Bhatt
DL, Biondi
Zoccai  G, et al.  European Association of Cardio-Thoracic
Surgery (EACTS) expert consensus statement on perioperative myocardial infarction
after cardiac surgery. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg
2024;65:ezad415. 10.1093/ejcts/ezad415
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Contra 
Allan S Jaffe , Yader Sandoval , Kristian Thygesen 
Introduction 
Myocardial injury is intrinsic to most cardiac surgical procedures including coronary
artery bypass grafting (CABG). Recent data in regard to the prognosis associated with
increases in cardiac troponin (cTn) after CABG have led to suggestions to change the
definition of myocardial infarction after cardiac surgery proposed by the universal
definition of myocardial infarction (UDMI). 1 These sorts of calls occur when new data emerge. But however
interesting and potentially important such data might seem, care should be taken in
prematurely redefining clinical definitions on their basis, including peri-operative
myocardial infarction (PMI). 
The original fundamentals for the redefinition of myocardial infarction 
It is important to recall the original precepts that underlie the definition of
myocardial infarction proposed after CABG. In 2000, when the UDMI was first proposed,
several essential conceptual issues were articulated which are still important
today. 2–4 The primary precept was that a definition describes the components
of a given diagnosis. It is not a treatment guideline, nor is it based on
prognosis. 5 The reasons
for this will be articulated below. In the 2000 initial definition, the task force did not
suggest how to make the diagnosis of myocardial infarction after percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI). With CABG, since it was known that there were unavoidable increases in
cTn concentrations associated with cross-clamp time, cardiopulmonary bypass, venting of
the ventricles, volume expansion, and complications from the procedure, many of which
would be best characterized as due to non-ischaemic myocardial injury, 2 the criteria suggested that PMI
should only be diagnosed once one had crossed a certain cTn threshold concentration that
accounted for the component of myocardial injury not due to ischaemia. 2–4 
Once that occurred, it was assumed that the additional injury was excessive and likely due
to ischaemia. Cardiac troponin was selected as the favoured biomarker because it is a more
sensitive and specific marker than others. 2 The decision in regard to what that threshold of cTn should be used
was arbitrary because there was a paucity of data to define what the normally expected
increases post-CABG in all its iterations should be. It was well known even then that
off-pump CABG caused less myocardial injury than on-pump CABG. 2 Similarly, when concomitant valve
replacement occurred, it was known that there was elaboration of more cTn. 5 Thus, if one chose a very high
threshold value based on CABG procedures using cardiopulmonary bypass, one would have had
a high threshold that would have rarely diagnosed patients undergoing isolated valve
replacement or having off-pump CABG as having myocardial infarction. Those with
concomitant valve replacement all might meet the diagnostic threshold every time.
Accordingly, an intermediate value was selected. This problem still exists today. 
The situation now 
We still lack control information about the amounts of post-operative cTn associated with
totally uncomplicated procedures including CABG and all its potential iterations in
addition to all of the other cardiac procedures where this information is relevant. These
concepts could be expanded further to PCI. 
Today, there are several new studies defining threshold cTn values that provide
prognostic insights. These studies are important but should not lead to challenges to the
definition of PMI. It is clear that marked increases in cTn values using much more
sensitive assays in patients undergoing CABG with cardiopulmonary bypass can define an
early very high threshold which helps to define 30-day mortality. 2 This is clearly an important
advance because it will allow studies to evaluate whether the cause for such signals might
be something that could be remediated. Specifically, one might wonder if patients with
markedly increased cTn values might be enriched in the group that may have primary
vascular events such as graft occlusion or coronary artery occlusion of a non-bypassed
vessel that might be amenable to intervention. Unfortunately, instead of embracing this
important issue, the data have led to calls to redefine PMI. 
The use of prognostic thresholds 
Let us reflect for a moment about the issues related to using a prognostic cut-off to
define myocardial infarction. In almost all clinical situations, the higher the cTn
concentration, the more adverse the prognosis; it is a continuous relationship. 2 , 6 , 7 
There are not many patients in the cardiac surgical arena whose post-operative troponin
values stay low or even normal, so we do not know how low this relationship goes in those
with cardiac surgery, but in studies where the data are reported, there is a continuous
relationship between prognosis and cTn concentrations. 2 , 6 
However, when one does cardiac surgery where one is doing a procedure with the hope that
it will improve prognosis, the amount of myocardial injury (increases of cTn values) that
would be adverse and prognostic needs to not only exceed baseline concentrations but be
sufficient to negate the benefits of the procedure itself. Is finding a concentration
threshold so high that it provides a mortality signal really the proper criteria to use to
make a definition? It neglects the fact that below that threshold, there are still harmful
degrees of myocardial injury because it is clear that the relationship between mortality
and cTn concentrations is a continuous one even in this situation. 2 , 6 It also has been reported in other studies that these
lower concentrations are prognostic but over a different time course. 6 Which timing is the best to use
for a definition? Both observations are probably important, but neither should be used as
a definition. In addition to issues of timing, a small amount of myocardial injury may
well be critically prognostic in patients with poor ventricular function but well
tolerated in those with normal ventricular function. Thus, the idea of prognosis requires
not only a degree of myocardial injury but also involvement of the patient’s baseline
clinical status, so it cannot be adequately applied to all individuals undergoing the
procedure, all of whom have a different level of risk. One important risk factor is
whether there are pre-procedural cTn increases above the 99th percentile that may identify
patients with chronic myocardial injury. These increases reflect underlying heart disease.
In most studies of coronary artery disease (CAD), increases in cTn identifies patients
with more extensive and complex CAD. 8 , 9 These patients
tend to elaborate more post-operative cTn as one would expect from the more complex
underlying disease. 2 Should
the same prognostic thresholds still apply? In addition, each cTn assay has a different
dynamic range so that each assay is very likely to give one a very different set of
values. 10 , 11 This is an important
consideration, but it means that taking the data from one assay to be a gold standard in
the absence of data from the rest is probably not as informative as would be ideal.
Finally, there are issues related to concomitant therapy which may be important. There are
differences between individuals who get one sort of cardioplegia vs. another. 2 If one is looking for a long-term
outcome, there will be patients who receive guideline-directed therapy and individuals who
do not and the titration becomes extremely complex. This is before one even adds the
complexity of the different assays that might be involved. Finally, how one finds
prognostic significance depends in part on the sample size and the endpoints. It is likely
that any increases in cTn values are prognostically important, but it might take extremely
large studies to ascertain that. In addition, mortality may not be the only thing that is
important after cardiac surgery; graft occlusion and reduced cardiac function may all
markedly impair patient well-being. Thus, all in all, it is likely impossible to identify
a concentration threshold based on prognosis to define PMI. If one uses a specific
threshold and it is not met despite a clinical scenario and electrocardiographic changes
indicative of an acute event, should it be ignored? Even if not a mortal event, it may
induce heart failure and be a critically important patient-related event. 
Just think about the implications of applying this sort of thinking to the diagnosis of
spontaneous myocardial infarction. No one would embrace an approach that insists on
finding a downstream mortality signal post-treatment to define myocardial infarction. That
said, it should be acknowledged that these prognostic signals should not be ignored. They
provide an opportunity for us to delve into the possibility that there is something
potentially remediable, particularly early on when we see such marked cTn increases, and
they may provide information to improve the amount of myocardial injury inherent to the
procedure. Clinical trialists can use these prognostic signals in their trials depending
on whether they are interested in short- or long-term outcomes or both. Prognostic
thresholds, once defined, could be selected based on the trial design and how much
influence investigators wish these events to impart on the trial itself. Ideally, pre- and
post-procedural samples would be measured in a core laboratory so that a uniform cTn assay
can be deployed to reduce the difficulties of multiple different assays that often limit
the comparability of cTn studies. 
The suggested solution 
What is needed to move forward ( Figure
2 )? The original UDMI definition asserted that myocardial infarction
requires myocardial necrosis due to ischaemia. 3 , 4 In
this setting, increases in cTn are a reasonable surrogate. It was also understood that
there is an obligatory amount of myocardial injury that occurs during cardiac
surgery. 2–4 The mechanisms for this have recently been reviewed, and there are
many. 12 They are not all
simply related to ischaemia. If one wants to define PMI after cardiac surgery, one will
need first to define the amount of myocardial injury for uncomplicated procedures of each
type. One might need separate criteria for on-pump CABG, off-pump CABG, isolated valve
surgery, CABG plus valve surgery, and then all of the subsets, including perhaps whether
myocardial injury (an increased cTn above the 99th percentile) is present pre-operatively.
One could then determine what level of non-ischaemic myocardial injury is associated with
uncomplicated procedures. Some believe one can use the cTn pattern to do that 13 although that is far from
proven. This is a daunting task, but the data about what one can expect from normal or
abnormal procedures of a large variety of sorts could be generated. This would then allow
determinations of what was above the expected and those individuals have myocardial
injury, and this would generate a much better definition. One could argue that in many
instances, the cause of the cTn increases may not be from acute myocardial ischaemia,
particularly in the absence of other clinical criteria to support an acute myocardial
infarction diagnosis, and therefore, such events should not be called myocardial
infarction. These issues could be elucidated by performing appropriate imaging studies.
One could then study those with more than the expected amount of myocardial injury to
assess how to help identify those with ischaemia and with modern day imaging that is no
longer impossible. This would be the way to refine the diagnosis. These thresholds will
all vary. Those for on-pump CABG may go up, but for off-pump CABG, isolated aortic valve
replacements, or transcatheter aortic valve replacement, it is hard to know. What is clear
is one size will not fit all. Ideally, these data should be developed using post-operative
serial samples to define the area under the time–concentration curve. These samples could
then be run with multiple different assays given the marked differences in the analytical
issues, dynamic ranges, and kinetics of release. 10 , 11 
Eventually, it may be that the criteria for some of the subsets are sufficiency similar
that the number of bins for diagnosis could be reasonably collapsed into just two or three
subsets. However, the data will need to guide that. For clinical trials, core laboratories
could provide consistent cTn data by using only one assay. Finally, no paradigm or
definition will ever be perfect. Clinical judgement is still an important component of
clinical care. It is likely that the additional of clinical suspicion of events
irrespective of any of the details will continue to have an important role. 
Figure 2. 
Open in a new tab 
Pathway forward for defining the amount of myocardial injury induced by surgical
procedures and defining how much is related to ischaemia. CABG, coronary artery bypass
grafting; CT, computed tomography; hs-cTn, high-sensitivity cardiac troponin; ECG,
electrocardiogram; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging 
Conclusions 
If this could be done, it would support the continued use of the fundamental concepts
initially proposed to reach a good PMI definition. It will take work, but it would be much
better than allowing the arbitrary selection of threshold values that fit some type of
prognosis that will vary over time or fit the biases about how to use the PMI definition.
It is not time to throw the basic concepts out; it is time to generate the information
that is necessary to develop a better PMI definition. At the same time, we should not
ignore the prognostic signals or the basis for the unavoidable myocardial injury. Both are
areas where improvements could help patients. A similar, well thought out but not
identical approach would be helpful for post-PCI injury as well. It is time to do the work
and not throw out the proper concepts for expediency. 
Supplementary data 
Supplementary data are not available at European Heart Journal 
online. 
Declarations 
Disclosure of Interest 
J.K., M.G., P.O.M., M.M., K.T., and Y.S. have nothing to declare. A.S.J. has or
presently consults for most of the diagnostic companies who make biomarker assays
(active at this moment, they are Abbott, Siemens, Roche, ET Healthcare, and Sphingotec).
He also has an equity interest in RCE Technologies. P.J.D. has grants from most of the
diagnostic companies who make biomarker assays (Abbott, Siemens, Roche, and AOP Pharma)
and is consultant for Abbott, AstraZeneca, Renibus, Roche, and Trimedic. 
References 
1. 
Thygesen  K,
Alpert
JS, Jaffe
AS,
Chaitman
BR, Bax
JJ,
Morrow
DA, et al. 
Fourth universal definition of myocardial infarction
(2018). J Am Coll Cardiol
2018;72:2231–64. 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.08.1038
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. 
Heuts  S,
Gollmann-Tepeköylü
C,
Denessen
EJS,
Olsthoorn
JR, Romeo
JLR,
Maessen
JG, et al. 
Cardiac troponin release following coronary artery bypass grafting:
mechanisms and clinical implications. Eur Heart J
2023;44:100–12. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac604
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. 
Myocardial infarction redefined-a consensus document of the Joint
European Society of Cardiology/American College of Cardiology Committee for the
redefinition of myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J
2000;21:1502–13. 10.1053/euhj.2000.2305
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. 
Thygesen  K,
Alpert
JS, White
HD,
Jaffe
AS, Apple
FS,
Galvani
M, et al. 
Universal definition of myocardial infarction: on behalf of the Joint
ESC/ACCF/AHA/WHF task force for the redefinition of myocardial
infarction. Eur Heart J
2007;28:2525–38. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehm355
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. 
Sandoval  Y,
Jaffe
AS. Raising
the bar for clinical cardiac troponin research studies and implementation
science. Circulation
2021;143:2225–8. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.054926
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. 
Pölzl  L,
Thielmann
M, Cymorek
S,
Nägele
F, Hirsch
J,
Graber
M, et al. 
Impact of myocardial injury after coronary artery bypass grafting on
long-term prognosis. Eur Heart J
2022;43:2407–17. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac054
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. 
Pareek  M,
Kragholm
KH,
Kristensen
AMD,
Vaduganathan
M,
Pallisgaard
JL, Byrne
C, et al. 
Serial troponin-T and long-term outcomes in suspected acute coronary
syndrome. Eur Heart J
2023;44:502–12. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac629
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. 
Everett  BM,
Brooks
MM,
Vlachos
HEA,
Chaitman
BR, Frye
RL,
Bhatt
DL, et al. 
Troponin and cardiac events in stable ischemic heart disease and
diabetes. N Engl J Med
2015;373: 610–20. 10.1056/NEJMoa1415921
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. 
Korosoglou  G,
Lehrke
S, Mueller
D, Hosch
W,
Kauczor
H-U,
Humpert
PM, et al. 
Determinants of troponin release in patients with stable coronary
artery disease: insights from CT angiography characteristics of atherosclerotic
plaque. Heart
2011;97:823–31. 10.1136/hrt.2010.193201
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. 
Arnadottir  A,
Pedersen
S,
Hasselbach
RB, Goetze
JP,
Friis-Hansen
L,
Bloch-Munster
A-M, et al. 
Temporal release of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T and I and
copeptin after brief induced coronary artery balloon occlusion in
humans. Circulation
2021;143:1095–104.
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.046574
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. 
Laugaudin  G,
Kuster
N, Peiton
A,
Leclerq
F,
Gervasoni
R, Macia
J-C, et al. 
Kinetics of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T and I differ in
patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction treated by primary coronary
intervention. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care
2016;5:354–63. 10.1177/2048872615585518
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. 
Devereaux  PJ,
Lamy  A,
Chan
MTV, Allard
RV,
Lomivorotov
VV,
Landoni
G, et al. 
High-sensitivity troponin I after cardiac surgery and 30-day
mortality. N Engl J Med
2022;386:827–36. 10.1056/NEJMoa2000803
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. 
Thielmann  M,
Massoudy
P,
Schmermund
A,
Neuhauser
M,
Marggraf
G, Kamler
M, et al. 
Diagnostic discrimination between graft-related and non-graft-related
perioperative myocardial infarction with cardiac troponin I after coronary artery
bypass surgery. Eur Heart J
2005;26:2440–7. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehi437
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
References 
1. 
Heuts  S,
Gollmann-Tepeköylü
C, Denessen
EJS,
Olsthoorn
JR, Romeo
JLR,
Maessen
JG, et al. 
Cardiac troponin release following coronary artery bypass grafting:
mechanisms and clinical implications. Eur Heart J
2023;44:100–12. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac604
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. 
Stone  GW,
Kappetein
AP, Sabik
JF, Pocock
SJ, Morice
M-C,
Puskas  J,
et al.  Five-year outcomes after PCI or CABG
for left main coronary disease. N Engl J Med
2019;381:1820–30. 10.1056/NEJMoa1909406
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. 
Cohen  D,
Brown
E. New England
Journal of Medicine reviews controversial stent study.
BMJ  2020;368:m878.
10.1136/bmj.m878
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. 
Pölzl  L,
Engler  C,
Sterzinger
P, Lohmann
R, Nägele
F, Hirsch
J, et al. 
Association of highsensitivity cardiac troponin T with 30-day and 5-year
mortality after cardiac surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol
2023;82:1301–12. 10.1016/j.jacc.2023.07.011
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. 
Pölzl  L,
Thielmann
M, Cymorek
S, Nägele
F, Hirsch
J, Graber
M, et al. 
Impact of myocardial injury after coronary artery bypass grafting on
long-term prognosis. Eur Heart J
2022;43:2407–17. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac054
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. 
Kim  KM,
Kim  SY,
Jung  JC,
Chang  HW,
Lee  JH,
Kim  DJ,
et al.  Elevated troponin I is associated
with a worse long-term prognosis in patients undergoing beating-heart coronary
surgery. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg
2023;63:ezad087. 10.1093/ejcts/ezad087
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. 
Cymorek  S,
Thielmann
M. Editorial
comment: ‘no time to die’-myocardial injury, troponins and long-term
prognosis. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg
2023;63:ezad187. 10.1093/ejcts/ezad187
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Articles from European Heart Journal are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (591.8 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
