Focus on atrial fibrillation, syncope, and arrhythmias during COVID-19 pandemic - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
editorial 
Eur Heart J 
. 2021 Feb 2;42(5):361–364. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab031 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Focus on atrial fibrillation, syncope, and arrhythmias during COVID-19 pandemic 
Filippo Crea 
Filippo Crea 
1 
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy 
2 
Department of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Sciences, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy 
Find articles by Filippo Crea 
1, 2, ✉ 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy 
2 
Department of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Sciences, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy 
✉ 
Email: Filippo.Crea@unicatt.it 
Collection date 2021 Feb 1. 
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. © The Author(s) 2021. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com. 
This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic or until permissions are revoked in writing. Upon expiration of these permissions, PMC is granted a perpetual license to make this article available via PMC and Europe PMC, consistent with existing copyright protections. 
This article is published and distributed under the terms of the Oxford University Press, Standard Journals Publication Model ( https://academic.oup.com/journals/pages/open_access/funder_policies/chorus/standard_publication_model ) 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC7928962  PMID: 33532851 
Open in a new tab 
For the podcast associated with this article, please visit https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/pages/Podcasts . 
Atrial fibrillation (AF) poses a ignificant burden to patients, physicians, and healthcare systems globally. Substantial research efforts and resources are being directed towards gaining detailed information about the mechanisms underlying AF, 1 its natural course, 2 and effective treatments, 3 , 4 and new evidence is continuously generated and published. This Focus Issue on arrhythmias contains the ‘ 2020 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation developed in collaboration with the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS) ’, authored by Gerhard Hindricks from the Leipzig Heart Institute and colleagues from the ESC Scientific Document Group. 5 The authors note that the complexity of AF requires a multifaceted, holistic, and multidisciplinary approach to the management of AF patients, with their active involvement in partnership with clinicians. Streamlining the care of patients with AF in daily clinical practice is a challenging but essential requirement for effective management of AF. In recent years, substantial progress has been made in the detection of AF and its management, and new evidence is integrated in a timely fashion in this third edition of the ESC guidelines on AF. The 2016 ESC AF Guidelines introduced the concept of the five domains to facilitate an integrated structured approach to AF care and promote consistent, guideline-adherent management for all patients. The Atrial Fibrillation Better Care (ABC) approach in the 2020 ESC AF Guidelines is a development of this approach, with the goal to further improve the structured management of AF patients, promote patient values, and finally improve patient outcomes. 
In a Special Article entitled ‘ The year in cardiovascular medicine 2020: arrhythmias ’, Harry Crijns from the Maastricht University Medical Centre in the Netherlands, and colleagues review the most relevant studies in the field of arrhythmias and pacing. 6 The past year has shown a significant progress: landmark clinical trials in AF and implantable defibrillator therapy, new guidelines, integrated care, lifestyle and arrhythmias, His bundle pacing, risk prediction in sudden cardiac death, and advances in cardiogenetics ( Figure 1 ) . 
Figure 1. 
Open in a new tab 
Graphical abstract. (from Crijns HJGM, Prinzen F, Lambiase PD, Sanders P, Brugada J. The year in cardiovascular medicine. See pages 499–507.) 
An estimated 50% of the general population will have a syncopal event at some point in their life, most frequently caused by vasovagal reflex. Although the clinical course is benign in most cases, especially in the younger population, severe forms of reflex syncope account for ∼14% of cases primarily in older patients. 7 Frequent unpredictable syncopal events in these patients may be severely disabling, justifying mechanism-specific treatments. Pacemakers with a rate-responsive closed loop stimulation (CLS) system continuously analyse trends of right ventricular intracardiac impedance during systolic phases to gather information about the speed of myocardial contraction and adjust the pacing rate accordingly. Recently, in acute tilt testing studies, pacemakers with CLS have shown the ability to institute a rapid pacing rate at the time of impending tilt-induced syncope. 8 In a Fast Track clinical research manuscript entitled ‘ Cardiac pacing in severe recurrent reflex syncope and tilt-induced asystole ’, Michele Brignole from the Ospedale San Luca in Milan, Italy, and colleagues note that the benefit of cardiac pacing in patients with severe recurrent reflex syncope and asystole induced by tilt testing has not been established. The usefulness of the tilt-table test to select candidates for cardiac pacing is controversial. 9 The authors randomly assigned patients 40 years or older who had at least two episodes of unpredictable severe reflex syncope during the last year and a tilt-induced syncope with an asystolic pause >3 s to receive either an active (pacing ON; 63 patients) or an inactive (pacing OFF; 64 patients) dual-chamber pacemaker with CLS. The primary endpoint was the time to first recurrence of syncope. Patients and independent outcome assessors were blinded to the assigned treatment. After a median follow-up of 11.2 months, syncope occurred in significantly fewer patients in the pacing group than in the control group (16% vs. 53%; hazard ratio, 0.23; P =0.00005). A combined endpoint of syncope or pre-syncope occurred in significantly fewer patients in the pacing group (37% vs. 63%; hazard ratio, 0.44; P =0.002) ( Figure 2) . Minor device-related adverse events were reported in five patients (4%). 
Figure 2. 
Open in a new tab 
Kaplan–Meier curves comparing survival free of symptoms. ( A ) Primary endpoint and ( B ) combined endpoint of syncope or pre-syncope. (from Brignole M, Russo V, Arabia F, Oliveira M, Pedrote A, Aerts A, Rapacciuolo A, Boveda S, Deharo JC, Maglia G, Nigro G, Giacopelli D, Gargaro A, Tomaino M; for the BioSync CLS trial Investigators. Cardiac pacing in severe recurrent reflex syncope and tilt-induced asystole. See pages 508–516.) 
Brignole et al. conclude that in patients 40 years or older, affected by severe recurrent reflex syncope and tilt-induced asystole, a dual-chamber pacemaker with CLS is highly effective in reducing recurrences of syncope. The authors’ findings support inclusion of tilt testing as a useful method to select candidates for cardiac pacing. The manuscript is accompanied by an Editorial by Cecilia Linde from the Karolinska Hospital in Stockholm, Sweden and Harry Crijns from the Maastricht University Medical Center in the Netherlands. 10 They note that The SPAIN study led to a Class IIb recommendation for dual-chamber pacing in the 2018 ESC syncope guidelines. The convincing results of the BIOSync CLS study published in this issue may contribute to broaden the recommendations for patients with recurrent vasovagal reflex syncope. There may indeed be a solution to an old problem. 
Ventricular arrhythmias (VAs) are more likely to occur in settings associated with increased sympathetic tone, including physical activity, illness, and emotional distress. Historically, we have seen significant world events coinciding with a substantial rise in myocardial infarctions as well as VAs and the need for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) therapies. 11 The health consequences of such events may be long lasting, with documented increases in myocardial infarctions up to 3 years following earthquakes and tsunamis. Interestingly, a decline in hospitalization for cardiovascular-related illness during coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has been documented in multiple countries, seemingly attributable to fewer acute coronary syndrome presentations. 12 , 13 In a clinical research article entitled ‘ Ventricular arrhythmia burden during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic ’, Catherine O’Shea from the University of Adelaide in Australia, and colleagues sought to determine the VA burden in ICD patients during COVID-19. 14 In their multicentre, observational, cohort study over a 100-day period during the COVID-19 pandemic in the USA, the authors assessed VAs in ICD patients from 20 centres in 13 States, via remote monitoring. Comparison was with a 100-day control period (late 2019) and a seasonal control period (early 2019). The primary outcome was the impact of COVID-19 on VA burden. During the COVID-19 period, ∼6000 ICD patients underwent remote monitoring, with ∼17 000 episodes of treated VAs (2.8 events per 100 patient-days). Comparing patients remotely monitored during both COVID-19 and the control period, significantly fewer VAs occurred during COVID-19 [incident rate ratio (IRR) 0.68, P < 0.001]. This difference persisted when comparing the patients monitored during both the COVID-19 and seasonal control period (IRR 0.69, 95% confidence interval 0.56–0.85, P < 0.001). 
The authors conclude that during COVID-19, there was a 32% reduction in VAs needing device therapies, coinciding with measures of social isolation. The manuscript is accompanied by an Editorial by Giuseppe Boriani and Marco Vitolo from the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia. 15 They note that this study highlights that within the wide spectrum of the complex, frequently disruptive, effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the natural course of cardiovascular disease, the net result of COVID-19 direct and indirect effects can be, in selected patients, a reduction of factors triggering or favouring VAs. 
In a State of the Art Review entitled ‘ Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and atrial fibrillation: an interdisciplinary perspective ’, Sami Simons from the Maastricht University Medical Centre, and colleagues note that chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is highly prevalent among patients with AF, shares common risk factors, and adds to the overall morbidity and mortality in this population. 16 Additionally, it may promote AF and impair treatment efficacy. The prevalence of COPD in AF patients is high and is estimated to be ∼25%. Diagnosis and treatment of COPD in AF patients requires a close interdisciplinary collaboration between the electrophysiologist/cardiologist and pulmonologist. Differential diagnosis may be challenging, especially in elderly and smoking patients complaining of unspecific symptoms such as dyspnoea and fatigue. Routine evaluation of lung function and determination of natriuretic peptides and echocardiography may be reasonable to detect COPD and heart failure as contributing causes of dyspnoea. Acute exacerbation of COPD transiently increases AF risk due to hypoxia-mediated mechanisms, inflammation, increased use of beta-2 agonists, and autonomic changes. Observational data suggest that COPD promotes AF progression, increases AF recurrence after cardioversion, and reduces the efficacy of catheter-based antiarrhythmic therapy. However, it remains unclear whether treatment of COPD improves AF outcomes and which metric should be used to determine COPD severity and guide treatment in AF patients. Future prospective cohort studies in AF patients are needed to confirm the relationship between COPD and AF, the benefits of treatment of either COPD or AF in this population, and to clarify the need and cost-effectiveness of routine COPD screening. 
The issue is further complemented by a Discussion Forum contribution. In a manuscript entitled ‘ Personalized anti-thrombotic management of patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation and a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 1: a statement of the ESC Working Group on Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapy and ESC Council on Stroke ’, Patrick Sulzgruber from the Medical University of Vienna in Austria comments on the ‘ 2020 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation developed in collaboration with the European Association of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS) ’ that are also published in this issue. 5 , 17 
The editors hope that readers of this issue of the European Heart Journal will find it of interest. 
With thanks to Amelia Meier-Batschelet, Johanna Huggler, and Martin Meyer for help with compilation of this article. 
References 
1. 
Lau DH, Schotten U, Mahajan R, Antic NA, Hatem SN, Pathak RK, Hendriks JM, Kalman JM, Sanders P.. 
Novel mechanisms in the pathogenesis of atrial fibrillation: practical applications. Eur Heart J 2016;37:1573–1581. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. 
Killu AM, Granger CB, Gersh BJ.. 
Risk stratification for stroke in atrial fibrillation: a critique. Eur Heart J 2019;40:1294–1302. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. 
Willems S, Meyer C, de Bono J, Brandes A, Eckardt L, Elvan A, van Gelder I, Goette A, Gulizia M, Haegeli L, Heidbuchel H, Haeusler KG, Kautzner J, Mont L, Ng GA, Szumowski L, Themistoclakis S, Wegscheider K, Kirchhof P.. 
Cabins, castles, and constant hearts: rhythm control therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J 2019;40:3793–3799. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. 
Heidbuchel H, Verhamme P, Alings M, Antz M, Diener HC, Hacke W, Oldgren J, Sinnaeve P, Camm AJ, Kirchhof P.. 
Updated European Heart Rhythm Association practical guide on the use of non-vitamin-K antagonist anticoagulants in patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation: executive summary. Eur Heart J 2017;38:2137–2149. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. 
Hindricks G, Potpara T, Dagres N, Arbelo E, Bax JJ, Blomström-Lundqvist C, Boriani G, Castella M, Dan GA, Dilaveris PE, Fauchier L, Filippatos G, Kalman JM, La Meir M, Lane DA, Lebeau JP, Lettino M, Lip GYH, Pinto FJ, Thomas GN, Valgimigli M, Van Gelder IC, Van Putte BP, Watkins CL, 
ESC Scientific Doument Group. 2020 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation developed in collaboration with the European Association of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). Eur Heart J 2021;42:373–498. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. 
Crijns HJGM, Prinzen F, Lambiase PD, Sanders P, Brugada J.. 
The year in cardiovascular medicine 2020: arrhythmias. Eur Heart J 2021;42:499–507. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. 
Brignole M, Moya A, de Lange FJ, Deharo JC, Elliott PM, Fanciulli A, Fedorowski A, Furlan R, Kenny RA, Martín A, Probst V, Reed MJ, Rice CP, Sutton R, Ungar A, van Dijk JG.. 
2018 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of syncope. Eur Heart J 2018;39:1883–1948. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. 
Palmisano P, Dell’Era G, Russo V, Zaccaria M, Mangia R, Bortnik M, De Vecchi F, Giubertoni A, Patti F, Magnani A, Nigro G, Rago A, Occhetta E, Accogli M.. 
Effects of closed-loop stimulation vs. DDD pacing on haemodynamic variations and occurrence of syncope induced by head-up tilt test in older patients with refractory cardioinhibitory vasovagal syncope: the Tilt test-Induced REsponse in Closed-loop Stimulation multicentre, prospective, single blind, randomized study. Europace 2018;20:859–866. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. 
Brignole M, Russo V, Arabia F, Oliveira M, Pedrote A, Aerts A, Rapacciuolo A, Boveda S, Deharo JC, Maglia G, Nigro G, Giacopelli D, Gargaro A, Tomaino M.. 
Cardiac pacing in severe recurrent reflex syncope and tilt-induced asystole. Eur Heart J 2021;42:508–516. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. 
Linde C, Crijns H.. 
Pacing for repeated vagal reflex-mediated syncope: an old problem with a solution. Eur Heart J 2021;42:517–519. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. 
Leor J, Poole WK, Kloner RA.. 
Sudden cardiac death triggered by an earthquake. N Engl J Med 1996;334:413–419. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. 
De Rosa S, Spaccarotella C, Basso C, Calabrò MP, Curcio A, Filardi PP, Mancone M, Mercuro G, Muscoli S, Nodari S, Pedrinelli R, Sinagra G, Indolfi C.. 
Reduction of hospitalizations for myocardial infarction in Italy in the COVID-19 era. Eur Heart J 2020;41:2083–2088. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. 
Rangé G, Hakim R, Motreff P.. 
Where have the ST-segment elevation myocardial infarctions gone during COVID-19 lockdown?
Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes
2020;6:223–224. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. 
O’Shea CJ, Thomas G, Middeldorp ME, Harper C, Elliott AD, Ray N, Lau DH, Campbell K, Sanders P.. 
Ventricular arrhythmia burden during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Eur Heart J 2021;42:520–528. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. 
Boriani G, Vitolo M.. 
COVID-19 pandemic: complex interactions with the arrhythmic profile and the clinical course of patients with cardiovascular disease. Eur Heart J 2021;42:529–531. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. 
Simons SO, Elliott A, Sastry M, Hendriks JM, Arzt M, Rienstra M, Kalman JM, Heidbuchel H, Nattel S, Wesseling G, Schotten U, van Gelder IC, Franssen FME, Sanders P, Crijns H, Linz D.. 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and atrial fibrillation: an interdisciplinary perspective. Eur Heart J 2021;42:532–540. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. Sulzgruber P, Doehner W, Niessner A. Valvular atrial fibrillation and a CHA2DS2-VAScscore of 1—a statement of the ESC workinggroup on cardiovascular pharmacotherapy andESC council on stroke. Eur Heart J 2021;42:541–543. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Articles from European Heart Journal are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (532.0 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
