High-risk NSTE-ACS: high time for robust data - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Eur Heart J 
. 2020 Nov 14;42(4):352. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa927 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
High-risk NSTE-ACS: high time for robust data 
Thomas A Kite 
Thomas A Kite 
1 
Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, University of Leicester and University Hospitals of Leicester, Glenfield Hospital, Groby Road, Leicester, LE3 9QP, UK 
Find articles by Thomas A Kite 
1, ✉ , Anthony H Gershlick 
Anthony H Gershlick 
2 
Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, University of Leicester and University Hospitals of Leicester, Glenfield Hospital, Groby Road, Leicester, LE3 9QP, UK 
Find articles by Anthony H Gershlick 
2 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 
Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, University of Leicester and University Hospitals of Leicester, Glenfield Hospital, Groby Road, Leicester, LE3 9QP, UK 
2 
Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, University of Leicester and University Hospitals of Leicester, Glenfield Hospital, Groby Road, Leicester, LE3 9QP, UK 
✉ 
Corresponding author. Tel: +4401162502677, Email: tom.kite@nhs.net 
Collection date 2021 Jan 21. 
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. © The Author(s) 2020. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com. 
This article is published and distributed under the terms of the Oxford University Press, Standard Journals Publication Model ( https://academic.oup.com/journals/pages/open_access/funder_policies/chorus/standard_publication_model ) 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC7850134  PMID: 33188591 
See " Optimal timing of invasive angiography in non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes-do we need more data? " with doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa930. 
See " 2020 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation. " with doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa575. 
This commentary refers to ‘2020 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation’, by JP Collet et al., doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa575 . 
Collet et al. 
1 in recently published ESC Guidelines addressed the issue of timing of invasive strategy in high-risk non-ST elevation acute coronary sydrome (NSTE-ACS) patients. Recommendations continue to mandate that invasive angiography within 24 h is the preferred approach when one high-risk criterion is met: (i) diagnosis of NSTE-ACS according to accepted definition, (ii) new or dynamic ST/T-segment changes, (iii) transient ST-segment elevation, or (iv) GRACE risk score >140. 
Whilst agreeing with (ii) and (iii), we contend that currently available data are not sufficiently robust to support the Class 1A recommendation for (iv) GRACE Score >140. Although both the historic TIMACS 2 and more contemporary VERDICT 3 pre-specified GRACE risk score >140 Subgroup analyses did demonstrate a benefit from early revascularization, the findings in both overall unselected trial populations were neutral. These sub-studies may therefore be subject to confounding and their results must be interpreted with a degree of caution. It should also be noted that the Jobs et al. 
4 meta-analysis, also cited by the Guideline committee to support its recommendation, comprised only 1519 patients (961 from TIMACS) and reported inconclusive tests for statistical interaction between invasive strategies, albeit hinting at a survival benefit in GRACE risk score >140 patients in the early invasive group. Furthermore, as all studies utilized conventional troponin or CK-MB for NSTE-ACS diagnosis, their results may not be translatable to the current era of high-sensitivity troponin use and greater detection of myocardial injury. 
Widespread implementation of these recommendations will necessitate restructuring of current ACS system pathways and catheter laboratory resources which may be to the detriment of other patient populations—in particular those with STEMI—a condition with a robust evidence base underpinned by multiple prospective randomized studies and large meta-analyses. Therefore, the lack of high-quality evidence in high-risk NSTE-ACS should, in our opinion, be acknowledged in current Guidelines. The need for a prospective and robust randomized trial in order to definitively answer this important clinical question requires greater emphasis. 
These data will be provided by our UK multi-centre British Heart Foundation funded RAPID N-STEMI trial of >1000 higher-risk patients (stratified by GRACE 2.0 risk score) randomized to very early ‘STEMI-like’ angiography vs. standard of care timing (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03707314 ). 
Conflict of interest: T.A.K. declares that there is no conflict of interest. A.H.G. declares receipt of a grant from the British Heart Foundation that supports the RAPID N-STEMI trial (grant number: CS/17/1/32445). 
Contributor Information 
Thomas A Kite, 
Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, University of Leicester and University Hospitals of Leicester, Glenfield Hospital, Groby Road, Leicester, LE3 9QP, UK. 
Anthony H Gershlick, 
Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, University of Leicester and University Hospitals of Leicester, Glenfield Hospital, Groby Road, Leicester, LE3 9QP, UK. 
References 
1. 
Collet
JP, Thiele
H, Barbato
E, Barthelemy
O, Bauersachs
J, Bhatt
DL, Dendale
P, Dorobantu
M, Edvardsen
T, Folliguet
T, Gale
CP, Gilard
M, Jobs
A, Juni
P, Lambrinou
E, Lewis
BS, Mehilli
J, Meliga
E, Merkely
B, Mueller
C, Roffi
M, Rutten
FH, Sibbing
D, Siontis
GCM, ESC Scientific Document Group. 
2020 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J  2020;doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa575.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. 
Mehta
SR, Granger
CB, Boden
WE, Steg
PG, Bassand
JP, Faxon
DP, Afzal
R, Chrolavicius
S, Jolly
SS, Widimsky
P, Avezum
A, Rupprecht
HJ, Zhu
J, Col
J, Natarajan
MK, Horsman
C, Fox
KA, Yusuf
S, TIMACS Investigators. 
Early versus delayed invasive intervention in acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med  2009;360:2165–2175. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. 
Kofoed
KF, Kelbæk
H, Hansen
PR, Torp-Pedersen
C, Høfsten
D, Kløvgaard
L, Holmvang
L, Helqvist
S, Jørgensen
E, Galatius
S, Pedersen
F, Bang
L, Saunamaki
K, Clemmensen
P, Linde
JJ, Heitmann
M, Wendelboe Nielsen
O, Raymond
IE, Kristiansen
OP, Svendsen
IH, Bech
J, Dominguez Vall-Lamora
MH, Kragelund
C, Hansen
TF, Dahlgaard Hove
J, Jørgensen
T, Fornitz
GG, Steffensen
R, Jurlander
B, Abdulla
J, Lyngbæk
S, Elming
H, Therkelsen
SK, Abildgaard
U, Jensen
JS, Gislason
G, Køber
LV, Engstrøm
T. 
Early versus standard care invasive examination and treatment of patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome. Circulation  2018;138:2741–2750. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. 
Jobs
A, Mehta
SR, Montalescot
G, Vicaut
E, Van't Hof
AWJ, Badings
EA, Neumann
FJ, Kastrati
A, Sciahbasi
A, Reuter
PG, Lapostolle
F, Milosevic
A, Stankovic
G, Milasinovic
D, Vonthein
R, Desch
S, Thiele
H. 
Optimal timing of an invasive strategy in patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome: a meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet  2017;390:737–746. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Articles from European Heart Journal are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (113.6 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
