Critical medications in cardiology: strategic policy of the European Medicines Agency - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Eur Heart J 
. 2025 Apr 2;46(26):2491–2493. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaf134 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Critical medications in cardiology: strategic policy of the European Medicines Agency 
Dobromir Dobrev 
Dobromir Dobrev 
1 
West German Heart and Vascular Center, Institute of Pharmacology, University Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, Essen 45122, Germany 
2 
Department of Medicine and Research Center, Montreal Heart Institute and Université de Montréal, 3655 Promenade Sir William Osler, Montreal QC, Canada H3G 1Y6 
3 
Department of Integrative Physiology, Baylor College of Medicine, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA 
Find articles by Dobromir Dobrev 
1, 2, 3, ✉ , Juan Tamargo 
Juan Tamargo 
4 
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, Universidad Complutense, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain 
Find articles by Juan Tamargo 
4 , Piotr Szymański 
Piotr Szymański 
5 
Center for Postgraduate Medical Education, Marymoncka 99/103, Warsaw 01-813, Poland 
6 
Clinical Cardiology Center, National Institute of Medicine MSWiA, Wołoska 137, Warsaw 02-507, Poland 
Find articles by Piotr Szymański 
5, 6 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 
West German Heart and Vascular Center, Institute of Pharmacology, University Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, Essen 45122, Germany 
2 
Department of Medicine and Research Center, Montreal Heart Institute and Université de Montréal, 3655 Promenade Sir William Osler, Montreal QC, Canada H3G 1Y6 
3 
Department of Integrative Physiology, Baylor College of Medicine, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA 
4 
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, Universidad Complutense, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain 
5 
Center for Postgraduate Medical Education, Marymoncka 99/103, Warsaw 01-813, Poland 
6 
Clinical Cardiology Center, National Institute of Medicine MSWiA, Wołoska 137, Warsaw 02-507, Poland 
✉ 
Corresponding author. Email: dobromir.dobrev@uk-essen.de 
Collection date 2025 Jul 7. 
© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information please contact journals.permissions@oup.com. 
This article is published and distributed under the terms of the Oxford University Press, Standard Journals Publication Model ( https://academic.oup.com/pages/standard-publication-reuse-rights ) 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC12232905  PMID: 40171671 
Drug shortages substantially affect healthcare systems. In December 2023, the European Commission (EU) released its first list of critical medicines with the purpose of ensuring the security of supply and availability of critical medicines at the EU level. The list of critical medicines was revised last year by Member States and key stakeholders, including the European Society of Cardiology (ESC), and a new version of this list was published on 16 December 2025. 
Drug shortage as emerging challenge 
In a world facing numerous political, economic, and social challenges, where conflicts escalate and events such as pandemics threaten global logistics, ensuring access to medicines is among the most pressing issues. Drug shortages, which frequently and persistently affect healthcare systems, pose substantial financial, logistical, and ethical challenges. 1 The main contributing factors to drug shortages have regulatory, manufacturing, and quality-related, as well as economic and supply chain-related, origins. 2 
It is not feasible to provide access to ‘everything for everyone’, in case of major global crisis, necessitating the definition of a list of critical medicines. These medicines should remain accessible to patients regardless of economic or political instability or global pandemic. The inherent limitation of such a list, by definition, excludes many therapeutic options. Consequently, the decisions surrounding its composition inevitably raise concerns of a medical, ethical, and economic nature. Nevertheless, experts affiliated with scientific societies have a responsibility to provide informed opinions on this matter. 
Creation of the Union List of critical medicines 
In December 2023, the European Commission released its first Union List of critical medicines, encompassing over 240 active substances for human use. 3 This list marked a significant step towards ensuring supply security and preventing shortages of critical medicines, an issue highlighted during recent years, particularly in times of crisis. The selection criteria for inclusion were multifaceted, with medicines considered critical if used for serious diseases and lacking easily replaceable alternatives in the event of shortages ( Figure 1 ). Additional criteria included clinical importance in at least one-third of EU/European Economic Area Member States. 
Figure 1. 
Open in a new tab 
European Medicines Agency methodology used to identify critical medicines for the ‘Union List of critical medicines’ (taken from EMA/432940/2023 Reference #3) 
Criterion 1:
High risk: indications with very serious implications for the health of individual patients or public health. Medicines used to treat patients with general life-threatening acute conditions, specific life-threatening acute conditions, or irreversibly progressive conditions 
Medium risk: indications with serious implications for the health of individual patients or public health 
Low risk: other indications 
Criterion 2:
High risk. (a) Quantitative classification: no appropriate alternative is available, OR only one appropriate alternative (product) on ATC Level 4 or 5 (same active substance or alternative is within the same ATC Level 4 group or in another ATC Level 4 group) is available. (b) Qualitative classification: treatments for which no appropriate alternative treatment exists or is available, or switching to the alternative treatment would require extensive clinical consultations not applicable for specific indications; substitution of treatment is expected to affect patient safety or disease prognosis. 
Medium risk. (a) Quantitative classification: at least two appropriate alternatives/products on ATC Level 4 or 5 (same active substance or alternative is within the same ATC Level 4 group) are available. (b) Qualitative classification: treatments for which alternative treatment requires additional input from medical personnel but is not expected to affect patient safety or disease prognosis, or the availability of alternative treatment may be limited. 
Low risk. (a) Quantitative classification: more than two appropriate alternatives/products are available on ATC Level 4 or 5. (b) Qualitative classification: treatments for which alternative treatment exists, or the availability of alternative treatment is manageable. Products can freely be substituted, and little or no input from medical personnel is required. Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical. 
Between February and September 2024, during the revision of first version of the list, Member States and key stakeholders, including the ESC, reviewed approximately 1500 active substances that met these criteria. This review aimed to identify additional substances for inclusion in the updated list. 
European Society of Cardiology advocates for the Union List of critical medicines of cardiovascular diseases 
The ESC, along with its Working Groups and Associations, contributed significantly to this process. Under the leadership of the Working Group on Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapy and the Regulatory Affairs Committee, the ESC developed a working list of critical medicines for cardiovascular diseases. The primary criterion for inclusion was the class of recommendation in ESC guidelines. Medicines with Class I indications, signifying high therapeutic or clinical importance, were prioritized, while those with Class II indications were generally not considered critical. 
The adopted methodology, emphasizing Class I and select Class IIa indications, ensured the inclusion of most—but not all—therapeutically critical cardiovascular drugs. Additional medicines proposed by ESC constituent bodies, typically falling within Class I or Class IIa indications, were also included due to their therapeutic significance. This approach reflects the ESC’s mission to prioritize therapeutic indications over availability of alternatives. However, as the concept of ‘clinical alternatives’ is less rigorously defined than Class I/IIa guideline indications, some at-risk medicines may have been labelled critical based on a more sensitive rather than specific approach to Criterion 2 (availability of alternatives). 
To address the limitation of excluding drugs or interventions outside ESC guidelines, such as anaesthetic agents or cardioplegia solutions, the ESC also included selected products from overlapping clinical specialties, such as anaesthesiology, intensive care, cardiac surgery, and radiology (e.g. propofol) that were deemed clinically important for practicing cardiologists. Consequently, the list is inherently incomplete and represents a ‘work in progress’. 
The initial Union List specified critical drugs rather than drug classes. However, the ESC emphasized that criticality should extend to therapeutic classes/groups rather than specific drugs. Availability of entire therapeutic groups is crucial for maintaining care continuity. 
Adapted version of the Union List of critical medicines released in December 2025 
Recognizing the evolving nature of critical medicine needs, the Union List was updated and expanded in December 2024, with revisions planned annually. The European Medicines Agency, in collaboration with National Competent Authorities and Ministries of Health, finalized the second version on 16 December 2024. 4 The ESC and its constituent bodies will review it accordingly and will continue to play an essential role in creating and updating this list. 
Declarations 
Disclosure of Interest 
D.D. obtained honoraria for educational lectures from Daiichi Sankyo, outside this work. J.T. received honoraria for educational lectures from Menarini CentroAmerica, outside this work. P.S. reports honoraria from GE, Novartis, and Samsung, outside this work. D.D. is chair of the ESC Working Group on Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapy, and J.T. and P.S. are members of the ESC Regulatory Affairs Committee, which is chaired by P.S. 
Contributor Information 
Dobromir Dobrev, 
West German Heart and Vascular Center, Institute of Pharmacology, University Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, Essen 45122, Germany; 
Department of Medicine and Research Center, Montreal Heart Institute and Université de Montréal, 3655 Promenade Sir William Osler, Montreal QC, Canada H3G 1Y6; 
Department of Integrative Physiology, Baylor College of Medicine, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 
Juan Tamargo, 
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, Universidad Complutense, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain. 
Piotr Szymański, 
Center for Postgraduate Medical Education, Marymoncka 99/103, Warsaw 01-813, Poland; 
Clinical Cardiology Center, National Institute of Medicine MSWiA, Wołoska 137, Warsaw 02-507, Poland. 
Funding 
The authors research was supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Research Training Group 2989, project 517043330 to D.D.), the National Institutes of Health (RO1HL131517, RO1HL136389, RO1HL163277, RO1HL160992, RO1HL165704, RO1HL164838, and RO1HL176651 to D.D.), and the European Union (large-scale network project MAESTRIA no. 965286 to D.D.). 
References 
1. 
Chen E, Goold S, Harrison S, Ali I, Makki I, Kent SS, et al. 
Drug shortage management: a qualitative assessment of a collaborative approach. PLoS One 2021;16:e0243870. 10.1371/journal.pone.0243870
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. 
Addressing the root causes of medicines shortages . Supply chain Stakeholders’ (supported by EPFIA-pharmaceutical companies, Medicines for Europe-generics, Vacines for Europe, Affordable Medicines Europe and European Industrial Pharmacists Group). https://www.efpia.eu/media/413378/addressing-the-root-causes-of-medicines-shortages-final-051219.pdf . Accessed 10 February 2025. 
3. 
European Medicines Agency . First version of the Union list of critical medicines agreed to help avoid potential shortages in the EU. EMA/528805/2023. https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/news/first-version-union-list-critical-medicines-agreed-help-avoid-potential-shortages-eu . Accessed 10 February 2025. 
4. 
European Medicines Agency . The list of critical medicines-version 2. EMA/536385/2024, 16 December 2024. Available at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-regulatory-overview/post-authorisation/medicine-shortages-availability-issues/availability-medicines-during-crises/union-list-critical-medicines . Accessed 10 February 2025. 
Articles from European Heart Journal are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (140.8 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
