Drug-Coated Balloons in Small Vessel De Novo Coronary Artery Disease: Better than DES? - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Eur Heart J 
. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2026 Apr 10. 
Published in final edited form as: Eur Heart J. 2025 May 2;46(17):1600–1602. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaf083 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Drug-Coated Balloons in Small Vessel De Novo Coronary Artery Disease: Better than DES? 
Christina Lalani 
Christina Lalani , MD 
a Division of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School Boston MA 
b Richard A. and Susan F. Smith Center for Outcomes Research in Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
Find articles by Christina Lalani 
a, b , Eric A Secemsky 
Eric A Secemsky , MD, MSc 
a Division of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School Boston MA 
b Richard A. and Susan F. Smith Center for Outcomes Research in Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
Find articles by Eric A Secemsky 
a, b , Robert W Yeh 
Robert W Yeh , MD, MSc 
a Division of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School Boston MA 
b Richard A. and Susan F. Smith Center for Outcomes Research in Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
Find articles by Robert W Yeh 
a, b 
Author information 
Copyright and License information 
a Division of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School Boston MA 
b Richard A. and Susan F. Smith Center for Outcomes Research in Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
✉ 
Corresponding Author: Robert W. Yeh, MD, MSc, Smith Center for Outcomes Research in Cardiology, 375 Longwood Avenue, Fourth Floor, Boston, MA 02215, ryeh@bidmc.harvard.edu 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC13063135  NIHMSID: NIHMS2159037  PMID: 40036794 
The publisher's version of this article is available at Eur Heart J 
Graphical Abstract: 
Despite ongoing innovation in drug-eluting stent (DES) technology, rates of target lesion failure (TLF) continue to accrue year after year after PCI with contemporary DES. 1 Long-term complications of DES occur due to a variety of mechanisms including neointimal hyperplasia, neoatherosclerosis, and stent fracture, which drive the observed 1-2% annual occurrence of stent failure and may present as clinically meaningful events such as myocardial infarction. 2 , 3 Although drug coated balloons (DCBs) hold theoretical promise for overcoming some of the limitations of DES, the ideal therapeutic target for DCBs remains unclear. 
Historically, DCBs had primarily been trialed for the treatment of in-stent restenosis (ISR), where they provide comparable results to DES while eliminating the need for an additional layer of stent. In the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines, DCBs received a Class IA recommendation for ISR as early as 2014. However, in the newly-published 2024 guidelines, there has been a controversial shift, leading to a first-line recommendation for DES over DCBs for ISR. 4 This shift was driven in part by new data suggesting higher rates of target vessel revascularization in patients who received DCBs vs. DES for ISR when follow-up duration was extended beyond one year. 5 , 6 In one meta-analysis comparing DCBs to everolimus-eluting stents, there were significantly higher rates of target vessel revascularization at 3 years in the DCB group, although the lack of patient-level data prevented evaluation of heterogeneity in the treatment effect of DCBs. 5 In another meta-analysis, DCBs were as effective as DES for the treatment of bare metal stent (BMS) ISR, but less effective for DES ISR when comparing rates of 3-year target lesion revascularization. 6 With these new studies, the ESC now offers a Class IA recommendation for DES over DCB for treatment of in-DES restenosis. 4 
The treatment of de novo coronary artery disease with DCBs has been less well studied, but is an area of growing interest. On one hand, the avoidance of even a first layer of stent with DCB treatment has the appeal of potentially restoring blood flow while preserving more normal vasomotion and allowing for the possibility of positive remodeling of the vessel. On the other hand, lower acute lumen gains achieved with balloons compared with stents, as well as risks of vessel closure, could lead to inferior outcomes with DCB. De novo coronary disease in small vessels may be particularly attractive for a DCB application due to the well-described elevated TLF rates after DES in small vessels. Trials evaluating DCBs for small vessels have suggested comparability with DES, but none have been powered sufficiently to examine whether the approach might in fact be superior. 
In the ANDROMEDA study, Fezzi et al aim to answer precisely this question. By conducting a meta-analysis of paclitaxel-coated balloon (PCB) use in de novo small vessel coronary artery disease (SV-CAD), the authors aim to advance previously-inconclusive data demonstrating non-inferiority of DCBs compared with DES in SV-CAD through inclusion of longer-term clinical outcomes in a combined, large patient population. 7 In this patient-level meta-analysis that involved 1154 patients with SV-CAD across four randomized control trials, there was a 25% reduction in major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) over 3 years, driven by lower risk of myocardial infarction and target vessel revascularization for patients who received DCB vs. DES. 7 In addition, at 3-year follow-up, there was no significant difference in the rates of TLF between the two arms, although the point estimate was directionally consistent with the findings for the MACE, myocardial infarction and target vessel revascularization endpoints. 
Conceptually, SV-CAD is one of the most appealing use cases for DCBs. Given the near-double estimated rates of one-year TLF for DES in SV-CAD when compared to short lesions in larger vessels, the development of alternatives to traditional DES in SV-CAD is imperative. 8 In SV-CAD, use of DCBs guarantees that vessel caliber is not further reduced through the implantation of metal struts. 9 Furthermore, in contrast to the negative remodeling that can be induced by conventional balloon angioplasty in SV-CAD, PCBs actively promote positive vessel remodeling, leading to improved vessel diameters and less late lumen loss. 9 Prior to the ANDROMEDA study, the largest randomized controlled trial evaluating PCB outcomes in SV-CAD was the PICCOLETO II trial, a study in which 252 patients with acute or chronic coronary syndrome were randomized to receive PCB vs. everolimus-eluting stent for treatment of SV-CAD. 10 Although the PICCOLETO II trial demonstrated superiority of PCBs vs. DES for angiographic late lumen loss, the study was not powered to assess clinical endpoints. It is for this reason that the larger sample size of the ANDROMEDA meta-analysis is particularly beneficial. 
Looking forward, there are still unanswered questions regarding how best to use DCBs in the treatment of SV-CAD. To start, there are multiple ongoing randomized control trials, including SELUTION ( NCT05946629 ) and TRANSFORM II ( NCT04893291 ), which will compare sirolimus-coated balloons (SCBs) to DES in SV-CAD. Unlike paclitaxel, which acts irreversibly and is rapidly absorbed by tissues, sirolimus acts reversibly and is more challenging to transfer to the vessel wall. 3 Consequently, SCBs are much more dependent on the specific excipient used to ensure the achievement of adequate drug levels at the site of the lesion. In addition, because sirolimus is cytostatic rather than cytocidal, SCBs may not promote the same degree of positive remodeling as is seen with PCBs. Although paclitaxel was traditionally seen as the preferred drug for DCBs, more recent data has suggested non-inferiority of SCBs in select situations, such as simple de novo disease. 11 , 12 That said, it is possible that the greater positive remodeling offered by PCBs is especially important in SV-CAD, and it is critical that future SCB trials evaluate outcomes in the subgroup of patients with SV-CAD to assess for heterogeneity of the treatment effect of SCBs. 
Another limitation of the ANDROMEDA study is that the trials included in the meta-analysis are not fully reflective of current clinical practice. For example, as the authors note, 31% of patients in the sample received a first-generation DES and very few patients underwent functional imaging or intravascular imaging guided PCI. Ideally, future randomized control trials will demonstrate findings similar to those in the ANDROMEDA study, but in a more contemporaneous population with current procedural techniques and devices. 
Despite the theoretical advantages of DCBs over DES for the treatment of coronary artery disease, there is still much to learn regarding which patients and which lesions benefit most from DCBs. Regardless, it is becoming clear that the benefits of DCB therapy may not be a class effect – whether for the class of balloons being used or for the types of lesions being treated. It will be important for future studies to evaluate long-term clinical outcomes for both PCBs and SCBs compared with the newest generation DES across a variety of lesion types to guide the individualization of care going forward. 
Disclosure of interest: 
- Dr. Lalani receives funding from the T32 HL160522. 
- Dr. Secemsky receives funding from NIH/NHLBI K23HL150290, Food & Drug Administration, and SCAI, has institutional grants from Abbott/CSI, BD, Boston Scientific, Cook, Medtronic, and Philips and receives speaking/consulting fees from Abbott/CSI, BD, BMS, Boston Scientific, Cagent, Conavi, Cook, Cordis, Endovascular Engineering, Gore, InfraRedx, Medtronic, Philips, RapidAI, Rampart, Shockwave, Siemens, Terumo, Thrombolex, VentureMed, and Zoll. 
- Dr. Yeh receives consulting fees for Abbott, Boston Scientific, CathWorks, Edwards, Elixir Medical, Magenta Medical, and Medtronic and receives research funds from Boston Scientific, Abbott and Medtronic. 
References 
1. Madhavan MV, Kirtane AJ, Redfors B, Généreux P, Ben-Yehuda O, Palmerini T, Benedetto U, Biondi-Zoccai G, Smits PC, Birgelen C von, Mehran R, McAndrew T, Serruys PW, Leon MB, Pocock SJ, Stone GW. Stent-Related Adverse Events >1 Year After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol
2020;75:590–604.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Giustino G, Colombo A, Camaj A, Yasumura K, Mehran R, Stone GW, Kini A, Sharma SK. Coronary In-Stent Restenosis: JACC State-of-the-Art Review. J Am Coll Cardiol
2022;80:348–372.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Korjian S, McCarthy KJ, Larnard EA, Cutlip DE, McEntegart MB, Kirtane AJ, Yeh RW. Drug-Coated Balloons in the Management of Coronary Artery Disease. Circulation: Cardiovascular Interventions
2024;17:e013302.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Vrints C, Andreotti F, Koskinas KC, Rossello X, Adamo M, Ainslie J, Banning AP, Budaj A, Buechel RR, Chiariello GA, Chieffo A, Christodorescu RM, Deaton C, Doenst T, Jones HW, Kunadian V, Mehilli J, Milojevic M, Piek JJ, Pugliese F, Rubboli A, Semb AG, Senior R, Berg JM ten, Van Belle E, Van Craenenbroeck EM, Vidal-Perez R, Winther S, ESC Scientific Document Group. 2024 ESC Guidelines for the management of chronic coronary syndromes: Developed by the task force for the management of chronic coronary syndromes of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Endorsed by the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). European Heart Journal
2024:ehae177. [ Google Scholar ] 
5. Elgendy IY, Mahmoud AN, Elgendy AY, Mojadidi MK, Elbadawi A, Eshtehardi P, Pérez-Vizcayno MJ, Wayangankar SA, Jneid H, David Anderson R, Alfonso F. Drug-Eluting Balloons Versus Everolimus-Eluting Stents for In-Stent Restenosis: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Trials. Cardiovasc Revasc Med
2019;20:612–618.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Giacoppo D, Alfonso F, Xu B, Claessen BEPM, Adriaenssens T, Jensen C, Pérez-Vizcayno MJ, Kang D-Y, Degenhardt R, Pleva L, Baan J, Cuesta J, Park D-W, Kukla P, Jiménez-Quevedo P, Unverdorben M, Gao R, Naber CK, Park S-J, Henriques JPS, Kastrati A, Byrne RA. Drug-Coated Balloon Angioplasty Versus Drug-Eluting Stent Implantation in Patients With Coronary Stent Restenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol
2020;75:2664–2678.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Fezzi S, Giacoppo D, Fahrni G, Latib A, Alfonso F, Colombo A, Mahfoud F, Scheller B, Jeger R, Cortese B
Assessment of long-term clinical outcomes of de Novo DCB peRformance: a cOmprehensive, individual patient data Meta- Analysis of ranDomized clinical triAls: the ANDROMEDA study. European Heart Journal. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Claessen BE, Smits PC, Kereiakes DJ, Parise H, Fahy M, Kedhi E, Serruys PW, Lansky AJ, Cristea E, Sudhir K, Sood P, Simonton CA, Stone GW. Impact of lesion length and vessel size on clinical outcomes after percutaneous coronary intervention with everolimus- versus paclitaxel-eluting stents pooled analysis from the SPIRIT (Clinical Evaluation of the XIENCE V Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System) and COMPARE (Second-generation everolimus-eluting and paclitaxel-eluting stents in real-life practice) Randomized Trials. JACC Cardiovasc Interv
2011;4:1209–1215.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. Yerasi C, Case BC, Forrestal BJ, Torguson R, Weintraub WS, Garcia-Garcia HM, Waksman R. Drug-Coated Balloon for De Novo Coronary Artery Disease: JACC State-of-the-Art Review. Journal of the American College of Cardiology
2020;75:1061–1073.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. Cortese B, Di Palma G, Guimaraes MG, Piraino D, Orrego PS, Buccheri D, Rivero F, Perotto A, Zambelli G, Alfonso F. Drug-Coated Balloon Versus Drug-Eluting Stent for Small Coronary Vessel Disease: PICCOLETO II Randomized Clinical Trial. JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions
2020;13:2840–2849.
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. Yeh RW, Lalani C. The future of sirolimus-coated balloon use in percutaneous coronary intervention. EuroIntervention
2024;20:e1320–e1321.
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Scheller B, Mangner N, Jeger RV, Afan S, Mahfoud F, Woitek FJ, Fahrni G, Schwenke C, Schnorr B, Kleber F. A randomised trial of sirolimus- versus paclitaxel-coated balloons for de novo coronary lesions. EuroIntervention
2024;20:e1322–e1329. 
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (163.2 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
