Abnormal electrocardiogram findings in athletes: A consensus statement of the European Association of Preventive Cardiology of the European Society of Cardiology - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Eur Heart J 
. 2025 Sep 25;47(2):152–169. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaf646 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Abnormal electrocardiogram findings in athletes 
A consensus statement of the European Association of Preventive Cardiology of the European Society of Cardiology 
Gherardo Finocchiaro 
Gherardo Finocchiaro 
1 Cardiovascular and Genomic Research Institute, City St George’s, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK 
Find articles by Gherardo Finocchiaro 
1 , Alessandro Zorzi 
Alessandro Zorzi 
2 Department of Cardio-Thoraco-Vascular Sciences and Public Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy 
Find articles by Alessandro Zorzi 
2 , Mark Abela 
Mark Abela 
3 University of Malta, Msida, MSD2090, Malta 
4 Department of Cardiology, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta 
Find articles by Mark Abela 
3, 4 , Aaron Baggish 
Aaron Baggish 
5 Department of Cardiology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland 
Find articles by Aaron Baggish 
5 , Silvia Castelletti 
Silvia Castelletti 
6 Dipartimento di Cardiologia, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy 
Find articles by Silvia Castelletti 
6 , Elena Cavarretta 
Elena Cavarretta 
7 Department of Medical-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza University, Latina, Italy 
Find articles by Elena Cavarretta 
7 , Guido Claessen 
Guido Claessen 
8 Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, Biomedical Research Institute, LCRC, UHasselt, Hasselt, Belgium 
Find articles by Guido Claessen 
8 , Domenico Corrado 
Domenico Corrado 
9 Department of Cardio-Thoraco-Vascular Sciences and Public Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy 
Find articles by Domenico Corrado 
9 , Maria Sanz de la Garza 
Maria Sanz de la Garza 
10 Cardiovascular Institute, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain 
Find articles by Maria Sanz de la Garza 
10 , Sabiha Gati 
Sabiha Gati 
11 School of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK 
Find articles by Sabiha Gati 
11 , Viviana Maestrini 
Viviana Maestrini 
12 Institute of Sport Medicine and Science, National Italian Olympic Committee, Rome, Italy 
Find articles by Viviana Maestrini 
12 , Aneil Malhotra 
Aneil Malhotra 
13 Institute of Sport, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK 
Find articles by Aneil Malhotra 
13 , Josef Niebauer 
Josef Niebauer 
14 Institute of Sports Medicine, Prevention and Rehabilitation, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria 
Find articles by Josef Niebauer 
14 , David Niederseer 
David Niederseer 
15 Hochgebirgsklinik Davos, Medicine Campus Davos, Davos, Switzerland 
Find articles by David Niederseer 
15 , Michael Papadakis 
Michael Papadakis 
16 Cardiovascular and Genomic Research Institute, City St George’s, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK 
Find articles by Michael Papadakis 
16 , Antonio Pelliccia 
Antonio Pelliccia 
17 Institute of Sport Medicine and Science, National Italian Olympic Committee, Rome, Italy 
Find articles by Antonio Pelliccia 
17 , Sanjay Sharma 
Sanjay Sharma 
18 Cardiovascular and Genomic Research Institute, City St George’s, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK 
Find articles by Sanjay Sharma 
18, ✉ , Flavio D’Ascenzi 
Flavio D’Ascenzi 
19 Department of Medical Biotechnologies, Sports Cardiology and Rehab Unit, University of Siena, Siena, Italy 
Find articles by Flavio D’Ascenzi 
19 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 Cardiovascular and Genomic Research Institute, City St George’s, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK 
2 Department of Cardio-Thoraco-Vascular Sciences and Public Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy 
3 University of Malta, Msida, MSD2090, Malta 
4 Department of Cardiology, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta 
5 Department of Cardiology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland 
6 Dipartimento di Cardiologia, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy 
7 Department of Medical-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza University, Latina, Italy 
8 Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, Biomedical Research Institute, LCRC, UHasselt, Hasselt, Belgium 
9 Department of Cardio-Thoraco-Vascular Sciences and Public Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy 
10 Cardiovascular Institute, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain 
11 School of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK 
12 Institute of Sport Medicine and Science, National Italian Olympic Committee, Rome, Italy 
13 Institute of Sport, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK 
14 Institute of Sports Medicine, Prevention and Rehabilitation, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria 
15 Hochgebirgsklinik Davos, Medicine Campus Davos, Davos, Switzerland 
16 Cardiovascular and Genomic Research Institute, City St George’s, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK 
17 Institute of Sport Medicine and Science, National Italian Olympic Committee, Rome, Italy 
18 Cardiovascular and Genomic Research Institute, City St George’s, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK 
19 Department of Medical Biotechnologies, Sports Cardiology and Rehab Unit, University of Siena, Siena, Italy 
✉ 
Corresponding author. Email: sasharma@sgul.ac.uk 
Collection date 2026 Jan 7. 
© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC12777699  PMID: 40996312 
This article has been corrected. See Eur Heart J. 2025 Dec 15 . 
Abstract 
Athletes commonly exhibit a series of electrical, structural, and functional physiological changes which may overlap with cardiac pathology. The last two decades have witnessed a progressive improvement in understanding what can be considered benign for athletes and what may be deemed as potentially pathological and require further investigations. However, diagnostic uncertainties in the cardiac assessment of athletes are often encountered. In particular, the clinical significance of some electrocardiogram (ECG) findings may be uncertain. While uncommon and suggestive of an underlying cardiac condition, they may be identified among healthy athletes without additional pathological findings to support a unifying clinical diagnosis. This creates significant dilemmas for clinicians charged with determining sports eligibility and those who have the responsibility to help athletes in the decision-making process regarding future competitive sports participation. Current guidelines, recommendations, and position papers provide a roadmap for the differential diagnosis between ‘athlete's heart’ and cardiac disease. However, managing ECG findings of uncertain clinical significance, especially when initial diagnostic evaluation reveals no supportive signs of pathology, has received comparatively less attention, in particular, the type of cardiac investigations, the extent of diagnostic work-up and the need for follow-up require clarification. This document aims to provide guidance based on published evidence and expert opinions to assist in the clinical decision-making regarding ECG anomalies that are common sources of uncertainty when managing asymptomatic athletes. 
Keywords: Electrocardiogram, Sudden cardiac death, Sports cardiology 
Graphical Abstract 
Graphical Abstract. 
Open in a new tab 
ECG interpretation in athletes presents several challenges due to physiological adaptations that can mimic pathological findings. A probabilistic approach is essential to refine pre-test probability, incorporating individual risk factors such as family history, sex, and ethnicity. When first-line tests fail to clarify the significance of ECG abnormalities, second-line investigations such as advanced imaging or functional assessments play a crucial role. In some cases, uncertainty may persist even with thorough diagnostic work. In such circumstances, the athlete may resume playing with periodic re-evaluation. Investigations shown are illustrative and not mandatory for all cases. 
Introduction 
Cardiac conditions associated with an increased risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD) are often indicated or detected by abnormalities on a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG). 1–5 However, interpreting ECGs in athletes can be challenging as these individuals often display a series of physiological, electrical, structural, and functional adaptations that overlap with cardiac pathology. While there is now a better understanding of the spectrum of athletic remodelling, including the ability to more accurately differentiate benign training-related ECG changes from those that indicate underlying disease, 6 grey areas with corollary clinical uncertainty persist. Specifically, some ECG findings typically associated with underlying cardiac disease may be observed in healthy athletes without additional pathological findings to support a unifying clinical diagnosis. This poses significant challenges for clinicians tasked with assessing sports eligibility and engaging in shared decision-making about future competitive sports participation. Although current guidelines, recommendations and position papers, including the International recommendations for ECG interpretation in athletes, offer guidance for distinguishing between ‘athlete's heart’ and cardiac disease, the management of ECG findings deemed as abnormal, in the absence of other signs of pathology after comprehensive diagnostic evaluation, has not received adequate attention. Furthermore, certain ECG findings are not sufficiently tackled by the International recommendations and clarification regarding the type and extent of cardiac investigations is needed. 
This document aims to provide clinical guidance based on published evidence and expert opinions to support clinical decision-making. While athletic grey zones can occur with all diagnostic tests, this document will specifically focus on those encountered on a 12-lead ECG. We will address isolated electrical abnormalities, where the term ‘isolated’ refers to findings suggestive of pathology that are not accompanied by a personal or family history suggestive of cardiac disease or the detection of pathological findings on first-line investigations. For the purpose of this document, we will use the term ‘athlete’ to define an individual who engages in competitive sports or intense regular exercise. The primary objective of this document is to provide guidance on the necessity and the type of clinical work-up for isolated ECG abnormalities and for ECG findings of uncertain clinical significance. It is important to note that further investigations should always be pursued when these anomalies are linked with other anamnestic or clinical abnormalities. The objective of this document is to reduce variability in care while allowing management strategies tailored to the unique requirements of each athlete. Additionally, we seek to provide clinicians with a pragmatic reference to guide their decision-making process. 
Methods 
This consensus statement was proposed by the nucleus of Sports Cardiology of the European Association of Preventive Cardiology (EAPC) and approved by the Scientific Committee of the EAPC and the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Scientific Document Committee in 2023. Current members of the EAPC Sports Cardiology nucleus and other distinguished sports cardiology experts were invited to participate as co-authors. Those who agreed were initially invited to an online meeting to discuss the aims of the project and to define ECG anomalies which should be discussed. Thereafter, each co-author was assigned to critically appraise a specific topic (ECG pattern) under the coordination of the chairs. A second meeting was held during the 2024 EAPC Congress in Athens to discuss the state of progress. Once the initial contributions were collected, a first draft was circulated together with an electronic survey for voting on the proposed recommendations. Three choices were offered: agree, agree with rephrasing, or disagree. The results of the poll were discussed during a second online meeting, after which the authors were asked to confirm whether they agreed or disagreed with the rephrased recommendations. According to the ESC policy on consensus statements, the strength of advice was classified into five categories on a scale from 0 to 4 bars. When a recommendation was based on robust evidence, the notion was designated 4 bars. When a recommendation was predominantly based on expert opinion, the notion was assigned 3 bars when all the authors agreed (‘uniform consensus’) while only 1 or 2 bars were assigned to a notion when >80% but not all experts were in agreement. The distinction between 1 bar and 2 bars was based on some published evidence or consensus opinion, respectively. Finally, when consensus could not be reached by at least 80% of authors, the statements were assigned an empty bar. After this process, a second draft was circulated and authors were offered the opportunity to provide further comments, which were handled by the chairmen. The document was subsequently forwarded to the EAPC Scientific Committee for internal blinded peer review. The manuscript was modified according to the reviewers’ comments and was finally approved by the EAPC Scientific Committee and the ESC Scientific Document Committee in 2024. 
Bradycardia and atrioventricular conduction abnormalities 
Marked sinus bradycardia (<30 b.p.m.) 
Sinus bradycardia is observed in up to 80% of high-level athletes. 6 Endurance athletes are more likely to develop sinus bradycardia, usually associated with myocardial remodelling. Heart rates below 35 b.p.m. are rare during waketime hours and typically occur only in extreme endurance athletes. 7 Sinus arrhythmia, junctional rhythms, wandering pacemaker, sinus pauses, and atrioventricular (AV) conduction delays are present in up to 70% of bradycardic athletes. 6 These benign arrhythmias are more frequently observed during sleep when the sinus rate may fall to below 30 beats/min. 8 
Vagal hypertonia has been extensively investigated as a causative mechanism of marked sinus bradycardia. Interestingly, even after complete pharmacological blocking of the autonomous nervous system using atropine and beta blockers, trained athletes still exhibit lower resting heart rates compared to sedentary people. 9 Recent data suggests that intrinsic changes occur in the sinus node, 10 which may persist after detraining. A longitudinal study in 157 former elite athletes with bradycardia (resting heart rate < 50 b.p.m. when they were engaged in high-level competitions) revealed that after >5 years of abstinence from training and competitions, 65% of participants had persistent bradycardia, with 18% exhibiting a heart rate < 50 b.p.m. 11 
In the absence of other clinical or electrocardiographic signs of sinus dysfunction, sinus bradycardia in an asymptomatic athlete should pose no clinical concern. In accordance with the International recommendations for ECG interpretation in athletes, 6 a resting heart rate above 30 b.p.m. may be considered normal for asymptomatic athletes who engage in intense training and, thereby require no further examination. The exception would be athletes, particularly those over the age of 35, in whom the heart rate response during exercise is abnormal. 
Among athletes with a heart rate < 30 b.p.m. at 12-lead ECG, with no or minimal chronotropic response despite a brief episode of brisk exercise or hyperventilation, further cardiac investigations are required. The clinical work-up should include basic blood tests (electrolytes and thyroid function test), transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), to rule out an associated structural heart disease, maximal exercise tolerance test (ETT), to assess chronotropic response and 24–48 h ambulatory ECG monitoring. The latter should incorporate a training session to demonstrate normal heart rate response and chronotropic reserve, and rule out sinus pauses or AV conduction abnormalities. It is important to note that marked bradycardia may be exacerbated by certain medications and is often associated with severe relative energy deficiency 12 (e.g. in athletes with anorexia nervosa). 13 , 14 
Genetic testing may be considered to rule out mutations in HCN4, SCN5A, and ANK2, if marked bradycardia is not justified by intense training, is familial, or there is an association with structural heart disease. 15–18 Despite the aforementioned cases, genetic testing is not recommended routinely in isolated ECG abnormalities, and may be considered only when supported by additional clinical or familial indicators. Invasive testing with an electrophysiology study has limited yield. However, it may be considered in carefully selected cases, for example, in cases with marked sinus bradycardia associated with persistent first-degree or with associate bundle branch block, exercise-unresponsive second-degree Mobitz I AV block, or suspected sinus node dysfunction presenting with unexplained exertional symptoms, despite a normal non-invasive evaluation. 19 
In the absence of symptoms or suspicious family history, an athlete with isolated marked sinus bradycardia and no other abnormalities should not be discouraged from engaging in high-intensity and/or high-volume sport. It is advisable to consider follow-up even in asymptomatic athletes, particularly if there is a discrepancy between the amount or the intensity of exercise and the degree of bradycardia ( Table 1 ). When sinus node dysfunction is suspected, a short detraining period may be necessary to differentiate it from physiological bradycardia induced by exercise. An extended period of detraining (>6 weeks) is expected to be required to return to normal levels. 11 , 20 
Table 1. 
Diagnostic work-up of athletes with marked sinus bradycardia/AV conduction abnormalities and bundle branch blocks 
Marked sinus bradycardia, AV block and short PR interval 
In athletes with marked sinus bradycardia, first-degree AV block with marked PR prolongation (>400 ms) or daytime second-degree Mobitz type I AV block that persists despite brisk exercise or hyperventilation, clinical investigations including basic blood tests, TTE, maximal ETT and ambulatory ECG monitoring, including a training session, are advised. 
In athletes with marked PR prolongation or diurnal second-degree Mobitz type I AV block, testing for anti-Ro/SSA the athlete and the mother (in young athletes) may be considered. 
In athletes with first-degree or second-degree AV block associated to bundle branch block, a more comprehensive clinical work-up to exclude genetic, infiltrative or inflammatory diseases should be considered. 
In athletes with AV block and associated bundle branch block and in symptomatic athletes with short PR interval and no overt pre-excitation, electrophysiological study may be appropriate. 
A detraining period of at least 2 months may be useful to differentiate between training-, marked first-degree AV block, or diurnal Mobitz type I AV block with normal initial investigations. 
Bundle branch blocks 
In ostensibly healthy athletes presenting with LBBB, TTE is strongly advised as first-line examination to identify underlying structural heart disease and assess systolic function. 
In athletes with LBBB, ETT and ambulatory ECG monitoring, including a training session, are advised to exclude AV conduction disease. 
In athletes with LBBB, CMR is advised as a second-line test even if TTE is normal. 
Coronary computed tomography angiography (CTCA) is advised as a second-line investigation in athletes with LBBB who are symptomatic or have a high risk profile for coronary atherosclerosis. 
Genetic testing may be appropriate in selected athletes with LBBB, in the presence of structural abnormalities, AV block and/or atrial fibrillation. 
In athletes with RBBB and QRS duration < 130 ms, further investigations are not advised in those without a family history of premature cardiac disease or SCD, or concomitant ECG abnormalities. 
TTE deserves consideration in athletes with RBBB and QRS duration ≥ 130 ms. 
In athletes with complete RBBB and concomitant ECG abnormalities, it may be appropriate to perform a CMR, even if no apparent abnormalities are detected during TTE. 
In athletes with complete RBBB, positioning V1 and V2 in the second and third intercostal spaces may be helpful to exclude a type I Brugada ECG pattern. 
Open in a new tab 
AV, atrioventricular; BrP, Brugada pattern; CCTA, coronary computed tomography angiogram; CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; ETT, exercise tolerance test; LBBB, left bundle branch block; RBBB, right bundle branch block; Ro/SSA, anti-Sjögren's-syndrome-related antigen A autoantibodies; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram; SCD, sudden cardiac death. 
First-degree AV block with marked PR prolongation (>400 ms) 
First-degree atrioventricular block (AVB) is considered a common ECG finding in competitive athletes. Its prevalence increases with age (from 0.3% in children to 7.5% in elite adult athletes) 6 , 21 and the PR interval prolongation is usually moderate (<250 ms). Adaptive first-degree AVB is typically due to increased vagal activity and intrinsic AV node changes. 7 The PR interval typically shortens with the exercise stimulus and detraining. In contrast, a markedly prolonged PR interval (defined as ≥400 ms in adults and ≥300 ms in children/adolescents) is uncommon, even in elite athletes, and should prompt further investigation aimed to exclude an underlying heart disease, higher degree AVB and life-threatening arrhythmias. 22 This is particularly important in the presence of coexisting bundle branch block, which should raise suspicion of infra-hissian block. 
In athletes with markedly prolonged PR interval, which is persistent despite a brief episode of brisk exercise or hyperventilation, preliminary investigations should include a detailed family history, an ambulatory ECG monitoring, including a training session, TTE and ETT. 23 It should be considered to investigate the autoimmunity status of the young athlete and the mother to identify potential congenital, late progressive congenital or acquired autoimmune AV block caused by maternal anti-Ro/SSA-autoantibodies (anti-Sjögren's-syndrome-related antigen A autoantibodies). 24–26 It should be noted that anti-Ro/SSA testing may be considered in exceptional cases of unexplained or progressive conduction disease, but not routinely in asymptomatic first-degree AV block. 
Second-line investigations are advised to exclude structural heart disease, infiltrative diseases and Lyme disease, particularly when the AV block is associated with bundle branch block or echocardiographic abnormalities. Among athletes with unexplained AVB with marked AV prolongation, in whom a potentially inherited cardiac disorder is suspected, genetic testing for mutations in the SCN5A, TRPM4 , Lamin A/C and PRKAG2 , 13 , 27 , 28 and ECG screening of first-degree family members can be considered. Consideration should be given to performing an electrophysiological study in specific cases where non-invasive evaluation fails to characterize the origin of conduction disturbances definitively 29 ( Table 1 ). 
Although participation in sports should not be impacted in asymptomatic individuals with forms of autoimmune AVB and a negative family history of SCD, follow-up is essential to evaluate the potential progression of the AV block. This also applies to athletes with a PR interval ≥ 400 ms in adults and ≥300 ms in children/adolescents and no other electrical and/or structural heart abnormalities. 
Daytime (‘diurnal’) second-degree Mobitz type I AV block 
Physiological second-degree Mobitz type 1 AVB is commonly observed in athletes with a high vagal tone. Nocturnal Mobitz type 1 s-degree AVB and marked bradycardia are common in healthy athletes and do not warrant further investigation. Benign AVB in healthy athletes generally improves after mild exercise or even forced hyperventilation. 22 In contrast, high-grade AVB or persistent Mobitz I AVB during the day and training sessions (i.e. ‘diurnal’ AVB) should raise suspicion of pathology. Although there are reported cases of second-degree Mobitz type 1 AVB due to infra-nodal block, most Wenckebach-type AVB are due to a transient and benign AV node conduction disturbance. Mobitz type 1 AVB is uncommonly caused by structural, infiltrative, infectious or genetic heart diseases (such as Lamin A/C cardiomyopathy, Lyme disease and cardiac sarcoidosis). 27 , 30–33 In rare cases, autoimmune disorders may directly affect the AV node and manifest as Wenckebach-type AVB. 34 
Mobitz type I AVB should be investigated when it is associated with cardiac symptoms or relevant family history, persists during physical activity including vigorous exercise, is accompanied by wide QRS complexes, and/or other ECG abnormalities (atrial enlargement, axis deviation, ST-segment depression, T-wave inversion, low QRS voltages), or chronotropic incompetence during exercise. 6 
Among those where the block fails to correct despite a period of brisk exercise or hyperventilation, an ETT is pivotal in evaluating chronotropic response and detecting a potential worsening of the AVB during progressive exercise ( Figure 1 ). Additionally, continuous ambulatory ECG monitoring, including during training sessions, proves invaluable when assessing AV conduction throughout the day and night. Structural heart disease should initially be excluded with TTE. In specific scenarios, serological and genetic testing and cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) may be helpful when considering autoimmune, infective or genetic aetiologies as described in the prior section for profound first-degree AV block 26 In instances where the phenotype is unclear (e.g. worsening of the AVB during sympathetic stimulation or associated bundle branch block), consideration of an electrophysiological study to rule out infra-nodal disease may also be necessary 35 ( Table 1 ). 
Figure 1. 
Open in a new tab 
Management of athletes with bradyarrhythmias. It has to be noted that the recommendations on athletes with extreme bradycardia and marked PR prolongation apply to individuals in whom brisk exercise or hyperventilation does not rapidly resolve the anomaly. ETT, exercise tolerance test; HR, heart rate; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram 
Finally, a detraining period may offer valuable insights by demonstrating diurnal AVB resolution and its correlation with symptoms. 20 
Asymptomatic athletes with diurnal Mobitz type 1 AVB that improves with a brief exercise period should not be precluded from engaging in sports. 
Short PR interval without overt pre-excitation (<120 ms) 
A short PR interval (<120 ms) may indicate either accelerated conduction through the AV node or the presence of an accessory pathway (AP), thus leading to ventricular pre-excitation (manifesting as a widened QRS complex of >120 ms with a delta wave). A short PR without overt pre-excitation is not uncommon in athletes and observed in 0.6%–15.1% of children and adolescent athletes 36 , 37 as well as non-athletes. Genetic factors may play a role in both athletes and non-athletes. The presence of a perinodal AP utilizing the ‘bundle of James’ has been suggested as a possible explanation for a short PR interval with no pre-excitation, although its existence remains a matter of debate. 38 
Electrophysiological study should be considered in athletes with a short PR interval who report palpitations suggestive of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. An asymptomatic athlete with an isolated short PR interval in the absence of an overt delta wave or other ECG abnormalities does not require further evaluation. 6 
However, it should be noted that in athletes with an AP, the degree of pre-excitation generating the ‘delta wave’ on the ECG depends on the amount of myocardium that is activated through the AP and the AV node. In particular, when the AP is located in the mitral annulus distant from the sinus node, the impulse is preferentially conducted through the AV node, and therefore, a clear delta wave may be missing. 39 Subtle ECG signs of pre-excitation include a tall R wave in V1, absence of Q wave in lateral precordial leads, left axis deviation, T-wave abnormalities and ST-segment depression during exercise. 40 Slowing of the AV node conduction caused by vagal stimulation (during night-time or the recovery phase after exercise) may unmask the pre-excitation. When symptoms of palpitations are reported, and when in doubt, adenosine challenge may be helpful in this setting. 
Depolarization abnormalities and premature ventricular beats 
Left bundle branch block 
Left bundle branch block (LBBB) is a rare occurrence in asymptomatic healthy individuals, with an estimated prevalence between 0.1% and 0.8%. 41 Longitudinal data for LBBB in athletic cohorts are lacking, but studies in the general population indicate that LBBB is associated with increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in asymptomatic individuals. 42 The five-year incidence of SCD as the initial manifestation of heart disease is 10 times greater in men with LBBB than in those without it. 42 Therefore, LBBB is not part of the physiological adaptation to exercise and should always prompt further investigation. The specific components of this diagnostic evaluation are not firmly established and will depend on the clinical context. 
In ostensibly healthy athletes presenting with LBBB, TTE is advised as a first-line examination to identify underlying structural heart disease and to assess the impact of dyssynchrony on myocardial systolic function. 43 Additionally, ETT and ambulatory ECG monitoring should be considered to exclude the possibility of dynamic AV block. In asymptomatic athletes with LBBB and a normal TTE, CMR is advised as a second-line investigation, as this test can detect subclinical structural heart disease in asymptomatic patients with LBBB despite normal TTE results 44 ( Figure 2 ). The presence of LBBB alone is not an independent predictor of coronary artery disease in low-to-moderate-risk patients, but coronary computed tomography angiography (CTCA) should be considered as a second-line investigation depending on individual risk assessment, considering symptoms, demographics (age > 35 years and male sex), and risk factors for coronary atherosclerosis. 45 When LBBB is associated with AV conduction abnormalities or abnormal features on cardiac imaging, a more in-depth clinical work-up, including genetic testing to rule out potentially serious heritable conditions (such as myotonic dystrophy, laminopathies, and progressive conduction disease), should be considered ( Table 1 ). 
Figure 2. 
Open in a new tab 
Management of athletes with LBBB and RBBB. AV, atrioventricular; CAD, coronary artery disease; CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; CTCA, computed tomography coronary angiography; EP, electrophysiological; ETT, exercise tolerance test; HD, heart disease; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram 
If a comprehensive diagnostic work-up fails to produce a clear diagnosis, it is advisable to schedule follow-up assessment with an echocardiogram, every one or two years. When LBBB is accompanied by even mild structural and/or functional abnormalities suggestive of a heritable cardiac disease, screening of first-degree relatives appears appropriate. 
Right bundle branch block (with QRS ≥ 130 ms) 
Complete right bundle branch block (cRBBB) is defined as a rSR′ pattern in lead V 1 with a QRS duration ≥ 120 ms and an S wave wider than the R wave in lead V6. This finding is uncommon in the general population, with a reported prevalence of 0.1%, 46 but it is reported in 0.2%–3% of competitive athletes. 47 , 48 Among a cohort of 510 healthy competitive athletes, an isolated typical cRBBB (i.e. average QRS duration 125 ± 5 ms) was associated with a physiological increase in left ventricular mass and/or right ventricular chamber dimensions. 49 When cRBBB is accompanied by other ECG findings, including atrial enlargement and QRS axis deviation, the likelihood of underlying heart disease increases (48). 
In athletes with cRBBB, QRS duration should be taken into account for clinical management. A recent study involving 104 369 consecutive apparently healthy young individuals screened with an ECG and health questionnaire showed that cardiac disease was more common in subjects with non-isolated cRBBB with a QRS duration of ≥130 ms. 46 In accordance with the International recommendations for ECG interpretation in athletes, additional diagnostic testing for athletes with an isolated cRBBB is not recommended. 6 However, we suggest that in athletes with cRBBB and QRS duration of ≥130 ms TTE should be considered at least once to exclude an underlying structural cardiac disease (with a stronger mandate for athletes exhibiting cRBBB associated with other ECG abnormalities, given the low yield in isolated cRBBB 46 ) ( Table 1 , Figure 1 ). Despite the low diagnostic yield of TTE in this setting, the rationale for this consideration is to exclude underlying structural heart disease, such as atrial septal defects, rather than to screen for conditions associated with a heightened risk of SCD. 
Further investigations, such as CMR, may be necessary, even in the absence of obvious abnormalities at TTE, if other ECG changes are present, including precordial lead T-wave inversion involving the inferior and/or lateral TWI and marked QRS fragmentation. Additionally, recording of the V1 and V2 leads in the second and third intercostal space may be useful to differentiate RBBB from the coved-type (type 1) Brugada ECG pattern. 50 
Athletes with RBBB and QRS duration of ≥130 ms, in the absence of structural abnormalities or significant AV conduction disease, should not be restricted from sports participation. However, repeat assessment every 1 or 2 years is advised in athletes with coexisting abnormal or borderline electrical patterns. 
Isolated low voltages in limb and precordial leads 
Low QRS voltages in the limb leads are defined as a QRS amplitude (from peak to nadir) < 0.5 mV in all the limb leads. 51 Low QRS voltages in the precordial leads are defined as an amplitude < 1.0 mV in all precordial leads. Low QRS voltages isolated to the precordial leads are not addressed in this document due to the lack of clinical data pertaining to their significance. 51 The prevalence of low QRS voltages in apparently healthy athletes is estimated to range between 1% and 2%, 52 but this ECG pattern is non-specific and may be identified in a number of non-cardiac (obesity, hypertrophic pectoral muscles, emphysema, breast augmentation procedures and hypothyroidism) and cardiac (pericardial effusion, cardiomyopathies, infiltrative disease and myocardial scar) 53 , 54 diseases. Specifically, low QRS voltages are more frequently present in patients with arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) with and without left ventricular (LV) involvement and isolated non-ischemic LV fibrosis (14%–22%) than in healthy athletes. 55–58 Although this ECG feature may indicate an underlying structural heart disease that predisposes to an increased risk of SCD, its presence or significance is not discussed in the current international recommendations for ECG interpretation in athletes. 
Athletes with low QRS voltages and normal personal and family history should undergo TTE, maximal ETT and 12-lead ambulatory ECG monitoring, including a training session ( Table 2 , Figure 3 ). The latter two tests aim to identify premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) conducting with wide RBBB patterns ( Table 3 ) that may suggest underlying non-ischemic LV fibrosis. 59 
Table 2. 
Diagnostic work-up of athletes with low QRS voltages in the limb leads and premature ventricular contractions 
Degree of recommendation 
Among athletes with unexplained LQRSV in the limb leads, further investigation, including a TTE, maximal ETT and ambulatory ECG monitoring comprising a training session, is advised. CMR should be performed in athletes displaying abnormalities on these preliminary tests. 
In athletes with LQRSV and negative initial tests, a CMR to exclude an underlying non-ischemic LV scar may be appropriate. 
In athletes with one or more PVCs on the resting ECG, with the exception of fascicular PVC (with QRS <130 ms), 24-hour ambulatory ECG monitoring, preferably with 12-lead configuration, is advised, including a training session. 
In athletes with high-risk features PVCs ( Table 3 ) and/or with a PVC burden > 10% and/or with associated ECG abnormalities, further investigations are advised including blood tests a , TTE, maximal ETT and CMR. 
In athletes without high-risk PVCs ( Table 3 ), associated ECG abnormalities or PVC burden > 10%, but with PVC burden > 1% and <10%, further investigation with a TTE is advised, and if this test is normal, follow-up should be considered. 
Genetic testing for CPVT is advised in athletes with exercise-induced, polymorphic PVCs suggestive of CPVT (e.g. increasing in frequency and complexity with adrenergic stimulation), in the context of a structurally normal heart. 
Invasive evaluation with electrophysiological study with programmed ventricular stimulation and endocardial voltage mapping may be appropriate in selected cases, with symptoms, high ectopic burden and complex PVCs. 
Open in a new tab 
CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; CPVT, catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia; ETT, exercise tolerance test; LQRSV, low QRS voltages; LV, left ventricular; PVC, premature ventricular contractions; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram. 
a Haemoglobin, thyroid function, and electrolytes. 
Figure 3. 
Open in a new tab 
Management of athletes with isolated LQRSV. CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; ETT, exercise tolerance test; HD, heart disease; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram 
Table 3. 
Risk stratification of PVCs in athletes 
Low-risk features 
High-risk features 
Clinical red flags 
Family history of premature SCD/cardiomyopathy 
No 
Yes 
Suspicious symptoms 
No 
Yes 
Physical examination 
Normal 
Abnormal 
Resting ECG 
Normal 
Abnormal 
Echocardiography 
Normal 
Abnormal 
PVCs characteristics 
Morphology, number 
Single 
Multiple 
Morphology, type 
Fascicular (RBBB narrow QRS), infundibular (LBBB/inferior axis), RBBB/inferior axis (intermediate-risk) 
RBBB/intermediate or superior axis 
LBBB/superior axis 
Response to exercise 
Suppression 
Persistence/increase 
R on T 
No 
Yes 
NSVT 
No 
Yes 
Open in a new tab 
LBBB, left bundle branch block; RBBB, right bundle branch block; NSVT, non-sustained ventricular tachycardia; PVC, premature ventricular contraction. 
In cases where first-line tests raise suspicion of cardiomyopathy, a CMR should be performed to verify the diagnosis. In athletes with isolated low QRS voltages and no abnormalities on TTE, ambulatory ECG monitoring and ETT, there is limited evidence to justify proceeding to CMR, which however can be considered if clinical suspicion remains, recognizing that, in our experience, it may occasionally reveal unexpected myocardial abnormalities not detected by other modalities. Asymptomatic athletes with normal evaluation may participate in all sports. Nevertheless, conducting annual surveillance assessments for athletes with low QRS voltages is advisable since the natural history of this anomaly is incomplete. First-line tests should be considered during the follow-up, with a low threshold for repeating a CMR with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE), if there are progressive ECG abnormalities and uncommon or complex ventricular extrasystoles during exercise testing. 
Premature ventricular contractions 
Premature ventricular contractions pose a clinical challenge as they are relatively common in athletes, often stemming from increased activity of a benign electrical focus, 60 and they may also signify underlying heart disease with a propensity for fatal arrhythmias and SCD. In athletes with PVCs on the ECG, it is crucial to strategize an appropriate diagnostic work-up to exclude serious cardiac conditions. This may be particularly challenging because certain ventricular arrhythmic substrates such as ACM, non-ischemic LV fibrosis and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) may not be detected by first-line diagnostic tests (e.g. TTE). Generally, the diagnosis often necessitates more comprehensive investigations such as CMR, ETT and genetic testing 56 , 61 , 62 
In the past, the risk stratification of PVCs relied on the concept of ‘arrhythmic burden’, which suggested that a higher number of PVCs indicated a greater likelihood of an underlying cardiac condition. This perspective was primarily based on an observational study published in 2002 that found an association between the number of PVCs on 24-hour ECG monitoring and diagnostic yield of underlying cardiac disease. 62 According to this concept, the 2017 International recommendations for interpretation of the athlete's ECG proposed further investigations only if two or more PVCs are present on a single 12-lead ECG reading. 6 However, recent studies have questioned this approach by showing that consideration based primarily on the arrhythmic burden may not be accurate in detecting underlying cardiac conditions, lacking both sensitivity and specificity. 63 , 64 Instead, the ventricular ectopic morphology, heterogeneity and complexity, coupling intervals and the relationship to exercise appear to offer a more accurate identification of an underlying cardiac disease 59 , 60 , 65 ( Table 3 ). 
Analysis of the morphology of the PVCs is key for inferring their potential site of origin. Although benign PVCs can originate from multiple cardiac structures, the most common are the fascicles of the left bundle (typical in children and characterized by QRS duration < 130 ms and a typical incomplete RBBB configuration), the right ventricular outflow tract, the left ventricular outflow tract/aortic cusps and the anterior mitral annulus. Origin from these sites is associated with a lower probability of underlying structural heart disease, particularly in asymptomatic athletes with ‘isolated’ PVCs. Although most non-fascicular ectopy, such as right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) variants, is benign even when frequent, certain features such as variable morphology, exercise augmentation, or atypical QRS characteristics may raise suspicion for underlying pathology and warrant further evaluation in selected cases. In contrast, PVCs with a broad RBBB pattern (QRS > 130 ms) and superior axis are uncommon among athletes. Recent studies have indicated an association between this PVC pattern and underlying LV scar. Additionally, if these PVCs fail to suppress during exercise, are reproduced during exercise testing/ambulatory ECG monitoring and/or display the ‘R on T’ phenomenon, they are more likely to be linked with LV scar. 60 , 66 
Athletes displaying one or more PVCs on the resting ECG (with the exception of fascicular PVCs with RBBB QRS < 130 ms) should initially undergo ambulatory ECG monitoring for 24–48 h, preferably with a 12-lead configuration, including an exercise session to analyse the prevalence and morphology of the PVCs. Those with high-risk features ( Table 3 ) should undergo further investigations, including a TTE (with coronary artery origin assessment), maximal ETT and CMR ( Figure 4 ). Routine blood tests to assess haemoglobin, electrolyte levels and thyroid function and an assessment of cardiac structure and function through TTE and possibly with CMR is also advised in athletes with a PVC burden > 10%, irrespective of high-risk features, to exclude PVC-induced LV dysfunction. 67 A CTCA may be considered only in athletes with high-risk PVCs and a clinical profile suggestive of coronary atherosclerosis (e.g. age > 35, cardiovascular risk factors, or concerning symptoms). An annual echocardiogram and exercise stress test are recommended in athletes with a high burden of extrasystoles who have had a normal comprehensive work-up to check for ventricular dysfunction and high-risk arrhythmias. When PVCs are polymorphic and exhibit distinct adrenergic dependency suggestive of CPVT, particularly after exclusion of structural heart disease, genetic testing for pathogenic variants implicated in CPVT should be considered. 68 The clinical utility of employing invasive evaluation using an electrophysiological study incorporating programmed ventricular stimulation and endocardial voltage mapping in athletes with isolated high-risk PVCs/NSVT remains uncertain. This approach may be deemed appropriate in highly selected cases with complex ventricular arrhythmias or when non-invasive imaging suggests possible cardiomyopathy 69 ( Table 2 ). 
Figure 4. 
Open in a new tab 
Management of athletes with PVCs. CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; CTCA, computed tomography coronary angiography; D/C, discharge; EP, electrophysiological; ETT, exercise tolerance test; HD, heart disease; TIC, tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram 
If the comprehensive diagnostic work-up yields negative results, the athlete should be reassured but continue to remain under clinical surveillance if the arrhythmias are frequent or complex. 
Repolarization abnormalities 
T-wave inversion 
T-wave inversion (TWI) is defined by a negative T wave ≥ 1 mm (0.1 mV) in depth in two or more contiguous leads (excluding leads aVR, III, and V1). TWI is one of the most common ECG manifestations in individuals with cardiomyopathies, including hypertrophic, dilated and arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathies (HCM, DCM, and ACM). 55 , 70 , 71 However, this repolarization pattern may be a marker of physiological adaptation to exercise in some athletes, especially when present in the anterior leads and preceded by J-point/coved ST-segment elevation. The clinical significance of TWI varies according to its lead distribution on the ECG, namely anterior (leads V2–V4), lateral (V5 and/or V6, I and aVL) and inferior (II and aVF) leads. TWI may occasionally be more widespread, affecting the anterolateral and/or inferolateral leads. 
Anterior T-wave inversion 
Anterior TWI is relatively common in pre-pubertal individuals. However, with the progression of pubertal development, T waves typically become positive. Consequently, the prevalence of persistent TWI in V1–V3 falls to < 1% in athletes aged 16 years or older. 72–74 According to the International recommendations for ECG interpretation in athletes, 16 years is considered the age cut-off for differentiating between benign (‘juvenile’) and potentially pathological TWI in V1–V3. 6 However, in the age group 13–15 years, the persistence of TWI may still be considered potentially abnormal if pubertal development has already been completed. 72 When there is doubt about the clinical significance of anterior TWI in the peri-pubertal age, reviewing prior ECG traces, if available, may be useful as a demonstration of normal repolarization patterns in the past would not support a benign persistence of the juvenile TWI. If no previous ECG is available, annual follow-up with ECG to demonstrate its normalization may be prudent. 
The presence of anterior TWI limited to V2 is relatively common in white female athletes, identified in ∼4% of cases. 75 Anterior TWI is also more common in male and female endurance athletes compared with white athletes participating in other sporting disciplines. 76 Although outcome data is limited, current experience suggests that isolated anterior TWI limited to V1–V2 in female athletes does not require further investigations, in the absence of cardiac symptoms or concerning family history and when not accompanied by other ECG abnormalities. 
Anterior TWI extending to V4 is observed in up to 13% of black athletes 74 and 5.7% of mixed-race athletes as opposed to just 1.5% of white athletes. 77 In accordance with the International recommendations for ECG interpretation in athletes, 6 anterior TWI in athletes of African or Afro-Caribbean origin (black athletes) may be considered an early repolarization variant when preceded by J-point elevation and an ascending convex ST-segment. This repolarization pattern has also been noted in a minority of white athletes. 78 A study comparing anterior TWI in black and white healthy athletes and patients with HCM and ACM showed that among athletes with anterior TWI, the combination of J-point elevation ≥ 1 mm and TWI confined to leads V1 to V4 excluded cardiomyopathy, irrespective of ethnicity. 79 Conversely, anterior TWI with minimal or absent J-point elevation (<1 mm) may represent an underlying cardiomyopathy. According to this study and current recommendations, 6 black athletes with the early-repolarization variant consisting of J-point/ST-segment elevation and TWI confined to V1–V4, do not require further investigations. However, it should be noted that there is limited long-term outcome data related to this pattern, highlighting the need for additional research in this area. It is also important to exercise caution in distinguishing this early-repolarization variant from the ‘coved-type’ (type 1) Brugada ECG pattern, which displays ST-segment elevation at the J-point followed by a descending ST-segment (see Supplementary data online , Figures S1 and S2 ). 80 When anterior TWI (even when limited to V2) coexists with other potential ECG markers of pathology, such as S wave prolongation (≥55 ms) in V1–V2, low QRS voltages, and high-risk PVCs ( Table 3 ), a more in-depth evaluation is required to exclude an underlying cardiomyopathy (as per prior paragraphs) ( Table 4 ). 6 , 55 
Table 4. 
Recommendations for diagnostic work-up of athletes with isolated TWI 
Degree of recommendation 
Additional investigations are not usually required in athletes with isolated TWI in the anterior leads: 
When confined to V1–V2 in the absence of other suspicious clinical or electrocardiographic findings; 
When confined to V1–V3 in athletes < 16 years of age; 
When confined to V1–V4 and preceded by J-point/ST-segment elevation in black athletes. 
In athletes with anterior TWI (excluding scenarios listed above) or TWI in the lateral leads V4–V6, a comprehensive clinical work-up including TTE, maximal ETT, ambulatory ECG monitoring and CMR to exclude an underlying heart disease is strongly advised. 
In adolescents aged 13–15, TWI in V1–V3 may require additional investigations if the pubertal development appears completed. If available, a previous ECG showing a positive anterior T wave reinforces the suspicion of a pathological pattern. 
Although the clinical significance of isolated TWI in the inferior leads is unclear, investigation with TTE may be appropriate. 
In athletes with inferior TWI, a CMR may be appropriate if the T waves are deep (≥0.2 mV) or preceded by ST depression, even if TTE does not reveal any positive findings. 
Genetic testing in athletes with isolated TWI, negative family history and a structurally normal heart is not advised. 
Open in a new tab 
CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; ETT, exercise tolerance test; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram; TWI, T-wave inversion. 
Lateral T-wave inversion—including anterolateral and inferolateral T-wave inversion 
Lateral TWI is commonly detected in individuals with cardiomyopathy and is associated with a high diagnostic yield of cardiomyopathy or myocardial scar. It is well established that athletes displaying this ECG repolarization pattern should be investigated with CMR, ETT and prolonged ECG monitor. 47 , 70 , 81 As per the International recommendations for ECG interpretation in athletes, 6 in the absence of overt structural abnormalities or of an unifying diagnosis, annual echocardiographic surveillance is recommended, especially if the athlete is young (<35 years old), and serial CMR re-evaluation should be conducted every 2–4 years as lateral TWI may precede full phenotypic expression of cardiomyopathy by several years, particularly HCM 70 ( Table 4 ). Investigation with a CMR is advised if the annual surveillance reveals ECG or echocardiographic changes suggestive of a developing cardiomyopathy phenotype (for example, increase in the extent of the TWI, development or worsening of ST depression, arrhythmias at the ECG, or increase in wall thickness, diastolic dysfunction, LV obstructions at TTE). 
It is important to note that the repolarization pattern in question is notably more prevalent in black athletes than in their white counterparts, with a frequency that is 10 times higher. 82 However, the likelihood of diagnosing cardiomyopathy or myocardial scar is three times lower in black athletes compared to white athletes (19% vs 56%). 82 Despite a compelling rationale for investigating all athletes with this repolarization anomaly, these statistics highlight the need for further research to pinpoint specific characteristics of TWI (such as depth, duration, pattern, and concomitant fragmentation) and customize investigations for greater efficacy in this demographic. 
Inferior T-wave inversion 
The significance of inferior TWI (lead II and aVF) is less clear than lateral TWI. It has been described in 6% of healthy black athletes and 1.5% of white athletes but also as an isolated finding in 1.9% of patients with HCM. 74 Studies in black athletes have revealed a low diagnostic yield in athletes displaying inferior TWI in isolation. Nevertheless, conducting a TTE as the first test for all athletes is advisable until more extensive multicentric studies can ascertain the precise significance of inferior TWI. A CMR may be appropriate in asymptomatic athletes with deep T wave (≥0.2 mV) inversion or concomitant ST depression in the affected leads ( Table 4 ). 
Figure 5 summarizes the diagnostic work-up of athletes with TWI. The presence of TWI in the absence of structural abnormalities does not warrant discouragement from participation in vigorous exercise and competitive sports. However, regular follow-up is advised. Familial evaluation of first-degree family members should be considered in young athletes with apparently unexplained TWI as the expression of cardiomyopathies varies with age and may not manifest until the fourth or fifth decade. However, genetic testing is not advised in TWI unless a specific phenotype is present or there is a family history of cardiomyopathy. 82 , 83 
Figure 5. 
Open in a new tab 
Management of athletes with TWI. CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; CTCA, computed tomography coronary angiography; D/C, discharge; ETT, exercise tolerance test; HD, heart disease; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram 
Type 2 and 3 Brugada patterns 
Brugada syndrome (BrS) is an inherited cardiac ion channel disorder, most commonly affecting the sodium channels and is characterized by a predisposition to ventricular arrhythmias and SCD. 84 There are three recognized Brugada ECG patterns (BrP), with only the type I pattern considered diagnostic and warranting investigation regardless of symptoms. 85 Type 2 and Type 3 BrP describe J-point elevation (≥2 mm; 0.2 mV) and ascending saddle-shaped ST-segment elevation of variable height in leads V1 and/or V2 and ST-segment; 84 in such cases, it is advisable to obtain an ECG with electrodes in high precordial position (second and/or third intercostal space) to potentially unmask a Brugada type I pattern 86 ( Table 5 ). Failure to demonstrate the type I BrS ECG pattern with this manoeuvre should reassure asymptomatic athletes. In selected cases, with type 2 or 3 BrP at baseline ECG and cardiac symptoms or family history of SCD at a young age, prolonged 12-lead ambulatory ECG monitoring using high right precordial lead positioning may aid in unmasking a diagnostic type 1 pattern 87–89 (see Supplemental Figures ). 
Table 5. 
Diagnostic work-up of athletes with type 2 or 3 Brugada electrocardiogram patterns and borderline QT interval prolongation 
Degree of recommendation 
In athletes with type 2 or 3 BrP, recording the ECG with electrodes in high precordial position (second and/or third intercostal space) should be performed to exclude a type 1 BrP. 
In asymptomatic athletes with type 2 or 3 BrP and no family history of sudden cardiac death or BrS, further investigations are not advised. 
In athletes with QTc prolongation (>480 ms seen in repeated ECGs) a comprehensive clinical work-up including blood tests a , ETT, ambulatory ECG, TTE, genetic testing and evaluation of first-degree relatives’ ECG are strongly advised. 
In athletes with borderline QTc (470–479 in females and 460–479 in males, seen in repeated ECGs) clinical evaluation with blood tests, ETT, ambulatory ECG is advised. Evaluation of first-degree relatives’ ECG (if possible) may facilitate the diagnosis. Genetic testing is justified only in the context of additional features suggestive of a LQTS diagnosis. 
In athletes with borderline long QTc interval, negative clinical investigations and genetic testing, there is limited data that normalization of the QTc interval after 4–6 months may indicate exercise-induced prolongation. 
Open in a new tab 
BrP, Brugada pattern; ETT, exercise tolerance test; LQTS, long QT syndrome; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram. 
a Haemoglobin, kidney function, and electrolytes. 
Borderline QTc interval 
Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is characterized by QT interval prolongation and propensity to ventricular arrhythmias. 90 Diagnosing LQTS can significantly impact athletes, affecting their participation in competitive sports and their risk of SCD. The measurement of the QTc interval in athletes can be challenging due to profound sinus bradycardia, sinus arrhythmia and prominent U waves, which can result in under-estimation or over-estimation of the QT interval. 91 Accurate manual measurement of the QT interval is crucial, as described elsewhere. 6 The probability of LQTS can be assessed using the modified Schwartz score derived from the 12-lead ECG, personal and family history, Holter monitoring and ETT. 92 According to the ESC Sports Cardiology Guidelines, LQTS should be suspected if the corrected QTc interval, determined by Bazzett's formula, is ≥470 ms or ≥480 ms in asymptomatic male or female athletes, respectively, on a resting ECG or an ECG conducted 4 min into the recovery phase of an ETT. 93 Additionally, as per the ESC Guidelines for the management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of SCD, a QTc ≥ 480 ms or an LQTS modified Schwartz score > 3 is diagnostic. 67 The results of the Schwartz score in athletes may be sometimes difficult to interpret, since profound bradycardia, QTc > 460 ms and notched T waves occur in a small but significant proportion of athletes. Moreover, an accurate assessment of the 4 min recovery QT interval may be difficult due to upward ST shift, tall T waves and T-U complexes. Therefore, clinical suspicion is predominantly based on the resting ECG. 
The detection of a prolonged QTc interval in an athlete should be confirmed at repeated ECG on a different day. 
Asymptomatic athletes with a QTc > 470 ms for males or >480 ms for females should undergo a comprehensive diagnostic work-up, including a review of the drug history and the family history, assessment of electrolyte levels including potassium, calcium and magnesium, an ETT, ambulatory ECG (preferably with a 12-lead configuration to better assess the QT interval), TTE and genetic testing. 83 
Exercise tolerance testing plays a significant role in evaluating athletes with suspected LQTS, particularly in assessing paradoxical QT interval lengthening and identifying exertion-induced arrhythmias. We advise obtaining ECG printouts every 30 s for manual assessment of the QTc through all stages of the exercise test, although correction of the QT beyond a ventricular rate > 120 b.p.m. is challenging and inaccurate. Progressive prolongation of the QTc from a baseline QTc up to target heart rate and development of de novo T wave notching in at least three leads, are also valuable indicators of an underlying ion channel disorder. 94 
Among athletes with borderline QTc prolongation (470–479 ms in females and 460–469 ms in males at repeated ECGs), blood tests, ambulatory ECG preferably with a 12-lead configuration, and ETT should be performed ( Figure 6 ). If these tests yield normal results, annual surveillance should be considered, if there is a high index of suspicion, such as a personal history of syncope, a family history of SCD or LQTS. Genetic testing is justified only in the context of additional features suggestive of a LQTS diagnosis 83 ( Table 5 ). 
Figure 6. 
Open in a new tab 
Management of athletes with borderline or mildly prolonged QTc interval. ETT, exercise tolerance test; LQTS, long QT syndrome; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram; SDM, shared decision-making 
Athletes with confirmed LQTS and a QTc > 480 ms may be considered for return to competitive sport following thorough evaluation, risk stratification, and implementation of individualized management strategies, including beta-blocker therapy, within a shared decision-making framework. Return to sport should also account for the LQTS genotype, prior symptoms, adherence to therapy, and appropriate emergency planning. Data suggesting an exercise-induced QTc prolongation and therefore a possible shortening after detraining are based on one scientific paper and should be corroborated by more robust evidence. 95 
Conclusions 
Electrical features recognized as abnormal and highly suggestive of cardiac disease may be isolated and unaccompanied by other pathological features supportive of a unifying diagnosis. Clinical management in these cases is often complex. Handling such cases can be intricate, as it is vital to strike a balance between avoiding unnecessary over-investigation and not overlooking potential issues. Recognized ECG patterns indicative of cardiac disease necessitate a comprehensive evaluation to exclude the broad spectrum of phenotypic manifestations of cardiac disease. When a definitive diagnosis is unattainable, a cautious approach should be adopted: in most instances, the athlete can continue to engage in competitive sports, but regular (annual) monitoring is advised. Additionally, evaluation of first-degree relatives may be appropriate in selected cases, particularly for young athletes whose underlying cardiac condition may not be fully expressed with ECG abnormalities potentially preceding complete phenotypic manifestation at an older age. Routine genetic testing is a powerful but imperfect tool, is generally not recommended for isolated ECG abnormalities and should be reserved for selected cases with a high index of suspicion for inherited disease. 
Finally, the recommendations provided in this document are based on a careful review and synthesis of the existing sports cardiology literature coupled with the cumulative clinical experience of the writing group. It must be acknowledged that some of the recommendations herein provided lack rigorous scientific outcomes data and thereby represent important opportunities for future work. 
Supplementary Material 
ehaf646_Supplementary_Data 
ehaf646_Supplementary_Data.zip (11.7MB, zip) 
Contributor Information 
Gherardo Finocchiaro, Cardiovascular and Genomic Research Institute, City St George’s, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK. 
Alessandro Zorzi, Department of Cardio-Thoraco-Vascular Sciences and Public Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. 
Mark Abela, University of Malta, Msida, MSD2090, Malta; Department of Cardiology, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta. 
Aaron Baggish, Department of Cardiology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland. 
Silvia Castelletti, Dipartimento di Cardiologia, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy. 
Elena Cavarretta, Department of Medical-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza University, Latina, Italy. 
Guido Claessen, Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, Biomedical Research Institute, LCRC, UHasselt, Hasselt, Belgium. 
Domenico Corrado, Department of Cardio-Thoraco-Vascular Sciences and Public Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. 
Maria Sanz de la Garza, Cardiovascular Institute, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 
Sabiha Gati, School of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK. 
Viviana Maestrini, Institute of Sport Medicine and Science, National Italian Olympic Committee, Rome, Italy. 
Aneil Malhotra, Institute of Sport, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK. 
Josef Niebauer, Institute of Sports Medicine, Prevention and Rehabilitation, University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria. 
David Niederseer, Hochgebirgsklinik Davos, Medicine Campus Davos, Davos, Switzerland. 
Michael Papadakis, Cardiovascular and Genomic Research Institute, City St George’s, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK. 
Antonio Pelliccia, Institute of Sport Medicine and Science, National Italian Olympic Committee, Rome, Italy. 
Sanjay Sharma, Cardiovascular and Genomic Research Institute, City St George’s, University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK. 
Flavio D’Ascenzi, Department of Medical Biotechnologies, Sports Cardiology and Rehab Unit, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. 
Supplementary data 
Supplementary data are available at European Heart Journal online. 
Declarations 
Disclosure of Interest 
All authors declare no disclosure of interest for this contribution. 
Data Availability 
No data were generated or analysed for this manuscript. 
Funding 
All authors declare no funding for this contribution. 
Ethical Approval 
Ethical Approval was not required. 
Pre-registered Clinical Trial Number 
None supplied. 
References 
1. Finocchiaro G, Westaby J, Sheppard MN, Papadakis M, Sharma S. Sudden cardiac death in young athletes: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol
2024;83:350–70. 10.1016/j.jacc.2023.10.032
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
2. Finocchiaro G, Radaelli D, D’Errico S, Papadakis M, Behr ER, Sharma S, et al. 
Sudden cardiac death among adolescents in the United Kingdom. J Am Coll Cardiol
2023;81:1007–17. 10.1016/j.jacc.2023.01.041
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. Maron BJ, Doerer JJ, Haas TS, Tierney DM, Mueller FO. Sudden deaths in young competitive athletes: analysis of 1866 deaths in the United States, 1980–2006. Circulation
2009;119:1085–92. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.804617
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
4. Finocchiaro G, Papadakis M, Sharma S, Sheppard M. Sudden cardiac death. Eur Heart J
2017;38:1280–2. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx194
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
5. Petek BJ, Churchill TW, Moulson N, Kliethermes SA, Baggish AL, Drezner JA, et al. 
Sudden cardiac death in national collegiate athletic association athletes: a 20-year study. Circulation
2024;149:80–90. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.065908
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
6. Sharma S, Drezner JA, Baggish A, Papadakis M, Wilson MG, Prutkin JM, et al. 
International recommendations for electrocardiographic interpretation in athletes. Eur Heart J
2017;39:1466–80. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehw631 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
7. Al-Othman S, Boyett MR, Morris GM, Malhotra A, Mesirca P, Mangoni ME, et al. 
Symptomatic bradyarrhythmias in the athlete—underlying mechanisms and treatments. Heart Rhythm
2024;21:1415–27. 10.1016/j.hrthm.2024.02.050
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
8. Doyen B, Matelot D, Carré F. Asymptomatic bradycardia amongst endurance athletes. Phys Sportsmed
2019;47:249–52. 10.1080/00913847.2019.1568769
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
9. Stein R, Medeiros CM, Rosito GA, Zimerman LI, Ribeiro JP. Intrinsic sinus and atrioventricular node electrophysiologic adaptations in endurance athletes. J Am Coll Cardiol
2002;39:1033–8. 10.1016/S0735-1097(02)01722-9
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
10. D’Souza A, Sharma S, Boyett MR. CrossTalk opposing view: bradycardia in the trained athlete is attributable to a downregulation of a pacemaker channel in the sinus node. J Physiol
2015;593:1749–51. 10.1113/jphysiol.2014.284356
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
11. Serra-Grima R, Puig T, Doñate M, Gich I, Ramon J. Long-term follow-up of bradycardia in elite athletes. Int J Sports Med
2008;29:934–7. 10.1055/s-2008-1038602
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
12. Mountjoy M, Ackerman KE, Bailey DM, Burke LM, Constantini N, Hackney AC, et al. 
2023 International Olympic Committee’s (IOC) consensus statement on Relative Energy Deficiency in sport (REDs). Br J Sports Med
2023;57:1073–97. 10.1136/bjsports-2023-106994
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
13. Glikson M, Nielsen JC, Kronborg MB, Michowitz Y, Auricchio A, Barbash IM, et al. 
2021 ESC guidelines on cardiac pacing and cardiac resynchronization therapy. Europace
2022;24:71–164. 10.1093/europace/euab232
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
14. Sachs KV, Harnke B, Mehler PS, Krantz MJ. Cardiovascular complications of anorexia nervosa: a systematic review. Int J Eat Disord
2016;49:238–48. 10.1002/eat.22481
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
15. Milano A, Vermeer AMC, Lodder EM, Barc J, Verkerk AO, Postma AV, et al. 
HCN4 mutations in multiple families with bradycardia and left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol
2014;64:745–56. 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.05.045
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
16. Benson DW, Wang DW, Dyment M, Knilans TK, Fish FA, Strieper MJ, et al. 
Congenital sick sinus syndrome caused by recessive mutations in the cardiac sodium channel gene (SCN5A). J Clin Invest
2003;112:1019–28. 10.1172/JCI200318062
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
17. McNair WP, Sinagra G, Taylor MRG, Di Lenarda A, Ferguson DA, Salcedo EE, et al. 
SCN5A mutations associate with arrhythmic dilated cardiomyopathy and commonly localize to the voltage-sensing mechanism. J Am Coll Cardiol
2011;57:2160–8. 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.09.084
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
18. Le Scouarnec S, Bhasin N, Vieyres C, Hund TJ, Cunha SR, Koval O, et al. 
Dysfunction in ankyrin-B-dependent ion channel and transporter targeting causes human sinus node disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2008;105:15617–22. 10.1073/pnas.0805500105
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
19. Link MS, Homoud MK, Wang PJ, Estes NAM. Cardiac arrhythmias in the athlete: the evolving role of electrophysiology. Curr Sports Med Rep
2002;1:75–85. 10.1249/00149619-200204000-00004
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
20. Petek BJ, Groezinger EY, Pedlar CR, Baggish AL. Cardiac effects of detraining in athletes: a narrative review. Ann Phys Rehabil Med
2022;65:101581. 10.1016/j.rehab.2021.101581
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
21. Idiazabal-Ayesa U, Ramírez-Vélez R, Sanz-de la Garza M, Izquierdo M. Electrocardiographic findings in pediatric versus young-adolescent athletes: a comparative analysis using general international criteria. Int J Cardiol
2023;390:131201. 10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131201
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
22. Abela M, Sharma S. Abnormal ECG findings in athletes: clinical evaluation and considerations. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med
2019;21:95. 10.1007/s11936-019-0794-4
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
23. Heidbuchel H, Adami PE, Antz M, Braunschweig F, Delise P, Scherr D, et al. 
Recommendations for participation in leisure-time physical activity and competitive sports in patients with arrhythmias and potentially arrhythmogenic conditions: part 1: supraventricular arrhythmias. A position statement of the Section of Sports Cardiology and exercise from the European Association of Preventive Cardiology (EAPC) and the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA), both associations of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Prev Cardiol
2021;28:1539–51. 10.1177/2047487320925635
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
24. Fusi C, Lazzerini PE, Cavigli L, Focardi M, Acampa M, Cameli M, et al. 
Maternal anti-Ro/SSA autoantibodies and prolonged PR interval in a competitive athlete: beyond training-induced electrical remodeling. JACC Case Rep
2022;4:1098–103. 10.1016/j.jaccas.2022.05.032
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
25. Lazzerini PE, Murthy Ginjupalli VK, Srivastava U, Bertolozzi I, Bacarelli MR, Verrengia D, et al. 
Anti-Ro/SSA antibodies blocking calcium channels as a potentially reversible cause of atrioventricular block in adults. JACC Clin Electrophysiol
2023;9:1631–48. 10.1016/j.jacep.2023.03.007
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
26. Lazzerini PE, Bertolozzi I, Cartocci A, Ginjupalli VKM, Teneggi PA, Pica D, et al. 
Advanced atrioventricular block in athletes: prevalence and role of anti-Ro/Sjögren syndrome-related antigen A antibodies. J Am Heart Assoc
2024;13:e034893. 10.1161/JAHA.124.034893
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
27. Nelson WP. Diagnostic and prognostic implications of surface recordings from patients with atrioventricular block. Card Electrophysiol Clin
2016;8:25–35. 10.1016/j.ccep.2015.10.031
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
28. Wilde AAM, Semsarian C, Márquez MF, Shamloo AS, Ackerman MJ, Ashley EA, et al. 
European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA)/Heart Rhythm Society (HRS)/Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS)/Latin American Heart Rhythm Society (LAHRS) expert consensus statement on the state of genetic testing for cardiac diseases. Europace
2022;24:1307–67. 10.1093/europace/euac030
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
29. Katritsis DG, Josephson ME. Electrophysiological testing for the investigation of bradycardias. Arrhythm Electrophysiol Rev
2017;6:24. 10.15420/aer.2016:34:2
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
30. Saj M, Dabrowski R, Labib S, Jankowska A, Szperl M, Broda G, et al. 
Variants of the lamin A/C (LMNA) gene in non-valvular atrial fibrillation patients. Mol Diagn Ther
2012;16:99–107. 10.1007/BF03256434
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
31. Taylor MRG, Fain PR, Sinagra G, Robinson ML, Robertson AD, Carniel E, et al. 
Natural history of dilated cardiomyopathy due to lamin A/C gene mutations. J Am Coll Cardiol
2003;41:771–80. 10.1016/S0735-1097(02)02954-6
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
32. Nery PB, Beanlands RS, Nair GM, Green M, Yang J, McArdle BA, et al. 
Atrioventricular block as the initial manifestation of cardiac sarcoidosis in middle-aged adults. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol
2014;25:875–81. 10.1111/jce.12401
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
33. Yeung C, Baranchuk A. Diagnosis and treatment of lyme carditis. J Am Coll Cardiol
2019;73:717–26. 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.11.035
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
34. Walcott SE, Tan CH, Wicker J, Litovsky S. Subclinical maternal autoimmune disease leading to congenital high degree atrioventricular block: case report and review of the literature. Cardiovasc Pathol
2024;72:107634. 10.1016/j.carpath.2024.107634
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
35. Abela M, Bonello J, Sammut MA. A case report of profound atrioventricular block in an endurance athlete: how far do you go?
Eur Heart J Case Rep
2022;6:ytac190. 10.1093/ehjcr/ytac190
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
36. Abela M, Grech N, Degiorgio S, Grech V, Adrian Sammut M. Isolated short PR interval in adolescent athletes and non-athletes: should we worry?
Hellenic J Cardiol
2023;72:65–6. 10.1016/j.hjc.2023.02.005
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
37. Velásquez-Rodríguez J, Diaz-Gonzalez L, Valenzuela PL, Bruña V, Boraita A, Lucia A. Preparticipation screening in pediatric athletes. Should we be concerned about the PR interval?
Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed)
2021;74:556–8. 10.1016/j.rec.2020.12.004
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
38. Lown B, Ganong WF, Levine SA. The syndrome of short P-R interval, normal QRS complex and paroxysmal rapid heart action. Circulation. 1952; 5 :693–706. 10.1161/01.cir.5.5.693 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
39. Fox DJ, Klein GJ, Skanes AC, Gula LJ, Yee R, Krahn AD. How to identify the location of an accessory pathway by the 12-lead ECG. Heart Rhythm
2008;5:1763–6. 10.1016/j.hrthm.2008.09.012
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
40. Perry JC, Giuffre RM, Garson A. Clues to the electrocardiographic diagnosis of subtle Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome in children. J Pediatr
1990;117:871–5. 10.1016/S0022-3476(05)80124-6
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
41. Kim JH, Baggish AL. Electrocardiographic right and left bundle branch block patterns in athletes: prevalence, pathology, and clinical significance. J Electrocardiol
2015;48:380–4. 10.1016/j.jelectrocard.2015.03.015
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
42. Rabkin SW, Mathewson FA, Tate RB. Natural history of left bundle-branch block. Br Heart J
1980;43:164–9. 10.1136/hrt.43.2.164
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
43. Kusumoto FM, Schoenfeld MH, Barrett C, Edgerton JR, Ellenbogen KA, Gold MR, et al. 
2018 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline on the evaluation and management of patients with bradycardia and cardiac conduction delay: executive summary. J Am Coll Cardiol
2019;74:932–87. 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.10.043
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
44. Mahmod M, Karamitsos TD, Suttie JJ, Myerson SG, Neubauer S, Francis JM. Prevalence of cardiomyopathy in asymptomatic patients with left bundle branch block referred for cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging
2012;28:1133–40. 10.1007/s10554-011-9931-1
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
45. Clerc OF, Possner M, Maire R, Liga R, Fuchs TA, Stehli J, et al. 
Association of left bundle branch block with obstructive coronary artery disease on coronary CT angiography: a case–control study. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging
2016;17:765–71. 10.1093/ehjci/jev202
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
46. MacLachlan H, Antonakaki A, Bhatia R, Fyazz S, Chatrath N, Androulakis E, et al. 
Prevalence and clinical significance of electrocardiographic complete right bundle branch block in young individuals. Eur J Prev Cardiol
2024:zwae082. 10.1093/eurjpc/zwae082/7615106 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
47. Chandra N, Bastiaenen R, Papadakis M, Panoulas VF, Ghani S, Duschl J, et al. 
Prevalence of electrocardiographic anomalies in young individuals: relevance to a nationwide cardiac screening program. J Am Coll Cardiol
2014;63:2028–34. 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.01.046
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
48. Baggish AL, Hutter AM, Wang F, Yared K, Weiner RB, Kupperman E, et al. 
Cardiovascular screening in college athletes with and without electrocardiography: a cross-sectional study. Ann Intern Med
2010;152:269–75. 10.7326/0003-4819-152-5-201003020-00004
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
49. Kim JH, Noseworthy PA, McCarty D, Yared K, Weiner R, Wang F, et al. 
Significance of electrocardiographic right bundle branch block in trained athletes. Am J Cardiol
2011;107:1083–9. 10.1016/j.amjcard.2010.11.037
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
50. Kawada S, Morita H, Antzelevitch C, Morimoto Y, Nakagawa K, Watanabe A, et al. 
Shanghai score system for diagnosis of Brugada syndrome: validation of the score system and system and reclassification of the patients. JACC Clin Electrophysiol
2018;4:724–30. 10.1016/j.jacep.2018.02.009
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
51. Pelliccia A, Drezner JA, Zorzi A, Corrado D. Prevalence and clinical significance of low QRS voltages in healthy individuals, athletes and patients with cardiomyopathy: implications for sports preparticipation cardiovascular screening. Eur J Prev Cardiol
2024;31:1106–14. 10.1093/eurjpc/zwae027
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
52. Zorzi A, Bettella N, Tatangelo M, Del Monte A, Vessella T, Poscolieri B, et al. 
Prevalence and clinical significance of isolated low QRS voltages in young athletes. Europace
2022;24:1484–95. 10.1093/europace/euab330
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
53. Finocchiaro G, Pinamonti B, Merlo M, Giannini F, Barbati G, Pivetta A, et al. 
Focus on cardiac amyloidosis: a single-center experience with a long-term follow-up. J Cardiovasc Med
2009;14:281–8. 10.2459/JCM.0b013e3283536534 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
54. Finocchiaro G, Merlo M, Sheikh N, Angelis GD, Papadakis M, Olivotto I, et al. 
The electrocardiogram in the diagnosis and management of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. Eur J Heart Fail
2020;22:1–2. 10.1002/ejhf.1505
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
55. Finocchiaro G, Papadakis M, Dhutia H, Zaidi A, Malhotra A, Fabi E, et al. 
Electrocardiographic differentiation between ‘benign T-wave inversion’ and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Europace
2018;20:f273. 10.1093/europace/eux334 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
56. Cipriani A, Bauce B, De Lazzari M, Rigato I, Bariani R, Meneghin S, et al. 
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy: characterization of left ventricular phenotype and differential diagnosis with dilated cardiomyopathy. J Am Heart Assoc
2020;9:e014628. 10.1161/JAHA.119.014628
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
57. Sen-Chowdhry S, Syrris P, Prasad SK, Hughes SE, Merrifield R, Ward D, et al. 
Left-dominant arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy. An under-recognized clinical entity. J Am Coll Cardiol
2008;52:2175–87. 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.09.019
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
58. Calò L, Crescenzi C, Martino A, Casella M, Romeo F, Cappelletto C, et al. 
The diagnostic value of the 12-lead ECG in arrhythmogenic left ventricular cardiomyopathy: novel ECG signs. JACC Clin Electrophysiol
2023;9:2615–27. 10.1016/j.jacep.2023.08.020
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
59. Zorzi A, Perazzolo Marra M, Rigato I, Lazzari MD, Susana A, Niero A, et al. 
Nonischemic left ventricular scar as a substrate of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death in competitive athletes. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol
2016;9:e004229. 10.1161/CIRCEP.116.004229
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
60. Corrado D, Drezner JA, D’Ascenzi F, Zorzi A. How to evaluate premature ventricular beats in the athlete: critical review and proposal of a diagnostic algorithm. Br J Sports Med
2019;54:1142–8. 10.1136/bjsports-2018-100529
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
61. Florio AD, Fusi C, Anselmi F, Cavigli L, Focardi M, Cameli M, et al. 
Clinical management of young competitive athletes with premature ventricular beats: a prospective cohort study. Int J Cardiol
2021;330:59–64. 10.1016/j.ijcard.2021.02.021
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
62. Biffi A, Pelliccia A, Verdile L, Fernando F, Spataro A, Caselli S, et al. 
Long-term clinical significance of frequent and complex ventricular tachyarrhythmias in trained athletes. J Am Coll Cardiol
2002;40:446–52. 10.1016/S0735-1097(02)01977-0
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
63. Zorzi A, Lazzari MD, Mastella G, Niero A, Trovato D, Cipriani A, et al. 
Ventricular arrhythmias in young competitive athletes: prevalence, determinants, and underlying substrate. J Am Heart Assoc
2018;7:e009171. 10.1161/JAHA.118.009171
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
64. Crescenzi C, Zorzi A, Vessella T, Martino A, Panattoni G, Cipriani A, et al. 
Predictors of left ventricular scar using cardiac magnetic resonance in athletes with apparently idiopathic ventricular arrhythmias. J Am Heart Assoc
2021;10:e018206. 10.1161/JAHA.120.018206
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
65. Cipriani A, Zorzi A, Sarto P, Donini M, Rigato I, Bariani R, et al. 
Predictive value of exercise testing in athletes with ventricular ectopy evaluated by cardiac magnetic resonance. Heart Rhythm
2019;16:239–48. 10.1016/j.hrthm.2018.08.029
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
66. Brunetti G, Cipriani A, Perazzolo Marra M, Lazzari MD, Bauce B, Calore C, et al. 
Role of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of athletes with premature ventricular beats. J Clin Med
2022;11:426. 10.3390/jcm11020426
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
67. Zeppenfeld K, Tfelt-Hansen J, Riva Md, Winkel BG, Behr ER, Blom NA, et al. 
2022 ESC guidelines for the management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death. Eur Heart J
2022;43:3997–4126. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac262
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
68. Abbas M, Miles C, Behr E. Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Arrhythm Electrophysiol Rev
2022;11:e20. 10.15420/aer.2022.09
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
69. Zorzi A, D’Ascenzi F, Andreini D, Castelletti S, Casella M, Cavarretta E, et al. 
Interpretation and management of premature ventricular beats in athletes: an expert opinion document of the Italian Society of Sports Cardiology (SICSPORT). Int J Cardiol
2023;391:131220. 10.1016/j.ijcard.2023.131220
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
70. Pelliccia A, Di Paolo FM, Quattrini FM, Basso C, Culasso F, Popoli G, et al. 
Outcomes in athletes with marked ECG repolarization abnormalities. N Engl J Med
2008;358:152–61. 10.1056/NEJMoa060781
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
71. Finocchiaro G, Sheikh N, Biagini E, Papadakis M, Maurizi N, Sinagra G, et al. 
The electrocardiogram in the diagnosis and management of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart Rhythm
2020;17:142–51. 10.1016/j.hrthm.2019.07.019
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
72. Migliore F, Zorzi A, Michieli P, Perazzolo Marra M, Siciliano M, Rigato I, et al. 
Prevalence of cardiomyopathy in Italian asymptomatic children with electrocardiographic T-wave inversion at preparticipation screening. Circulation
2012;125:529–38. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.055673
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
73. Calò L, Sperandii F, Martino A, Guerra E, Cavarretta E, Quaranta F, et al. 
Echocardiographic findings in 2261 peri-pubertal athletes with or without inverted T waves at electrocardiogram. Heart
2015;101:193–200. 10.1136/heartjnl-2014-306110
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
74. Papadakis M, Carre F, Kervio G, Rawlins J, Panoulas VF, Chandra N, et al. 
The prevalence, distribution, and clinical outcomes of electrocardiographic repolarization patterns in male athletes of African/Afro-Caribbean origin. Eur Heart J
2011;32:2304–13. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr140
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
75. Malhotra A, Dhutia H, Gati S, Yeo T-J, Dores H, Bastiaenen R, et al. 
Anterior T-wave inversion in young white athletes and nonathletes: prevalence and significance. J Am Coll Cardiol
2017;69:1–9. 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.10.044
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
76. Brosnan M, La Gerche A, Kalman J, Lo W, Fallon K, MacIsaac A, et al. 
Comparison of frequency of significant electrocardiographic abnormalities in endurance versus nonendurance athletes. Am J Cardiol
2014;113:1567–73. 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.01.438
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
77. Malhotra A, Oxborough D, Rao P, Finocchiaro G, Dhutia H, Prasad V, et al. 
Defining the normal spectrum of electrocardiographic and left ventricular adaptations in mixed-race male adolescent soccer players. Circulation
2021;143:94–6. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.049740
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
78. Malhotra A, Dhutia H, Yeo T-J, Finocchiaro G, Gati S, Bulleros P, et al. 
Accuracy of the 2017 international recommendations for clinicians who interpret adolescent athletes’ ECGs: a cohort study of 11 168 British white and black soccer players. Br J Sports Med
2020;54;739–45. 10.1136/bjsports-2017-098528
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
79. Calore C, Zorzi A, Sheikh N, Nese A, Facci M, Malhotra A, et al. 
Electrocardiographic anterior T-wave inversion in athletes of different ethnicities: differential diagnosis between athlete’s heart and cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J
2015;37:2515–27. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv591
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
80. Zorzi A, Leoni L, Di Paolo FM, Rigato I, Migliore F, Bauce B, et al. 
Differential diagnosis between early repolarization of athlete’s heart and coved-type Brugada electrocardiogram. Am J Cardiol
2015;115:529–32. 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.11.035
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
81. Schnell F, Riding N, O’Hanlon R, Axel Lentz P, Donal E, Kervio G, et al. 
Recognition and significance of pathological T-wave inversions in athletes. Circulation
2015;131:165–73. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.011038
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
82. Sheikh N, Papadakis M, Wilson M, Malhotra A, Adamuz C, Homfray T, et al. 
Diagnostic yield of genetic testing in young athletes with T-wave inversion. Circulation
2018;138:1184–94. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.034208
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
83. Castelletti S, Gray B, Basso C, Behr ER, Crotti L, Elliott PM, et al. 
Indications and utility of cardiac genetic testing in athletes. Eur J Prev Cardiol
2022;29:1582–91. 10.1093/eurjpc/zwac080
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
84. Antzelevitch C, Yan G-X, Ackerman MJ, Borggrefe M, Corrado D, Guo J, et al. 
J-Wave syndromes expert consensus conference report: emerging concepts and gaps in knowledge. Heart Rhythm
2016;13:e295–324. 10.1016/j.hrthm.2016.05.024
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
85. Priori SG, Wilde AA, Horie M, Cho Y, Behr ER, Berul C, et al. 
Executive summary: HRS/EHRA/APHRS expert consensus statement on the diagnosis and management of patients with inherited primary arrhythmia syndromes. Europace
2013;15:1389–406. 10.1093/europace/eut272
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
86. Papadakis M, Papatheodorou E, Mellor G, Raju H, Bastiaenen R, Wijeyeratne Y, et al. 
The Diagnostic Yield Of Brugada Syndrome After Sudden Death With Normal Autopsy. J Am Coll Cardiol
2018;71;1204–14. 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.01.031
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
87. Antzelevitch C, Yan G-X, Ackerman MJ, Borggrefe M, Corrado D, Guo J, et al. 
J-Wave syndromes expert consensus conference report: emerging concepts and gaps in knowledge. Europace
2016;19:665–94. 10.1093/europace/euw235 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
88. Gray B, Kirby A, Kabunga P, Freedman SB, Yeates L, Kanthan A, et al. 
Twelve-lead ambulatory electrocardiographic monitoring in Brugada syndrome: potential diagnostic and prognostic implications. Heart Rhythm
2017;14:866–74. 10.1016/j.hrthm.2017.02.026
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
89. Behr ER, Winkel BG, Ensam B, Alfie A, Arbelo E, Berry C, et al. 
The diagnostic role of pharmacological provocation testing in cardiac electrophysiology: a clinical consensus statement of the European Heart Rhythm Association and the European Association of Percutaneous Cardiovascular Interventions (EAPCI) of the ESC, the ESC working group on cardiovascular pharmacotherapy, the Association of European Paediatric and Congenital Cardiology (AEPC), the Paediatric & Congenital Electrophysiology Society (PACES), the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), the Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS), and the Latin American Heart Rhythm Society (LAHRS). Europace
2025;27:euaf067. 10.1093/europace/euaf067 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
90. Schwartz PJ, Stramba-Badiale M, Crotti L, Pedrazzini M, Besana A, Bosi G, et al. 
Prevalence of the congenital long-QT syndrome. Circulation
2009;120:1761–7. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.863209
[ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
91. Basavarajaiah S, Wilson M, Whyte G, Shah A, Behr E, Sharma S. Prevalence and significance of an isolated long QT interval in elite athletes. Eur Heart J
2007;28:2944–9. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehm404
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
92. Schwartz PJ, Moss AJ, Vincent GM, Crampton RS. Diagnostic criteria for the long QT syndrome. An update. Circulation
1993;88:782–4. 10.1161/01.CIR.88.2.782
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
93. Pelliccia A, Sharma S, Gati S, Bäck M, Börjesson M, Caselli S, et al. 
2020 ESC guidelines on sports cardiology and exercise in patients with cardiovascular disease. Eur Heart J
2021;42:17–96. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa605
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
94. Porta-Sánchez A, Spillane DR, Harris L, Xue J, Dorsey P, Care M, et al. 
T-wave morphology analysis in congenital long QT syndrome discriminates patients from healthy individuals. JACC Clin Electrophysiol
2017;3:374–81. 10.1016/j.jacep.2016.10.013
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
95. Dagradi F, Spazzolini C, Castelletti S, Pedrazzini M, Kotta M-C, Crotti L, et al. 
Exercise training-induced repolarization abnormalities masquerading as congenital long QT syndrome. Circulation
2020;142:2405–15. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.048916
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Associated Data 
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. 
Supplementary Materials 
ehaf646_Supplementary_Data 
ehaf646_Supplementary_Data.zip (11.7MB, zip) 
Data Availability Statement 
No data were generated or analysed for this manuscript. 
Articles from European Heart Journal are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (4.2 MB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
