The ‘ten commandments’ for the 2024 European Society of Cardiology guidelines on elevated blood pressure and hypertension - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Eur Heart J 
. 2024 Oct 16;45(44):4682–4683. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehae646 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
The ‘ten commandments’ for the 2024 European Society of Cardiology guidelines on elevated blood pressure and hypertension 
Cian P McCarthy 
Cian P McCarthy 
1 
Division of Cardiology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA 
Find articles by Cian P McCarthy 
1 , Rhian M Touyz 
Rhian M Touyz 
2 
Department of Medicine, McGill University, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec H4A 3J1, Canada 
3 
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, 2155 Guy Street, Montreal, Quebec H3H 2R9, Canada 
Find articles by Rhian M Touyz 
2, 3, ✉ , John W McEvoy 
John W McEvoy 
4 
Cardiology Department, Galway University Hospital and University of Galway School of Medicine, Newcastle Road, Galway H91 YR71, Ireland 
5 
National Institute for Prevention and Cardiovascular Health, Croi House, Moyola Ln, Newcastle, Galway H91FF68, Ireland 
6 
Johns Hopkins Ciccarone Centre for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 601 North Caroline Street, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA 
Find articles by John W McEvoy 
4, 5, 6, ✉ 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 
Division of Cardiology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA 
2 
Department of Medicine, McGill University, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec H4A 3J1, Canada 
3 
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, 2155 Guy Street, Montreal, Quebec H3H 2R9, Canada 
4 
Cardiology Department, Galway University Hospital and University of Galway School of Medicine, Newcastle Road, Galway H91 YR71, Ireland 
5 
National Institute for Prevention and Cardiovascular Health, Croi House, Moyola Ln, Newcastle, Galway H91FF68, Ireland 
6 
Johns Hopkins Ciccarone Centre for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 601 North Caroline Street, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA 
✉ 
Corresponding authors. Email: Johnwilliam.mcevoy@universityofgalway.ie (J.W.M.); Email: rhian.touyz@mcgill.ca (R.M.T.) 
Collection date 2024 Nov 21. 
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology 2024. 
This article is published and distributed under the terms of the Oxford University Press, Standard Journals Publication Model ( https://academic.oup.com/pages/standard-publication-reuse-rights ) 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC13016619  PMID: 39412133 
The 2024 European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines for the management of elevated blood pressure (BP) and hypertension were developed by a multidisciplinary team including patient representatives. 1 These ‘ten commandments’ summarize the guideline ( Figure 1 ). 
Figure 1. 
Open in a new tab 
Summarizing the ‘ten commandments’ of the 2024 ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Management of Elevated Blood Pressure and Hypertension. N.B., for the 5th commandment, drug treatment is only for persons with high CVD risk and a repeat confirmed BP of 130/80 mmHg or more after 3 months of lifestyle measures. N.B., For the 5th commandment, drug treatment is only for persons with high CVD risk and a repeat confirmed BP of 130/80 mmHg or more after 3 months of lifestyle measures. ALARA, as low as reasonably achievable; CVD, cardiovascular disease; SBP, systolic blood pressure 
Blood pressure classification: A new BP classification is introduced: non-elevated (office BP < 120/70 mmHg), elevated BP (office BP 120–139/70–89 mmHg), and hypertension (office BP ≥ 140/90 mmHg). 
Diagnosis: Out-of-office BP measurement is recommended for the diagnosis and management of elevated BP and hypertension when logistically and economically feasible (preferred over office BP). 
Risk assessment: Risk assessment is recommended for persons with elevated BP to identify high cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk individuals. Risk assessment follows a step-wise approach: (i) assess for high CVD risk conditions (e.g. established CVD), (ii) predict 10-year risk of CVD, (iii) evaluate for sex-specific and shared risk modifiers, and (iv) consider additional testing with risk tools. 
Elevated BP with low CVD risk: Lifestyle measures are recommended for elevated BP and low CVD risk (no high CVD risk conditions and 10-year predicted CVD risk < 5% or borderline risk of 5–<10% without risk modifiers or abnormal risk tests). 
Elevated BP with high CVD risk: For elevated BP and high CVD risk (high risk CVD conditions or 10-year risk ≥ 10% or borderline risk of 5–<10% with risk modifiers or abnormal risk tests), lifestyle measures are recommended initially and after 3 months, if BP remains ≥ 130/80 mmHg, pharmacological BP-lowering treatment is recommended. 
Hypertension: Lifestyle and pharmacological BP-lowering treatment are recommended for hypertension. Single-pill double combination treatment is recommended initially for most patients. 
Lifestyle management: Updated lifestyle recommendations include aerobic and resistance training, increasing potassium intake, reducing sodium intake (<2 g/day), healthy diet, maintain normal body-mass index, smoking cessation, and limiting alcohol intake. 
Blood pressure target: For patients on treatment, a systolic BP target of 120–129 mmHg [including for non-frail older individuals (<85 years)] is recommended. If not possible/tolerated—or in persons ≥ 85 years or with symptomatic orthostasis, moderate-to-severe frailty, or limited lifespan—target a BP that is as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA). 
Resistant hypertension: For resistant hypertension, spironolactone (eplerenone if not tolerated), followed by beta blockers and subsequently, additional medications (e.g. alpha blockers) should be considered. Renal denervation may also be considered. 
Multidisciplinary team: Multidisciplinary approaches are strongly recommended to improve BP control, including task-shifting away from physicians. 
Declarations 
Disclosure of Interest 
C.P.M. is supported by a National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Career Development Award (K23HL167659) and has received consulting fees/honorarium from Roche Diagnostic, Abbott Laboratories, New Amsterdam Pharma, and HeartFlow, Inc. The remaining authors have nothing to disclose. 
Contributor Information 
Cian P McCarthy, 
Division of Cardiology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
Rhian M Touyz, 
Department of Medicine, McGill University, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Montreal, Quebec H4A 3J1, Canada; 
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, 2155 Guy Street, Montreal, Quebec H3H 2R9, Canada. 
John W McEvoy, 
Cardiology Department, Galway University Hospital and University of Galway School of Medicine, Newcastle Road, Galway H91 YR71, Ireland; 
National Institute for Prevention and Cardiovascular Health, Croi House, Moyola Ln, Newcastle, Galway H91FF68, Ireland; 
Johns Hopkins Ciccarone Centre for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 601 North Caroline Street, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. 
Reference 
1. 
McEvoy  JW, McCarthy  CP, Bruno  RM, Brouwers  S, Canavan  MD, Ceconi  C, et al.  2024 ESC Guidelines for the management of elevated blood pressure and hypertension. Eur Heart J  2024;45:3912–4018. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehae178
[ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Articles from European Heart Journal are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (230.1 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
