Because of its association with major bleeding the ADP-binding enzyme creatine kinase should be estimated in studies of patients treated for non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes (NSTE-ACS) - PMC
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 
Official websites use .gov 
A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
A lock (
) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Log in 
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Search…
Search NCBI
Primary site navigation
Search
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log in
Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
Search in PMC 
Journal List
User Guide
PERMALINK 
Copy 
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|
PMC Copyright Notice
Eur Heart J 
. 2020 Nov 13;42(23):2311–2312. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa905 
Search in PMC 
Search in PubMed 
View in NLM Catalog 
Add to search 
Because of its association with major bleeding the ADP-binding enzyme creatine kinase should be estimated in studies of patients treated for non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes (NSTE-ACS) 
Lizzy M Brewster 
Lizzy M Brewster 
1 
CK Science Foundation, Department of Cardiovascular Disease, and The Amsterdam Institute for Global Health and Development, POB 23639, 1100 EC Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Find articles by Lizzy M Brewster 
1, ✉ 
Author information 
Article notes 
Copyright and License information 
1 
CK Science Foundation, Department of Cardiovascular Disease, and The Amsterdam Institute for Global Health and Development, POB 23639, 1100 EC Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
✉ 
Corresponding author. Email mail@lizzybrewster.net 
Collection date 2021 Jun 14. 
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. © The Author(s) 2020. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com. 
This article is published and distributed under the terms of the Oxford University Press, Standard Journals Publication Model ( https://academic.oup.com/journals/pages/open_access/funder_policies/chorus/standard_publication_model ) 
PMC Copyright notice 
PMCID: PMC8203080  PMID: 33186454 
See " Major bleeding and the ADP-binding enzyme creatine kinase in non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes. " with doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa908. 
See " 2020 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation. " with doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa575. 
This commentary refers to ‘2020 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation: the Task Force for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)’ by J.-P. Collet et al ., doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa575 and the discussion piece ‘Major bleeding and the ADP-binding enzyme creatine kinase in non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes (NSTE-ACS)’, by J.-P. Collet and H. Thiele, doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa908 . 
In the recent 2020 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation (NSTE-ACS), 1 there was a major change in a recommendation regarding diagnostics, stating that: ‘…it is not recommended to routinely measure additional biomarkers such as CK, CK-MB, h-FABP, or copeptin, in addition to hs-cTn’. This statement is certainly correct regarding the estimation of creatine kinase (CK) for diagnostic purposes, but recently, data have been presented indicating a potential functional association of this enzyme with major bleeding. The cytoplasmic form of CK as estimated in plasma functions to bind adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and form adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Thus, the high CK levels that can occur during acute coronary syndromes may lead to excessive ADP binding in a clopidogrel-like effect, increasing bleeding risk ( Figure  1 ). 2 
, 
3 
Figure 1. 
Open in a new tab 
Potential inhibitory role of creatine kinase (CK) in platelet aggregation. Central to the development of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) is plaque rupture or erosion resulting in platelet activation, aggregation, and thrombosis. Activated platelets release substances including adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and thromboxane A2 (TXA2) synthesized from arachidonic acid (AA) through prostaglandin (PG) catalyzed by cyclooxygenase-1 (COX1). ADP and TXA2 amplify the response to injury and produce sustained platelet aggregation. ADP is considered to be central to platelet activation. 2 
, 
3 ADP-stimulation of the P2Y1 receptor activates phospholipase C resulting in weak, transient platelet aggregation, while P2Y12 receptor activation results in the activation of glycoprotein receptors IIb/IIIa [integrin (I)-αIIbβ3] and firm platelet aggregation. 2 
, 
3 CK strongly binds ADP and reduces platelet aggregation in the presence of phosphocreatine (CrP), in an effect that resembles that of P2Y 12 receptor blockers such as clopidogrel. 2 
, 
3 The enzyme might act in synergy with antithrombotic and fibrinolytic drugs to increase bleeding risk in ACS. 2 
, 
3 ATP, adenosine triphosphate. 
In post hoc analyses, plasma CK was independently associated with fatal or non-fatal bleeding during treatment for ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, OR 2.6 [95% CI 1.8–2.7]/log CK increase ( n  = 3339). In NSTE-ACS ( n  = 1473), the adjusted OR per log CK increase was 3.1 [1.6–5.8] for major bleeding, and 3.9 [2.5–6.1] for combined major bleeding, stroke, and all-cause mortality; C-index 0.8 for both outcomes. 2 The majority of patients were white men. Outcomes were adjusted for important clinical characteristics including age, sex, and BMI, and for laboratory and treatment variables. 2 
, 
3 
Major bleeding is the most common non-cardiac cause of mortality during the treatment of non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes (NSTE-ACS). 1 
, 
2 Therefore, it is important to identify patients at risk for haemorrhagic complications during the management of ACS. 1–3 The strong, proportionate, and independent association of the ADP-binding enzyme CK at admission with subsequent major bleeding and haemorrhagic death during ACS treatment is biologically plausible, but deserves further prospective study. Importantly, analyses as summarized here are based on trials before the introduction of troponin as a diagnostic tool. Such analyses have become increasingly difficult to perform as data on CK in ACS patients are rarely presented in more recent studies. Thus, perhaps not for diagnostic reasons, but to further analyse the strong association with major bleeding and haemorrhagic death, plasma CK should be estimated in studies of patients treated with antithrombotic or thrombolytic drugs for ACS. 
Data availability 
The data on which this letter is based, are available at the Biologic Specimen and Data Repository Information Coordinating Center (BioLINCC), the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute of the United States National Institutions of Health (NIH), USA. https:// biolincc. nhlbi. nih. gov/ home/. 
Conflict of interest : L.M.B. is an inventor on patent WO/2012/138226, an ‘open’ non-restrictive patent request filed and published as ‘prior art’ to protect the freedom of researchers to operate and share their innovative ideas on CK and CK inhibition without license or payment. 
References 
1. 
Collet
J-P, Thiele
H, Barbato
E, Barthélémy
O, Bauersachs
J, Bhatt
DL, Dendale
P, Dorobantu
M, Edvardsen
T, Folliguet
T, Gale
CP, Gilard
M, Jobs
A, Jüni
P, Lambrinou
E, Lewis
BS, Mehilli
J, Meliga
E, Merkely
B, Mueller
C, Roffi
M, Rutten
FH, Sibbing
D, Siontis
GCM, Kastrati
A, Mamas
MA, Aboyans
V, Angiolillo
DJ, Bueno
H, Bugiardini
R, Byrne
RA, Castelletti
S, Chieffo
A, Cornelissen
V, Crea
F, Delgado
V, Drexel
H, Gierlotka
M, Halvorsen
S, Haugaa
KH, Jankowska
EA, Katus
HA, Kinnaird
T, Kluin
J, Kunadian
V, Landmesser
U, Leclercq
C, Lettino
M, Meinila
L, Mylotte
D, Ndrepepa
G, Omerovic
E, Pedretti
RFE, Petersen
SE, Petronio
AS, Pontone
G, Popescu
BA, Potpara
T, Ray
KK, Luciano
F, Richter
DJ, Shlyakhto
E, Simpson
IA, Sousa-Uva
M, Storey
RF, Touyz
RM, Valgimigli
M, Vranckx
P, Yeh
RW, Barbato
E, Barthélémy
O, Bauersachs
J, Bhatt
DL, Dendale
P, Dorobantu
M, Edvardsen
T, Folliguet
T, Gale
CP, Gilard
M, Jobs
A, Jüni
P, Lambrinou
E, Lewis
BS, Mehilli
J, Meliga
E, Merkely
B, Mueller
C, Roffi
M, Rutten
FH, Sibbing
D, Siontis
GCM; ESC Scientific Document Group. 
2020 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation: the Task Force for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J  2020;doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa575. [ Google Scholar ] 
2. 
Brewster
LM, Fernand
J. 
Creatine kinase during non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes is associated with major bleeding. MedRxiv  2020;029108. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
3. 
Brewster
LM, Fernand
J. 
Creatine kinase is associated with bleeding after myocardial infarction. Open Heart  2020;7:e001261. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
Associated Data 
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. 
Data Availability Statement 
The data on which this letter is based, are available at the Biologic Specimen and Data Repository Information Coordinating Center (BioLINCC), the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute of the United States National Institutions of Health (NIH), USA. https:// biolincc. nhlbi. nih. gov/ home/. 
Conflict of interest : L.M.B. is an inventor on patent WO/2012/138226, an ‘open’ non-restrictive patent request filed and published as ‘prior art’ to protect the freedom of researchers to operate and share their innovative ideas on CK and CK inhibition without license or payment. 
Articles from European Heart Journal are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 
ACTIONS 
View on publisher site 
PDF (246.5 KB) 
Cite 
Collections 
Permalink 
PERMALINK 
Copy 
RESOURCES 
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
Cite 
Copy 
Download .nbib 
.nbib 
Format: 
AMA
APA
MLA
NLM
Add to Collections 
Create a new collection 
Add to an existing collection 
Name your collection
* 
Choose a collection
Unable to load your collection due to an error 
Please try again 
Add
Cancel
Follow NCBI
NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NCBI on Facebook 
NCBI on LinkedIn 
NCBI on GitHub 
NCBI RSS feed 
Connect with NLM
NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
NLM on Facebook 
NLM on YouTube 
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Back to Top
