Identification and management of maternal sepsis during and following pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 64) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Identification and management of maternal sepsis during and following pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 64) 
Identification and management of maternal sepsis during and following pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 64) 
Published : 19 December 2024 
Green-top Guideline No. 64 
Collapse 
Access the web version of this guideline on Wiley 
Access the PDF version of this guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
The need for such a guideline was originally identified by the 2007 Confidential Enquiry into Maternal Deaths. The scope of this guideline covers the recognition and management of sepsis in the antenatal, intrapartum and postpartum periods, including post-abortion sepsis. The scope includes bacterial infections arising in the genital tract or elsewhere and influenza and their management in secondary care. Sepsis arising due to primary viral (other than influenza and HSV) or parasitic infection is outside the scope of this guideline. There is separate specific guidance available on Coronavirus (COVID-19) infection in pregnancy. 
Sepsis during and following pregnancy remains an important cause of maternal death globally, accounting for 11% of all maternal deaths. Between 2019–21, 241 of 2 066 997 women giving birth in the UK died. Of these, 78 women died of sepsis, either direct or indirect. Despite a statistically non-significant increase in the overall maternal death rate due to sepsis in the UK between 2016–18 and 2019–21, most of this was accounted for by SARS-COV-2 viral infections in unvaccinated women. 
Suboptimal care continues to be identified in many cases where women and people die from sepsis. To reduce maternal death from sepsis requires high levels of vigilance and to “Think Sepsis” at an early stage with any unwell, pregnant or recently pregnant woman or person. Key actions are the importance of early diagnosis, the rapid initiation of broad spectrum antibiotics and the need for review by senior doctors and midwives and early involvement of relevant experts such as infection specialists and critical care, where appropriate. To avoid preventable deaths the importance of maternal vaccination for influenza and COVID-19 must be continually promoted. 
This guideline replaces the 2012 Green-top Guidelines No. 64a Bacterial Sepsis in Pregnancy and No. 64b Bacterial Sepsis following Pregnancy.  
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline was developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the second edition of this guideline. 
The review process will commence in 2027 unless otherwise indicated.  
Developer declaration of interests 
Declarations of interest are stated within the guideline document. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
