Care of Women with Obesity in Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 72) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Care of Women with Obesity in Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 72) 
Care of Women with Obesity in Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 72) 
Published: 22 November 2018 
Green-top Guideline No.72 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline 
Access the web version of this guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
Obesity is becoming increasingly prevalent in the UK population and has become one of the most commonly occurring risk factors in obstetric practice with 21.3% of the antenatal population being obese and fewer than one-half of pregnant women (47.3%) having a body mass index (BMI) within the normal range. Pregnant women who are obese are at greater risk of a variety of pregnancy-related complications compared with women of normal BMI, including pre-eclampsia and gestational diabetes. Pregnant women who are obese are also at increased risk of caesarean birth. Maternal size can make the assessment of fetal size, presentation and external monitoring of fetal heart tracing more challenging during pregnancy. Initiation and maintenance of breastfeeding are also more difficult in the women with obesity. 
While the majority of the recommendations within this guideline pertain to women with a BMI 30 kg/m 2  or greater, some recommendations are specific to women in the higher classes of obesity only. Obese women with a BMI below a specified threshold may also benefit from recommendations in a higher BMI group, depending on individual circumstances. However, the chosen BMI cut-offs reflect careful consideration given to the balance of medical intervention versus risk, differences in local prevalence of maternal obesity and resource implications for local healthcare organisations. 
The recommendations cover interventions prior to conception, and during and after pregnancy. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the first edition of this guideline; the second edition is currently in development. 
Please note that the RCOG Guidelines Committee regularly assesses the need to update the information provided in this publication. Further information on this review is available on request. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Professor FC Denison:  Professor Denison has several grant applications pending and has design protection rights for a device. Professor Denison is also Vice Chair of NICE MTAC Board and a Member of Grant Awarding Bodies (Tenovus, CSO). 
Dr NR Aedla:  None declared. 
Dr O Keag:  None declared. 
Dr K Hor:  None declared. 
Professor RM Reynolds:  None declared. 
Dr A Milne:  Dr Milne had received an Edinburgh and Lothian’s Health Foundation £33,458 grant for project entitled, ‘Integrated ultrasound needle to facilitate placement of regional anaesthesia in obese pregnant women.” 
Mrs A Diamond:  Mrs Diamond has received honoraria for diet input to SPCDs study day. Mrs Diamond has also received payment for diet/lifestyle lecture on diabetes course (Oct 2016). 
Additional Guidance content on eLearning 
Collapse 
We have developed a hub of bitesize video summaries and infographics to break down the key points from our Green-top Guidelines and Scientific Impact Papers. 
Visit eLearning 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
