Prevention of Early-onset Group B Streptococcal Disease (Green-top Guideline No. 36) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Prevention of Early-onset Group B Streptococcal Disease (Green-top Guideline No. 36) 
Prevention of Early-onset Group B Streptococcal Disease (Green-top Guideline No. 36) 
Green-top Guideline No. 36 
Collapse 
Green-top Guideline No. 36 
Access the web version of this paper 
Summary 
GBS is recognised as the most frequent cause of severe early-onset infection in newborn infants. GBS is present in the bowel flora of 20–40% of adults (colonisation) and those who are colonised are called ‘carriers’. This includes pregnant women. There is variation in practice across the UK regarding the best strategies to prevent EOGBS disease.  
In 2015, the incidence of EOGBS in the UK and Ireland was 0.57/1000 births (517 cases), a significant increase from the previous surveillance undertaken in 2000 where an incidence of 0.48/1000 was recorded. 
The purpose of this guideline is to provide guidance for obstetricians, midwives and neonatologists on the prevention of early-onset (less than 7 days of age) neonatal group B streptococcal (EOGBS) disease and the information to be provided to women, their partners and families. Prevention of late-onset group B streptococcal (GBS) disease and treatment of established GBS is not considered beyond initial antibiotic therapy. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the third edition of this guideline. 
Please note that the RCOG Guidelines Committee regularly assesses the need to update the information provided in this publication. Further information on this review is available on request. 
Developer declaration of interests 
DR RG Hughes : Dr Hughes is a General Medical Council performance assessor and is the Chair of the NICE Intrapartum care for high-risk women guidelines committee. 
Professor P Brocklehurst : Professor Brocklehurst has received a number of grants for his work in research. Professor Brocklehurst is the Chair of the MRC/NIHR Methodology Research Programme panel and the MRC/NIHR Women’s and Children’s Health panel, is a member of the NIHR/HTA Prioritisation panel and is a trustee of Wellbeing of Women. 
Professor PJ Steer : Dr Steer has received travel and accommodation expenses to attend meetings and conferences, and has received honoria for delivering lectures. Dr Steer also receives book loyalties for “Heart Disease in Pregnancy” and “High Risk Pregnancy Management Options”. Since 1985, Dr Steer has acted as a mediolegal expert for obstetric clinical negligence cases. Dr Steer is Chair of the Medical Advisory Panel and GBSS. Dr Steer has shareholdings with Path2Safety Ltd. and Caretek Medical UK. 
Professor P Heath : The university at which Professor Heath is employed has received grants from charities to undertake GBS-related work. Professor Heath has acted as a mediolegal expert for two perinatal infection clinical negligence cases since October 2013. 
Professor BM Stenson : Professor Stenson received commercial funding for the CTIMP study and has received consultation fees from NICE. Professor Stenson receives royalties for “Macleod’s Clinical Examination” and received payment for his editorial work on an edition of “Archives of Disease in Childhood Fetal and Neonatal Edition”. Professor Stenson provides medicolegal reports and is a faculty member of “Reason”. 
This page was last reviewed 13 September 2017. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
