Management of Bladder Pain Syndrome (Green-top Guideline No. 70) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Management of Bladder Pain Syndrome (Green-top Guideline No. 70) 
Management of Bladder Pain Syndrome (Green-top Guideline No. 70) 
Green-top Guideline No.70 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline 
Access the web version of this guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
The wide spread definition for BPS is that proposed by the European Society for the Study of BPS in 2008 as ‘pelvic pain, pressure or discomfort perceived to be related to the bladder, lasting at least 6 months, and accompanied by at least one other urinary symptom, for example persistent urge to void or frequency, in the absence of other identifiable causes’. More recently, the American Urological Association has described BPS as ‘an unpleasant sensation (pain, pressure, discomfort) perceived to be related to the urinary bladder, associated with lower urinary tract symptoms of more than 6 weeks duration, in the absence of infection or other identifiable causes’; this definition is preferable as it allows treatments to be initiated soon after symptom presentation. BPS may be associated with negative cognitive, behavioural, sexual or emotional consequences, as well as symptoms suggestive of sexual dysfunction according to the European Association of Urology.  
BPS is a chronic condition with unknown aetiology. As the definition of BPS has evolved, it is seen now as a diagnosis of exclusion with no definitive diagnostic test; hence, it is difficult to estimate prevalence, which can be dependent on whether symptoms are clinician assigned or patient reported. A number of expert panels have published symptom-based diagnostic criteria for BPS. All include the symptoms of pain related to the bladder, at least one other urinary symptom, absence of identifiable causes and minimum duration of symptoms of 6 weeks to 6 months. Although there are very limited data on BPS in the UK, a survey of urogynaecologists has shown variable practice regarding its diagnosis and management. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the first edition of this guideline. 
This edition was reviewed by Guidelines Committee in May 2023 and an update of the guideline is now in development. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Dr SA Tirlapur : None declared. 
Mrs JV Birch : None declared. 
Dr CL Carberry MD : None declared. 
Professor KS Khan: None declared. 
Dr PM Latthe : Dr Latthe has received speaker fees from Astellas and Pfizer; has also received support towards attending conferences Trustee of COB (Bladder Health now) 
Dr S Jha : Dr Jha has in the past received funding from Ethicon/Boston/Pfizer/Astellas to attend conferences. Dr Jha has also been on the Advisory board for Astellas for Betmiga. 
Dr KL Ward : Dr Ward is a member of the United Kingdom Continence Society, British Society of Urogynaecology, European Association of Urology, International Urogynecological Association and International Continence Society, and is an associate of The British Association of Urological Surgeons Limited. 
Ms A Irving : Ms Irving is a Trustee for The Cystitis and Overactive Bladder Foundation. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
