Shoulder Dystocia (Green-top Guideline No. 42) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Shoulder Dystocia (Green-top Guideline No. 42) 
Shoulder Dystocia (Green-top Guideline No. 42) 
Shoulder Dystocia 
Collapse 
View the PDF version of this guideline 
Summary 
Shoulder dystocia is defined as a vaginal cephalic delivery that requires additional obstetric manoeuvres to deliver the fetus after the head has delivered and gentle traction has failed. An objective diagnosis of a prolongation of head-to-body delivery time of more than 60 seconds has also been proposed, but these data are not routinely collected. Shoulder dystocia occurs when either the anterior, or less commonly the posterior, fetal shoulder impacts on the maternal symphysis, or sacral promontory, respectively. 
There can be significant perinatal morbidity and mortality associated with the condition, even when it is managed appropriately. Maternal morbidity is increased, particularly the incidence of postpartum haemorrhage (11%) as well as third and fourth-degree perineal tears (3.8%). Their incidences remain unchanged by the number or type of manoeuvres required to effect delivery. Brachial plexus injury (BPI) is one of the most important fetal complications of shoulder dystocia, complicating 2.3% to 16% of such deliveries. 
The purpose of this guideline is to review the current evidence regarding the possible prediction, prevention and management of shoulder dystocia; it does not cover primary prevention of fetal macrosomia associated with gestational diabetes mellitus. The guideline provides guidance for skills training for the management of shoulder dystocia, but the practical manoeuvres are not described in detail – these can be found in standard textbooks and course manuals. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the second edition of this guideline; the third edition is currently in development. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Available on request. 
This page was last reviewed 28 March 2012. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
