Reduced Fetal Movements (Green-top Guideline No. 57) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reduced Fetal Movements (Green-top Guideline No. 57) 
Reduced Fetal Movements (Green-top Guideline No. 57) 
Green-top Guideline No.57 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline on Wiley 
Access the web version of this guideline on Wiley 
The purpose of this guideline is to advise clinicians, based on the best evidence where available, on the care of women presenting with reduced fetal movements during pregnancy.  
This guideline reviews the risk factors for reduced fetal movements in pregnancy and aspects influencing maternal perception. Recommendations are provided on how to care for women presenting in both the community and hospital settings.  
Many of the recommendations are graded lower owing to the available evidence, but the aim has been to provide a broad practical guide for both midwives and obstetricians in clinical practice, with the understanding that in individual women alternative approaches may be reasonable.  
Version history: 
This is the second edition of this guideline. The first edition was previously published in 2011 under the same title. The review process will commence in 2029, unless otherwise indicated.  
Disclosures of interest: 
Dr MK Whitworth: None declared. 
Dr M Fisher: None declared.  
Professor AEP Heazell: Professor Heazell is the director of the Tommy's Maternal and Fetal Health Research Centre and has received centre funding to the University of Manchester from 2013–Present; he has also received grants to the University of Manchester and Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust from the National Institute of Health Research. He has received consulting fees from Norgine Ltd for a patient information video on induction of labour, payment from Canon Ultrasound for a lecture on the Evaluation of NHS England Saving Babies Lives Care Bundle, as well as medicolegal expert witness work relating to stillbirth. He has also acted as medical advisor for Count the Kicks and the Star Legacy Foundation.  
This page was last reviewed 29 April 2026. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
