Ovarian Cysts in Postmenopausal Women (Green-top Guideline No. 34) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Ovarian Cysts in Postmenopausal Women (Green-top Guideline No. 34) 
Ovarian Cysts in Postmenopausal Women (Green-top Guideline No. 34) 
Green-top Guideline No.34 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline 
Summary 
Ovarian cysts are diagnosed with increasing frequency in postmenopausal women as more patients are undergoing imaging in connection with medical care. An ovarian cyst inevitably raises the question of its relevance to the woman’s symptoms and concerns for the possibility of ovarian cancer. The understandable fear of malignancy has driven many patients and their care providers to pursue further testing and surgical investigation. 
This guideline aims to clarify when ovarian masses can be managed within a general gynaecological service or when referral to a specialist gynaecological oncology service is appropriate. This should help in determining whether surgical or expectant management is more appropriate, and help to avoid unnecessary surgery or invasive or costly testing in the vast majority of patients in whom simple cysts are benign. 
A useful clinical algorithm for the management of postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts can be found on page 6 of this guideline. 
The management of confirmed ovarian malignancy is outside the remit of this guideline. Further information can be sought from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence and the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. 
Update December 2025: This guideline was amended in December 2025 in line with a consensus statement issued on behalf of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) and the Royal College of Radiologists (RCR), and supported by the British Gynaecological Cancer Society (BGCS), and British Society of Urogenital Radiology (BSUR) regarding follow up of simple ovarian cysts in postmenopausal women: 
For postmenopausal women, unilateral, unilocular simple ovarian cysts measuring 3cm or less detected on imaging do not require routine follow up.  
The changes were made to the following sections of the guideline:  
Final paragraph, page 4 
Clinical algorithm for the care of postmenopausal women with ovarian cysts, pages 6 and 30 (Appendix II) 
Section 2, page 7 
Section 6.1.1, page 19 
Three references were added (176-178), detailed on page 1. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the third edition of this guideline; the fourth edition of this guideline is currently in development. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Dr MK Mehasseb : Dr Mehasseb has received payment for lectures at the University of Leicester for the RCOG Membership examination, and is a member of the Advisory Board for Ethicon Endo-Surgery. 
Dr NA Siddiqui : None declared. 
Dr F Bryden : None declared. 
This page was last reviewed 05 December 2025. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
