Umbilical Cord Prolapse (Green-top Guideline No. 50) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Umbilical Cord Prolapse (Green-top Guideline No. 50) 
Umbilical Cord Prolapse (Green-top Guideline No. 50) 
Green-top Guideline No.50 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline 
Summary 
Cord prolapse has been defined as the descent of the umbilical cord through the cervix alongside (occult) or past the presenting part (overt) in the presence of ruptured membranes. Cord presentation is the presence of the umbilical cord between the fetal presenting part and the cervix, with or without membrane rupture. The overall incidence of cord prolapse ranges from 0.1% to 0.6%. In the case of breech presentation, the incidence is slightly higher than 1%. It has been reported that male fetuses appear to be predisposed to cord prolapse. The incidence is influenced by population characteristics and is higher where there is a large percentage of multiple gestations. 
Cases of cord prolapse appear consistently in perinatal mortality enquiries, and one large study found a perinatal mortality rate of 91/1000. Prematurity and congenital malformations account for the majority of adverse outcomes associated with cord prolapse in hospital settings but birth asphyxia is also associated with cord prolapse. Perinatal death has been described with normally formed term babies, particularly with planned home birth. Delay in transfer to hospital appears to be an important contributing factor. 
Asphyxia may also result in hypoxic–ischaemic encephalopathy and cerebral palsy. The principal causes of asphyxia in this context are thought to be cord compression and umbilical arterial vasospasm preventing venous and arterial blood flow to and from the fetus. There is a paucity of long-term follow-up data of babies born alive after cord prolapse in both hospital and community settings. 
The management of prolapsed cord is one of the labour ward guidelines mandated by the Clinical Negligence Scheme for Trusts (CNST), Welsh Pool Risk and Clinical Negligence and Other Risks Scheme (CNORIS) maternity standards in England, Wales and Scotland, respectively. 
The purpose of this guideline is to describe modalities to prevent, diagnose and manage cord prolapse. It addresses those pregnant women at high risk of or with a diagnosis of cord prolapse in hospital and community settings. Pregnancies complicated by fetal malformation or with cord prolapse before 22 completed weeks of gestation ate not covered by this guideline. All later gestations are included. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline was developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the second edition of this guideline. 
This guideline was reviewed in December 2024 and extended for 2 years. The review process will commence in 2026, unless otherwise indicated. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Available on request. 
This page was last reviewed 05 November 2014. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
