Premenstrual Syndrome, Management (Green-top Guideline No. 48) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Premenstrual Syndrome, Management (Green-top Guideline No. 48) 
Premenstrual Syndrome, Management (Green-top Guideline No. 48) 
Access other versions of this paper 
Collapse 
Green-top Guideline No. 48 
Access the PDF version of this guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
Since the first edition, there has been considerable work by the International Society for Premenstrual Disorders and the National Association for Premenstrual Syndrome to achieve consensus on the recognition, diagnosis, classification and management of premenstrual syndrome (PMS).  
Misdiagnosis of PMS (e.g. confusion with bipolar disorder) and the use of a wide range of treatments, often with little evidence for effectiveness and safety, demand that these issues are addressed. 
PMS encompasses a vast array of psychological symptoms such as depression, anxiety, irritability, loss of confidence and mood swings. There are also physical symptoms, typically bloatedness and mastalgia. Four in ten women (40%) experience symptoms of PMS and of these 5–8% suffer from severe PMS. 
The aim of this guideline is to review the diagnosis, classification and management of PMS. In addition, the evidence for pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatments is examined. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline was developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the second edition of this guideline. 
This edition was reviewed by Guidelines Committee in May 2023 and an update of the guideline is now under development. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Dr LJ Green : None declared. 
Professor PMS O’Brien : Professor O’Brien has received consultancy fees, payments for lectures and expenses, as well as longstanding support for research from Bayer Healthcare. He has also received payment for consultancy work from Umercrine Mood Pharma Sweden (now renamed Asarina Pharma). He has copyright protection for the Menstrual Pictogram and its various guises; a commercial interest jointly between Keele University and Bayer Healthcare. Professor O’Brien is currently receiving EU Research Funding from the EU Framework 7 Programme, from the National Institute for Health Research and from North Staffordshire Medical Institute; some of which relates to menstrual disorders and specifically PMS. He is Chairman of the International Society for Premenstrual Disorders, Past Chairman of the British Society for Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology and Andrology and recent Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology. He is Senior Editor of three current textbooks: one for Informa Press (The Premenstrual Disorders) and two for Cambridge University Press (CUP) (Biopsychosocial Factors in Obstetrics and Gynaecology and Introduction to Research Methodology). He receives and has received limited royalties from Informa Press, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) Press and CUP. Professor O’Brien is co-inventor of PreMentricS app which is used to quantify premenstrual syndrome and is distributed through the iTunes App Store, and a member of his immediate family devised and manages the website for the app. The same family member has undertaken research on ovarian, breast and prostate cancers as a senior employee of Astra Zeneca, and has shares in that company. 
Mr N Panay : Mr Panay has received sponsorship or paid consultancy work from Abbott, Bayer, Besins, Meda, MSD, Mylan, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer and Shionogi. He is Past Chairman of the British Menopause Society, Chairman of the National Association for Premenstrual Syndrome (NAPS), Past President of the Royal Society of Medicine (Obstetrics and Gynaecology section), Patron of Daisy Network (Premature Ovarian Insufficiency Society) and Honorary Director of Conferences at the RCOG. He is currently the Co Editor-in-Chief of Climacteric (The Journal of the International Menopause Society) and is on the editorial advisory board for the Journal of Family Planning and Reproductive Healthcare. 
Dr M Craig : Dr Craig is the present Chair of the UK and Ireland Marcé Society (UKIMS) for Perinatal Mental Health and Trustee and medical advisor to NAPS. He is also Clinical Lead of the National Female Hormone Clinic at the Maudsley Hospital, London. This national multiprofessional treatment service accepts NHS and private patient referrals from across the UK. 
This page was last reviewed 01 May 2023. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
