Cervical cerclage (Green-top Guideline No. 75) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Cervical cerclage (Green-top Guideline No. 75) 
Cervical cerclage (Green-top Guideline No. 75) 
The purpose of this guideline is to review the literature and provide evidence-based guidance on the use of cerclage in women at risk of preterm birth and second trimester loss. 
Green-top Guideline No. 75 
Collapse 
Access the web version of the guideline on Wiley 
Access the PDF version of the guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
Cerclage remains one of the standard options performed prophylactic intervention in the care of women at risk of preterm birth and second trimester fetal loss and is used by most obstetricians, despite difficulties in identifying the population of women who would most benefit. The procedure, a stitch inserted into the cervix, was first performed in 1902 in women with a history of second trimester loss or spontaneous preterm birth suggestive of cervical insufficiency, with the aim of preventing recurrent loss. 
Cervical insufficiency is an imprecise clinical diagnosis frequently applied to women with such a history, where it is assumed that the cervix is ‘weak’ and unable to remain closed during the pregnancy. Recent evidence suggests that, rather than being a dichotomous variable, cervical integrity is likely to be a continuum influenced by factors related not solely to the intrinsic structure of the cervix but also to processes driving premature effacement and dilatation. While cerclage may provide a degree of structural support to a ‘weak’ cervix, its role in maintaining the cervical length and the endocervical mucus plug as a mechanical barrier to ascending infection may be more important. 
There is lack of consensus on the optimal cerclage technique, timing of suture placement, the role of amniocentesis before emergency cerclage insertion and optimal care following insertion. Complications are not well documented and often difficult to separate from risks inherent to the underlying condition. The purpose of this guideline is to review the literature and provide evidence-based guidance on the use of cerclage in women at risk of preterm birth and second trimester loss. 
Please note that the information provided in this update will be considered for update by the RCOG Guidelines Committee 3 years after publication, with an intermediate assessment of the need to update 2 years after publication. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline was developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the first edition of this paper. The Guidelines Committee reviewed this edition in February 2025 and it was agreed to extend this guideline for two years. The next review process will commence in 2027, unless otherwise indicated. 
Developers’ declarations of interest 
Available on request. 
Clinical content hub 
Collapse 
We have developed a hub of audio versions, bitesize video summaries and infographics based on our Green-top Guidelines and Scientific Impact Papers. 
Access the extra content 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
