The Diagnosis and Treatment of Malaria in Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 54b) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
The Diagnosis and Treatment of Malaria in Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 54b) 
The Diagnosis and Treatment of Malaria in Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 54b) 
Green-top Guideline No.54b 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline 
Summary: Malaria is the most important parasitic infection in humans and is the tropical disease most commonly imported into the UK, with approximately 1500 cases reported each year and rising, apart from 2008. Immigrants and second- and third-generation relatives returning home assuming they are immune from malaria are by far the highest-risk group. They may take no prophylaxis or may be deterred by the cost, may not adhere to advice, may receive poor advice or some combination of these factors.  
In the UK, the prevalence of imported malaria in pregnancy is unknown. A review of the burden of malaria in pregnancy estimated that about one in four women in sub-Saharan Africa in areas of stable transmission has malaria at the time of birth. Online and telephone enquiries with the  Health Protection Agency  and  Eurosurveillance archives  and reviews of published reports failed to uncover a report of maternal death from malaria in UK for the past 10 years. Maternal deaths from malaria are unlikely to be reported when they occur in endemic countries. 
The aim of this guideline is to provide clinicians with up-to-date, evidence-based information on the diagnosis and treatment of malaria in pregnancy, in situations that are likely to be encountered in UK medical practice. Initial rapid assessment and management is covered in Appendix 1. Prevention of malaria is covered in  Green-top Guideline No. 54A: The prevention of malaria in pregnancy . 
COVID disclaimer: This guideline was developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history: This is the first edition of this guideline. 
The  Advisory committee on malaria prevention  have agreed to take over and update this guideline. This version will remain valid until the publication of the new guidance. 
Developer declaration of interests: Available on request. 
This page was last reviewed 28 April 2010. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
