Monochorionic Twin Pregnancy, Management – 2024 Partial Update (Green-top Guideline No. 51) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Management of Monochorionic Twin Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 51) 
Monochorionic Twin Pregnancy, Management – 2024 Partial Update (Green-top Guideline No. 51) 
Green-top Guideline No.51 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline 
Access the web version of this guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
A monochorionic pregnancy is a multiple pregnancy, most commonly a twin pregnancy, in which babies are dependent on a single, shared placenta. Approximately 30% of twin pregnancies in the UK are monochorionic. Monochorionic placentation can also occur in higher-order multiples. 
With the increasing use of assisted reproductive technology and sociodemographic changes in our population, there has been an increase in all types of multiple pregnancies. Monochorionic and dichorionic twin pregnancies share increased risks of preterm birth, fetal growth restriction, pre-eclampsia, maternal pregnancy symptoms and postpartum haemorrhage. 
The particular challenges of monochorionic pregnancies arise from the vascular placental anastomoses that are almost universal and connect the umbilical circulations of both twins. Specific complications associated with inter-twin vascular anastomoses include: twin–twin transfusion syndrome, selective growth restriction, twin anaemia-polycythaemia sequence, twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence and although not exclusive to monochorionic twin pregnancy, single intrauterine death is more common. In addition, monochorionic, monoamniotic pregnancies (1% of twin pregnancies) carry a very high risk of cord entanglement. 
The purpose of this guideline is to describe and, if possible, quantify the problems associated with monochorionic placentation and to identify the best evidence to guide clinical care, including routine fetal surveillance and treatment of complications at secondary and tertiary levels. 
A partial update of this guideline was undertaken following the publication of NICE Guideline [NG137] Twin and triplet pregnancy addressing the use of cell free fetal DNA (cffDNA) in screening for major anomalies, as well as changes to the care and management of monochorionic twin pregnancies regarding selective growth restriction and screening twin anaemia polycythaemia sequence (TAPS). There is also an additional section on timing of birth for complicated and uncomplicated monochorionic twin pregnancies.  
COVID disclaimer:  This guideline was developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the second edition of this guideline; a partial update of this guideline is currently in development. 
Developer declaration of interests: 
Professor MD Kilby : Professor Kilby is president of the British Maternal and Fetal Medicine Society. He has received editorial fees for the commissioned book “Twins” published by Dorling Kindersley in 2013. Professor Kilby receives financial support from Siemen’s Ultrasound for training meetings held within his department. 
Dr L Bricker : None declared. 
This page was last reviewed 19 February 2024. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
