Post-Hysterectomy Vaginal Vault Prolapse | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Post-Hysterectomy Vaginal Vault Prolapse (Green-top Guideline No. 46) 
Post-Hysterectomy Vaginal Vault Prolapse 
Green-top Guideline No.46 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline 
Summary 
There is no precise definition of PHVP; however, the International Urogynecological Association (IUGA)/ International Continence Society (ICS) joint report on female pelvic floor dysfunction defines it as ‘descent of … the apex of the vagina (vaginal vault or cuff scar after hysterectomy)’. Prolapse of the vaginal vault after hysterectomy may occur when the structures that support the top of the vagina and uterus are not reattached at the time of the initial procedure or due to weakening of these supports over time. 
Case series dating back to 1960 have identified the incidence of PHVP as ranging from 0.2% to 43%. More recently, PHVP has been reported to follow 11.6% of hysterectomies performed for prolapse and 1.8% for other benign diseases. A large study from Austria estimated the frequency of PHVP requiring surgical repair to be between 6% and 8%. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline was developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the second edition of this guideline. 
Please note that the RCOG Guidelines Committee regularly assesses the need to update the information provided in this publication. Further information on this review is available on request. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Mr AM El Naqa : Mr El Naqa has received educational sponsorship to attend educational meetings/sponsorship from Astellas. He has received consultancy fees for attending one Astellas Advisory Board meeting in 2013. Mr El Naqa is a member of the British Society of Urogynaecology, the International Urogynaecological Association and the International Continence Society. 
Miss KL Guerrero : Miss Guerrero has received educational sponsorship/speaker fees from Gynecare, Astellas, Pfizer, Allergan and AMS. She has attended one Advisory Board meeting for Allergan in 2013. Miss Guerrero’s unit is a centre for the CAPTURE registry, a multinational database project funded by AMS. Miss Guerrero is a member of the Scottish Government transvaginal mesh Short Life Working Group and Independent Review. She is a member of the Research and Meetings subcommittees of the British Society of Urogynaecology. 
Mr MS Abdel Fattah : The University of Aberdeen received a research grant from Coloplast to fund a research project for Mr Abdel Fattah in 2009. He has received travel grants to attend scientific conferences from Lilly, Astellas and Coloplast. He is the Chairman of the Scottish Pelvic Floor Network and the Chief Investigator of the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)-funded SIMS Study. He is a member of the Short Life Working Group on transvaginal mesh in Scotland and research committees in the British Society of Urogynaecology and the International Urogynaecological Association. 
This page was last reviewed 24 July 2015. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
