Management of Inherited Bleeding Disorders in Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 71) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Management of Inherited Bleeding Disorders in Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 71) 
Management of Inherited Bleeding Disorders in Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 71) 
Green-top Guideline No.71 
Collapse 
Access the web version of this guideline on Wiley 
Access the PDF version of the guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
This guideline is intended for both specialist haematologists and obstetricians who have experience in managing pregnant patients with bleeding disorders. In addition, it may be a useful reference text for obstetric anaesthetists and neonatologists. 
Version history 
This is the first edition of a combined United Kingdom Haemophilia Centre Doctors’ Organisation (UKHCDO) and Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) guideline although a previous guideline was written by the UKHCDO in 2006. 
Description 
Women who have inherited bleeding disorders may be at significant risk of bleeding following miscarriage, abortion, antenatal procedures and delivery. They require multidisciplinary specialised care tailored to the individual, with cross-specialty communication, including anaesthetists and neonatologists as necessary. 
The conditions covered in this guideline are haemophilia A and B, von Willebrand disease (VWD), factor XI deficiency, rare factor deficiencies, fibrinogen disorders, Bernard Soulier Syndrome (BSS), Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia (GT) and other platelet function disorders. 
COVID disclaimer: This guideline was developed as part of the regular updates to programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Declaration of interests (guideline developers): 
Dr S Pavord FRCP, FRCPath, Oxford: Dr Pavord has received honoraria for delivering lectures and has received sponsorship from a variety of companies to attend conferences. Dr Pavord has received payment for a small amount of medico-legal work and gains 2% from the royalties of the “Obstetric haematology manual”. 
Dr R Rayment DPhil, FRCP, FRCPath, Cardiff: None declared. 
Dr B Madan FRCP, FRCPath, London: Dr Madan has received sponsorship from some companies to attend medical conferences and also to conduct medical conferences organised by Guy's and St Thomas' NHS foundation Trust. 
Dr A Cumming PhD, FRCPath, Manchester: Dr Cumming has received payment to deliver a Blood Coagulation course at Manchester Metropolitan University. 
Dr W Lester FRCP, FRCPath, Birmingham: Dr Lester has received honoraria for delivering lectures and attending advisory boards and has received sponsorship from a variety of companies to attend conferences. 
Dr E Chalmers FRCP, FRCPath, Glasgow: None declared. 
Dr B Myers MA, FRCP, FRCPath, Leicester & Lincoln:  Dr Myers has received honoraria for delivering lectures and attending advisory boards and has received sponsorship from a variety of companies to attend conferences. 
Mrs H Maybury MD, MRCOG, Leicester: Mrs Maybury received an honoraria from Nova Nordisk for delivering the lecture “Diabetes in Pregnancy”. 
Dr C Tower PhD, MRCOG, Manchester: Dr Tower has received honoraria for delivering lectures, a small amount of private antenatal work since Oct 2013 and also received payment from Leo Pharma (Innohep) to attend the BMFMS conference in April 2013. Dr Tower has received fees for acting as a medico-legal expert for Obstetric clinical negligence cases since Oct 2013. Dr Tower also receives book royalties from “Ten teachers”. 
Mrs RA Kadir FRCOG, London: Mrs Kadir receives royalties for the book “Book royalty from inherited bleeding disorders in women”. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
