Outpatient Hysteroscopy (Green-top Guideline No. 59) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Outpatient Hysteroscopy (Green-top Guideline No. 59) 
Outpatient Hysteroscopy (Green-top Guideline No. 59) 
Green-top Guideline No. 59 
Collapse 
Access the web version of this guideline on Wiley 
Download the PDF version of this guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
The aim of this guideline is to provide clinicians with up to date, evidence-based information regarding outpatient hysteroscopy, with particular reference to minimising pain and optimising the experience of the woman or person. 
Outpatient hysteroscopy is an established, diagnostic and therapeutic procedure widely used across the UK. The procedure involves the use of miniaturised endoscopic equipment to directly visualise the uterine cavity, without the need for intravenous sedation or regional/general anaesthesia necessitating the use of formal theatre facilities. However, women or people should be made aware of other settings and modes of anaesthesia for hysteroscopy (e.g. procedure under general or regional anaesthesia, intravenous sedation) as an alternative to outpatient hysteroscopy. Outpatient hysteroscopy is indicated primarily in the assessment of women or people with a uterus with abnormal uterine bleeding but is also employed in the diagnostic work up of reproductive problems. Advances in endoscopic technology and ancillary instrumentation have facilitated the development of operative hysteroscopic procedures in an outpatient setting with or without the use of local anaesthesia. 
Outpatient hysteroscopy, whether diagnostic or operative is successful, safe and well tolerated by most women. However, as with any procedure requiring instrumentation of the uterus, outpatient hysteroscopy can be associated with significant pain, anxiety and embarrassment. This not only impacts upon the satisfaction of women with their experience, but also limits the feasibility and possibly the safety, accuracy and effectiveness of the procedure. In order to minimise pain and discomfort, variations in hysteroscopic equipment, adaptations in technique and use of pharmacological agents have been advocated. This guideline assesses these components along with issues relating to optimal service provision. 
Edition statement 
This is the second edition of this guideline. 
Developer declarations of interest 
These are included in the published guideline. 
This page was last reviewed 09 September 2024. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
