The Management of Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome (Green-top Guideline No. 5) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
The Management of Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome (Green-top Guideline No. 5) 
The Management of Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome (Green-top Guideline No. 5) 
Green-top Guideline No. 5 
Collapse 
Access the web version of this guideline on Wiley 
Access the PDF version of this guideline on Wiley 
OHSS is a complication of fertility treatment with pharmacological ovarian stimulation to increase the number of oocytes, and therefore embryos, available during assisted reproductive technology (ART).   
In a minority of women undergoing treatment, the ovarian response is excessive and results in this clinical condition and specific pathophysiology. OHSS is associated with significant physical and psychosocial morbidity and has been associated with maternal death. However, in most cases OHSS is self-limiting and requires supportive care and monitoring while awaiting resolution. Those with severe OHSS may require inpatient treatment to manage symptoms and reduce the risk of further complications.  
Women with more severe OHSS may require inpatient treatment to manage the symptoms and reduce the risk of further complications. Prevention of OHSS is outside the scope of this guideline and is covered by guidance from the British Fertility Society and European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology . 
Version history: 
This is the fourth edition of this guideline. The first edition was published in 1995 as Management and Prevention of Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome. This edition was archived in 1998 when NICE incorporated elements of the topic into Clinical Guideline 11 on fertility. The second edition and third edition of this guideline were published in 2006 and 2016. 
Developer declaration of interests: 
Dr RS Mathur FRCOG, Manchester: Dr Mathur has received payment for providing medicolegal expert opinion on behalf of claimants and defendants in cases in the field of fertility. 
Mr AJ Drakeley FRCOG, Liverpool: Mr Drakeley has received a speaker fee from Ferring. 
Mr IO Evbuomwan FRCOG, Gateshead: None declared. 
Dr HMAB Hamoda MRCOG, London: Dr Hamoda has received payment for providing medical expert opinion in the field of reproductive medicine and surgery. 
Ms K Brian: None declared. 
This page was last reviewed 14 April 2026. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
