Small-for-Gestational-Age Fetus and a Growth Restricted Fetus, Investigation and Care (Green-top Guideline No. 31) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Small-for-Gestational-Age Fetus and a Growth Restricted Fetus, Investigation and Care (Green-top Guideline No. 31) 
Small-for-Gestational-Age Fetus and a Growth Restricted Fetus, Investigation and Care (Green-top Guideline No. 31) 
Green-top Guideline No.31 
Collapse 
Access the HTML version 
Access the PDF version 
Summary 
A fetus is considered SGA when individual biometric measurements or a combination of measurements used to estimate fetal weight fall below set parameters and requires accurate assessment of gestational age. Commonly, the definition of SGA refers to a fetus with a predicted weight or an abdominal circumference (AC) measurement less than the 10th centile. SGA at birth is commonly diagnosed based on a birthweight below the 10th centile and often birthweight charts are adjusted for the sex of the baby.  
Fetal growth restriction (FGR) implies a pathological restriction of the genetic growth potential. Some, but not all, growth restricted fetuses/infants are SGA. The likelihood of FGR is higher in fetuses that are smaller. Growth restricted fetuses may manifest evidence of fetal compromise (abnormal Doppler studies, reduced liquor volume). Defining FGR and thus diagnosing it in a current pregnancy is challenging because of the need to determine growth potential. Similarly, risk assessing whether FGR existed in a previous pregnancy presents a different challenge. There is a need to focus on those fetuses at risk of adverse outcome and thus those that are FGR rather than SGA using varying parameters such as sequential ultrasound measurements, Doppler assessments, and biomarkers. 
The purpose of this guideline is to provide advice that is based on the best evidence available to guide clinicians, regarding the investigation and care of the small–for–gestational age fetus and fetal growth restricted fetus. The guideline reviews the risk factors for these conditions and provides recommendations regarding surveillance, diagnosis, and management, including recommendations for fetal monitoring and birth.  
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the third edition of the guideline. The review process will commence in 2027, unless otherwise indicated. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Declarations of interest are stated within the guideline document.  
This page was last reviewed 14 May 2024. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
