Placenta Praevia and Placenta Accreta: Diagnosis and Management (Green-top Guideline No. 27a) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Placenta Praevia and Placenta Accreta: Diagnosis and Management (Green-top Guideline No. 27a) 
Placenta Praevia and Placenta Accreta: Diagnosis and Management (Green-top Guideline No. 27a) 
Green-top guideline No. 27a 
Collapse 
Access the web version of the guideline on Wiley 
Access the PDF version of the guideline 
Summary 
Placenta praevia and placenta accreta are associated with high maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality. The rates of placenta praevia and accreta have increased and will continue to do so as a result of rising rates of caesarean deliveries, increased maternal age and use of assisted reproductive technology (ART), placing greater demands on maternity-related resources. The highest rates of complication for both mother and newborn are observed when these conditions are only diagnosed at delivery. 
Determining placental location is one of the first aims of routine midpregnancy (18+6 to 21+6 weeks of gestation) transabdominal obstetric ultrasound examination. A recent multidisciplinary workshop of the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine suggests that the term ‘placenta praevia’ is used when the placenta lies directly over the internal os. The estimated incidence of placenta praevia at term is 1 in 200 pregnancies. 
Placenta accreta is a spectrum disorder ranging from abnormally adherent to deeply invasive placental tissue. Diagnostic difficulties probably explain the current wide variation in reported prevalence of placenta accreta ranging between 1 in 300 and 1 in 2000 pregnancies, and highlight the need for a standardised approach to imaging, clinical and histopathological descriptions. 
The purpose of this guideline is to describe the diagnostic modalities and review the evidence-based approach to the clinical management of pregnancies complicated by placenta praevia and placenta accreta. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline was developed as part of the regular updates to programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the fourth edition of this guideline; the fifth edition is currently in development. 
Please note that the RCOG Guidelines Committee regularly assesses the need to update the information provided in this publication. Further information on this review is available on request. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Professor ERM Jauniaux: Professor in Obstetrics and Fetal Medicine, Professor Jauniaux is a departmental Graduate Tutor (taught) at the EGA Institute for Women's Health, Faculty of Population Health Sciences, University College London. Professor Jauniaux is the co-founder and trustee of Medical aid films [MAF] a UK-registered charity [no 1121578] which provides multi-media programs for medical education and training in developing countries (www.medicalaidfilms.org). In addition, Professor Jauniaux is the co-founder of Sonic Womb, a research collaboration with UCL which aims to understand and recreate the sound in utero in order to improve neonatal incubators for premature babies.  
Professor Z Alfirevic 
Mr AG Bhide: None declared.  
Professor MA Belfort   
Professor GJ Burton: None declared.  
Professor SL Collins: Professor Collins is the Vice Chairman of the International Society for Abnormally Invasive Placenta. 
Dr S Dornan 
Mr D Jurkovic 
Professor G Kayem: Professor Kayem is a member of the French Perinatal Society. Professor Kayem is also the co-director of Axis 2 “maternal morbidity” of the EPOPE team, and the the principle investigator of the PACCRETA and TOCOPROM projects funded by the French Health Ministry. 
Professor J Kingdom 
Professor R Silver 
Professor L Sentilhes: Professor Sentilhes receives lecture and consulting fees from Ferring, and lecture fees from Bayer, GSK and SIGVARIS. Professor Sentilhes is the main investigator of the TRAAP1 and TRAAP2 trials funded by the French Health Ministry. 
This page was last reviewed 27 September 2018. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
