Third- and Fourth-degree Perineal Tears, Management (Green-top Guideline No. 29) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Third- and Fourth-degree Perineal Tears, Management (Green-top Guideline No. 29) 
Third- and Fourth-degree Perineal Tears, Management (Green-top Guideline No. 29) 
Green-top Guideline No.29 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline 
Summary 
The reported rate of OASIS (in singleton, term, cephalic, vaginal first births) in England has tripled from 1.8% to 5.9% from 2000 to 2012. The overall incidence in the UK is 2.9% (range 0–8%), with an incidence of 6.1% in primiparae compared with 1.7% in multiparae. With increased awareness and training, there appears to be an increase in the detection of anal sphincter injuries. A trend towards an increasing incidence of third- or fourth-degree perineal tears does not necessarily indicate poor quality care. It may indicate, at least in the short term, an improved quality of care through better detection and reporting. 
Obstetricians who are appropriately trained are more likely to provide a consistent, high standard of anal sphincter repair and contribute to reducing the extent of morbidity and litigation associated with anal sphincter injury. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the third edition of this guideline; the fourth edition is currently in development. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Dr RJ Fernando : Mr Fernando has received speaker fees and travel grants from Astellas, AMS, Pfizer and Laborie unrelated to this topic. 
Mr AH Sultan : Mr Sultan has previously been a speaker for Astellas and Pfizer. He is the co-director of the Croydon perineal and anal sphincter trauma courses. 
Professor RM Freeman : Professor Freeman has received speaker fees from Astellas and Pfizer and has been on a European advisory board for Astellas. He has a patent/patents pending on Episcissors-60 as an inventor and is IUGA President. 
Dr AA Williams : Dr Williams is on the Astellas and Femeda medical advisory board and has received sponsorship/honorarium for speaker meetings from Pfizer and Astellas. 
Dr EJ Adams : None declared. 
This page was last reviewed 12 June 2015. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
