Vasa Praevia: Diagnosis and Management (Green-top Guideline 27b) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Vasa Praevia: Diagnosis and Management (Green-top Guideline 27b) 
Vasa Praevia: Diagnosis and Management (Green-top Guideline 27b) 
Green-top Guideline No. 27b 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline 
Access the web version of this paper 
Summary 
Vasa praevia occurs when the fetal vessels run through the free placental membranes. Unprotected by placental tissue or Wharton’s jelly of the umbilical cord, a vasa praevia is likely to rupture in active labour, or when amniotomy is performed to induce or augment labour, in particular when located near or over the cervix, under the fetal presenting part. Vasa praevia is classified as type I when the vessel is connected to a velamentous umbilical cord, and type II when it connects the placenta with a succenturiate or accessory lobe. 
Vasa praevia may be diagnosed during early labour by vaginal examination, detecting the pulsating fetal vessels inside the internal os, or by the presence of dark-red vaginal bleeding and acute fetal compromise after spontaneous or artificial rupture of the placental membranes. The fetal mortality rate in this situation is at least 60% despite urgent caesarean delivery. However, improved survival rates of over 95% have been reported where the diagnosis has been made antenatally by ultrasound followed by planned caesarean section. 
Vasa praevia is uncommon in the general population with a prevalence ranging between 1 in 1200 and 1 in 5000 pregnancies, although the condition may have been under-reported. 
The purpose of this guideline is to describe the diagnostic modalities and review the evidence-based approach to the clinical management of pregnancies complicated by vasa praevia. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the fourth edition of this guideline. 
Please note that the RCOG Guidelines Committee regularly assesses the need to update the information provided in this publication. Further information on this review is available on request. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Professor ERM Jauniaux: Professor in Obstetrics and Fetal Medicine, Professor Jauniaux is a departmental Graduate Tutor (taught) at the EGA Institute for Women's Health, Faculty of Population Health Sciences, University College London. Professor Jauniaux is the co-founder and trustee of Medical aid films [MAF] a UK-registered charity [no 1121578] which provides multi-media programs for medical education and training in developing countries (www.medicalaidfilms.org). In addition, Professor Jauniaux is the co-founder of Sonic Womb, a research collaboration with UCL which aims to understand and recreate the sound in utero in order to improve neonatal incubators for premature babies. 
Professor Z Alfirevic 
Mr AG Bhide: None declared. 
Professor GJ Burton: None declared. 
Professor SL Collins: Professor Collins is the Vice Chairman of the International Society for Abnormally Invasive Placenta. 
Professor R Silver 
This page was last reviewed 27 September 2018. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
