Female Genital Mutilation and its Management (Green-top Guideline No. 53) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Female Genital Mutilation and its Management (Green-top Guideline No. 53) 
Female Genital Mutilation and its Management (Green-top Guideline No. 53) 
Green-top Guideline No.53 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline 
Summary: Female genital mutilation, also known as ‘female genital cutting’, ‘female genital mutilation/cutting’ or ‘cutting’, refers to ‘all procedures involving partial or total removal of the external female genitalia or other injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons’. FGM is practised for a variety of complex reasons, usually in the belief that it is beneficial for the girl. It has no health benefits and harms girls and women in many ways. FGM is a human rights violation and a form of child abuse, breaching the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, and is a severe form of violence against women and girls. 
The purpose of this guideline is to provide evidence-based guidance on the management of women with female genital mutilation (FGM) and those who are considered to be at risk. It covers the clinical care of women before, during and after pregnancy, including the legal and regulatory responsibilities of health professionals. The focus of this guideline is on practice in the UK. Although much of the content is applicable to all four constituent countries, the regulatory framework in  Scotland  and  Northern Ireland  differs to that described here. 
For a global perspective on FGM, further information is available from  other sources . 
COVID disclaimer: This guideline was developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history: This is the second edition of this guideline. 
The RCOG is supportive of further research into the role of reconstructive surgery for women affected by FGM. The RCOG Guidelines Committee reviewed this guideline in September 2023 and a partial update of the guideline is now under development. 
Developer declaration of interests: 
Dr NM Low-Beer : None declared. 
Professor SM Creighton : Professor Creighton is a founder member of the Female Genital Mutilation Clinical Group. She is a member of the RCOG FGM Task Force. She has provided ad hoc, unpaid clinical and strategic advice on FGM to the Department of Health, Home Office, Director of Public Prosecutions, Health Education England, NHS London and NHS England. 
This page was last reviewed 10 June 2015. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
