Assisted Vaginal Birth (Green-top Guideline No. 26) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Assisted Vaginal Birth (Green-top Guideline No. 26) 
Assisted Vaginal Birth (Green-top Guideline No. 26) 
Green-top Guideline No.26 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline on Wiley 
Access the web version of the guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
The aim of this guideline is to provide evidence-based recommendations on the use of forceps and vacuum extraction for both rotational and non-rotational operative vaginal births. In order to provide safe care for the full range of clinical scenarios, obstetricians should develop competency in the use of both vacuum and forceps for non-rotational birth and at least one specialist technique for rotational birth. The scope of this guideline includes indications, procedures and governance issues relating to operative vaginal birth. 
Two new developments have occurred since the publication of the 2011 guideline: i) the Montgomery ruling has emphasised the importance of informed consent; and ii) a number of high profile manslaughter convictions on the grounds of gross negligence have highlighted the risk of a criminal conviction, where serious shortcomings are identified in medical care provided to a patient who dies. The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) has also received reports of a number of neonatal fatalities associated with traumatic birth-related injuries. It is in this context that the safety aspects of this guideline have been reviewed and updated. 
Update June 2023: 
Following several recent adverse incidents, the College wishes to remind clinicians of their key obligations to promote the safe use of Kielland's rotational forceps. 
Assisted vaginal birth promotes benefits to both mother and the baby when used appropriately and safely. We have no doubt that clinicians use Kielland’s forceps with a high degree of caution, and respect the skill and expertise required to facilitate a safe birth. Misuse or incorrect application of Kielland’s forceps can, however, result in serious complications for both mother and baby. 
Rotational births using Kielland’s forceps should only be performed by experienced operators or under the direct supervision of an experienced operator. The operator is required to define fetal head position and identify the position of the occiput correctly, in order to safely undertake a rotational birth. In this regard, an ultrasound assessment of the fetal head position prior to application of forceps is more reliable than clinical examination and is advisable. 
While ultrasound scan is not directly mandated prior to all assisted births, it should be noted that recent concerns arose following inaccurate assessment of the fetal head position by clinicians prior to starting the procedure. Procedure should also be discontinued where rotation is not easily achieved with gentle pressure, after confirming correct application. 
RCOG Green-top Guideline No. 26 on Assisted Vaginal Birth , published in 2020, provides the evidence-based recommendations to support practitioners around use of instruments for assisted vaginal births, and promotes support for the availability of intrapartum ultrasonography for clinicians in their daily practice. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the fourth edition of this paper. The Guidelines Committee reviewed this edition in September 2024 and it was agreed to extend the guideline for two years. The next review process will commence in 2026, unless otherwise indicated. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Dr DJ Murphy:  personal fees from legal expert reports during the conduct of the study. 
Dr R Bahl:  none declared. 
Dr BK Strachan:  none declared. 
This page was last reviewed 29 April 2020. 
Clinical content hub 
Collapse 
We have developed a hub of audio versions, bitesize video summaries and infographics based on our Green-top Guidelines and Scientific Impact Papers. 
Access the extra content 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
