Amniocentesis and Chorionic Villus Sampling (Green-top Guideline No. 8) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Amniocentesis and Chorionic Villus Sampling (Green-top Guideline No. 8) 
Amniocentesis and Chorionic Villus Sampling (Green-top Guideline No. 8) 
Published: 25 October 2021 
Green-top Guideline No. 8 
Collapse 
Access the web version of this guideline on Wiley 
Access the PDF version of this guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
Pregnant women are offered amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS) for prenatal diagnosis for a variety of reasons including a higher chance aneuploidy screening result, fetal structural anomaly, or a known risk of inherited genetic disease. 
CVS is usually performed between 11 +0  and 13 +6  weeks of gestation. If required, CVS can be performed between 14 +0  and 14 +6  weeks’ gestation. Individualised counselling of the merits of CVS versus amniocentesis should be provided for women considering CVS during this time period. Amniocentesis, performed to obtain amniotic fluid for analysis, is usually offered from 15 +0  weeks. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline was developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers (PDF) , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the fifth edition of this guideline. 
This guideline was reviewed in December 2024 and extended for 2 years. The review process will commence in 2026, unless otherwise indicated. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Dr K Navaratnam: None declared 
Professor Z Alfirevic:  None declared. 
Key points 
Women should be informed that the additional risk of miscarriage following amniocentesis or CVS performed by a skilled operator is likely to be below 0.5%. 
Amniocentesis should not be performed prior to 15 +0 weeks gestation. CVS should be performed between 11 +0  and 13 +6  weeks; it should not be performed prior to 10 +0  weeks gestation. 
Women with multiple pregnancies should be informed that the additional risk of miscarriage for twin pregnancy following CVS or amniocentesis performed by a skilled operator is around 1%. 
When an invasive test is considered, screening results for blood borne viruses, viral load and antigen test results should be reviewed and individualised risk of viral transmission should be discussed. 
Women considering amniocentesis or CVS should receive detailed counselling and pregnancy mapping by suitably trained healthcare professionals. 
Care for women who consent to have a CVS or amnioncentesis should be organised in accordance with National Screening Committee Standards. 
Clinical content hub 
Collapse 
We have developed a hub of audio versions, bitesize video summaries and infographics based on our Green-top Guidelines and Scientific Impact Papers. 
Access the extra content 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
