Recurrent Miscarriage (Green-top Guideline No. 17) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Recurrent Miscarriage (Green-top Guideline No. 17) 
Recurrent Miscarriage (Green-top Guideline No. 17) 
Published: 19 June 2023 
Access here 
Collapse 
Access the web version of the guideline on Wiley 
Access the PDF version of the guideline on Wiley 
The guideline provides comprehensive information on risk factors, recommended investigations and treatments for recurrent first trimester and one or more second trimester miscarriages. 
It also discusses provisions for the management of any subsequent miscarriages, in terms of women and people receiving appropriate supportive care via informed and empathetic communication with healthcare professionals, ultrasound examinations and prompt access to services. 
This guideline defines recurrent miscarriage as three or more first trimester miscarriages, in keeping with previous versions. However, clinicians are encouraged to use their clinical discretion to recommend extensive evaluation after two first trimester miscarriages, if there is a suspicion that the miscarriages are of pathological and not of sporadic nature. Furthermore, as the incidence of certain diagnoses does not appear to differ between women with consecutive versus non-consecutive losses, the definition in this guideline has not been restricted to women and people suffering with consecutive miscarriages only nor miscarriages suffered with the same partner, as certain maternal pathologies would be unaffected by the partner. 
To conclude, areas of uncertainty are highlighted along with recommendations for future research in this field. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline was developed as part of the regular programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers , and initiated prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the fourth edition of this guideline. 
Please note that the information provided in this update will be considered for update by the RCOG Guidelines Committee 3 years after publication, with an intermediate assessment of the need to update 2 years after publication. 
Developers’ declarations of interest 
Available on request. 
This page was last reviewed 19 June 2023. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
