Care of Women Presenting with Suspected Preterm Prelabour Rupture of Membranes from 24+0 Weeks of Gestation (Green-top Guideline No. 73) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Care of Women Presenting with Suspected Preterm Prelabour Rupture of Membranes from 24+0 Weeks of Gestation (Green-top Guideline No. 73) 
Care of Women Presenting with Suspected Preterm Prelabour Rupture of Membranes from 24+0 Weeks of Gestation (Green-top Guideline No. 73) 
Green-top Guideline No.73 
Collapse 
Access the web version of this guideline on Wiley 
Access the PDF version of the guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
Preterm prelabour rupture of membranes (PPROM) complicates up to 3% of pregnancies and is associated with 30-40% of preterm births. PPROM can result in significant neonatal morbidity and mortality, primarily from prematurity, sepsis, cord prolapse and pulmonary hypoplasia. In addition, there are risks associated with chorioamnionitis and placental abruption. 
This guideline comprises recommendations relating to the diagnosis, assessment, care and timing of birth of women presenting with suspected PPROM from 24 +0  to 36 +6  weeks of gestation. It also addresses care in a subsequent pregnancy. 
Update June 2022:  This guideline cites NICE guideline NG25 Preterm labour and birth, last updated August 2019, which recommends offering antenatal corticosteroids for up to 33 +6 weeks gestation and considering up to 35 +6 weeks gestation. In February 2022 the RCOG published  Green-top Guideline No 74: Antenatal Corticosteroids to reduce neonatal morbidity and mortality , which cites new evidence from the recent Cochrane systematic review on the topic, recommending antenatal corticosteroids to be offered up to 34 +6 weeks gestation with careful consideration of the benefits versus harms for use beyond this gestation. Please also refer to this guideline and associated enhanced content regarding the use of antenatal corticosteroids steroids in PPROM. 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline was developed as part of the regular updates to programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the first edition of this guideline. 
The guideline was reviewed in October 2024 and extended for 2 years. The review process will commence in 2026, unless otherwise indicated. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Dr A Thomson:  None declared. 
Summary graphic 
Read plain text below graphic. 
Diagnosis 
The diagnosis of spontaneous rupture of the membranes is made by maternal history followed by a sterile speculum examination. 
If, on speculum examination, no amniotic fluid is observed, clinicians should consider performing an insulin-like growth factorbinding protein 1 (IGFBP-1) or placental alpha microglobulin-1 (PAMG-1) test of vaginal fluid to guide further management. 
Assessments 
A combination of clinical assessment, maternal blood tests (C-reactive protein and white cell count) and fetal heart rate should be used to diagnose chorioamnionitis in women with PPROM; these parameters should not be used in isolation. 
Antibiotics, corticosteroids and magnesium sulfate 
An antibiotic (preferably erythromycin) should be given for 10 days or until the woman is in established labour (whichever is sooner) following the diagnosis of PPROM, and corticosteroids and magnesium sulfate, considered or offered. 
Expectant management 
Women whose pregnancy is complicated by PPROM who have no contraindications to continuing pregnancy should be offered expectant management until 37+0 weeks, as this is associated with better outcomes compared with early birth. Timing of birth should be discussed with each woman on a individual basis. 
Remember: 
Communicate with neonatologists 
Offer women and partners emotional support 
Tocolysis is not recommended 
Care at home may be appropriate for some women 
This page was last reviewed 18 June 2019. 
Clinical content hub 
Collapse 
We have developed a hub of audio versions, bitesize video summaries and infographics based on our Green-top Guidelines and Scientific Impact Papers. 
Access the extra content 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
