Diagnosis and Management of Ectopic Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 21) | RCOG 
Skip to main content 
You are currently using an unsupported browser which could affect the appearance and functionality of this website. Please consider upgrading to the latest version or using alternatives such as Mozilla Firefox , Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge . 
About us 
Courses and events 
News 
Journals 
RCOG Learning 
Register / Sign in 
Link to RCOG home 
Toggle Search 
Toggle Menu 
Register / Sign in 
For the public 
Back 
For the public 
RCOG engagement: Listening to patients 
RCOG Women's Network 
Maternal mental health - women's voices 
Women's Voices Involvement Panel (WVIP) 
Browse our patient information 
Patient information for consultation 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Translated patient information 
A-Z of medical terms 
About your doctor 
Menopause and later life 
Careers and training 
Back 
Careers and training 
Your O&G career 
Workforce 
Research 
SAS and LE doctors 
Awards, grants and prizes 
Training 
Trainee ePortfolio 
RCOG Learning 
Courses and events 
Curriculum 
Resources and support for trainers 
More 
Exams 
MRCOG: Our specialty training exam 
Book an exam 
DRCOG: Our Diploma exam 
CPD & revalidation 
The CPD framework 
CPD ePortfolio 
Revalidation 
Appraisal 
CPD registration 
More 
Guidance 
Back 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Coronavirus (COVID-19), pregnancy and women’s health 
Library services 
Patient safety 
Green-top Guidelines 
Reproducing RCOG guidance and patient information 
Coronavirus 
Resources to inform and support clinicians 
Read the guidance 
Membership 
Back 
Membership 
Fellows and Members 
Trainees 
RCOG Associates 
Retired Fellows and Members 
Benefits of RCOG membership 
We provide tailored benefits depending on your career stage 
How membership fees support our mission 
The revenue we receive from membership fees supports our strategic objectives 
Membership fees and payment FAQs 
Answers to frequently asked questions 
Membership fees FAQs 
Search 
Search the site 
Search 
You are here: 
Home 
Guidance 
Browse all guidance 
Green-top Guidelines 
Diagnosis and Management of Ectopic Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 21) 
Diagnosis and Management of Ectopic Pregnancy (Green-top Guideline No. 21) 
Green-top Guideline No. 21 
Collapse 
Access the PDF version of the guideline on Wiley 
Access the web version of this guideline on Wiley 
Summary 
An ectopic pregnancy is any pregnancy implanted outside of the endometrial cavity. In the UK, the incidence is approximately 11/1000 pregnancies, with an estimated 11 000 ectopic pregnancies diagnosed each year. This guideline will cover the following ectopic pregnancies: tubal, cervical, caesarean scar, interstitial, cornual, ovarian, abdominal and heterotopic. The diagnosis and management of pregnancy of unknown location will not be covered. 
Unfortunately, women still die from ectopic pregnancy, with six maternal deaths reported between 2006 and 2008. However, the case fatality rate has decreased over recent years, suggesting that earlier diagnosis and treatment may have made an impact. 
Risk factors for ectopic pregnancy include tubal damage following surgery or infection, smoking and in vitro fertilisation. However, the majority of women with an ectopic pregnancy have no identifiable risk factor. 
Update June 2022: An update of this guideline is currently in development, which will address the Healthcare Safety Investigation Branch (HSIB) recommendations published in the 2020 report The diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy . 
COVID disclaimer 
This guideline was developed as part of the regular updates to programme of Green-top Guidelines, as outlined in our document  Developing a Green-top Guideline: Guidance for developers , and prior to the emergence of COVID-19. 
Version history 
This is the first edition of this guideline; the second edition is currently in development. 
Developer declaration of interests 
Ms CJ Elson  FRCOG, London: Ms Elson is a medical advisor and volunteer for the Ectopic Pregnancy Trust. 
Mr R Salim  MRCOG, London: None declared. 
Miss N Potdar  MRCOG, Leicester: None declared. 
Ms M Chetty  MRCOG, Edinburgh: None declared. 
Miss JA Ross  FRCOG, London: Ms Ross is a medical advisor to the Ectopic Pregnancy Trust and a member of the Association of Early Pregnancy Units. She receives payments for running courses sponsored by Cook UK. 
Ms EJ Kirk  MRCOG, London: Ms Kirk is coordinator of the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology Special Interest Group in Implantation and Early Pregnancy, is on the executive committee of the Association of Early Pregnancy Units and is a medical advisor to the Ectopic Pregnancy Trust. 
This page was last reviewed 04 November 2016. 
Join the conversation 
Facebook 
Instagram 
LinkedIn 
Jobs 
RCOG Shop 
Contact us 
10–18 Union Street 
London 
SE1 1SZ 
UK 
T +44 20 7772 6200 
Support our work around the world by making a donation 
Donate now 
Registered charity no. 213280 
Accessibility 
Privacy policy 
Terms & conditions 
Equality, diversity and inclusion 
Site Map 
Top
