EULAR/PRES recommendations for vaccination of paediatric patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases: update 2021 | Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases 
Skip to main content 
Viewing from: Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine 
Intended for healthcare professionals 
Log In 
More 
Log in via Institution 
Log in via OpenAthens 
Log in using your username and password 
For personal accounts OR managers of institutional accounts 
Username * 
Password * 
Forgot your log in details? Register a new account? 
Forgot your user name or password? 
Basket 
Search 
More 
Search for this keyword 
Advanced search 
Search for this keyword 
Advanced search 
Close 
Log in 
More 
Log in via Institution 
Log in via OpenAthens 
Log in using your username and password 
For personal accounts OR managers of institutional accounts 
Username * 
Password * 
Forgot your log in details? Register a new account? 
Forgot your user name or password? 
BMJ Journals 
More 
You are viewing from: Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine 
You are here 
Home 
Archive 
Volume 82, Issue 1 
EULAR/PRES recommendations for vaccination of paediatric patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases: update 2021 
Email alerts 
Article Text 
Article menu 
Article 
Text 
Article 
info 
Citation 
Tools 
Share 
Rapid Responses 
Article 
metrics 
Alerts 
PDF 
Recommendation 
EULAR/PRES recommendations for vaccination of paediatric patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases: update 2021 
Free 
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6969-8759 Marc H A Jansen 1 , 2 , 
Christien Rondaan 3 , 
Geertje E Legger 2 , 4 , 
Kirsten Minden 5 , 6 , 
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4655-1652 Yosef Uziel 7 , 
Natasa Toplak 2 , 8 , 
Despoina Maritsi 9 , 
Lotte van den Berg 10 , 
Guy A M Berbers 11 , 
Patricia Bruijning 12 , 
Yona Egert 13 , 
Christophe Normand 14 , 
Marc Bijl 15 , 
Helen E Foster 16 , 
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8939-5763 Isabelle Koné-Paut 17 , 
Carine Wouters 18 , 
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9658-0385 Angelo Ravelli 2 , 19 , 20 , 
Ori Elkayam 21 , 
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9548-5562 Nicolaas M Wulffraat 1 , 2 , 
Marloes W Heijstek 2 , 22 
1 
Department of Paediatric Immunology & Rheumatology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital , University Medical Center Utrecht , Utrecht , The Netherlands
2 
RITA , European Reference Networks , Brussels , Belgium
3 
Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention , University Medical Centre Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands
4 
Department of Paediatric Rheumatology, Beatrix Children's Hospital , University Medical Center Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands
5 
Department of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, Immunology and Critical Care Medicine , Charité Universitätsmedizin , Berlin , Germany
6 
Epidemiology Unit , German Rheumatism Research Centre , Berlin , Germany
7 
Paediatric Rheumatology Unit, Department of Paediatrics , Meir Medical Center , Kfar Saba , Israel
8 
Department of Allergology, Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology , University Children's Hospital , Ljubljana , Slovenia
9 
Infectious Diseases, Immunology and Rheumatology Unit, Department of Paediatrics , Kyriakou Children’s Hospital, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens , Athens , Greece
10 
Dutch JIA Patient and Parent Organisation (JVN), Member of ENCA , Amsterdam , The Netherlands
11 
Centre for Infectious Disease Control Netherlands, Laboratory for Infectious Diseases and Screening , National Institute of Public Health and the Environment (RIVM) , Bilthoven , The Netherlands
12 
Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care , University Medical Center Utrecht , Utrecht , The Netherlands
13 
European Network Childhood Arthritis (ENCA) Patient Organisation , Judea and Samaria Area , Israel
14 
MCI Secretariat , European Network for Children with Arthritis (ENCA) , Geneva , Switzerland
15 
Department of Internal Medicine and Rheumatology , Martini Hospital Groningen , Groningen , The Netherlands
16 
Population and Health Institute , Newcastle University , Newcastle upon Tyne , UK
17 
Department of Paediatric Rheumatology and CEREMAIA , Hôpital Bicêtre, AP HP, Université Paris Saclay , Paris , France
18 
Division of Paediatric Rheumatology , University Hospitals Leuven , Leuven , Belgium
19 
Department of Rheumatology, Direzione Scientifica , IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini , Genova , Italy
20 
Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Riabilitazione, Oftalmologia, Genetica e Scienze Materno-Infantili (DINOGMI), Università degli Studi di Genova , Genoa , Italy
21 
Department of Rheumatology , Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center and the Sackler faculty of medicine, Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv , Israel
22 
Department of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology , University Medical Center Utrecht , Utrecht , The Netherlands
Correspondence to 
Dr Marc H A Jansen, Department of Paediatric Immunology & Rheumatology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; m.h.a.jansen{at}umcutrecht.nl 
Abstract 
Objectives Recent insights supporting the safety of live-attenuated vaccines and novel studies on the immunogenicity of vaccinations in the era of biological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs in paediatric patients with autoimmune/inflammatory rheumatic diseases (pedAIIRD) necessitated updating the EULAR recommendations. 
Methods Recommendations were developed using the EULAR standard operating procedures. Two international expert committees were formed to update the vaccination recommendations for both paediatric and adult patients with AIIRD. After a systematic literature review, separate recommendations were formulated for paediatric and adult patients. For pedAIIRD, six overarching principles and seven recommendations were formulated and provided with the level of evidence, strength of recommendation and Task Force level of agreement. 
Results In general, the National Immunisation Programmes (NIP) should be followed and assessed yearly by the treating specialist. If possible, vaccinations should be administered prior to immunosuppressive drugs, but necessary treatment should never be postponed. Non-live vaccines can be safely given to immunosuppressed pedAIIRD patients. Mainly, seroprotection is preserved in patients receiving vaccinations on immunosuppression, except for high-dose glucocorticoids and B-cell depleting therapies. Live-attenuated vaccines should be avoided in immunosuppressed patients. However, it is safe to administer the measles–mumps–rubella booster and varicella zoster virus vaccine to immunosuppressed patients under specific conditions. In addition to the NIP, the non-live seasonal influenza vaccination should be strongly considered for immunosuppressed pedAIIRD patients. 
Conclusions These recommendations are intended for paediatricians, paediatric rheumatologists, national immunisation agencies, general practitioners, patients and national rheumatology societies to attain safe and effective vaccination and optimal infection prevention in immunocompromised pedAIIRD patients. 
Vaccination 
Autoimmune Diseases 
Arthritis, Juvenile 
Biological Therapy 
Immune System Diseases 
https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2022-222574 
Statistics from Altmetric.com 
Vaccination 
Autoimmune Diseases 
Arthritis, Juvenile 
Biological Therapy 
Immune System Diseases 
Introduction 
Patients with autoimmune/auto-inflammatory rheumatic diseases (AIIRD) have an increased risk of infections caused by the disease itself and/or by the treatment with immunomodulating or immunosuppressive drugs. 1–5 Infection prevention is therefore vital in the management of patients with AIIRD. 
Vaccinations play an important role in infection prevention. 6–8 Paediatric patients with AIIRD (pedAIIRD) are offered vaccines via National Immunisation Programmes (NIPs) in order to prevent infections. However, a one-size-fits-all NIP is suboptimal for infection prevention in pedAIIRD patients because additional vaccinations may be required due to specific infection risks, whereas live-attenuated vaccines might be contraindicated in specific circumstances. Also, vaccinations may be less effective and timing of vaccination in relation to treatment and disease activity may be warranted. Therefore, pedAIIRD patients require a tailor-made vaccination schedule, taking their disease activity, treatment, infection risk, vaccine safety and efficacy into account. 
The EULAR developed the first set of recommendations for the vaccination of pedAIIRD patients in 2011. 9 These recommendations were based on 27 manuscripts specifically addressing paediatric patients. No data were available on the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, only one paper was available on pneumococcal vaccine 10 and information on the safety and immunogenicity of live-attenuated vaccines was scarce. 11 In addition, there were hardly any studies on the effect of biological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (bDMARDs) on the immunogenicity of vaccinations. Most of the recommendations were based on extrapolation of data from adult AIIRD patients to the paediatric population. Since 2011, the amount of evidence on the safety and immunogenicity of vaccinations in pedAIIRD patients has doubled and the level of evidence (LoE) has increased. The safety of the live-attenuated measles–mumps–rubella (MMR) and varicella zoster virus (VZV) vaccines has been studied in pedAIIRD patients, including patients using methotrexate (MTX) and bDMARDs. Also, data on the safety and immunogenicity of the HPV vaccine in pedAIIRD patients has been published, as well as data on long-term immunogenicity of certain vaccines. The use of bDMARDs has increased, for example, up to 25% of the patients with JIA 12 and up to 100% of patients with systemic JIA use bDMARDs nowadays. 13 14 Therefore, data on immunogenicity in relation to biologicals (mainly tumour necrosis factor inhibitors (TNFi)) have become available. This new evidence and the emergence of new drugs (targeted synthetic (ts)DMARDs) urged us to update the EULAR recommendations for the vaccination of pedAIIRD. 
Recent studies on the safety and immunogenicity of COVID-vaccinations have been published in adults with AIIRD and in healthy adolescents. 15 16 Studies on the safety, efficacy and immunogenicity of the recently introduced COVID-19 vaccination in children with pedAIIRD are in progress. It is planned to develop separate recommendations specific on COVID-19 vaccines in pedAIIRD in the near future. 
The target-users for these updated EULAR recommendations are healthcare professionals involved in the management and vaccination of pedAIIRD patients, including paediatricians, paediatric rheumatologists, general practitioners, nurses, pharmacists and primary healthcare professionals involved in the execution of the NIPs. These recommendations also aim to inform patients and families as an integral part of informed/shared decision-making. 
Methods 
Steering committee and task force 
The present update of the EULAR recommendations was a partially combined project for paediatric and adult patients with AIIRD. It was constructed using the updated EULAR standard operating procedures from 2016, including adherence to the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research & Evaluation II recommendations. 17 After approval of the EULAR executive committee, the convenor (NMW) and methodologist (MWH) of the recommendations for vaccination of pedAIIRD patients along with the convenor of the recommendations for adult AIIRD patients (OE) formed a steering committee to update the 2011 EULAR recommendations. The steering group outlined the methodology to be used for these novel recommendations and assembled two Task Forces; one to establish the recommendations for the paediatric AIIRD patients described in the current paper and one for the adult AIIRD patients described elsewhere. 4 The paediatric Task Force consisted of 20 international experts (expert paediatric and adult rheumatologists, biologists, epidemiologists, immunologists and multiple patient representatives overall representing 9 countries. 
MJ, MWH and CR were in charge of the systematic literature research (SLR). The results of the SLR are being published separately (manuscript accepted by Frontiers). The search focused on the safety, immunogenicity and efficacy of vaccinations in pedAIIRD patients and the effect of (b)DMARDS and glucocorticoids. The steering committee organised a 1-day meeting of the Task Force. Prior to this meeting, all experts independently graded literature on methodological quality and LoE. Each paper was evaluated by at least three experts. Data were extracted and LoE were determined using the standards of the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine. During the 1-day meeting, the Task Forces on paediatric and adult AIIRD jointly discussed available evidence gathered from the systematic literature reviews, since the results of studies in adult patients may sometimes be extrapolated to paediatric patients and vice versa. Subsequently, separate recommendations were formulated for paediatric and adult patients. For pedAIIRD, six overarching principles and seven recommendations were formulated. 
Each of the recommendations was graded based on the data from the SLRs following the standards of the Oxford Centre for Evidence Based Medicine. Subsequently, a second meeting was held at the end of 2021 to perform a closed Delphi voting procedure. In this meeting the final version of the principles and recommendations was formulated. Additionally, the level of agreement was determined with a reach from 0 (no agreement) to 10 (absolute agreement) for each recommendation. Recommendations on which the agreement was below 7.5 were removed. 
The ﬁnal manuscript was drafted after the second online meeting, reviewed, revised and approved by all Task Force members, followed by ﬁnal review and approval by the EULAR Executive Committee before submission to the journal. 
Definitions 
It should be kept in mind that most studies evaluate the immunogenicity of vaccines (ability to induce humoral and cellular immune responses after vaccination) rather than efficacy, meaning the effect of vaccination on infection rates (ie, vaccine efficacy). In the current SLR, some studies describe the occurrence of vaccine-preventable infections after vaccinations. Still, most studies evaluate the immunogenicity of vaccines as a surrogate primary endpoint. For some vaccines there is a good correlation between pathogen-specific antibody levels and protection against infection (measles, rubella, tetanus, meningococci, hepatitis A and B), but for other vaccines this correlate of protection is less clear, for example, HPV and pertussis. 18 
Safe vaccination implies that vaccines have no severe adverse effects, do not aggravate the underlying disease and do not cause infections in case of live-attenuated vaccines. These three aspects of vaccine safety will be discussed throughout the recommendations. 
Terminology of medications has changed in comparison to the previous recommendations. It was decided to use the same terminology for DMARDs as proposed recently, including conventional synthetic (cs)DMARDs, tsDMARDs and bDMARDs. 19 Also, not all DMARDS used in paediatric rheumatology are immunosuppressive. Some drugs are ‘immunomodulatory’, while others are ‘immunosuppressive’ (eg, glucocorticoids and MMF). 20 We; therefore, clearly defined ‘immunosuppressive’ drugs, in line the previous 2011 recommendations and the 2019 update of EULAR recommendations for vaccination in adult patients. 
In the principles, we often use the term ‘immunosuppressed’ patients. We defined ‘immunosuppressed’ according to the following definitions, mainly based on expert opinion: In adults, prednisolone in a dose ≥2 mg/kg or a total of ≥20 mg/day during ≥2 weeks is considered a high-dose of glucocorticoids. 6 In the 2011 paediatric version of the recommendations, it was already noted that in children a prednisolone dose of 20 mg/day is often equivalent to dosages below 2 mg/kg per day. 9 Therefore, in the current updated recommendations, prednisolone is considered ‘immunosuppressive’ in children in a dose of ≥0.5 mg/kg/day for ≥2 weeks. The experts further defined patients as immunosuppressed when using csDMARDS in the following dosages: cyclosporine >2.5 mg/kg/day, azathioprine ≥3 mg/kg/day, cyclophosphamide orally >2.0 mg/kg/day, leflunomide ≥0.5 mg/kg/day, mycophenolate mofetil ≥30 mg/kg/day or >1000 mg/day, MTX ≥15 mg/m 2 /week or ≥25 mg/week, tacrolimus >1.5 mg/day). All patients were considered immunosuppressed when using bDMARDS or tsDMARDS. Finally, patients were considered immunosuppressed when using a combination of the abovementioned drugs, at any dose. 
Results 
Differences with the 2011 version of the recommendations 
New in these recommendations are the overarching principles that serve as the basis of this update. These principles are generic and concern essential aspects of vaccination of pedAIIRD patients, such as timing of vaccination, relation with immunosuppressive treatment, relation with NIPs and responsibilities. The overarching principles are separated from individual recommendations on specific vaccinations, patient groups or medications. Six overarching principles were formulated ( table 1 ). 
View this table: 
View inline 
View popup 
Table 1 
Overarching principles for vaccination in paediatric patients with AIIRD 
Also, in the previous version, the separate recommendations were grouped based on use of immunosuppressive drugs, non-live vaccines and live-attenuated vaccines. As this gave considerable overlap between the individual recommendations, some of the recommendations regarding immunosuppressive drugs were combined with the recommendations on specific vaccines (tetanus toxoid, TT) and others were shifted toward the overarching principles ( table 2 ). 
View this table: 
View inline 
View popup 
Table 2 
Recommendations per vaccine in paediatric patients with AIIRD 
Finally, the grade of recommendation could be increased based on new data on safety (MMR and VZV vaccine) and immunogenicity (pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) and HPV vaccine). The Delphi voting procedure showed high levels of agreement; none of the recommendations had a level of agreement below 7.5. 
Overarching principles 
Principle 1: the vaccination status, indications for vaccinations in addition to the NIP, and indications for withholding NIP vaccinations should be assessed yearly by the treating specialist in pedAIIRD 
This new principle has been given a prominent place within the recommendation. Optimal vaccination of pedAIIRD patients cannot be guaranteed when it is unclear who is responsible, as is shown by the low vaccination rate in pedAIIRD patients. 21 22 As the treating physician or nurse specialists have extensive expertise on the entire disease spectrum and its treatment, the committee considers it crucial that the treating physician is in charge. PedAIIRD patients are generally vaccinated according to the NIPs, which differ between countries as these programmes take into account local epidemiology, programmatic issues, resources and policies. However, some vaccines within the NIP may be contraindicated due to immunosuppressive treatments, whereas additional (booster) vaccinations may be required in specific patient groups. As the disease activity and its treatment changes over time, the vaccination status should be assessed regularly and at least yearly. The specialist should inform patients and their parents about the risk of infections, the indications for vaccinations and the possible adverse events (AEs) of vaccines to enable shared decision making between patients, their parents and their specialist. 
Principle 2: vaccinations should preferably be administered during quiescent disease 
The timing of vaccination in pedAIIRD patients in relation to disease activity was not discussed in the previous recommendation, but it is an important uncertainty in daily clinical practice and is therefore included as one of the main principles of these recommendations. The effect of disease activity on the safety and efficacy of vaccines has not been studied in detail. Most studies assessed the effect of immunosuppressive drugs on the safety and immunogenicity of vaccines rather than the effect of disease activity. Also, patients with high disease activity are often excluded from vaccination studies. Only two studies primarily assessed the effect of disease activity on vaccination-induced immunological responses. One prospective study in 110 patients with juvenile onset systemic lupus erythematosus (jSLE) showed that an SLE Disease Activity Index (SLEDAI) >8 was associated with lower seroconversion rates after H1N1 vaccination. 23 Also, in 30 jSLE patients vaccinated with the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV-23), those with higher SLEDAI scores responded less to vaccination, although there was no correction for the use of immunosuppressive drugs in this study. 24 In contrast, in 340 adult patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), higher disease activity did not impair H1N1 vaccination responses. 25 In conclusion, it is still largely unknown whether patients with high disease activity might be effectively and safely vaccinated. It is therefore the experts’ opinion to vaccinate during quiescent disease whenever possible, but there is no absolute contraindication to vaccinate during high disease activity. 
Principle 3: if possible, vaccinations should be administered 2–4 weeks prior to commencement of immunosuppression (especially B-cell depleting therapies), but necessary treatment should never be postponed 
In the previous recommendations, the timing of vaccination against pneumococci and influenza in relation to B-cell depleting therapy was discussed, as well as the timing of the live-attenuated varicella zoster virus (VZV) vaccine in relation to planned immune suppression. However, the importance of timing of vaccination is not restricted to these three vaccines or B-cell depleting therapy: it is essential for all vaccines administered via NIPs and for all DMARDs. Therefore, this overarching principle was formulated, including the statement that necessary treatment should never be postponed for the planning of vaccination. 
With regard to glucocorticosteroids, most patients included in the studies used low dosages of prednisolone (≤0.5 mg/kg/day or <20 mg/day). In such dosages, glucocorticosteroids had no detrimental effect on immunogenicity of vaccines or established antibody concentrations. In contrast, in pedAIIRD patients on dosages>20 mg/day, lower humoral responses were detected. 26 27 This was in line with data from adult AIIRD patients. From cDMARDS, MTX has most frequently been studied. In adult AIIRD, patients on MTX had reduced seroprotective antibodies after influenza vaccination, and an increased response was observed after 2 weeks withholding MTX 28 In children, MTX did not reduce antibody levels after influenza vaccination. 23 26 27 29–35 More recently, also the COVID-19 vaccination serological response appeared to be diminished by MTX in adult patients. 36 37 
Regarding bDMARDs, clear evidence is available for B-cell depleting therapies. Numerous studies in adult AIIRD patients showed lower to absent vaccine-induced humoral responses (PPSV-23, influenza vaccine, H1N1 vaccine) until 6 months after treatment. 4 In contrast, data on cellular immune response after rituximab (RTX), which might be more important for some infectious diseases, is scarce. In children, studies on B-cell depleting therapies are still limited. In a study on jSLE, nine patients received the PCV vaccination while on RTX. Of seven patients who received RTX within a window of 6 months prevaccination, six reached no protective antibody titers. 38 In another study, four jSLE patients on RTX were able to generate an adequate humoral immune responses on PPSV-23 vaccination, but the date of the last dose of RTX was not reported. 24 Based on these paediatric studies and more importantly the results in adult patients, the Task Force was convinced of the hampering effect of B-cell depleting therapies on humoral vaccine responses. Of other bDMARDS, TNFi were most frequently studied in children. Although these studies often showed that antibody titers were lower in patients on TNFi (in Meningococcal C, 39 influenza 33 34 and TT 40 ), the majority of pedAIIRD patients on TNFi reached protective antibody concentrations. 29 41–45 This is in line with results from studies in adult patients. A meta-analysis of 12 studies in patients with RA showed that TNFi did not impair the seroprotection rates to influenza (308 patients) and pneumococcal vaccines (258 patients). 46 Anti-interleukin 6 (IL6) treatment did not reduce humoral responses to influenza vaccination in 27 JIA patients 47 and to VZV vaccination in 2 JIA patients. 48 This was also shown for influenza, pneumococcal, and tetanus vaccines in adult patients with RA. 49–52 PPSV-23 titres in four paediatric patients on canakinumab were protective and IL-1 blockade did not seem to hamper seroprotection in seven patients after HAV vaccination. 53 54 The diphtheria and tetanus vaccination response of children on abatacept was adequate as well. 55 For other bDMARDS data are lacking in pedAIRD patients. 
A study with 155 patients with Kawasaki disease showed lower seroprotection rates and antibody titers in patients vaccinated with MMR within 9 months after intravenous immunoglobulin administration compared with controls. 56 This was unrelated to the amount of intravenous immunoglobulin doses. Patients who received the vaccination prior to intravenous immunoglobulin had equal titers compared with healthy controls. 56 It may therefore be considered to administer the MMR vaccination prior to (if clinically possible) or at least 9 months after intravenous immunoglobulins. 
In conclusion, the Task Force recommends that vaccines should be ideally administered before planned immunosuppression or immune modulating therapies to obtain optimal vaccination responses, especially B cell-depleting therapy. However, necessary immunosuppressive treatment should never be postponed due to vaccination. When in doubt, serological immune responses should be measured after vaccination and patients can be boostered accordingly. 
Principle 4: adhere to the NIPs and to general rules applying to travels’ vaccinations, except for live-attenuated vaccines in immunosuppressed (as detailed in Definitions) patients 
Throughout the previous recommendations it was recommended to adhere to NIPs, but this was indicated per vaccine and/or immunosuppressive drug. For clarity reasons the separate recommendations were combined into one overarching principle stating to adhere to NIP and travellers’ vaccinations advice, except for live-attenuated vaccines in immunosuppressed patients. This overarching principle was also formulated to emphasise the importance of following the NIP in order to improve vaccination coverage. Vaccination coverage is still very low in pedAIIRD patients, although these patients are at increased risk of contracting infections that can be prevented by vaccinations. 21 57 In 200 JIA patients complete vaccination according to schedule was identified in only 52% of patients at 2.5 years and 68% at 10.5 years of age. 21 This was largely caused by low MMR vaccine coverage at 2.5 years (58%). Another study reported a coverage rate for children on bDMARDs of only 46% compared with 65% for patients on csDMARDs and 84% for patients who never received immunosuppressive therapy. 58 For patients with autoinflammatory disease coverage numbers were even lower: complete immunisation according to the French vaccination programme was reached in only 32% of patients at 2 years, 28% at 7 years, 6% at 15 years. 57 In addition, coverage of vaccines indicated specifically for risk groups, such as the pneumococcal and influenza vaccine for patients with SLE is low. In American jSLE patients, who have an indication for pneumococcal vaccination, the uptake of the 13-valent PCV was 6.7% and PPSV-23 8.9%. 59 
Finally, this principle was formulated to highlight that specific considerations apply to live-attenuated vaccines in immunosuppressed patients. This is further explained in overarching principle 6 and the vaccine-specific recommendations. 
Principle 5: non-live vaccines can be administered to paediatric AIIRD patients on glucocorticosteroids or DMARD therapy 
This principle was modified from the initial version in 2011 and upgraded to the overarching principles based on the increasing amount of evidence of the overall safety and immunogenicity of vaccination during the use of glucocorticoids and/or csDMARD, bDMARD and tsDMARDs in a variety of paediatric rheumatic diseases. Vaccines against HPV, hepatitis A and B, meningococci C, pneumococci (PPSV-23 and PCV7, PCV10 or PCV13), seasonal influenza, tetanus and diphtheria have been studied in pedAIIRD patients. 23 24 26 27 29–35 38 41–44 47 53–55 60–77 These vaccines did not aggravate the underlying disease or cause severe AEs. The majority of studies showed acceptable immunogenicity of these vaccines in patients using glucocorticosteroids or DMARDS. 26 27 
Again, it should be kept in mind that most studies included patients with quiescent disease on relatively low-dose immunosuppressive drugs; the immunogenicity of non-live vaccines in high-dose immunosuppressive drugs may be hampered. Also, none of the studies was powered to study infection rates, the primary goal of vaccination. Nevertheless, for most vaccines humoral immune responses can be considered good surrogate markers for protection against infection. The consistency of the various studies on varying vaccines supports the recommendation that pedAIIRD patients on glucocorticosteroids and DMARDS can be safely vaccinated with non-live vaccines with a generally protective immune response. 
Principle 6: live-attenuated vaccines should be avoided in immunosuppressed pedAIIRD, except for the MMR booster and varicella vaccination under specific conditions 
Live-attenuated vaccines should be avoided in immunosuppressed patients because of the risk of infections with the attenuated pathogen. For example, a case report described a 3-month old infant born to a mother with Crohn’s disease using infliximab who had a lethal vaccination-induced mycobacterial infection after BCG vaccination. 78 Another patient using infliximab who was inadvertently vaccinated with the primary yellow fever (YF) vaccine developed fever and myalgia 1 week after vaccination, with a slight increase in transaminases and detectable viraemia. 79 
Exceptions to this principle are the live-attenuated MMR booster and varicella vaccination in patients treated with MTX and bDMARDs. This is further discussed in recommendation 5 and 6. 
Recommendations for non-live vaccines 
Recommendation 1: non-live seasonal influenza vaccination should be strongly considered for pedAIIRD on immunosuppressive therapies 
According to the previous recommendations, seasonal inﬂuenza vaccination should be considered in all pedAIIRD patients. Currently, the seasonal non-live influenza vaccination should be strongly considered in pedAIIRD patients treated on immunosuppressive therapies. These modifications are explained below. 
The seasonal influenza vaccination is not incorporated in the NIP and, therefore, only indicated for patients at risk for (complicated) influenza infections. Whether pedAIIRD patients are to be considered at risk is poorly studied, but the Task Force considers pedAIIRD patients using glucocorticosteroids or (b/ts)DMARDs at risk based on new data in line with previous results. In the 2011 version of the recommendations, data from adult AIIRD patients were extrapolated to paediatric patients. 9 Two retrospective studies in adult AIIRD showed an increased risk of admission for pneumonia or influenza (4.5%–7% vs 0.8%, OR 1.6) and for death by influenza (OR 2.7). 80 81 For the updated recommendation, a large retrospective cohort study in 46 030 adult RA patients showed an increased risk of influenza compared with matched healthy controls (1.33-fold higher risk), with a 2.75-fold increase in the incidence of complications in RA. 82 In addition, a study in 61 JIA patients which was performed during the months of peak occurrence of influenza infections in two consecutive years in Brazil, showed an incidence rate of 3.9–7.6 acute respiratory infections per 1000 child-days. Of these episodes, 26.6% were characterised as influenza-like illness, defined as fever plus at least one respiratory symptom and one constitutional symptom (headache, malaise, myalgia, sweat or chills, or fatigue). Disease was generally mild; only one patient developed a pneumonia. Unfortunately, no healthy controls were included and it is not mentioned in the study whether patients had to be admitted to the hospital. 31 Mainly based on the adult data, the experts consider (ped)AIIRD patients at risk of (severe) influenza infections. The Task Force added the restriction that this increased risk applies to patients treated with glucocorticosteroids or (b/ts)DMARDS, as no studies are performed in children with pedAIIRD without treatment. Also, studies on other infectious diseases, such as pneumococcal disease, show that this risk is more pronounced in patients on glucocorticosteroids or DMARDs. 6 83 84 
The word ‘strongly’ was added to this recommendation based on accumulating data on the safety and immunogenicity of the vaccine, as well as its efficacy in preventing influenza infections. The vaccine is well tolerated and induces a serological response that is associated with protection against infections. In patients with pedAIIRD, seroprotection rates were generally equal to healthy controls, except for patients using high-dose glucocorticoids 27 74 and for patients with jSLE, 23 especially those with high disease activity. 23 26 27 29–35 41 47 69 75 Likewise in patients on bDMARDs (TNFi and anti-IL6) seroprotection rates are equal compared with healthy controls, although in patients treated with TNFi, antibody titers tend to be lower and show a more rapid decline. 31 33 34 47 
The occurrence of influenza infection after vaccination (in other words, the efficacy of the vaccine) has been studied poorly in pedAIIRD patients. Only two studies reported on influenza infections after vaccination since 2011. In the first study with JIA patients, 1 out of 31 immunised JIA patients and 2 out of 14 non-immunised controls had influenza infection in the observational 6-month period postvaccination. 32 In the second previously mentioned study performed in 61 JIA patients in Brazil, influenza-like episodes were significantly more common in unvaccinated patients compared with vaccinated patients. 31 In addition, no positive influenza samples (out of 33 collected samples) were found during an influenza-like episode in immunised patients. In the current recommendation concerning adult patients, two large studies were added showing the effectiveness of seasonal influenza vaccination in SLE patients with a HR for hospitalisation of 0.82 (95% CI 0.73 to 0.92) and of 0.41 (95% CI 0.27 to 0.61) for death, 85 and in RA with a relative risk of influenza infection of 0.83 (95% CI 0.71 to 0.95). 86 
In conclusion, pedAIIRD patients on immunosuppression seem to be at risk of influenza infections and vaccination is safe and immunogenic, while it has been shown to be effective in preventing infections in adult AIIRD patients. This evidence led to the adjusted recommendation to strongly consider non-live seasonal influenza vaccination for pedAIIRD on immunosuppressive therapies. Live-attenuated influenza vaccine should be avoided in immunocompromised children. 
Recommendation 2: pneumococcal vaccination with PCV10 or PCV13 is recommended in all non-vaccinated pedAIIRD 
Streptococcus pneumoniae is a leading human pathogen with relatively high incidence affecting all age groups, and due to a high mortality, morbidity and expensive treatment, prevention against pneumococcal infections is WHO priority. 87–89 In the previous recommendations, it was stated that the pneumococcal vaccination can be considered in patients on high-dose immunosuppressive drugs or biological agents before therapy. This recommendation has now been modified, as the conjugated pneumococcal vaccine is included in the NIP in the majority of countries. The inclusion of PCV in the NIP is based on the high rates of invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD, ie, bacteraemia, meningitis or other infection of a normally sterile site) among young children, and the proven efficacy of the different PCV vaccines to prevent pneumococcal infections. 90 PCV proved to be effective in immunocompromised patients including AIIRD patients. After the introduction of PCV7 for all children, IPD caused by the seven serotypes had decreased by 90% (95% CI 77% to 96%) in immunocompromised persons of all ages, including AIIRD patients 91 and in an observational cohort of 497 adult RA and spondyloarthropathy patients, PCV7 reduced the risk of severe bacterial infection with approximately 45%. 92 The immunogenicity and safety of PCVs has also been shown in pedAIIRD patients, including patients on MTX and glucocorticosteroids. In addition, in the past 10 years accumulating data on bDMARDS have become available. Children using TNFi had equal seroprotection compared with controls, 43 but had lower antibody concentrations in one study. 10 The adequate safety and immunogenicity in pedAIIRD and the proven efficacy for all children has led to the recommendation to vaccinate all pedAIIRD patients with PCV10/13, if possible according to the NIP. 
The question remains whether pedAIIRD patients should additionally receive a booster vaccination with the PPSV-23 in addition to the PCV10/13 vaccination via the NIP. This vaccine includes capsular polysaccharides of 23 serotypes, is T-cell independent and induces poor or absent antibody responses in children <2 years of age. The indication for PPSV-23 is dependent on the risk of (severe) pneumococcal infections in pedAIIRD patients not captured by PCV10/13. It has been shown in Canada, that 27% of isolates causing IPD in immunocompromised persons were serotypes not covered by PCV13 that could be prevented by PPSV-23. 91 Unfortunately, no studies are yet available in pedAIIRD patients on the incidence of IPD. One study reported a higher risk of hospitalisation for bacterial infections in JIA (especially when using high-dose glucocorticosteroids), but this study was not limited to S. pneumoniae . 93 In addition there are no studies on the efficacy of the PPSV-23 in addition to PCV10/13 in pedAIIRD to prevent IPD. The PPSV-23 vaccine has been shown to be safe in pedAIIRD by studies including 27 JIA and 30 jSLE patients. 24 42 Immunogenicity was moderate: in one study adequate seroconversion for all serotypes was only obtained in 53% and 30% of the patients on MTX versus MTX and TNFi respectively, although 77% of the patients vs 86% of the healthy controls had seroprotective levels in another study in jSLE. 24 42 Two vaccinated patients, however, experienced respectively pneumonia (while on RTX) and pneumococcal invasive disease (while on TNFi), but unfortunately the subtype of the pneumococcal bacteria was not mentioned in the studies and therefore a vaccination failure cannot be stated nor ruled out. 38 42 
In contrast, in adults, two studies have shown an increased risk of (invasive) pneumococcal infections in AIIRD patients. One demonstrated that RA and SLE patients had higher rates of pneumococcal disease (rate ratio 4.4 (95% CI 3.8 to 5.2)) and IPD (rate ratio 7.1 (95% CI 4.9 to 10.1)), as well as patients on glucocorticosteroids or immunosuppressive drugs. 83 The second study compared the incidence of IPD in 20.427 patients with systemic autoimmune disorders with 3 973 048 immunocompetent controls. An increased risk in AIIRD patients was shown with an incidence rate ratio (IRR) of 4.1 (95% CI 1.5 to 11). 91 Patients using immunosuppressive treatment had an IRR of 3.9 (95% CI 2.1 to 7.3). Several studies assessed the risk of pneumococcal infections in specifically SLE patients. 94–98 The incidence of IPD in SLE patients was 16/100 000 person-years, which was 13 times higher compared with the regular Dutch population. 98 Besides the higher frequency of pneumococcal infections, these infections tend to be more severe in immunocompromised patients. 99 The efficacy of the PPSV-23 vaccine to prevent IPD has been proven in healthy adults, 100 as well as in immunocompromised patients including AIIRD patients in a population-based study. IPD incidence declined signiﬁcantly after PPSV-23 programme implementation (IRR 0.57, 95% CI 0.40 to 0.82). 91 
Due to this lack of data in children both on the occurrence of IPD and on the ability of the PPSV-23 vaccine to prevent pneumococcal disease in addition to PCV10/13, the Task Force decided after an intense discussion, that adding the PPSV-23-vaccinations to PCV10/13 cannot be recommended (yet) as standard care in all pedAIIRD. However, PPSV-23 can be considered in immunosuppressed patients or in SLE patients, as it is safe and immunogenic. It is then advised to administer the PPSV-23 vaccination every 5 years, in concordance with adult guidelines, in addition to PCV10/13. 
Importantly, there seems to be a safety issue of pneumococcal vaccination in patients with cryopyrin associated periodic syndrome (CAPS). 53 A case series of 18 paediatric and 50 adult CAPS patients, in which all but one was treated with canakinumab, showed severe reactions after PPSV-23 vaccination. Vaccine reactions occurred in 80% after PPSV-23 vaccination (compared with 0% after PCV10/13), including severe local reactions at time of vaccination, fever (50%) and CAPS flares (n=2). In this study, only in four patients PPSV-23 antibody levels were measured, and those were all protective. We, therefore, recommend to avoid PPSV-23 in CAPS. 
As in the 2011 version of the recommendations, PCV10/13 and PPSV-23 vaccination is recommended for patients with primary complement deficiencies and patients with functional asplenia as these patients have high risk of sepsis caused by pneumococci. 9 
In summary, PCV10/13 is recommended for all children including patients with pedAIIRD and, if PCV10/13 is included in the NIP, this programme can be followed. A 5-yearly PPSV-23 is not recommended as standard of care but can be considered in immunosuppressed patients and SLE patients. The taskforce recommends to avoid the PPSV-23 in CAPS due to safety reasons. 
Recommendation 3: tetanus vaccination should be administered in accordance with recommendations for the general population. In case of an indication for TT vaccination, passive immunisation is recommended for patients receiving B-cell depleting therapy in the past 6 months 
This recommendation is broadly similar to the 2011 version, but is modified in terms of the B-cell depleting therapy. Since 2011, four new studies on the seroprevalence of TT antibodies in pedAIIRD have been published (475 JIA patients, 30 jSLE patients). 40 55 61 101 Three studies showed lower to non-protective TT antibody concentrations in pedAIIRD patients several years after vaccination. Since the correlation between antibody concentrations and protection against tetanus infection is good in healthy children, these findings show that pedAIIRD may become unprotected against tetanus over time. 102 It is thus of utmost importance that booster TT vaccinations are administered to these patients when indicated. The TT vaccine is safe: no vaccine-related AEs were observed after DT vaccination. 55 
As it is also known from adult studies that humoral responses towards the TT vaccine with B-cell depleting therapy are severely hampered until 6 months after treatment, passive immunisation is recommended in these patients in case of indication for TT vaccination. 103 104 In the previous recommendations, passive immunisation was suggested, but given the evidence for lower antibody concentrations in pedAIIRD patients, this was rephrased into recommended. 
Recommendation 4: HPV vaccination should be strongly considered in non-vaccinated jSLE patients 
The HPV vaccine is administered to young adolescent girls via the NIP in most countries and it is an overarching principle to follow the NIP. Nevertheless, the experts opted for a specific recommendation on the HPV vaccine, to highlight the importance of this vaccine in SLE patients, like in the 2011 version of the recommendations. SLE patients have a higher risk of persistent (high-risk) HPV infections than healthy subjects, with a higher risk of squamous intraepithelial lesions and cervical cancer, as has been shown consistently by various groups in the world. 4 Therefore, protection against HPV infection is especially important in these patients. The HPV vaccine is 98%–100% effective against cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) caused by HPV16/18 in healthy women. 105 
No efficacy data are available from pedAIIRD patients, and a correlate of protection is still lacking. 18 However, all healthy vaccinated women protected against CIN had higher HPV16/18 antibody levels than those who had an infection, and therefore, antibody levels can be used as a surrogate marker. 18 Since 2011, four articles assessing the immunogenicity and safety of the HPV-vaccine in pedAIIRD have been published. 69–71 106 Antibody responses in JIA and IBD patients were broadly comparable to healthy controls. After the bivalent and quadrivalent HPV vaccine all but two out of 28 jSLE patients seroconverted, although 6 jSLE patients reported lower antibody concentrations compared with healthy controls. 69 70 The latter was also reported in a study in 39 adult SLE patients. 106 Another study including 34 adult SLE patients showed antibody concentrations comparable to a historical cohort of healthy controls. 107 The vaccine was generally well tolerated in children/adolescents, although one study in 22 jSLE patients reported 9 disease flares; unfortunately no unvaccinated control group was included in this study. 70 In contrast, an adult study reported no differences in disease activity between 50 vaccinated adult SLE patients and 50 SLE controls. 106 Importantly, population based studies have shown that the quadrivalent HPV vaccine was not associated with increased incidence of new-onset autoimmune disease in girls and women with other pre-existing autoimmune disease. 108 109 Based on the increased risk of persistent high-risk HPV infections and premalignant lesions in SLE patients, the good seroprotection rate after vaccination, the acceptable safety profile of the vaccine, despite the lack of efficacy data, HPV vaccination should be strongly considered in non-vaccinated jSLE patients. 
Recommendations for live-attenuated vaccines 
In line with the overarching principles, patients on (b-)DMARDs are considered immunosuppressed as defined in Definitions in the Methods section, and live-attenuated vaccines should be avoided in these patients. However, as stated in the previous recommendations, live-attenuated vaccines can be considered in patients using (b-)DMARDS on an individual base weighing the risk of infections versus the hypothetical risk of inducing infections by vaccination. For clarity, it is now indicated per vaccine whether deviations from the overarching principle can be considered. These recommendations only refer to systemic live-attenuated vaccines that are injected intramuscularly or subcutaneously and not to mucosal vaccines such as the live-attenuated influenza vaccine and rotavirus vaccine. Studies on the safety of these mucosal vaccines in immunosuppressed children are still lacking. 
Recommendation 5: (a) MMR booster vaccination can be administered to patients on MTX; (b) MMR booster can be considered in patients treated with low-dose glucocorticosteroids TNFi, anti-IL1 and anti-IL6 therapy 
The first part of the recommendation, MMR booster vaccination can be administered to patients on MTX is stronger compared with the recommendations in 2011 as the grade of recommendation increased from C to A. This is based on a randomised controlled trial on the safety of MMR-booster vaccination in 137 JIA patients including 60 using MTX (median dose 11 mg/m 2 /week) and 15 on TNFi. 110 MMR booster vaccination did not induce disease flares, and no infections with the attenuated viruses were noted. All patients showed a significant increase in antibody concentrations. As the correlation between measles and rubella-specific antibody concentrations and protection against infection is good, these patients are considered to be seroprotected. 111 
Also in other studies in pedAIIRD patients, the immunogenicity of the MMR vaccines was generally good and comparable to patients without (b-)DMARDs. 40 101 110 However, the persistence of these antibodies may be shorter in pedAIIRD patients, as was shown for mumps, 40 63 101 112–114 rubella 101 112 and in one study in SLE patients for measles, 115 although other studies could not confirm the accelerated decline in antibodies for measles. 40 61 101 
For the second part of the recommendation, MMR booster can be considered in patients treated with low-dose glucocorticosteroids TNFi, anti-IL1 and anti-IL6 therapy, the LoE and grade of recommendation are much lower (LoE 4, grade C). In the past 10 years, several studies reporting on MMR vaccine-related AEs included patients vaccinated while on these bDMARDs, most often TNFi (n=123) and a smaller number on anti-IL1 (n=26) and anti-IL6 (n=6). 110 116–118 In a large multinational study (n=234 patients) focusing on safety of the MMR booster vaccine in pedAIIRD patients on bDMARDs, no vaccine-induced infections were observed and 13 mild AE were reported, consisting of local skin reaction, influenza-like symptoms, fever and pain, and none had moderate or severe AE. 117 Also in the other studies no vaccine-induced infections or severe AEs were documented indicating that these vaccines may be safely administered, although the LoE is too low for definite conclusions regarding safety. 
Recommendation 6: (a) VZV vaccination should be strongly considered in varicella vaccination/infection naïve patients on MTX (b) VZV vaccination can be considered in varicella vaccination/infection naïve patients on low-dose glucocorticosteroids, TNFi, anti-IL1 and anti-IL6 therapy 
The VZV is a highly contagious virus that causes varicella (chickenpox); a mild, self-limiting illness characterised by fever and a generalised vesicular rash. Complications are rare, but immunocompromised individuals have a higher risk of complications, consisting of bacterial superinfection of the skin lesions, pneumonia, encephalitis, hepatitis or haemorrhagic complications. 119–121 Following primary infection, the virus remains latent in the dorsal root ganglia and can reactivate later in life, causing shingles (herpes zoster). The incorporation of the (optional or mandatory) VZV vaccine in NIPs differs considerably between countries. In countries without routine VZV vaccination, the majority of the children get chickenpox early in childhood. 
In VZV (vaccination and infection) naive pedAIIRD patients, there is always the threat of chickenpox. Exposures must be avoided, causing children to miss school and playgroups, immunosuppressive treatment may be interrupted with potentially negative consequences on disease, and there is a risk of severe disseminated disease. 120 121 Case reports exist of severe disseminated or even lethal varicella infections in pedAIIRD patients. 122 123 Since 2011, several studies on VZV infection rates and course in pedAIIRD patients were published. In a large retrospective case–control study, an increased risk for varicella-related admissions was found in patients with IBD. 124 In this study, 8 828 712 paediatric hospitalisations in the USA including 4434 varicella and 4488 herpes zoster-related hospitalisations were analysed. Compared with the general population, there was an increased risk for varicella-related hospitalisations in patients with Crohn’s disease (OR 12.8 (95% CI 8.3 to 19.6)) and ulcerative colitis (OR 4.3 (95% CI 2.0 to 9.1)). 124 Four mild to severe VZV infections were described in 185 JIA patients on etanercept. 125 The incidence and severity of VZV infections in 156 JIA patients was similar in patients with etanercept compared with patients on MTX. 126 In comparison to the general population, the risk of VZV-related infections was increased in AIIRD patients on TNFi therapy in a large national database analysis with an estimated incidence rate for VZV-related hospitalisations of 1.9/100 000 PY in the general population versus 26/100 000 PY in AIIRD patients on anti-TNFα treatment. 127 
Data on the efficacy of the varicella vaccine in preventing VZV infections are currently insufficient in VZV naïve pedAIIRD patients. None of the available studies was significantly powered to assess the outcome on infection rates. Data on the efficacy of the vaccine come from studies performed in the late 1970s in children with underlying leukaemia. In the largest trial, more than 500 children with leukaemia in remission were vaccinated against chickenpox. The efficacy was 85% in preventing chickenpox and breakthrough cases were mild. 128 129 Subsequently, the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of the vaccine was shown in healthy children. 130–132 As vaccine failures do occur in considerable rates, a two-dose schedule is more effective against all VZV cases. 133 The immunogenicity of the VZV vaccine has been studied in pedAIIRD patients. VZV-specific antibody responses are critical in the control of acute infection and VZV-specific T-cell responses are essential for both recovery and maintenance of the latent phase of VZV. 134 135 In pedAIIRD patients, a humoral response was induced in the majority of patients and VZV-specific T-cell responses were comparable between pedAIIIRD patients and healthy controls. 136 137 However, it should be kept in mind that the correlation between humoral and cellular immunity and protection against VZV infection is uncertain. 
Finally, the safety of this live-attenuated vaccine is of the upmost importance in VZV naïve patients. In the past decade, a total of 78 pedAIIRD varicella naïve patients receiving VZV vaccination were described/recruited in various studies, including patients on low-dose glucocorticosteroids (n=20), MTX (n=60) and bDMARDs (TNFi (n=8) anti-IL6 (n=5) anti-IL1 (n=5). Since the vaccination in these patients was a primary immunisation, it constitutes a higher risk of vaccine-induced infection with the attenuated virus than booster vaccines. There were no complicated or disseminated varicella infections and only three patients developed a vaccine-induced mild and transient VZV-like rash, of which one patient was admitted for i.v. acyclovir treatment for safety reasons. 136 No worsening in disease activity or disease flares were reported. 136 137 One study investigated a prevaccination check lists for patients; all patients met the prevaccination criteria and no AEs were observed. 138 Although these studies were small, the evidence for the safety of this vaccine in situations of immunosuppression has been broadened. 
The VZV vaccine was extensively discussed by the Task Force. Knowing that the risk of (severe) infections is increased and based on the safety data in a small number of pedAIIRD patients it is the experts’ opinion that in VZV naïve patients it is preferable to immunise in a controlled manner, rather than waiting for inevitable exposure to the wild type virus which endorses the risk of severe disseminated disease. Therefore, VZV vaccination should be strongly considered in VZV naïve patients on MTX. The Task Force does not recommend a treatment pause because of the risk of disease worsening or flares. Although we recommend to preferably vaccinate when patients are on MTX monotherapy, the VZV vaccine can be considered as well in patients treated with TNFi, anti-IL1, anti-IL6 and low-dose glucocorticosteroids, carefully weighing the risk of infections against the risk of inducing infections by vaccination, knowing that vaccine-induced infections with the attenuated virus are generally mild and can be treated with acyclovir. 
Recommendation 7: YF vaccination should be avoided in all immunosuppressed patients 
A single dose of YF vaccine is sufficient to confer sustained immunity and lifelong protection against YF disease and booster doses are no longer required. 139 No data exist on the safety of the primary YF vaccine in immunosuppressed pedAIIRD patients. One adult patient with Crohn’s disease treated with MTX and inﬂiximab, who inadvertently received YF vaccination, developed high fever, severe headache, general weakness and transiently elevated transaminase levels probably due to YF viraemia since the YF PCR became positive 6 days after vaccination, 79 whereas another patient on adalimumab showed no AEs on inadvertent YF vaccination. 140 Both patients were seroprotected after vaccination. We recommend measuring serum antibodies in patients previously vaccinated for YF and travelling into endemic areas. In case immunosuppressive drugs can be interrupted (according to existing guidelines 141 ), YF vaccination can be safely administered if necessary. 142 
Discussion 
This 2021 update of the EULAR recommendations for vaccinations in pedAIIRD is based on a systematic literature review of published studies between 2009 and 2021 and is a combined effort of a taskforce consisting of 20 international experts including paediatric and adult rheumatologists, immunologists and a patient representative. The 15 recommendations from the 2011 EULAR paper have now been replaced, upgraded or adjusted and were subdivided into six overarching principles and seven recommendations. These overarching principles are the basis of the update covering essential aspects of vaccination in pedAIIRD. 
Infectious diseases are still a great burden and risk for immunosuppressed children. Therefore, adherence to the Natural Immunisation Programme (NIP) is essential, thereby protecting the patients for vaccine-preventable infections. Still, the adherence to the NIP is low for pedAIIRD patients, as parents seem reluctant for vaccinations due to insufficient information provision and fear for AEs, hence special attention is needed from the treating physician. 21 The first overarching principle, therefore, states to assess the patient’s NIP status and indications for vaccinations on a yearly base. As in adults, vaccinations are preferably administered in quiescent disease. If possible, vaccinations should be given 2–4 weeks before the start of immune suppression, especially RTX, but necessary treatment should never be postponed. 
Since 2011 several new studies have been published, which especially increased the evidence on the safety of live-attenuated vaccines in immunosuppressed children. Still the overarching principle remains that live-attenuated vaccines should be avoided in all immunosuppressed pedAIIRD. The risk of a live vaccine in immunosuppressed children was shown by a case report on a newborn whose mother used infliximab during pregnancy, and who died from vaccine-induced tuberculosis after BCG vaccination. 78 However, the overarching principle includes an exception for the vaccination of MMR booster and varicella vaccination under specific conditions. The strength of the recommendation considering the MMR booster vaccination increased significantly; it is therefore now recommended that this booster can be safely administered to patients on MTX. This was mainly based on an RCT on the MMR booster vaccine showing no worsening of disease activity and no infections with the attenuated viruses. 110 Also, patients showed a significant increase in antibody concentrations and were considered to be protected against infection. LoE on administrating the MMR booster while treated with low-dose glucocorticosteroids and bDMARDs is much lower (LoE 3, grade of recommendation D), but these non-randomised cohort studies suggest it is safe with in general seroprotection levels comparable to healthy controls. 40 56 101 110 112 113 115–117 143 
There were no complicated or disseminated vaccine-induced varicella infections in VZV naive patients receiving VZV vaccination; only mild vesicular rashes occurred in a few patients. 58 118 136 138 Therefore, the recommendation on VZV was adjusted; this vaccination should now be strongly considered in varicella vaccination/infection naïve patients on MTX. In addition, VZV vaccination can be considered in varicella naïve patients treated with low-dose glucocorticosteroids, TNFi, anti-IL1 and anti-IL6 therapy. In VZV-naïve patients, the immunogenicity of the vaccine was equal in immunosuppressed children compared with healthy controls. 136 In the future, larger cohorts on primary VZV vaccination are needed, especially cohorts including patients on bDMARDs, to confirm these data on safety, immunogenicity and eventually efficacy. In addition, studies are warranted on the non-live VZV vaccine for VZV naïve patients, as this vaccine might further improve the safety profile of VZV vaccination in pedAIIRD patients. 
In adults, several studies demonstrate that the pneumococcal infection rate is higher in AIIRD patients. 83 91 Specifically in SLE patients, these infections tend to be more severe, especially in those on (high-dose) immunosuppression. Therefore, pneumococcal vaccination with PCV10 or PCV13 is recommended in all non-vaccinated pedAIIRD, and in most countries, this vaccination is included in the NIP. Although additional PPSV-23 is recommended in immunosuppressed adult patients, we cannot recommend PPSV-23 as standard care in children; there are no data on the efficacy of the PPSV-23 in addition to the PCV vaccine to prevent pneumococcal disease in pedAIIRD. However, PPSV-23 can be considered every 5 years in immunosuppressed patients or in SLE patients, as it is safe and moderately immunogenic. 24 42 Of note, physicians should be aware of the high risk of adverse events including flares after PPSV-23 vaccination in CAPS patients. 53 
In 2011, no data were available on HPV vaccination in pedAIIRD. 9 Thanks to new studies the recommendation on HPV vaccination could be enforced; HPV vaccination should now be strongly considered in non-vaccinated JSLE patients. Although HPV is included in most NIP, this specific recommendation is made because the HPV vaccination is of utmost importance in SLE patients, since these patients have an increased risk to develop cervical cancer. Although efficacy trials are lacking, four new trials including patients with jSLE have proved good immunogenicity of the vaccine, and no severe adverse events. 69–71 
Seasonal influenza vaccination is not routinely included in the NIP. In the current recommendations it is now strongly suggested to consider annual inactivated or subunit influenza vaccination in all patients on glucocorticoids or (b/ts) DMARDs. Adding strongly to the recommendation is mainly based on adult data showing an increased risk for influenza infection in patients with AIIRD 82 and on accumulating data in pedAIIRD showing a good immunogenicity of the vaccine. 23 27 29–34 41 47 74 75 Efficacy is not well studied in children but small studies report a significant decrease in influenza-like illness after vaccination. 31 32 
Overall, studies performed in the past decade corroborate the results from previous trials that immunogenicity of the vaccines is sufficient in pedAIIRD patients using immunosuppressive drugs with the exceptions of high-dose glucocorticoids and intravenous immunoglobulin. 29 56 New in the current recommendations is the data on patients using bDMARDs. In general, patients vaccinated while treated with bDMARDs reached seroprotection. B-cell depleting therapy within the last 6 months is an exception. 38 Patients vaccinated while on TNFi are usually seroprotected but antibody titers, especially after influenza vaccination, are lower compared with other patients on DMARDS and the titers show a more rapid decline. 31 33 34 One study on tocilizumab showed similar seroprotection and antibody levels in patients on anti-IL6 compared with healthy controls. 47 It is important to realise that most data on bDMARDs are limited to immunogenicity and not efficacy. In order to increase the strength of these recommendations in the future and to obtain more knowledge on efficacy of vaccinations in patients on bDMARDs, larger cohort studies and ideally RCTs should be performed. 
The past months (after these recommendations were completed) the first studies became available on the BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. 144–147 These first reports show good short-term immunogenicity (97%–100% seropositivity in patients 1–3 months postvaccination) and only mild AE, including children on TNFi. 145 146 Flares after vaccination were reported, but no case control studies have been performed yet. 147 Future recommendations will include the COVID-19 vaccination. 
In general, the NIP should be followed for all patients with pedAIIRD as in healthy children. Several vaccines within the NIPs require specific attention: the (10 or 13-valent) PCV vaccine is recommended in all non-vaccinated pedAIIRD patients and the vaccination against HPV is advocated in non-vaccinated jSLE patients. Also, the MMR booster can be administered safely in patients on MTX and can even be considered in patients on glucocorticoids and specified bDMARDS (TNFi, anti-IL1 and anti-IL6 therapy). Thus, postponing the MMR booster vaccination is often not required. Finally, additional vaccinations not included in the NIP may be considered in pedAIIRD patients: The yearly influenza vaccination should be strongly considered in all pedAIIRD patients. Physicians should be aware of the varicella status of their patients and strongly consider the VZV vaccination in varicella naive patients, also while on MTX. They also should consider this vaccination in naive patients on low-dose glucocorticosteroids, TNFi, anti-IL1 and anti-IL6 therapy. 
In conclusion, studies from the past decade yielded significant new data on vaccinations in paediatric AIIRD. Specifically, information on the safety of life-attenuated vaccines, the safety and immunogenicity of vaccinations in patients treated with bDMARDs and the experience with the HPV vaccination have been increased and led to the adjustment and upgrade of the recommendations on vaccinations in pedAIIRD. No recommendations on COVID-19 vaccines in pedAIIRD are yet included in these recommendations, as studies were still ongoing by the time of the search. 
Ethics statements 
Patient consent for publication 
Not applicable. 
Acknowledgments 
We thank Dr. JF Swart for his help and support during the Delphi Voting procedure. 
References 
↵ 
Zink A 
, 
Manger B 
, 
Kaufmann J 
. Evaluationof the rabbit risk score for serious infections . Ann Rheum Dis 2014 ; 76 : 1673 – 6 . doi::10.1136/annrheumdis2013-203341 
OpenUrl 
↵ 
Doran MF 
, 
Crowson CS 
, 
Pond GR 
, et al 
. Frequency of infection in patients with rheumatoid arthritis compared with controls: a population-based study . Arthritis Rheum 2002 ; 46 : 2287-93 . doi:10.1002/art.10524 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12355475 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Falagas ME 
, 
Manta KG 
, 
Betsi GI 
, et al 
. Infection-related morbidity and mortality in patients with connective tissue diseases: a systematic review . Clin Rheumatol 2007 ; 26 : 663-70 . doi:10.1007/s10067-006-0441-9 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17186117 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Furer V 
, 
Rondaan C 
, 
Heijstek MW 
. 2019 update of EULAR recommendations for vaccination in adult patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases . Ann Rheum Dis ; 2020 . 
↵ 
Hashkes PJ 
, 
Laxer RM 
. Medical treatment of juvenile idiopathic arthritis . J Am Med Assoc 2005 . doi:10.1001/jama.294.13.1671 
↵ 
van Assen S 
, 
Agmon-Levin N 
, 
Elkayam O 
, et al 
. EULAR recommendations for vaccination in adult patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases . Ann Rheum Dis 2011 ; 70 : 414 – 22 . doi:10.1136/ard.2010.137216 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21131643 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Ada G 
. The importance of vaccination . Front Biosci 2007 ; 12 : 1278-90 . doi:10.2741/2146 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17127380 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Ada G 
. Vaccines and. English J , 2011 . 
↵ 
Heijstek MW 
, 
Ott De Bruin LM 
, 
Bijl M 
. EULAR recommendations for vaccination in paediatric patients with rheumatic diseases . Ann Rheum Dis 2011 . doi:10.1136/ard.2011.150193 
↵ 
Farmaki E 
, 
Kanakoudi-Tsakalidou F 
, 
Spoulou V 
, et al 
. The effect of anti-TNF treatment on the immunogenicity and safety of the 7-valent conjugate pneumococcal vaccine in children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis . Vaccine 2010 ; 28 : 5109 – 13 . doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2010.03.080 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20470802 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Pileggi GS 
, 
De Souza CBS 
, 
Ferriani VPL 
. Safety and immunogenicity of varicella vaccine in patients with juvenile rheumatic diseases receiving methotrexate and corticosteroids . Arthritis Care Res 2010 . doi:10.1002/acr.20183 
↵ 
Berthold E 
, 
Månsson B 
, 
Kahn R 
. Outcome in juvenile idiopathic arthritis: a population-based study from Sweden . Arthritis Res Ther 2019 ; 21 : 218 . doi:10.1186/s13075-019-1994-8 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31661011 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Ter Haar NM 
, 
van Dijkhuizen EHP 
, 
Swart JF 
, et al 
. Treatment to target using recombinant interleukin-1 receptor antagonist as first-line monotherapy in new-onset systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis: results from a five-year follow-up study . Arthritis Rheumatol 2019 ; 71 : 1163 – 73 . doi:10.1002/art.40865 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30848528 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Corica D 
, 
Romano C 
. Biological therapy in pediatric inflammatory bowel disease: a systematic review . J Clin Gastroenterol 2017 ; 51 : 100 – 10 . doi:10.1097/MCG.0000000000000696 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27636407 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Furer V 
, 
Eviatar T 
, 
Zisman D 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity and safety of the BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 vaccine in adult patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases and in the general population: a multicentre study . Ann Rheum Dis 2021 ; 80 : 1330 – 8 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2021-220647 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34127481 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Frenck RW 
, 
Klein NP 
, 
Kitchin N 
. Safety, immunogenicity, and efficacy of the BNT162b2 Covid-19 vaccine in adolescents . N Engl J Med 2021 . doi:10.1056/nejmoa2107456 
↵ 
van der Heijde D 
, 
Aletaha D 
, 
Carmona L 
, et al 
. 2014 update of the EULAR standardised operating procedures for EULAR-endorsed recommendations . Ann Rheum Dis 2015 ; 74 : 8-13 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2014-206350 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25261577 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Turner TB 
, 
Huh WK 
. HPV vaccines: translating immunogenicity into efficacy . Hum Vaccin Immunother 2016 ; 12 : 1403-5 . doi:10.1080/21645515.2015.1103936 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26512762 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Smolen JS 
, 
van der Heijde D 
, 
Machold KP 
, et al 
. Proposal for a new nomenclature of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs . Ann Rheum Dis 2014 ; 73 : 3 – 5 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204317 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24072562 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Isaacs JD 
, 
Burmester GR 
. Smart battles: immunosuppression versus immunomodulation in the inflammatory RMDs . Ann Rheum Dis 2020 ; 79 : 991 – 3 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-218019 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32527869 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Morin M-P 
, 
Quach C 
, 
Fortin E 
, et al 
. Vaccination coverage in children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis followed at a paediatric tertiary care centre . Rheumatology 2012 ; 51 : 2046 – 50 . doi:10.1093/rheumatology/kes175 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22864995 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Bednarek A 
, 
Klepacz R 
. Vaccinology education of nurses and the current immunoprophylaxis recommendations for children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis . J Clin Med 2020 ; 9 . doi: doi:10.3390/jcm9113736 . [Epub ahead of print: 20 11 2020 ]. pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33233818 
↵ 
Campos LMA 
, 
Silva CA 
, 
Aikawa NE 
, et al 
. High disease activity: an independent factor for reduced immunogenicity of the pandemic influenza A vaccine in patients with juvenile systemic lupus erythematosus . Arthritis Care Res 2013 ; 65 : 1121 – 7 . doi:10.1002/acr.21948 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23818263 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Alyasin S 
, 
Adab M 
, 
Hosseinpour A 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity of 23-valent pneumococcal vaccine in children with systemic lupus erythematosus . Iran J Immunol 2016 ; 13 : 204 – 19 . doi:IJIv13i3A6 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27671512 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Ribeiro ACM 
, 
Guedes LKN 
, 
Moraes JCB 
, et al 
. Reduced seroprotection after pandemic H1N1 influenza adjuvant-free vaccination in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: implications for clinical practice . Ann Rheum Dis 2011 ; 70 : 2144 – 7 . doi:10.1136/ard.2011.152983 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21859696 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Aikawa NE 
, 
Campos LMA 
, 
Silva CA 
, et al 
. Glucocorticoid: major factor for reduced immunogenicity of 2009 influenza A (H1N1) vaccine in patients with juvenile autoimmune rheumatic disease . J Rheumatol 2012 ; 39 : 167 – 73 . doi:10.3899/jrheum.110721 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22089462 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Guissa VR 
, 
Pereira RMR 
, 
Sallum AME 
, et al 
. Influenza A H1N1/2009 vaccine in juvenile dermatomyositis: reduced immunogenicity in patients under immunosuppressive therapy . Clin Exp Rheumatol 2012 ; 30 : 583 – 8 . pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22931582 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Park JK 
, 
Lee YJ 
, 
Shin K 
, et al 
. Impact of temporary methotrexate discontinuation for 2 weeks on immunogenicity of seasonal influenza vaccination in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomised clinical trial . Ann Rheum Dis 2018 ; 77 : 898 – 904 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-213222 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29572291 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Aikawa NE 
, 
Campos LMA 
, 
Goldenstein-Schainberg C 
, et al 
. Effective seroconversion and safety following the pandemic influenza vaccination (anti-H1N1) in patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis . Scand J Rheumatol 2013 ; 42 : 34 – 40 . doi:10.3109/03009742.2012.709272 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22992045 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Å L 
, 
Ingelman-Sundberg HM 
, 
Myrberg IH 
. Altered proportions of circulating CXCR5+ helper T cells do not dampen influenza vaccine responses in children with rheumatic disease . Vaccine 2019 . doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.05.037 
↵ 
Carvalho LM 
, 
de Paula FE 
, 
Silvestre RVD 
, et al 
. Prospective surveillance study of acute respiratory infections, influenza-like illness and seasonal influenza vaccine in a cohort of juvenile idiopathic arthritis patients . Pediatr Rheumatol 2013 ; 11 . doi:10.1186/1546-0096-11-10 
↵ 
Toplak N 
, 
Subelj V 
, 
Kveder T 
, et al 
. Safety and efficacy of influenza vaccination in a prospective longitudinal study of 31 children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis . Clin Exp Rheumatol 2012 ; 30 : 436 – 44 . pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22513085 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Woerner A 
, 
Sauvain M-J 
, 
Aebi C 
, et al 
. Immune response to influenza vaccination in children treated with methotrexate or/and tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors . Hum Vaccin 2011 ; 7 : 1293 – 8 . doi:10.4161/hv.7.12.17981 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22185812 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Dell'Era L 
, 
Corona F 
, 
Daleno C 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity, safety and tolerability of MF59-adjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccine in children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis . Vaccine 2012 ; 30 : 936 – 40 . doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.11.083 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22138210 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Camacho-Lovillo MS 
, 
Bulnes-Ramos A 
, 
Goycochea-Valdivia W 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity and safety of influenza vaccination in patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis on biological therapy using the microneutralization assay . Pediatr Rheumatol Online J 2017 ; 15 : 62 . doi:10.1186/s12969-017-0190-0 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28784185 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Haberman RH 
, 
Herati R 
, 
Simon D 
, et al 
. Methotrexate hampers immunogenicity to BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 vaccine in immune-mediated inflammatory disease . Ann Rheum Dis 2021 ; 80 : 1339 – 44 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2021-220597 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34035003 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Mahil SK 
, 
Bechman K 
, 
Raharja A 
. The effect of methotrexate and targeted immunosuppression on humoral and cellular immune responses to the COVID-19 vaccine BNT162b2: a cohort study . Lancet Rheumatol 2021 . doi:10.1016/S2665-9913(21)00212-5 
↵ 
Gorelik M 
, 
Elizalde A 
, 
Wong Williams K 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity of sequential 13-valent conjugated and 23-valent unconjugated pneumococcal vaccines in a population of children with lupus . Lupus 2018 ; 27 : 2228 – 35 . doi:10.1177/0961203318808589 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30380992 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Stoof SP 
, 
Heijstek MW 
, 
Sijssens KM 
, et al 
. Kinetics of the long-term antibody response after meningococcal C vaccination in patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis: a retrospective cohort study . Ann Rheum Dis 2014 ; 73 : 728 – 34 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202561 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23505231 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Ingelman-Sundberg HM 
, 
Laestadius Åsa 
, 
Chrapkowska C 
, et al 
. Diverse effects on vaccine-specific serum IgG titres and memory B cells upon methotrexate and anti-TNF-α therapy in children with rheumatic diseases: a cross-sectional study . Vaccine 2016 ; 34 : 1304 – 11 . doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.01.027 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26827664 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
deBruyn JCC 
, 
Hilsden R 
, 
Fonseca K 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity and safety of influenza vaccination in children with inflammatory bowel disease . Inflamm Bowel Dis 2012 ; 18 : 25 – 33 . doi:10.1002/ibd.21706 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21472826 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Aikawa NE 
, 
França ILA 
, 
Ribeiro AC 
, et al 
. Short and long-term immunogenicity and safety following the 23-valent polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccine in juvenile idiopathic arthritis patients under conventional DMARDs with or without anti-TNF therapy . Vaccine 2015 ; 33 : 604 – 9 . doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.12.030 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25554240 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Banaszkiewicz A 
, 
Targońska B 
, 
Kowalska-Duplaga K 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity of 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in pediatric patients with inflammatory bowel disease . Inflamm Bowel Dis 2015 ; 21 : 1607 – 14 . doi:10.1097/MIB.0000000000000406 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25919976 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Banaszkiewicz A 
, 
Gawronska A 
, 
Klincewicz B 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity of pertussis booster vaccination in children and adolescents with inflammatory bowel disease: a controlled study . Inflamm Bowel Dis 2017 ; 23 : 847 – 52 . doi:10.1097/MIB.0000000000001076 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28394806 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Nerome Y 
, 
Akaike H 
, 
Nonaka Y 
, et al 
. The safety and effectiveness of HBV vaccination in patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis controlled by treatment . Mod Rheumatol 2016 ; 26 : 368 – 71 . doi:10.3109/14397595.2015.1085608 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26471922 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Hua C 
, 
Barnetche T 
, 
Combe B 
. Effect of methotrexate, anti-tumor necrosis factor α, and rituximab on the immune response to influenza and pneumococcal vaccines in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Arthritis Care Res 2014 . doi:10.1002/acr.22246 
↵ 
Shinoki T 
, 
Hara R 
, 
Kaneko U 
, et al 
. Safety and response to influenza vaccine in patients with systemic-onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis receiving tocilizumab . Mod Rheumatol 2012 ; 22 : 871 – 6 . doi:10.3109/s10165-012-0595-z 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22322589 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Toplak N 
, 
Avcin T 
. Safety and efficacy of varicella vaccination in children with JIA treated with biologic therapy . Pediatr Rheumatol 2014 ; 12 . doi:10.1186/1546-0096-12-S1-O20 
↵ 
Bingham CO 
, 
Rizzo W 
, 
Kivitz A 
, et al 
. Humoral immune response to vaccines in patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with tocilizumab: results of a randomised controlled trial (VISARA) . Ann Rheum Dis 2015 ; 74 : 818 – 22 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204427 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24448345 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Tsuru T 
, 
Terao K 
, 
Murakami M 
, et al 
. Immune response to influenza vaccine and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine under IL-6 signal inhibition therapy with tocilizumab . Mod Rheumatol 2014 ; 24 : 511 – 6 . doi:10.3109/14397595.2013.843743 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24252023 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Mori S 
, 
Ueki Y 
, 
Hirakata N 
, et al 
. Impact of tocilizumab therapy on antibody response to influenza vaccine in patients with rheumatoid arthritis . Ann Rheum Dis 2012 ; 71 : 2006 – 10 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-201950 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22887851 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Mori S 
, 
Ueki Y 
, 
Akeda Y 
, et al 
. Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccination in rheumatoid arthritis patients receiving tocilizumab therapy . Ann Rheum Dis 2013 ; 72 : 1362 – 6 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202658 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23345600 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Jaeger VK 
, 
Hoffman HM 
, 
van der Poll T 
, et al 
. Safety of vaccinations in patients with cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes: a prospective registry based study . Rheumatology 2017 ; 56 : 1484 – 91 . doi:10.1093/rheumatology/kex185 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28482054 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Maritsi DN 
, 
Vartzelis G 
, 
Kossiva L 
, et al 
. The response to the inactivated hepatitis a vaccine in children with autoinflammatory diseases: a prospective observational controlled study . Rheumatology 2016 ; 55 : 1705 – 6 . doi:10.1093/rheumatology/kew239 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27313277 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Brunner HI 
, 
Tzaribachev N 
, 
Cornejo GV 
, et al 
. Maintenance of antibody response to diphtheria/tetanus vaccine in patients aged 2-5 years with polyarticular-course juvenile idiopathic arthritis receiving subcutaneous abatacept . Pediatr Rheumatol Online J 2020 ; 18 : 19 . doi:10.1186/s12969-020-0410-x 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32087715 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Tacke CE 
, 
Smits GP 
, 
van der Klis FRM 
, et al 
. Reduced serologic response to mumps, measles, and rubella vaccination in patients treated with intravenous immunoglobulin for Kawasaki disease . J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013 ; 131 : 1701 – 3 . doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2013.01.045 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23498596 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Rollet-Cohen V 
, 
Mirete J 
, 
Dingulu G 
, et al 
. Suboptimal vaccination coverage of recommended vaccines among French children with recurrent autoinflammatory fever syndromes: a study from the juvenile inflammatory rheumatism cohort . Clin Rheumatol 2021 ; 40 : 2855 – 64 . doi:10.1007/s10067-020-05553-y 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33439385 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Bizjak M 
, 
Blazina Štefan 
, 
Zajc Avramovič M 
, et al 
. Vaccination coverage in children with rheumatic diseases . Clin Exp Rheumatol 2020 ; 38 : 164 – 70 . pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31577215 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Harris JG 
, 
Maletta KI 
, 
Ren B 
. A179: improving pneumococcal vaccination rate in the pediatric rheumatology clinic . Arthritis Rheumatol 2014 . doi:10.1002/art.38605 
↵ 
Ł D 
, 
Dziekiewicz M 
, 
Banaszkiewicz A 
. Immune response to vaccination in children and young people with inflammatory bowel disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis . J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2020 . doi:10.1097/MPG.0000000000002810 
↵ 
Miyamoto M 
, 
Ono E 
, 
Barbosa C 
, et al 
. Vaccine antibodies and T- and B-cell interaction in juvenile systemic lupus erythematosus . Lupus 2011 ; 20 : 736 – 44 . doi:10.1177/0961203310397409 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21505013 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Moses J 
, 
Alkhouri N 
, 
Shannon A 
, et al 
. Response to hepatitis a vaccine in children with inflammatory bowel disease receiving infliximab . Inflamm Bowel Dis 2011 ; 17 : E160 . doi:10.1002/ibd.21892 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21953938 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Maritsi DN 
, 
Eleftheriou D 
, 
Onoufriou M 
. Decreased antibodies against hepatitis A in previously vaccinated treatment naïve juvenile SLE patients: a prospective case control study . Clin. Exp. Rheumatol 2017 . 
↵ 
Maritsi D 
, 
Vartzelis G 
, 
Spyridis N 
. SAT0500 the immune response to hepatitis a vaccine in children with Pfapa syndrome . Ann Rheum Dis 2015 ; 74 : 841 . 
↵ 
Maritsi DN 
, 
Coffin SE 
, 
Argyri I 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity and safety of the inactivated hepatitis a vaccine in children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis on methotrexate treatment: a matched case-control study . Clin Exp Rheumatol 2017 ; 35 : 711 – 5 . pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28721859 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Mertoglu S 
, 
Sahin S 
, 
Beser OF 
, et al 
. Hepatitis A virus vaccination in childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus . Lupus 2019 ; 28 : 234 – 40 . doi:10.1177/0961203318819827 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30551721 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Szczygielska I 
, 
Hernik E 
, 
Kwiatkowska M 
, et al 
. Assessment of the level of vaccine-induced anti-HBs antibodies in children with inflammatory systemic connective tissue diseases treated with immunosuppression . Reumatologia 2015 ; 53 : 56 – 60 . doi:10.5114/reum.2015.51503 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27407228 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Aytac MB 
, 
Kasapcopur O 
, 
Aslan M 
, et al 
. Hepatitis B vaccination in juvenile systemic lupus erythematosus . Clin Exp Rheumatol 2011 ; 29 : 882 – 6 . pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22011373 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Heijstek MW 
, 
Scherpenisse M 
, 
Groot N 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity and safety of the bivalent HPV vaccine in female patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis: a prospective controlled observational cohort study . Ann Rheum Dis 2014 ; 73 : 1500 – 7 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203429 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23723319 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Soybilgic A 
, 
Onel KB 
, 
Utset T 
, et al 
. Safety and immunogenicity of the quadrivalent HPV vaccine in female Systemic Lupus Erythematosus patients aged 12 to 26 years . Pediatr Rheumatol Online J 2013 ; 11 : 29 . doi:10.1186/1546-0096-11-29 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23924237 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Esposito S 
, 
Corona F 
, 
Barzon L 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity, safety and tolerability of a bivalent human papillomavirus vaccine in adolescents with juvenile idiopathic arthritis . Expert Rev Vaccines 2014 ; 13 : 1387 – 93 . doi:10.1586/14760584.2014.943195 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25066387 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Sousa S 
, 
Duarte AC 
, 
Cordeiro I 
, et al 
. Efficacy and safety of vaccination in pediatric patients with systemic inflammatory rheumatic diseases: a systematic review of the literature . Acta Reumatol Port 2017 ; 42 : 8 – 16 . pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28133957 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Walker UA 
, 
Hoffman HM 
, 
Williams R 
, et al 
. Brief report: severe inflammation following vaccination against Streptococcus pneumoniae in patients with cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes . Arthritis Rheumatol 2016 ; 68 : 516 – 20 . doi:10.1002/art.39482 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26808830 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Aikawa N 
, 
Goldenstein-Schainberg C 
, 
Vendramini M 
, et al 
. PReS-FINAL-2177: safety and lack of autoantibody production following influenza H1N1 vaccination in patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) . Pediatr Rheumatol 2013 ; 11 . doi:10.1186/1546-0096-11-S2-O12 
↵ 
Shimizu M 
, 
Ueno K 
, 
Yachie A 
. Relapse of systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis after influenza vaccination in a patient receiving tocilizumab . Clin Vaccine Immunol 2012 . doi:10.1128/CVI.00309-12 
↵ 
Maritsi D 
, 
Vartzelis G 
, 
Soldatou A 
. AB1131 hepatitis B immunity in children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis at disease onset . Ann Rheum Dis 2013 ; 71 (suppl 2 : 702 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-eular.1129 
↵ 
Maritsi D 
, 
Vougiouka O 
, 
Vartzelis G 
, et al 
. The response to hepatitis a vaccine in children with JIA on immunosuppresive treatment . Pediatr Rheumatol 2014 ; 12 . doi:10.1186/1546-0096-12-S1-P41 
↵ 
Cheent K 
, 
Nolan J 
, 
Shariq S 
. Case Report: Fatal case of disseminated BCG infection in an infant born to a mother taking infliximab for Crohn’s Disease . J Crohn’s Colitis 2010 . doi::10.1016/j.crohns.2010.05.001 
↵ 
Ekenberg C 
, 
Friis-Møller N 
, 
Ulstrup T 
, et al 
. Inadvertent yellow fever vaccination of a patient with Crohn's disease treated with infliximab and methotrexate . BMJ Case Rep 2016 ; 2016 . doi: doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-215403 . [Epub ahead of print: 29 Aug 2016 ]. pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27571912 
↵ 
Nichol KL 
, 
Wuorenma J 
, 
von Sternberg T 
. Benefits of influenza vaccination for low-, intermediate-, and high-risk senior citizens . Arch Intern Med 1998 ; 158 : 1769-76 . doi:10.1001/archinte.158.16.1769 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9738606 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Hak E 
, 
Nordin J 
, 
Wei F 
, et al 
. Influence of high-risk medical conditions on the effectiveness of influenza vaccination among elderly members of 3 large managed-care organizations . Clin Infect Dis 2002 ; 35 : 370-7 . doi:10.1086/341403 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12145718 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Blumentals WA 
, 
Arreglado A 
, 
Napalkov P 
, et al 
. Rheumatoid arthritis and the incidence of influenza and influenza-related complications: a retrospective cohort study . BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2012 ; 13 : 158 . doi:10.1186/1471-2474-13-158 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22925480 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Shea KM 
, 
Edelsberg J 
, 
Weycker D 
, et al 
. Rates of pneumococcal disease in adults with chronic medical conditions . Open Forum Infect Dis 2014 ; 1 : ofu024 . doi:10.1093/ofid/ofu024 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25734097 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Leuvenink R 
, 
Aeschlimann F 
, 
Baer W 
, et al 
. Clinical course and therapeutic approach to varicella zoster virus infection in children with rheumatic autoimmune diseases under immunosuppression . Pediatr Rheumatol Online J 2016 ; 14 : 34 . doi:10.1186/s12969-016-0095-3 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27256096 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Chang C-C 
, 
Chang Y-S 
, 
Chen W-S 
, et al 
. Effects of annual influenza vaccination on morbidity and mortality in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: a nationwide cohort study . Sci Rep 2016 ; 6 : 37817 . doi:10.1038/srep37817 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27910867 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Kobashigawa T 
, 
Nakajima A 
, 
Taniguchi A 
, et al 
. Vaccination against seasonal influenza is effective in Japanese patients with rheumatoid arthritis enrolled in a large observational cohort . Scand J Rheumatol 2013 ; 42 : 445 – 50 . doi:10.3109/03009742.2013.788733 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23724971 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
23-Valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine . WHO position paper. Wkly Epidemiol Rec 2008 . 
↵ 
World Health Organization (WHO) 
. Pneumococcal conjugate vaccines in infants and children under 5 years of age: who position paper – February 2019 , 2019 . 
↵ 
Wkly Epidemiol Rec 
. Pneumococcal vaccines who position paper-2012 , 2012 . 
↵ 
Black S 
, 
Shinefield H 
, 
Fireman B 
. Efficacy, safety and immunogenicity of heptavalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in children. Northern California Kaiser Permanente vaccine study center group . Pediatr Infect Dis J 2000 . 
↵ 
Shigayeva A 
, 
Rudnick W 
, 
Green K 
, et al 
. Invasive pneumococcal disease among immunocompromised persons: implications for vaccination programs . Clin Infect Dis 2016 ; 62 : 139 – 47 . doi:10.1093/cid/civ803 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26354970 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Nagel J 
, 
Geborek P 
, 
Saxne T 
, et al 
. The risk of pneumococcal infections after immunization with pneumococcal conjugate vaccine compared to non-vaccinated inflammatory arthritis patients . Scand J Rheumatol 2015 ; 44 : 271 – 9 . doi:10.3109/03009742.2014.984754 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25656734 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Beukelman T 
, 
Xie F 
, 
Chen L 
, et al 
. Rates of hospitalized bacterial infection associated with juvenile idiopathic arthritis and its treatment . Arthritis Rheum 2012 ; 64 : 2773 – 80 . doi:10.1002/art.34458 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22569881 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Naveau C 
, 
Houssiau FA 
. Pneumococcal sepsis in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus . Lupus 2005 ; 14 : 903 – 6 . doi:10.1191/0961203305lu2242xx 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16335583 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Klippel JH 
. Systemic lupus erythematosus: demographics, prognosis, and outcome . J Rheumatol Suppl 1997 ; 48 : 67 – 71 . pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9150122 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
AMF Y 
, 
SC N 
, 
Sobel RE 
. FcγRIIA polymorphism as a risk factor for invasive pneumococcal infections in systemic lupus erythematosus . Arthritis Rheum 1997 . doi:10.1002/art.1780400626 
↵ 
Isenberg DA 
, 
Lipkin DP 
, 
Mowbray JF 
, et al 
. Fatal pneumococcal epiglottitis in lupus overlap syndrome . Clin Rheumatol 1984 ; 3 : 529 – 32 . doi:10.1007/BF02031277 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6525789 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Luijten RKMAC 
, 
Cuppen BVJ 
, 
Bijlsma JWJ 
, et al 
. Serious infections in systemic lupus erythematosus with a focus on pneumococcal infections . Lupus 2014 ; 23 : 1512 – 6 . doi:10.1177/0961203314543918 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25078055 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Sangil A 
, 
Xercavins M 
, 
Rodríguez-Carballeira M 
, et al 
. Impact of vaccination on invasive pneumococcal disease in adults with focus on the immunosuppressed . J Infect 2015 ; 71 : 422 – 7 . doi:10.1016/j.jinf.2015.07.004 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26192199 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Moberley S 
, 
Holden J 
, 
Tatham DP 
, et al 
. Vaccines for preventing pneumococcal infection in adults . Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013 : CD000422 . doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000422.pub3 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23440780 
↵ 
Heijstek MW 
, 
van Gageldonk PGM 
, 
Berbers GAM 
, et al 
. Differences in persistence of measles, mumps, rubella, diphtheria and tetanus antibodies between children with rheumatic disease and healthy controls: a retrospective cross-sectional study . Ann Rheum Dis 2012 ; 71 : 948 – 54 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200637 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22172491 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Embree J 
, 
Law B 
, 
Voloshen T 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity, safety, and antibody persistence at 3, 5, and 10 years postvaccination in adolescents randomized to booster immunization with a combined tetanus, diphtheria, 5-component acellular pertussis, and inactivated poliomyelitis vaccine administered with a hepatitis B virus vaccine concurrently or 1 month apart . Clin Vaccine Immunol 2015 ; 22 : 282 – 90 . doi:10.1128/CVI.00682-14 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25540274 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Bingham CO 
, 
Looney RJ 
, 
Deodhar A 
, et al 
. Immunization responses in rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with rituximab: results from a controlled clinical trial . Arthritis Rheum : 2010 ; 62 : 64 – 74 . doi:10.1002/art.25034 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20039397 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
van der Kolk LE 
, 
Baars JW 
, 
Prins MH 
, et al 
. Rituximab treatment results in impaired secondary humoral immune responsiveness . Blood 2002 ; 100 : 2257 – 9 . doi:10.1182/blood.V100.6.2257 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12200395 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Harper DM 
, 
DeMars LR 
. Hpv vaccines – a review of the first decade . Gynecol Oncol 2017 . doi:10.1016/j.ygyno.2017.04.004 
↵ 
Mok CC 
, 
Ho LY 
, 
Fong LS 
, et al 
. Immunogenicity and safety of a quadrivalent human papillomavirus vaccine in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: a case-control study . Ann Rheum Dis 2013 ; 72 : 659 – 64 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-201393 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22589375 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Dhar JP 
, 
Essenmacher L 
, 
Dhar R 
, et al 
. The safety and immunogenicity of quadrivalent HPV (qHPV) vaccine in systemic lupus erythematosus . Vaccine 2017 ; 35 : 2642 – 6 . doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.04.001 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28404357 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Grönlund O 
, 
Herweijer E 
, 
Sundström K 
. Incidence of new-onset autoimmune disease in girls and women with pre-existing autoimmune disease after quadrivalent human papillomavirus vaccination: a cohort study . J Intern Med 2016 . doi:10.1111/joim.12535 
↵ 
Arnheim-Dahlström L 
, 
Pasternak B 
, 
Svanström H 
, et al 
. Autoimmune, neurological, and venous thromboembolic adverse events after immunisation of adolescent girls with quadrivalent human papillomavirus vaccine in Denmark and Sweden: cohort study . BMJ 2013 ; 347 : f5906 . doi:10.1136/bmj.f5906 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24108159 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Heijstek MW 
, 
Kamphuis S 
, 
Armbrust W 
, et al 
. Effects of the live attenuated measles-mumps-rubella booster vaccination on disease activity in patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis: a randomized trial . JAMA 2013 ; 309 : 2449 . doi:10.1001/jama.2013.6768 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23780457 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Shinefield HR 
, 
Black SB 
, 
Staehle BO 
, et al 
. Vaccination with measles, mumps and rubella vaccine and varicella vaccine: safety, tolerability, immunogenicity, persistence of antibody and duration of protection against varicella in healthy children . Pediatr Infect Dis J 2002 ; 21 : 555 – 61 . doi:10.1097/00006454-200206000-00014 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12182381 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Maritsi D 
, 
Coffin S 
, 
Onoufriou M 
, et al 
. Decreased antibodies against rubella in previously vaccinated treatment naive-JSLE patients: a prospective case control study . Scandinavian Journal of Rheumatology Despoina Maritsi2018 ; 48 : 1 – 3 . doi:10.1080/03009742.2018.1446100 
OpenUrl 
↵ 
Kraszewska-Głomba B 
, 
Matkowska-Kocjan A 
, 
Miśkiewicz K 
, et al 
. Mumps, measles and rubella vaccination in children with PFAPA syndrome . Vaccine 2016 ; 34 : 5903 – 6 . doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.10.035 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27997341 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Maritsi DN 
, 
Vartzelis G 
, 
Kopsidas J 
, et al 
. Antibody status against measles in previously vaccinated childhood systemic lupus erythematosus patients: a prospective case-control study . Rheumatology 2018 ; 57 : 1491 – 3 . doi:10.1093/rheumatology/key142 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29868831 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Maritsi DN 
, 
Kopsidas I 
, 
Vartzelis G 
, et al 
. Long-term preservation of measles and rubella specific-IgG antibodies in children with enthesitis related arthritis on anti-TNFα treatment: a prospective controlled study . Rheumatology 2019 ; 58 : 1686 – 8 . doi:10.1093/rheumatology/kez096 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31323665 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Lee AM 
, 
Burns JC 
, 
Tremoulet AH 
. Safety of infliximab following live virus vaccination in Kawasaki disease patients . Pediatr Infect Dis J 2017 ; 36 : 435 – 7 . doi:10.1097/INF.0000000000001447 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27918378 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Uziel Y 
, 
Moshe V 
, 
Onozo B 
, et al 
. Live attenuated MMR/V booster vaccines in children with rheumatic diseases on immunosuppressive therapy are safe: multicenter, retrospective data collection . Vaccine 2020 ; 38 : 2198 – 201 . doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2020.01.037 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31987692 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Jeyaratnam J 
, 
Ter Haar NM 
, 
Lachmann HJ 
, et al 
. The safety of live-attenuated vaccines in patients using IL-1 or IL-6 blockade: an international survey . Pediatr Rheumatol Online J 2018 ; 16 : 19 . doi:10.1186/s12969-018-0235-z 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29562920 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Lin F 
, 
Hadler JL 
. Epidemiology of primary varicella and herpes zoster hospitalizations: the pre-varicella vaccine era . J Infect Dis 2000 ; 181 : 1897 – 905 . doi:10.1086/315492 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10837168 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Rawson H 
, 
Crampin A 
, 
Noah N 
. Deaths from chickenpox in England and Wales 1995-7: analysis of routine mortality data . BMJ 2001 ; 323 : 1091 – 3 . doi:10.1136/bmj.323.7321.1091 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11701571 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Edmunds WJ 
, 
Brisson M 
. The effect of vaccination on the epidemiology of varicella zoster virus . J Infect 2002 ; 44 : 211 – 9 . doi:10.1053/jinf.2002.0988 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12099726 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Douglas KMJ 
, 
Gordon C 
, 
Osman H 
. Lupus and zoster . Lancet 2003 . doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14192-X 
↵ 
Huang DF 
, 
Yang AH 
, 
Tsai YY 
. Acute massive pulmonary haemorrhage, pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis in a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus and varicella . Respir Med 1996 . doi:10.1016/S0954-6111(96)90294-2 
↵ 
Adams DJ 
, 
Nylund CM 
. Hospitalization for varicella and zoster in children with inflammatory bowel disease . J Pediatr 2016 ; 171 : 140 – 5 . doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2015.12.072 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26826886 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Horneff G 
, 
Burgos-Vargas R 
, 
Constantin T 
, et al 
. Efficacy and safety of open-label etanercept on extended oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis, enthesitis-related arthritis and psoriatic arthritis: Part 1 (week 12) of the CLIPPER study . Ann Rheum Dis 2014 ; 73 : 1114 – 22 . doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-203046 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23696632 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Nicolai R 
, 
Cortis E 
, 
Rav L 
. Herpes virus infections during treatment with etanercept in juvenile idiopathic arthritis . J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 2015 . doi:10.1093/jpids/piu078 
↵ 
García-Doval I 
, 
Pérez-Zafrilla B 
, 
Descalzo MA 
, et al 
. Incidence and risk of hospitalisation due to shingles and chickenpox in patients with rheumatic diseases treated with TNF antagonists . Ann Rheum Dis 2010 ; 69 : 1751 – 5 . doi:10.1136/ard.2009.125658 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20551153 
OpenUrl Abstract / FREE Full Text 
↵ 
Gershon AA 
, 
Steinberg SP 
, 
Gelb L 
, et al 
. Live attenuated varicella vaccine. efficacy for children with leukemia in remission . JAMA 1984 ; 252 : 355-62 . doi:10.1001/jama.252.3.355 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6330386 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Gershon AA 
, 
Steinberg SP 
. Persistence of immunity to varicella in children with leukemia immunized with live attenuated varicella vaccine . N Engl J Med 1989 ; 320 : 892 – 7 . doi:10.1056/NEJM198904063201403 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2538749 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Weibel RE 
, 
Neff BJ 
, 
Kuter BJ 
, et al 
. Live attenuated varicella virus vaccine. efficacy trial in healthy children . N Engl J Med 1984 ; 310 : 1409 – 15 . doi:10.1056/NEJM198405313102201 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6325909 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Varis T 
, 
Vesikari T 
. Efficacy of high-titer live attenuated varicella vaccine in healthy young children . J Infect Dis 1996 ; 174 Suppl 3 : S330 – 4 . doi:10.1093/infdis/174.Supplement_3.S330 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8896541 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Rozenbaum MH 
, 
van Hoek AJ 
, 
Vegter S 
, et al 
. Cost-effectiveness of varicella vaccination programs: an update of the literature . Expert Rev Vaccines 2008 ; 7 : 753 – 82 . doi:10.1586/14760584.7.6.753 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18665775 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Henry O 
, 
Brzostek J 
, 
Czajka H 
, et al 
. One or two doses of live varicella virus-containing vaccines: efficacy, persistence of immune responses, and safety six years after administration in healthy children during their second year of life . Vaccine 2018 ; 36 : 381 – 7 . doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.11.081 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29224964 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Weinberg A 
, 
Levin MJ 
. VZV T cell-mediated immunity . Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2010 ; 342 : 341 – 57 . doi:10.1007/82_2010_31 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20473790 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Oxman MN 
. Zoster vaccine: current status and future prospects . Clin Infect Dis 2010 ; 51 : 197 – 213 . doi:10.1086/653605 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20550454 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed Web of Science 
↵ 
Groot N 
, 
Pileggi G 
, 
Sandoval CB 
, et al 
. Varicella vaccination elicits a humoral and cellular response in children with rheumatic diseases using immune suppressive treatment . Vaccine 2017 ; 35 : 2818 – 22 . doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.04.015 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28412076 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Barbosa CMPL 
, 
Terreri MTRA 
, 
Rosário PO 
, et al 
. Immune response and tolerability of varicella vaccine in children and adolescents with systemic lupus erythematosus previously exposed to varicella-zoster virus . Clin Exp Rheumatol 2012 ; 30 : 791 – 8 . pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22935227 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Speth F 
, 
Hinze CH 
, 
Andel S 
, et al 
. Varicella-zoster-virus vaccination in immunosuppressed children with rheumatic diseases using a pre-vaccination check list . Pediatr Rheumatol Online J . 2018 ; 16 : 15 . doi:10.1186/s12969-018-0231-3 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29499726 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Vaccines and vaccination against yellow fever : WHO Position Paper — June 2013 = Note de synthèse : position de l’OMS sur les vaccins et la vaccination contre la fièvre jaune, juin 2013 . Wkly Epidemiol Rec = Relev épidémiologique Hebd 2013 . 
↵ 
Nash ER 
, 
Brand M 
, 
Chalkias S 
. Yellow fever vaccination of a primary vaccinee during adalimumab therapy . J Travel Med 2015 ; 22 : 279 – 81 . doi:10.1111/jtm.12209 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25922988 
OpenUrl CrossRef PubMed 
↵ 
Pileggi GS 
, 
Da Mota LMH 
, 
Kakehasi AM 
, et al 
. Brazilian recommendations on the safety and effectiveness of the yellow fever vaccination in patients with chronic immune-mediated inflammatory diseases . Adv Rheumatol 2019 ; 59 : 17 . doi:10.1186/s42358-019-0056-x 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31036077 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Valim V 
, 
Machado KLLL 
, 
Miyamoto ST 
, et al 
. Planned yellow fever primary vaccination is safe and immunogenic in patients with autoimmune diseases: a prospective non-interventional study . Front Immunol 2020 ; 11 : 1382 . doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.01382 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32765496 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Cagol L 
, 
Seitel T 
, 
Ehrenberg S 
, et al 
. Vaccination rate and immunity of children and adolescents with inflammatory bowel disease or autoimmune hepatitis in Germany . Vaccine 2020 ; 38 : 1810 – 7 . doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.12.024 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31879123 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Beesley RP 
, 
Costello W 
, 
Angevare SP 
, et al 
. Survey of adult and paediatric rheumatology patients suggests information about COVID-19 vaccination will aid uptake . Rheumatology 2021 ; 60 : 3474 – 5 . doi:10.1093/rheumatology/keab169 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33590835 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Heshin-Bekenstein M 
, 
Ziv A 
, 
Toplak N 
, et al 
. Safety and immunogenicity of BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 vaccine in adolescents with rheumatic diseases treated with immunomodulatory medications . Rheumatology 2022 . doi: doi:10.1093/rheumatology/keac103 . [Epub ahead of print: 18 Feb 2022 ]. pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35179569 
↵ 
Dimopoulou D 
, 
Spyridis N 
, 
Vartzelis G 
, et al 
. Safety and tolerability of the COVID-19 messenger RNA vaccine in adolescents with juvenile idiopathic arthritis treated with tumor necrosis factor inhibitors . Arthritis Rheumatol 2022 ; 74 : 365 – 6 . doi:10.1002/art.41977 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34492161 
OpenUrl PubMed 
↵ 
Haslak F 
, 
Gunalp A 
, 
Cebi MN 
, et al 
. Early experience of COVID-19 vaccine-related adverse events among adolescents and young adults with rheumatic diseases: a single-center study . Int J Rheum Dis 2022 ; 25 : 353 – 63 . doi:10.1111/1756-185X.14279 
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34978376 
OpenUrl PubMed 
Footnotes 
Handling editor Josef S Smolen 
NMW and MWH contributed equally. 
Contributors MHAJ, MWH and CR performed the SLR. MHAJ and MWH primarily wrote the manuscipt. All authors were involved in the Delphi meeting and voting and reviewed the manuscript. 
Funding This study was funded by European League against Rheumatism (EULAR). 
Competing interests None declared. 
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed. 
Read the full text or download the PDF: 
Log in 
Log in via Institution 
Log in via OpenAthens 
Log in using your username and password 
For personal accounts OR managers of institutional accounts 
Username * 
Password * 
Forgot your log in details? Register a new account? 
Forgot your user name or password? 
Website Terms & Conditions 
Privacy & Cookies 
Contact BMJ 
Cookie Settings 
Online ISSN: 1468-2060 Print ISSN: 0003-4967 
© BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
