System dynamics modelling methods for public health policy evaluation: a systematic literature review focussing on mental health and substance use disorders
Background
In public health, simulation models are important tools for policy evaluations, and the nature of the problems these models address is complex. System dynamics (SD) modelling is acknowledged as a methodology for complex systems, but there is limited insight in the development and application of SD models for noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) and lifestyle-related risk factors. Therefore, this review investigates how these SD models are developed and utilised to project health outcomes and evaluate policy interventions.
Methods
Relevant studies were identified through a systematic search strategy. Studies were selected based on eligibility criteria, and data were extracted in two phases: (1) extraction of study characteristics, and (2) detailed examination of applied methods for a subset of included studies focussing on mental health and substance use disorders. For the second phase, data extraction was stratified according to steps of the modelling cycle, and the reporting quality of each study was assessed.
Results
In phase 1, 63 studies were included, mainly on mental health and substance use disorders (27%), obesity (17%), and diabetes (13%), with the number of studies increasing over time. In phase 2, 17 studies on mental health and substance use disorders were included. These studies commonly used dedicated software for SD modelling for the mathematical formulation and computerisation of their models. However, in 76% of these studies, the underlying mathematical equations were not shared, and in 82%, the models were not openly accessible. A (slight) majority of studies validated model outcomes against empirical data (65%), and performed sensitivity analysis (53%). Few studies reported model verification (18%) and face validation of model outcomes (18%).
Conclusions
SD models are increasingly developed for NCDs and lifestyle-related risk factors, and particularly applied to mental health and substance use disorders. This review offers insights into applied techniques for developing SD models for mental health and substance use disorders, and shows that steps of the modelling cycle are reported on with considerable variation. Although studies frequently report on certain aspects of testing and validation, many report incompletely on other activities of the modelling cycle, and the models sometimes lack transparency. Improving this would enhance the credibility of SD modelling in public health.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12889-026-26444-y.

Background
Policy evaluations and projections based on simulation models are important tools in public health to inform decision-making. These public health simulation models include health impact assessment (HIA) models and health economic (HE) decision models. HIA models are used for projections and evaluations with a focus on health outcomes only, while HE models are specifically applied for economic evaluations. Many public health problems arise from systems comprising multiple interconnected and interdependent components, such as interacting risk factors, which makes them complex. To capture this complexity, the structure of the simulation model should be carefully chosen.
Various model structures are available to support decision-making in public health. These structures can be classified in several ways. One way is to consider their ability to capture non-linear behaviour. State-transition models, which are commonly used model structures for HIA and HE models, generally have limited capacity to represent non-linear properties. Discrete event simulations are also frequently used and can account for non-linearities at an individual level, but they are limited in capturing feedback loops between system elements. In contrast, system dynamics (SD) models and agent-based models (ABMs) are specifically designed to capture non-linearities and feedback loops. The latter two are presented as complex systems modelling methods, in which there is growing interest in public health.
An SD model describes the structure of a complex system to quantitively analyse its behaviour over time. This is achieved by simulating how quantities, such as a number of patients, change over time as they move through the system. The system is conceptualised using stocks and flows, for instance the disease incidence, which are mathematically expressed by differential equations. SD models can also include auxiliary variables, like the infection rate or staff availability, which influence the flow rates. Key features of SD models are feedback loops, cycles in which changes influence themselves over time, and time delays, lags between actions and their effects. These features typically drive the dynamics of an SD model, allowing changes in one part to resonate throughout the whole system. In contrast to SD models, ABMs primarily focus on modelling individual behaviours and interactions.
Attention for SD modelling has increased in public health over the past years, with studies acknowledging its relevance and recent reviews showing applications to a wide range of public health problems. These problems include non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and lifestyle-related risk factors. SD models are particularly useful to model the complex dynamics of these conditions in a whole system, such as non-linear trajectories, multiple interconnected factors, emergent properties, and complex interactions. One group of conditions in public health that encompasses these complex processes is mental health and substance use disorders. Causal loop diagrams of two important conditions in this group, depression and tobacco use, include feedback loops (e.g., for tobacco use: smoking can increase financial strain, which in turn raises stress levels, potentially resulting in more smoking), and show that the dynamics of these conditions are a result of the complex interplay between individual, social, and environmental factors. This highlights the importance of accurately modelling the underlying complex system to ensure meaningful and reliable insights. Moreover, the high prevalence of mental health and substance use disorders, as well as their significant contribution to disease burden, implies the need for systematic evaluation of policy strategies, for example regarding investments in the prevention of mental disorders. Hence, the distinguishing features of SD models seem to align well with the characteristics of mental health and substance use disorders, as well as with needs for informed policy decisions. This makes SD modelling a promising technique for mental health and substance use disorders in particular.

Aim and objectives
Although SD modelling is a promising technique, notably for mental health and substance use disorders, it remains rather unclear how these models are developed and how they are used for projection and evaluation. As with any simulation modelling application, a structured and transparent modelling process is essential. This can be achieved by following the modelling cycle, which starts with a problem definition and then runs via conceptualisation, formalisation, computer implementation to validation and model results. Previous reviews on SD modelling lack detailed information on the methods used at each stage of the modelling cycle. Hence, more insight is needed into how these steps can be operationalised for SD models in public health. Therefore, our aim was to perform a systematic literature review to identify best practice applications of SD models for NCDs and lifestyle-related risk factors of NCDs, focussing on SD models for mental health and substance use disorders in particular. This systematic literature review was guided by the following two research questions:
What are the main NCDs and lifestyle-related risk factors for which SD models are used to project incidence and prevalence of population health outcomes, and to evaluate the effects of policy interventions on these outcomes?
How are SD models for mental health and substance use disorders developed and quantified, and how are they used to project incidence and prevalence of population health outcomes, and to evaluate the effects of policy interventions on these outcomes?

Methods
This systematic literature review was mainly conducted according to a protocol that was written and registered with PROSPERO (review number CRD42023445063) prior to the start of the review. The original research questions from the protocol were aimed at providing an overview of methods for SD modelling in public health. Because our search strategy resulted in a large number of studies, we conducted the complete data extraction for a subset of included studies. Due to the relevance highlighted above, we limited the full extraction to SD models addressing mental health and substance use disorders. For the complete set of included studies on SD modelling in public health, we provided an overview of study characteristics. We updated the research questions from the protocol according to this new extraction strategy. The review is reported following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines (see Additional file 1 for the completed PRISMA checklist).

Selection criteria
Studies were included if they met all of the following criteria. The study: (1) describes a model referred to as a SD model; (2) reports on the model development of an SD model in order to project incidence or prevalence of NCDs and their risk factors (for specification: see below) in a public health context, or reports on expanding such a model; (3) reports an evaluation of policy interventions, or a theoretical scenario, using the model; (4) is modelled on a (sub)population-level; (5) was published after 2000; and (6) was peer reviewed.
We specified categories of NCDs that are lifestyle-related and can reasonably be influenced by interventions using the “Global health estimates 2021: Leading causes of DALYs” list by the WHO. These NCD categories were: cancers, diabetes, mental health and substance use disorders, neurological conditions, cardiovascular diseases, respiratory diseases, kidney diseases, oral conditions, and musculoskeletal/neurological manifestation. For mental health, we also included suicide as an endpoint. Lifestyle-related risk factors of NCDs were based on a factsheet on NCDs published by the WHO, and were selected if they could reasonably be influenced by interventions. These risk factors were: obesity, hypertension, tobacco use (including smoking), excess salt or sodium intake, and insufficient physical activity. From here onwards, we will refer to these groups as NCDs and risk factors. A detailed specification can be found in Additional file 2.

Information sources and search strategy
A systematic electronic search was conducted in MEDLINE (via PubMed), Embase (via embase.com), Web of Science Core Collection, and the IEEE Xplore Digital Library, covering studies published between 2000 and 2025. The initial search was conducted on November 6, 2023, and updated on May 6, 2025. Search strategies were developed in collaboration with an information specialist (SvdW) and focused on four core concepts: (1) system dynamics modelling; (2) population health or policy; (3) NCDs and risk factors; and (4) outcome (e.g., projection or impact). For each concept, both controlled vocabulary (e.g., MeSH, Emtree) and free-text terms, searched in titles and abstracts, were used.
The search excluded animal studies, review studies, records with “coronavirus” or “COVID” in the title, and studies published before 2000, due to the high volume of unrelated results. To supplement the database searches, additional studies were identified through backward and forward citation tracking of eligible studies, as well as selected reviews. The first 100 results from Google Scholar were also screened to identify potentially relevant studies not captured in the database searches. Full search strategies are provided in Additional file 3.

Screening process
All search results were exported to EndNote, and duplicates were removed following a step-by-step method described by Bramer et al.. Screening was conducted in Rayyan in two stages based on the predefined eligibility criteria. First, two reviewers (HV and JtD) independently screened all titles and abstracts for eligibility. Next, the same reviewers independently assessed the full-text, including their relevant supplementary materials, of studies that were identified as eligible by at least one reviewer in the title and abstract screening. Excluded articles were labelled with the specific reason for exclusion based on the eligibility criteria. Any disparities in the second stage were resolved through discussion and reaching consensus. One disagreement was resolved through discussion with a third reviewer (JR), and one non-English papers was screened in correspondence with a native speaker.

Data items and data collection process
The data extraction process consisted of two phases, and the results section is structured accordingly. In phase 1, studies were grouped into NCD or risk factor categories. For this purpose, we identified the main NCD or risk factor for each study. The categories are in line with the NCDs and risk factors categories used as selection criteria (see Additional file 2). Studies that did not cover one NCD or risk factor in particular (e.g., multiple chronic conditions) were classified as ‘combination’. We also extracted the publication year, title, modelled location and objective in phase 1. In phase 2, we focussed on mental health and substance use disorders-related studies. In this phase, elaborate information on the characteristics of the SD model and methods used for development was extracted from the included studies and, if applicable, their supplementary materials. Since no existing data extraction framework could be identified for this purpose, an extraction framework was drafted based on the Strengthening the Reporting of Empirical Simulation Studies guidelines for system dynamics (STRESS-SD) reporting guidelines and the steps of the modelling cycle instead. The framework includes items for citation details and study characteristics (e.g., time horizon) and items for the following themes, which are in line with the topics of the modelling cycle: (1) problem formulation; (2) formulating a conceptual model; (3) formulating a simulation model; (4) model testing and validation; and (5) policy design and evaluation. Figure 1 visualises the five steps of the modelling cycle. Additional file 4 shows the full data extraction framework.
Visualisation of the modelling steps (based on)
Two reviewers (HV and JtD) conducted data extraction for both phases. In phase 1, HV extracted the information and JtD reviewed the extracted data. In phase 2, first, HV and JtD independently extracted two included studies. The results were discussed, and after this, the set of remaining studies was split in two disjoint sets. Each reviewer independently extracted the data for one of the sets, and after completion, the other reviewer reviewed the extraction. Finally, all extractions were discussed by the two reviewers to reach consensus, resolving any disparity through discussion.

Quality assessment
The aim of the quality assessment was to evaluate, based on reporting, the process to develop the model and to obtain its results. An assessment form was based on quality criteria for computer simulation modelling in health care as presented by Fone et al. and the steps of the modelling cycle. The assessment form contained 15 criteria, categorised into four topics: (1) general information; (2) describing the model; (3) model assessment: validation, calibration, verification; and (4) results. The complete list of criteria is provided in Additional file (5) Each criterion was scored on a scale from 0 to 2, where 0 meant ‘not described’, 1 meant ‘partially described’, and 2 meant ‘fully described’. If necessary, 0.5 points could be awarded and a maximum total score of 30 points could be obtained. The same procedure as described for the phase 2 data extraction was used for the quality assessment. Quality scores were not to be used to exclude studies.
PRISMA flow diagram of the study selection process

Results

Search findings
A flowchart of the selection strategy according to the PRISMA guidelines is displayed in Fig. 2. A total of 2556 unique records were identified by searching the scientific databases. An additional 6209 records were identified though the Google scholar search, forward and backward snowballing of retained studies, and by checking the reference list of ten related reviews. In total, 63 studies met the eligibility criteria and were included in this review. The most common reason for exclusion was that no SD model was developed (e.g.,). Out of the 63 studies included in this review, 17 covered mental health or substance use disorders and were thus included in the second phase of the data extraction.

Phase 1: SD models for NCDs and risk factors
Figure 3 shows the distribution of included articles over the NCD and risk factors categories. Most studies modelled mental health and substance use disorders (n = 17, 27%) and obesity (n = 11, 17%), followed by studies reporting on diabetes (n = 8, 13%) and studies reporting a combination of conditions (n = 7, 11%). We did not identify studies on neurological conditions, respiratory diseases, musculoskeletal/neurological manifestation, hypertension, or physical activity. Figure 4 shows that the number of studies on public health SD models has been increasing over time, especially over in the past 10 years. Additional file 6 lists an overview of the other study characteristics that were extracted in phase 1.
Number of studies on SD models for NCDs and lifestyle-related risk factors (phase 1, by category)
Number of studies on SD models for NCDs and lifestyle-related risk factors over time (January 2000 – May 2025)

Phase 2: SD models for mental health and substance use disorders
We included 17 studies focusing on mental health and substance use disorders in the second phase of the study. Tables 1 and 2 show the extracted data on the development of SD models for mental health and substance use disorders. Table 1 contains information on step 1 and 2 of the modelling cycle, which are problem formulation and formulating a conceptual model, and Table 2 presents the result on steps 3 to 5 of the modelling cycle, which are formulating a simulation model, model validation and testing, and policy design and evaluation.
Data extraction for studies on mental health and substance use disorders (phase 2, steps 1 and 2)
Item	Problem formulation	Formulating a conceptual model	 	Purpose of the study and model	Time horizon	Population and country	Type of health problem	Main model outputs	Qualitative data collection method	Conceptual model overview diagram	Feedback loops	Delays	 	Cavana and Tobias 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making	2001–2031	The general population (age > 10) of New Zealand	Smoking/tobacco use	Smoking prevalence, tobacco consumption, tobacco attributable mortality	Not reported	Causal loop diagram, Conceptual model diagram, Stock and flow diagram	Yes	Not reported	 	Clouth et al. 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making	2000–2050	The general population of Germany	Schizophrenia	Schizophrenia prevalence	Not reported	Stock and flow diagram	Not reported	Not reported	 	Crosland et al. 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making	2023–2032	Children, adolescents, and young adults in the Australian Capital Territory, Australia	Suicide, mental health problems	QALYs	Participatory modelling	Conceptual model diagram, Stock and flow diagram	Yes	No	 	Deutsch et al. 	To address gaps in literature by presenting an SD model that aligns with current research.	2019–2024	The general population (age ≥ 12) of the Northern Plains in the United States	Alcohol abuse	Risky drinkers, people with alcohol use disorder	Literature search	Stock and flow diagram	None	Not reported	 	Goldberg et al. 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making	2016–2031	The general population (age ≥ 20) in New South Wales, Australia	Suicide	Number of suicide attempts and suicide deaths.	Participatory modelling	Stock and flow diagram	Not reported	Not reported	 	Hill and Camacho 	To investigate the potential health impact of new nicotine products.	2000–2050	The general population in the United Kingdom	Smoking/tobacco use	Smoking prevalence by smoking status	Expert reference group	Stock and flow diagram	Yes	Not reported	 	Homer and Wakeland 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making	1990–2030	The general population (age ≥ 20 year) of the USA	Opioid abuse	Prescriptive opioids nonmedical users, heroin users	Literature search	Stock and flow diagram	Yes	None	 	Occhipinti et al. 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making	2011–2041	The general population of North Coast, New South Wales, Australia	Suicide	Self-harm hospitalisation and suicide rates	Participatory modelling	Conceptual model diagram, Stock and flow diagram	Not reported	Yes	 	Ospina-Pinillos et al. 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making	2010–2030	Children and adolescents (7–17 years) in Bogotá, Colombia	Suicide, mental health problems	Suicide attempts, suicides, mental health problems, and substance use problems.	Participatory modelling	Conceptual model diagram, Stock and flow diagram	Not reported	Not reported	 	Page et al. 	To demonstrate a potential platform for policy decision-making by integrating diverse evidence sources	2001–2025	The general population of Australia	Suicide	Number of suicides	Not reported	Conceptual model diagram	Yes	Yes	 	Page et al. 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making	2018–2028	The general population of Western Sydney (Australia)	Suicide	Number of hospital-based attempted suicide and suicide deaths.	Participatory modelling	Conceptual model diagram, Stock and flow diagram	Not reported	Not reported	 	Selya et al. 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making	1992–2032	Youth (age 11–18) in North Dakota, USA	Smoking/tobacco use	Youth smoking rates	Not reported	Causal loop diagram, Stock and flow diagram	Yes	Not reported	 	Selya 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making	2000–2100	The general population of the USA	Smoking/tobacco use	People with established (e-)cigarette use, e-cigarette inflation rate, e-cigarette initiation rate	Not reported	Causal loop diagram, Stock and flow diagram	Yes	Yes	 	Tengs et al. 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making	2001–2051	The general population of the United States	Smoking/tobacco use	QALYs	Not reported	Not reported	None	Not reported	 	Vickland et al. 	To improve understanding of the dynamics between the different parts of the system	2001–2040	General population (age > 60) of Australia	Dementia	Prevalence of dementia by stage	Expert reference group	Stock and flow diagram	Not reported	Not reported	 	Wakeland et al. 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making, and to improve understanding of the dynamics between the different parts of the system	2008–2015	Individuals prescribed opioids and nonmedical opioid users in the United States	Opioid abuse	Opioid overdose fatalities, non-medical opioid users	Expert reference group	Stock and flow diagram	Yes	Not reported	 	Wakeland et al. 	To explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making, and to improve understanding of the dynamics between the different parts of the system	2010–2016	Susceptible nonmedical pharmaceutical opioid analgesics users in the United States	Opioid abuse	Non-medical opioid users and accidental overdose mortality	Expert reference group	Stock and flow diagram	Yes	Not reported
Data extraction for studies on mental health and substance use disorders (phase 2, steps 3–5)
Item	Formulating a simulation model	Model testing and validation	Policy design and evaluation	 	Data sources	Mathematical model	Computerised model:parameterisation	Computerised model:implementation tool	Open access	Model validation and verification	Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis	Costs and health	Economic efficiency analysis	 	Cavana and Tobias	National and regional datasetsLiterature	Implicit using tool: no formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataAlgebraically determined ratios and consumption using simple formulasCalibration of unknown parameters	iThink	Yes(by emailing the first author)	Validation against empirical data	Scenario-based sensitivity analysis	Health gains	Interventions	 	Clouth et al. 	National dataset(s)Literature	Implicit using tool: no formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataAlgebraically determined death rates using simple formulaCalibration of unknown parameters	Vensim	Not reported	Not reported	Scenario-based sensitivity analysis	Both	Scenario projections	 	Crosland et al. 	National and regional datasetsLiteratureExpert consensus	Not reported	Prior research/literature and dataCalibration of unknown parameters	Not reported	Not reported	Validation against empirical dataStakeholder face validity	One-way sensitivity analysisParameter uncertainty through Latin Hypercube Sampling and reporting uncertainty intervals	Both	Impact of interventions	 	Deutsch et al. 	National and/or regional dataset(s)Literature	Implicit using tool: no formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataCalibration of unknown parameters	Vensim	Yes	Validation against empirical data	Two-way sensitivity analysisParameter uncertainty through calibration and reporting uncertainty intervals	Health gains	Scenario projections	 	Goldberg et al. 	Regional dataset(s)LiteratureExpert consensus	Implicit using tool: no formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataExpert consultationCalibration of unknown parameters	Stella Architect	No	Validation against empirical data	Not reported	Health gains	Interventions	 	Hill and Camacho 	National dataset(s) and regional dataset(s)Literature	Implicit using tool; formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataAlgebraically determined risk ratios using a negative exponential distributionAlgebraically determined mortality and all-cause mortality using simple formulaBaseline calibration	Vensim	Not reported	Stakeholder face validityModel code verification	One-way sensitivity analysis	Health gains	Scenario projections	 	Homer and Wakeland 	National dataset(s)	Implicit using tool; formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataCalibration of unknown parameters	Vensim	Not reported	Validation against empirical data	Parameter uncertainty through Monte Carlo testing and reporting mean absolute error of the mean	Health gains	Interventions	 	Occhipinti et al. 	National dataset(s) and regional dataset(s)Literature	Implicit using tool; formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataAlgebraically determined death rates using simple formulaCalibration of unknown parameters	Stella Architect	Not reported	Validation against empirical data Stakeholder face validity	Parameter uncertainty through Latin Hypercube Sampling and reporting uncertainty intervals	Health gains	Interventions	 	Ospina-Pinillos et al. 	National dataset(s)Literature	Implicit using tool; no formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataCalibration of unknown parameters	Stella Architect	Not reported	Validation against empirical data	Parameter uncertainty through Latin Hypercube Sampling and reporting uncertainty intervals	Health gains	Interventions	 	Page et al. 	National dataset(s)Literature	Not reported	Prior research/literature and dataCalibration of unknown parameters	Not reported	No (reported open access, but cannot be accessed)	Not reported	Not reported	Health gains	Interventions	 	Page et al. 	National dataset(s)Regional dataset(s)Published researchExpert consensus	Implicit using tool; no formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataExpert consultation for unknown parametersBaseline calibration	Stella Architect	Not reported	Validation against empirical data	One-way sensitivity analysisParameter uncertainty reporting % marginal of error	Health gains	Interventions	 	Selya et al. 	National dataset(s) and regional dataset(s)Literature	Implicit using tool; no formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataSoft variables procedure for unknown parametersBaseline calibration	Stella Architect	Yes	Validation against empirical dataModel code verification	One-way sensitivity analysis	Health gains	Interventions	 	Selya 	National dataset(s)	Implicit using tool; no formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataCalibration of unknown parameters	Stella Architect	Yes	Validation against empirical dataModel code verification	Scenario-based sensitivity analysis	Health gains	Interventions	 	Tengs et al. 	National dataset(s)Literature	Implicit using tool; no formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataComputational parameter estimation using hazard functions and indirect estimation method for risk of relapse	Vensim	Not reported	Not reported	Parameter uncertainty through Monte Carlo testing and reporting uncertainty intervals	Both	Interventions	 	Vickland et al. 	Literature	Implicit using tool; no formulas reported	Prior research/literature and dataCalibration of unknown parameters	AnyLogic	Not reported	Not reported	Scenario-based sensitivity analysis	Health gains	Scenario projections	 	Wakeland et al. 	LiteratureExpert consensus	Not reported	Prior research/literature and dataExpert consultation for unknown parameters	Not reported	Not reported	Validation against empirical data	Not reported	Health gains	Interventions	 	Wakeland et al. 	LiteratureExpert consensus	Implicit using tool; formulas partially reported	Prior research/literature and dataCalibration of unknown parameters	Vensim	Not reported	Validation against empirical data	Not reported	Health gains	Interventions

Step 1. Problem formulation
Studies reported various motivations to develop their SD model. Most aimed to explore the effects of policy interventions and support decision-making (n = 13, 76%). The second most common reason was to improve understanding of the dynamics between the different parts of the system (n = 3, 18%). The other motivations were: to address gaps in literature (n = 1, 6%), to demonstrate a potential platform for integrating diverse evidence sources for decision-making (n = 1, 6%), and investigating potential health impacts (n = 1, 6%).
The studies focussed on the following subtopics within mental health and substance use disorders: suicide and mental health problems (n = 6, 35%), smoking/tobacco use (n = 5, 29%), opioid abuse (n = 3, 18%), alcohol abuse (n = 1, 6%), dementia (n = 1, 6%), and schizophrenia (n = 1, 6%). Most studies modelled the general population of a country, while six studies focussed on larger sub-populations (35%). The studies were primarily set in high income countries (94%), apart from one study set in Colombia (6%). All studies reported a time horizon, with lengths varying between 5 and 100 years (100%). Most studies reported on prevalence or incidences of NCDs or risk factors as main model output (n = 15, 88%), while two studies primarily focussed on Quality-Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) (12%).

Step 2. Formulating a conceptual model
Figure 5 shows the qualitative data collection methods reported to formulate a conceptual model (5a) and the inclusion of feedback loops and delays (5b). To formulate the conceptual model, five studies used a participatory modelling approach (29%), four studies consulted an expert reference group (24%), and two studies conducted a literature search (12%). All other studies did not report on this (n = 6, 35%). Nine studies reported to incorporate feedback loops in their model (53%). Two studies did not consider feedback loops (12%), whereas the six other studies did not report on feedback loops (35%). Three studies implemented delays in their models (18%), one reported not to implement them (6%), and all other studies did not report on delays (76%).
The majority of studies visualised and presented the conceptual model through a stock and flow diagram (n = 15, 88%). Four of these studies additionally presented a more abstract overview by providing a conceptual model diagram (24%), two of them also presented a causal loop diagram (12%), and one of the studies additionally presented both a causal loop diagram and conceptual model diagram (6%). For one study, the conceptual model diagram was the sole method (6%), and one study did not visually present the conceptual model (6%).
Data extraction summary for conceptual model formulation of SD models for mental health and substance use disorders: (a) methods for qualitative data collection, (b) inclusion of feedback loops and delays

Step 3. Formulating a simulation model
Studies used data from various sources to parameterise their simulation models. Figure 6a shows the methods that were used by studies to estimate the model parameters for which no empirical data were available. They were often estimated through calibration, which in all cases was performed via constrained optimisation. Typically, this was performed with the software’s built-in method (n = 10, 59%), while other studies did not specify software for parameter estimation (n = 2, 12%). Four studies used additional methods to estimate some parameters: three applied simple algebraic formulas (18%) and one consulted experts after calibration (6%). Other studies that did not estimate unknown model parameters through calibration used alternative estimation methods: hazard functions and indirect estimation (n = 1, 6%), simple algebraic formulas (n = 1, 6%), expert consultation (n = 2, 12%) and a soft variable approach to estimate subjective values using expert opinion and qualitative information (n = 1, 6%). The latter three did also calibrate the model at baseline by tuning the model parameters to ensure that the model outputs match observed data.
Figure 6b shows the number of studies that reported mathematical equations. Most studies did not provide the underlying mathematical equations. Only four studies, all using a dedicated software tool, (partially) reported these (24%). The three studies that did not specify the software that was used also did not report on mathematical equations (18%). The majority of studies used dedicated SD software to convert the conceptual model into a mathematical and computerised model (n = 14, 82%). The tools Stella Architect (n = 6, 35%) and Vensim (n = 6, 35%) were most used. iThink and AnyLogic were both used once (both 6%), and three studies did not report on this (18%). Three simulation models were openly available (18%), one could be obtained by e-mailing the first author (6%), and one model was inaccessible although stated otherwise (6%). All remaining models were not open access.
Data extraction summary for model formulation of SD models for mental health and substance use disorders: (a) methods to estimate unknown parameters, (b) reporting of mathematical equations

Step 4. Model testing and validation
Figure 7a shows methods that were used across studies to assess validation, verification and uncertainty of their models. Eleven studies compared model outcomes with empirical data to validate model results (65%). Two of these studies also face validated the model structure and results by consulting stakeholders (12%). One study only performed face validation on model outcomes (6%). Three studies verified their model code (18%), and four studies did not report any validation or verification efforts (24%). Parameter uncertainty was assessed in seven studies (41%), for which several methods were used. Latin Hypercube Sampling (n = 3, 18%) and Monte Carlo testing (n = 2, 12%) were the most prevalent ones. Most of them reported uncertainty intervals (n = 5, 29%). It is shown in Fig. 7b that nine studies conducted deterministic sensitivity analysis (53%). Four of these studies conducted one-way sensitivity analysis (24%), four others conducted scenario-based sensitivity analysis (24%), and one study conducted a two-way sensitivity analysis (6%).
Data extraction summary for model testing and validation of SD models for mental health and substance use disorders: (a) (face) validation, verification and parameter uncertainty, (b) sensitivity analysis method

Step 5. Policy design and evaluation
In their projections, the majority of studies evaluated intervention policies (n = 13, 76%), and four studies presented theoretical scenarios to inform policy making (24%). Evaluations were always conducted based on health gains (100%), and costs were additionally reported in three studies (18%).

Quality assessment
Figure 8 shows scoring of each item of the reporting quality assessment. Most studies did not describe the mathematical model (n = 10, 59%) and computerised model (n = 14, 82%). Low scores were also obtained on the model assessment items about validation, calibration and verification of the conceptual model (n = 9, 53%) and the computerised model (n = 12, 71%). Full points were mainly obtained on general criteria, such as describing the study objectives and main health outcomes (n = 13, 76% for both). No study fully described all quality assessment items, and overall quality scores varied between 7 and 23 (out of 30), with an average score of 16.8 (± 4.3 sd). Full results can be found in Additional file 7.
Quality assessment of included studies on mental health and substance use disorders, per item of the quality assessment form

Discussion and conclusions
This study presents a systematic literature review of SD models for pre-specified NCDs and lifestyle-related risk factors of NCDs that were used for projection and policy evaluation. The study consisted of two phases. In phase 1, a total of 63 relevant studies were included, most of which focussed on mental health and substance use disorders. In phase 2, we extracted data from the 17 studies on mental health and substance use disorders, which offered insights into how these SD models were conceptualised, computerised and implemented. The use of dedicated SD software and built-in parameter estimation methods via calibration appears to be a common approach to implement the mathematical and computerised model. However, most underlying mathematical models were poorly documented and the models are often not open access. While many studies validated model outcomes against empirical data and conducted sensitivity analysis, other methods to ensure that the simulation model is fit for purpose were rarely reported.

Main findings and comparison with prior reviews
Of the SD models included in the first phase of this study, the following NCD categories were the most frequently addressed: mental health and substance use disorders, obesity, and diabetes. This finding aligns with other systematic reviews on SD models for health, such as those of Darabi and Hosseinichimeh and Davahli et al., which also identified these categories as commonly studied. In phase 1, we found 17 studies on mental health and substance use disorders, 11 studies on obesity and 8 studies on diabetes. In comparison, Darabi and Hosseinmich identified 14 studies in total on obesity and diabetes and 18 studies on mental health alone, while Davahli et al. reported 15 studies on mental health and substance use disorders, 14 studies on obesity and 7 on diabetes. These differences might be explained by variations in research aims and hence selection criteria. Both other reviews were more general than ours and we applied stricter selection criteria. For example, they used more generic search terms, while we focussed on specific terms for included NCDs and risk factors. Furthermore, our review utilised four electronic databases, while the others used only two. Additionally, both of the other reviews were published 5 years prior to the conduct of this study, and therefore did not include more recent studies.
In the second phase of this study, with a focus on SD models for mental health and substance use disorders, we found that nearly half of the studies did not specify their qualitative data collection method for designing the conceptual model. We argue that specifying this is essential for understanding the perspectives used to conceptualise the system and model. Moreover, although fewer than a third of the studies employed participatory modelling, its use has become more prevalent in recent studies. Most studies implemented the mathematical and computerised model using dedicated SD modelling software (82%), resulting in more consistency, and often employing calibration methods to estimate unknown parameters (71%). This approach is common, because SD models often include abstract non-linear relationships and unmeasurable parameters that complicate analytic estimation of these parameters. While the use of dedicated software is understandable, it impedes the provision of underlying mathematical equations, and thereby insights into the model’s computerisation. Our results show that many studies did not specify mathematical equations (76%), and did not make the models open access (82%). Transparent reporting on models would enhance overall transparency and help avoid the perception of the model as a black box.
To test and validate their SD model, studies reported some approaches more frequently than others. Validation against empirical data was conducted in most studies on mental health and substance use disorders (65%). In contrast, face validation and model code verification were infrequently reported (both 18%). Other forms of validation, such as cross model validation, were not reported on. Notably, some studies did not report on model validation and verification at all (24%). 53% of the studies conducted sensitivity analysis, and 41% addressed parameter uncertainty. Hence, although validation against empirical data and sensitivity analysis are reported in the majority of studies, other model testing practices are reported less frequently.

Opportunities and recommendations
This study’s results provide insights in opportunities for further application and development of SD models in public health. SD modelling is frequently applied to address NCDs and lifestyle-related risk factors of NCDs. Also, some good practices in developing SD models were reported by a share of the studies, such as the use of dedicated SD modelling software for the mathematical formulation and computerisation of the SD model (82%) and validation against empirical data (65%). However, gaps remain in both the application of SD modelling, and in the underlying methods that are used. This highlights opportunities for further research and advancement in SD modelling.
For the application of SD models, there were a number of categories of NCDs and risk factors for which no SD models were identified: neurological conditions, respiratory diseases, musculoskeletal/neurological manifestation, hypertension, and physical activity. For many of these topics, the potential of SD modelling seems to be underexplored, even though the technique might be useful for understanding and addressing them. For example, the respiratory disease asthma encompasses dynamic and reciprocal relationships between risk factors, such as air pollution and physical activity. Asthma, as well as other NCDs, are complex health conditions that may involve numerous determinants, feedback loops, and dynamic interactions over time.
Regarding methods used for the development of SD models for mental health and substance use disorders, we identified opportunities for participatory modelling and model transparency. We found that 29% of studies reported using a participatory modelling approach as their qualitative data collection method for designing the conceptual model. SD models for NCDs and risk factors often incorporate human behaviour and are ultimately intended to inform decision-making. For these reasons, they are ideally developed in a participatory fashion. While participatory modelling has become more common in the conceptualisation phase of recent studies, co-creation throughout the entire modelling process remains relatively rare. Yet, involving stakeholders at every stage fosters the credibility and legitimacy of the model, which in turn can increase the acceptability of the model among decision-makers. Therefore, engaging stakeholders throughout the whole modelling process presents a valuable opportunity for SD modelling practice.
In 76% of the studies for mental health and substance use disorders, the underlying mathematical equations were not shared, and in 82%, the models were not openly accessible. Moreover, few studies reported model code verification (18%) and face validation of model outcomes (18%), and only a slight majority of studies reported on validating the model against empirical data or conducted sensitivity analysis. Hence, studies can improve the transparency of the SD models themselves, as well as the transparency of reporting on their activities to develop, test, and validate their models. This is also in line with our quality assessment results, where we found that items on describing the model and model assessment scored low. Transparent SD models are important to establish confidence in model results and are essential for providing decision-makers with reliable insights into the potential consequences of various policy scenarios. In addition, transparency enhances clarity and reproducibility of models and their outcomes, which in turn also facilitates knowledge sharing. To address these issues, transparency of SD models can be enhanced by adhering to guidelines regarding SD modelling (e.g.,), and best practices in SD modelling (e.g.,), as well as making models open source. Improving transparency in SD modelling thus represents a key opportunity for future research to enhance the credibility, reproducibility, and practical impact of SD models.

Strengths and limitations of this review
The key strength of this systematic literature review lies in its comprehensive overview of SD models for NCDs and risk factors, and in-depth insights in how SD models for mental health and substance use disorders are formulated. Moreover, this review contributes to the existing body of knowledge related to the methods used in the development of SD models, especially in the field of mental health and substance use disorders, and provides valuable insights into existing research gaps. It thereby points out opportunities in modelling practice. The review is transparent through the provided search strategy and eligibility criteria, by pre-registering the study protocol in PROSPERO, and by adhering to PRISMA guidelines in general.
Nevertheless, this review is subject to several limitations. First, our inclusion criterion to only consider studies that use the term “system dynamics” in the title, abstract, main text and/or appendix is strict, and might have excluded studies that are arguably SD models but are not explicitly labelled as such (e.g.,). This criterion was chosen to maintain a clear definition. Given this, we provided an exhaustive overview of studies on SD models for NCDs and lifestyle-related risk factors of NCDs. Another limitation is that we did not provide the phase 2 extraction for all the studies that were included in phase 1. In contrast to our approach in the protocol, where we planned for data extraction from all studies identified in the initial selection, we limited our scope for the full extraction to SD models for mental health and substance use disorders for the reasons stated in the Methods section. If these SD models are systematically differently developed, the methods and reporting gaps we identified might not generalise to other application areas. However, no obvious reasons exist why aspects of model transparency and validation would be different in different application areas.
The third limitation is posed by our eligibility criterion to include only studies about the development of an SD model that was used for both projection and policy evaluation. As a result, studies that reported the development of an SD model in one publication, and demonstrated its usefulness for evaluation in a separate one, were excluded. While these studies have more space to report, they might provide more detailed descriptions of aspects that were lacking in the studies included in this review.

Conclusions
This systematic literature review presents an overview of which NCDs and lifestyle-related risk factors of NCDs are most frequently explored using SD modelling. We found that they are most commonly used for mental health and substance use disorders. Moreover, we examined how they are developed and applied for projection and evaluation in mental health and substance use disorders.
Our findings indicate that the conceptualisation of an SD model is increasingly being carried out in a participatory fashion, although this trend is still emerging and rarely applied throughout the entire modelling process. Moreover, models were often developed and calibrated using dedicated software, and a slight majority of studies reported on validating the model against empirical data and conducting sensitivity analysis. However, our results show that many studies lack reporting on other steps of the modelling cycle, indicating a lack of transparency. This highlights the importance of following reporting guidelines and best practices, and ensuring models are openly accessible. Overall, although SD models are increasingly developed and applied, reporting on key methodological aspects can be improved. This will increase transparency and may strengthen model credibility, ultimately supporting more robust evidence-based decision-making in public health.

Supplementary Information

Abbreviations
SD
System dynamics
NCDs
Noncommunicable diseases
HIA
Health impact assessment
HE
Health economic
ABM
Agent-based model
QALY
Quality-Adjusted Life Year
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Authors’ contributions
The conceptualisation and initiation of this systematic review was done by HV, TF, JR and BW. HV registered the review with PROSPERO. The search strategy was developed by HV and SvdW. The study selection and data extractions were performed by HV and JtD. Manuscript concept and drafting were done by all authors. HV prepared all tables and figures in the manuscript. All authors revised, read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding
Funding for this research was provided by the Strategic Program of the Netherlands National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), grant number S/133032/01. The funder did not influence the design and execution of this research.

Data availability
All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this published article and its supplementary information files.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Informing public health policies with models for disease burden, impact evaluation, and economic evaluation
Briggs A, Claxton K, Sculpher M. Decision modelling for health economic evaluation. Oxford University Press; 2006.
Health impact assessment
Complex systems thinking and current impasses in health disparities research
Complexity in epidemiology and public health. Addressing complex health problems through a mix of epidemiologic methods and data
Guidance on the use of complex systems models for economic evaluations of public health interventions
A taxonomy of model structures for economic evaluation of health technologies
Briggs ADM, Wolstenholme J, Blakely T, Scarborough P. Choosing an epidemiological model structure for the economic evaluation of non-communicable disease public health interventions. Popul Health Metr. 2016. 10.1186/s12963-016-0085-1.
Selecting a dynamic simulation modeling method for health care delivery research—Part 2: report of the ISPOR dynamic simulation modeling emerging good practices task force
Complex system policy modelling approaches for policy advice -comparing systems thinking, system dynamics and agent-based modelling
Systems thinking and complexity science methods and the policy process in Non-communicable disease prevention: A systematic scoping review
The need for a complex systems model of evidence for public health
Mathematical modelling for health systems research: a systematic review of system dynamics and agent-based models
Review of modelling approaches for healthcare simulation
Systems science and systems thinking for public health: a systematic review of the field
Practical challenges of systems thinking and modeling in public health
System dynamics modeling in health and medicine: a systematic literature review
A system dynamics simulation applied to healthcare: a systematic review
System dynamics modeling for public health: background and opportunities
Depression as a systemic syndrome: mapping the feedback loops of major depressive disorder
Using systems science to advance health equity in tobacco control: a causal loop diagram of smoking
Global, regional, and National burden of 12 mental disorders in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2019
Global incidence, prevalence, years lived with disability (YLDs), disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs), and healthy life expectancy (HALE) for 371 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories and 811 subnational locations, 1990–2021: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021
Global burden of disease and the impact of mental and addictive disorders
Global burden of disease attributable to mental and substance use disorders: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010
The economic case for the prevention of mental illness
Economic evaluations of interventions designed to prevent mental disorders: a systematic review
Kuntz K et al. Best Practices for Decision and Simulation Modeling. In: Decision and Simulation Modeling in Systematic Reviews. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2013. Report No.: 11(13)-EHC037-EF. pp. 56–75. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK127471/
PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency. 2011. The PBL-checklist for assessing modelquality. Questionnaire, explanation and vocabulary. Bilthoven, the Netherlands. https://www.pbl.nl/publicaties/het-pbl-normenkader-voor-modellen. Accesed September 2023.
Sargent RG. An introductory tutorial on verification and validation of simulation models. 2015 Winter Simul Conf (WSC). 2015. 10.1109/WSC.2015.7408291.
System dynamics models of depression at the population level: a scoping review
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
WHO. 2021. Global health estimates: Leading causes of DALYs. https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/mortality-and-global-health-estimates/global-health-estimates-leading-causes-of-dalys. Accesed September 2023.
WHO. 2023. Factsheet: Noncommuncable diseases. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/noncommunicable-diseases. Accessed September 2023.
De-duplication of database search results for systematic reviews in endnote
Rayyan—a web and mobile app for systematic reviews
Strengthening the reporting of empirical simulation studies: introducing the STRESS guidelines
Systematic review of the use and value of computer simulation modelling in population health and health care delivery
Applications of system dynamics modelling to support health policy
Dynamic modeling approaches to characterize the functioning of health systems: a systematic review of the literature
The application of system dynamics modelling to environmental health decision-making and policy - a scoping review
Using system dynamics modelling to assess the economic efficiency of innovations in the public sector - a systematic review
Evaluation of public health interventions from a complex systems perspective: a research methods review
Complex systems model of dynamic mechanisms of early childhood caries development
From model to action: using a system dynamics model of chronic disease risks to align community action
Future burden and costs of smoking-related disease in the netherlands: a dynamic modeling approach
Prostate cancer ambassadors: enhancing a theory-informed training program for informed decision-making
Integrative system dynamics: analysis of policy options for tobacco control in New Zealand
Evaluating health care using system dynamics modelling – a case study in schizophrenia
Cost-effectiveness of system-level mental health strategies for young people in the Australian Capital Territory: a dynamic simulation modelling study
Grounding alcohol simulation models in empirical and theoretical alcohol research: a model for a Northern plains population in the United States
Strategies to prevent suicide and attempted suicide in New South Wales (Australia): community-based outreach, alternatives to emergency department care, and early intervention
A system dynamics modelling approach to assess the impact of launching a new nicotine product on population health outcomes
A dynamic model of the opioid drug epidemic with implications for policy
Reducing youth suicide: systems modelling and simulation to guide targeted investments across the determinants
Systems modelling and simulation to guide targeted investments to reduce youth suicide and mental health problems in a low–middle-income country
A decision support tool to inform local suicide prevention activity in Greater Western Sydney (Australia)
A decision-support tool to inform Australian strategies for preventing suicide and suicidal behaviour
Reducing the smoking-related health burden in the USA through diversion to electronic cigarettes: a system dynamics simulation study
Youth smoking and anti-smoking policies in North Dakota: a system dynamics simulation study
The cost-effectiveness of intensive national school-based anti-tobacco education: results from the Tobacco Policy Model
In Silico modeling systems: learning about the prevalence and dynamics of dementia through virtual experimentation
Dynamic model of nonmedical opioid use trajectories and potential policy interventions
Modeling the impact of simulated educational interventions on the use and abuse of pharmaceutical opioids in the United States: a report on initial efforts
Obesity trend in the United States and economic intervention options to change it: a simulation study linking ecological epidemiology and system dynamics modeling
Insights from a codesigned dynamic modelling study of child and adolescent obesity in Australia
Modeling social transmission dynamics of unhealthy behaviors for evaluating prevention and treatment interventions on childhood obesity
Systems simulation model for assessing the sustainability and synergistic impacts of sugar-sweetened beverages tax and revenue recycling on childhood obesity prevention
Understanding the dynamics of the obesity transition associated with physical activity, sedentary lifestyle, and consumption of ultra-processed foods in Colombia
A system dynamics model of the nutritional stages of the Colombian population
Systems thinking and simulation modeling to inform childhood obesity policy and practice
Can the target set for reducing childhood overweight and obesity be met? A system dynamics modelling study in New South Wales, Australia
An exploration using system dynamics modelling of population-level mindfulness, mindful eating and healthy weight following intervention
Assessing policies to reduce adolescent overweight and obesity: insights from a system dynamics model using data from the health behavior in School-Aged children study
Policy insights from the nutritional food market transformation model: the case of obesity prevention
Multi-level preventive care for type 2 diabetes
Quantifying a strategic view of diabetes technology impacts: a system dynamics approach
Understanding diabetes population dynamics through simulation modeling and experimentation
System dynamic model simulates the growth trend of diabetes mellitus in Chinese population: implications for future urban public health governance
Charting plausible futures for diabetes prevalence in the united states: a role for system dynamics simulation modeling
An innovative approach for decision-making on designing lifestyle programs to reduce type 2 diabetes on Dutch population level using dynamic simulations
Construction of a simulation model and evaluation of the effect of potential interventions on the incidence of diabetes and initiation of dialysis due to diabetic nephropathy in Japan
Projection of diabetes morbidity and mortality till 2045 in Indonesia based on risk factors and NCD prevention and control programs
A system dynamics model to simulate sustainable interventions on chronic disease outcomes in an urban community
Evaluating public health efforts to prevent and control chronic disease: a systems modeling approach
Use of system dynamics modelling for evidence-based decision making in public health practice
Exploring ways to respond to rising obesity and diabetes in the Caribbean using a system dynamics model
Chronic illness in a complex health economy: the perils and promises of downstream and upstream reforms
Modelling the social determinants of health and simulating short-term and long-term intervention impacts for the City of Toronto, Canada
Which priorities for health and well-being stand out after accounting for tangled threats and costs? Simulating potential intervention portfolios in large urban counties
Psychological and lifestyle risk factors for asthma exacerbations and morbidity in children
Vennix JA. Group model-building: tackling messy problems. Syst Dyn Rev. 1999; 10.1002/(SICI)1099-1727(199924)15:4%3C379::AID-SDR179%3E3.0.CO;2-E.
A checklist for model credibility, salience, and legitimacy to improve information transfer in environmental policy assessments
Putting stakeholder engagement at the center of health economic modeling for health technology assessment in the United States
Model transparency and validation: A report of the ISPOR-SMDM modeling good research practices task Force–7
Best practices in system dynamics modeling
Projection of the year 2050 burden of diabetes in the US adult population: dynamic modeling of incidence, mortality, and prediabetes prevalence
Simulation modeling and tobacco control: creating more robust public health policies
Projection of the health and economic impacts of chronic kidney disease in the Chilean population