From Pulmonary Embolism to Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension: A Pathophysiological Approach
Venous thromboembolism presenting as deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism (PE) remains to be an important cause of mortality and morbidity worldwide. Despite its significance and incidence, compared to many other cardiovascular conditions there are significant gaps in knowledge in many aspects of it, including its pathophysiology. A rare sequela of PE is chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH). This complication has a poor outcome and data is scarce in this field. Many therapeutic approaches are based solely on clinical expertise, which can be explained by the complex and not fully understood pathobiology of this disease. Over the years, many theories have been proposed regarding its genesis. Although generally acute PE is accepted as a trigger for CTEPH, this condition is multifactorial and cannot be explained by recurring PEs only. By reviewing the current evidence, we have demonstrated that thrombus non-resolution in CTEPH is due to multiple mechanisms and predisposing factors including: inflammation, small-vessel disease, impaired angiogenesis, platelet dysfunction, coagulopathies, malignancy, impaired fibrinolysis, genetics and many other components. Based on the current evidence, we aimed to explain the pathophysiology CTEPH, PE and the connection between these two important diseases. Furthermore, we highlight the negative hemodynamic effects of CTEPH and PE on the right ventricle and its role in further exacerbation of these patients.

1. Introduction
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is a rare and progressive  disease with a poor prognosis, currently classified as group 4 in the World  Health Organization’s clinical classification of pulmonary hypertension (PH)  . The diagnosis of CTEPH is based on clinical findings (typically including  fatigue and excretion dyspnoe), detection of thrombotic material in the pulmonary  vascular system and eventually confirmation of the findings by showing elevated  precapillary pressure via right heart catheterization. The diagnosis of this  disease remains a challenge, with a reported 14 month gap between the initial  symptoms and the final diagnosis in centers specializing in this field. We  believe this has in part to do with our understanding of the pathophysiology of  this disease. Currently, Ventilation-Perfusion mismatch scintigraphy in  combination with echocardiography is the recommended method of choice for  screening CTEPH according to the European Society of Cardiology. In recent  years the diagnosis of CTEPH has been more frequent, most probably due to  improvements of diagnostic methods (such as dual-energy computer tomography) and  our comprehension of CTEPH. An important distinction of CTEPH from other PH  groups is in its specific therapeutic options. Pulmonary endarterectomy (PEA)  has proven to be an effective option for more proximal lesions. For more  distal lesions and microvaculopathy, balloon pulmonary angioplasty (BPA) and  medical therapy are recommended respectively. It is generally accepted that a  thromboembolic event plays a key role in the pathogenesis of this disease.  Thanks to research done in this field, it is evident that this disease has a  multifactorial and complex pathogenesis, which cannot be merely explained by  recurrent pulmonary embolisms (PE). In this article we review the pathobiology of  PE, discuss the possible mechanisms catalyzing and causing CTEPH and the cardiac  consequences of CTEPH as a chronic condition.

2. PE
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) presenting as deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or  clinical apparent PE is the third most frequent cardiovascular event with  significant mortality and morbidity worldwide. Due to silent PE, it is  impossible to calculate the exact incidence of PE. However, it is estimated to  have an annual incidence of 39–115 per 100,000 population (in Germany  approximately 98 per 100,000).

2.1 Predisposing Factors
According to Virchow’s triad, hypercoagulability, alteration in blood flow  causing stasis and endothelial injury are the three main factors responsible for  VTE. Many conditions can act as a predisposing factor by changing one or more  components of the Virchow’s triad (Table 1, Ref.): Strong risk factors  such as major general surgery, polytrauma and spinal cord injury have an odds  ratio of over 10 with an indication for prophylactic treatment against VTE.  Cancer is a well-known risk factor for PE, depending on the type, stage, age,  treatment factors and time from diagnosis. Highest risks are reported in  pancreas, brain, lung, ovarian, lymphomas, myeloma, kidney, stomach and bone  cancer. Meanwhile breast and prostate cancer are associated with relatively  low risks.
Acquired and inherited risk factors of VTE .
Risk	Acquired	Inherited	 	Weak risk factors (odds ratio 2)	Bed rest (3 days)	Hyperhomocysteinemia	 	Extended immobilization (e.g., air travel)	Homozygous factor XIII 34Val alleles	 	Increasing age (40 years)		 	Laparoscopic surgery (e.g., cholecystectomy)		 	Obesity		 	Pregnancy/antepartum		 	Varicose veins		 	Moderate risk factors (odds ratio 2–9)	Central venous lines	Factor V Leiden mutation	 	Chemotherapy	Prothrombin 20210A 1	 	Congestive heart or respiratory failure	Non-O blood group	 	Hormone replacement therapy	Fibrinogen gamma 10034T 2	 	Malignancy		 	Oral contraceptive therapy		 	Paralytic stroke		 	Postpartum		 	Previous VTE		 	Strong risk factors (odds ratio 10)	Lower extremity fracture	Antithrombin deficiency	 	Hip/knee replacement	Protein C/S deficiency	 	Major Trauma	Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) insufficiency	 	Spinal cord injury	Endothelin protein C receptor (EPCR) insufficiency	 	Major surgery
1: mutation in the 3′-untranslated part of the prothrombin gene, 2: C to T 
variant at position 10034 in the fibrinogen gamma chain. VTE, venous 
thromboembolism.
Among the hereditary risk factors antithrombin deficiency, protein C and protein  S deficiencies, activated protein C (APC) Resistance, homozygous factor V Leiden  mutation, homozygous prothrombin G20210A mutation, antiphospholipid antibody  syndrome, elevated levels of several coagulation factors, including factors VIII,  IX, and XI have been shown to be higher in patients with VTE.
Inflammation is known to cause a hypercoagulable state. Logically,  autoimmune conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus, inflammatory bowel  disease, immune thrombocytopenic purpura, polyarteritis nodosa and Behçet’s  syndrome have been linked to VTE. Furthermore, infectious diseases  including Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), respiratory tract, genitourinary  tract, and hepatobiliary tract can increase the risk of VTE.  Estrogen-containing oral contraceptives as well as post-menopausal hormonal  therapy increase the risk of VTE, especially combination compounds containing  progesterone and estrogen with up to a 6-fold higher risk. These  observations could not be confirmed in progesterone only pills or intra-uterine  devices.

2.2 Sources of PE
The most frequent source of PE are the lower extremities’ deep veins. DVT  most commonly occurs in calf veins followed by femoropopliteal veins, and less  frequently in the iliac veins. In the presence of predisposing factors such  as pelvic infection, pelvic surgery and pregnancy, pelvic vein DVTs can also  develop. Proximal veins of the lower extremities or calf vein DVTs with  central extensions are more likely to cause a PE compared to only distally  located thrombosis. Upper limb DVTs are typically associated with central  venous catheters, intracardiac devices such as pacemakers and defibrillators  comparatively cause PE less frequently, although with similar outcomes.  Although considered a rare occurrence, PE can occur in the absence of peripheral  thrombosis or in situ PE is also possible. This has been associated  with chest trauma, congenital anatomical anomalies, tuberculosis, coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 infection (COVID-19)  infection and pneumonectomy. The exact frequency is not known, since  differentiating a complete DVT dislodgment and in situ pulmonary  thrombosis is almost impossible. Furthermore, in many cases a complete  exclusion of peripheral thrombosis (e.g., upper extremities) is not performed  .

2.3 Hemodynamic and Respiratory Alterations in PE
PE causes both, hemodynamic alterations and gas exchange interference. In  patients without prior cardiopulmonary disease, a non-preconditioned right  ventricle (RV) can generate up to a mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP) of 40  mmHg through increased RV wall tension, myocyte stretch and the Frank-Starling  mechanism in acute PE. Beyond this point, severe PE which is  usually defined as 50% obstruction of the pulmonary circulation, can lead to  RV failure. Increased RV wall tension leads to prolonged RV myocardial  shortening time into left ventricle (LV) diastole and leftward septal bowing of  the heart. This desynchrony can be further exacerbated by right bundle  branch block. Due to interference of LV-filling, cardiac output can be  massively reduced and lead to hemodynamic instability and consequently to  cardiogenic shock.
A major reason for hypoxia in PE is due to the redistribution of blood to areas  of the lung that are less or not ventilated leading to ventilation-perfusion  mismatch. This mismatch causes an increase in anatomical and  physiological dead space ventilation and interference with CO₂ elimination  . In response, the medullary chemoreceptors increase total minute  ventilation, thereby normalizing arterial PCO₂ and respiratory alkalosis.  Further contributing factors are intrapulmonary and intracardial shunts.  Intrapulmonary shunts can be caused by collapsing alveoli due to lack of  surfactant, interalveolar hemorrhage or pulmonary infarction. The  increasing pressures of the right side of the heart may lead to intracardiac  shunting through the foramen ovale (either a persistent one or separation of the  membranes of a closed one). An additional application of positive end  expiratory pressure due to mechanical ventilation can result in a further  increase of pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR).
Neurohormonal mediators, mainly thromboxane-A3 and serotonin released by  platelets, can cause vasoconstriction further increasing the PVR.  Endomyocarditis of the RV assumed to be related to high levels of epinephrin,  might explain the clinical exacerbation observed in patients 24–48 hours after  the acute PE. Although RV infarction is very rare, elevated levels of  biomarkers of myocardial injury hint at ischemia of the RV probably due to an  imbalance in oxygen supply and systemic hypotension.
While some patients fully recover from an acute PE, up to 16% remain with a  persisting impairment of their exercise capacity. In very few cases, development  of a CTEPH can be observed.

3. Role of PE in CTEPH

3.1 Incidence and Prevalence of CTEPH and PE
CTEPH is a notoriously underdiagnosed and under-researched disease. There  is evidence of geographical differences in CTEPH prevalence, the true incidence  however remains unknown. Reports of CTEPH after PE vary from 0.1 to 10%  . For the USA and Europe most studies suggest 3.5–4.0% of patients with  prior VTE develop CTEPH, while around 75% of CTEPH patients in Europe and North  America have a history of acute PE and 56% have had a prior DVT. These  numbers seem to be lower in Asian countries, only 15–30% of CTEPH patients in  Japan have reported a VTE in their history. CTEPH tends to develop in  the first 2–3 years after an acute PE incidence. It is important to note  that these numbers regarding PE incidence in CTEPH patients are most probably  overestimated, since the first manifestation of CTEPH might be misdiagnosed and  recorded as PE. It has been observed that CTEPH patients with a history of  PE generally have an asymptomatic phase before developing chronic symptoms.  On the other hand, in many cases, CTEPH is diagnosed only a few months after the  PE indicating that CTEPH was most likely already present at the index PE.  Furthermore, in many of the patients the systolic pulmonary artery pressure (sPAP) is already  significantly increased, indicating a chronic process and RV remodeling.  Nevertheless, according to these data, PE plays an important role in CTEPH and  its pathophysiology.

3.2 Thromboembolic vs. Arteriopathy Theory
Based on the thromboembolic theory, CTEPH is primarily triggered by an acute or  recurrent PE that fails to resolve. Various factors play an important  role in stabilizing a dislodged thrombus and the progression of the disease  . That being said, the reason why only a small percentage of patients fail  to resolve the fresh thrombi and progress into CTEPH remains speculative. It  is nearly impossible to cause CTEPH in an animal model even when inducing  recurrent PE and considering that 50% CTEPH patients could be diagnosed with  DVT. These observations have led to the formulation of an alternative  hypothesis that a primary arteriopathy and secondary in situ thrombosis  is the main pathological element in CTEPH. An important observation  supporting this theory is the formation of pulmonary thrombosis in PH patients of  other etiologies. However, differentiating a patient with PH and in  situ thrombosis with a distal type CTEPH patient is certainly not an easy task  and there might be some overlapping between the disorders. Nevertheless,  considering the current evidence the role of PE cannot be ignored and in  situ thrombosis is likely a co-factor in CTEPH genesis.

3.3 Predisposing Factors for CTEPH
Looking at the epidemiological data, following predisposing factors have been  identified to play a role in the non-resolution of thrombus. Larger, more  proximal PE with larger perfusion defects and recurrent emboli are associated  with a higher risk of causing CTEPH and not being dissolved efficiently by the  fibrinolytic system. One study showed that VTE and CTEPH patients more  commonly had non-type O blood. Possible explanations include elevated levels  of von Willebrand factor, factor VIII, P-selectin and tumor necrosis factor in  non-type O blood. Similarly, hypothyroidism may be diagnosed more frequently  in CTEPH patients. It is not exactly known whether thyroid dysfunction or  the hormone replacement therapy is the underlying cause. Splenectomy  increases the risk of CTEPH probably due to abnormal erythrocytes that would  normally be filtered, without which may possibly lead to reactive thrombocytosis  . VTE history, history of malignancy, idiopathic PE and age 60 years have  all been associated with a higher risk of developing CTEPH. The  above-mentioned data have been driven from statistical analysis and their exact  molecular mechanisms are still unclear. Further factors that also play a role are  discussed below.
Interestingly, intermediate-risk PE (European Society of Cardiology (ESC) classification) has been shown to have  higher risk of CTEPH compared to high-risk PE. One likely explanation for  this finding could be a more aggressive therapeutic approach in high-risk  patients and use of thrombolytic treatment. That being said, the use of  thrombolytic treatment alone cannot explain the lower incidence of CTEPH in  high-risk PE. In fact, in the PEITHO trial thrombolytic treatment failed to  reduce dyspnea and RV dysfunction in intermediate to high-risk PE. In this  trial, the CTEPH diagnostic algorithm was not part of the protocol and a  definitive diagnosis was made in only 4 out of 190 patients. Therefore, no  definitive conclusions can be made. Up to this date there have been no  prospective randomized trials conducted investigating the role of an aggressive  PE treatment for prevention of CTEPH. However, there has been effort made to find  the possible predictors of CTEPH after a PE. In a study unprovoked PE (Odds ratio  = 20), onset of symptoms 14 days before diagnosis (Odds Ratio = 7.9), RV  dysfunction at presentation (Odds Ratio = 4.1) and hypothyroidism (Odds Ratio =  4.3) were shown to correlate with CTEPH development. It is mportant to note  that this correlation does not translate into causation and the background of it  remains unclear. Interestingly, in this study contradictory to the PEITHO trial  results, patients treated with thrombolytic agents or a surgical embolectomy did  not show signs of CTEPH in their follow-ups. Looking at the above-mentioned  evidence it becomes clear that our understanding of CTEPH is still to be improved  and an accurate interpretation of these findings remains challenging. Currently  it is unclear if a timely recanalization treatment reduces the risk of CTEPH.

3.4 Mechanistic Studies
There have been many studies on animals, mostly pigs, dogs, rabbits and mice,  trying to explain the mechanism of CTPEH. Reproducing CTEPH features in  animals, namely a persistent increase in pulmonary pressure, stable reduction of  pulmonary vasculature and most importantly RV remodeling has proven to be more of  a challenge than anticipated. In these studies, merely repeated  embolization of thrombotic material did not result in long-term complications as  observed in CTEPH patients, but rather only a mild increase of sPAP. In a  study, use of ligation of the left main pulmonary artery resulted in persistent  increased pressures in the pulmonary system. This approach, however, seems to be  overly mechanistic and does not explain the molecular and pathological background  of CTEPH. Similarly in pigs, the use of spring rings with tissue adhesives  created a histologic and physiologic condition similar to CTEPH in humans.  In many of the animals used for these studies, the fibrinolytic system is much  more efficient. For example, in dogs the faster rates of PE lysis were  attributed to higher urokinase-type PA (u-PA) activity and closer association of  u-PA with platelets and pulmonary endothelial cell. To overcome this, other  approaches such as use of non-thrombotic material as embolus or inhibiting  fibrinolysis via the use of tranexamic acid were examined, which remains  controversial. While some studies have claimed to replicate CTEPH with it  and even show impaired angiogenesis, other studies could not observe similar  effects. Although some studies have been able to create high stable  pulmonary pressures using non-thrombotic materials in rats and rabbits, these  particles simulate the thromboembolic process in humans very poorly. In  light of these animal experiments, no single method has been proven to be optimal  for replicating CTEPH in animal models. Although they have provided us with  important information, not all of them translate well into human pathophysiology.  In conclusion, these observations point to a complex and multifactorial  pathophysiology, which cannot be explained only by recurrent embolisms.

4. Other Factors in the Pathophysiology of CTEPH

4.1 Small Vessel Disease
It was first noted by Dr. Moser and his colleagues after performing the first  PEA that open pulmonary arteries compared to distal arteries of the occlusion had  marked structural changes. These findings were later on confirmed in  histological samples and therefore a two-compartment pulmonary vascular bed  theory was proposed. These changes include intimal thickening, eccentric  intimal fibrosis, intimal fibromuscular proliferation and plexiform lesions  affecting distal pulmonary arteries and even arterioles and venules. Due  to proximal occlusion the same amount of blood volume flows into a reduced  vascular bed, exposing these open pulmonary vessels to higher pressure and shear  stress, which is probably an important factor for these histological findings  . However, microvasculopathy could also be detected not only in open  vessels but also in post-occlusion pulmonary vessels. These changes have  been attributed to the thromboembolic mediated pressure increase of the pulmonary  system leading to the opening of the pre-existing anastomoses between bronchial  (systemic circulation) and pulmonary arteries as well as venules distal to the  obstruction. These anastomoses are opened by the pressure gradient generated  due to thromboembolic occlusion of the pulmonary system. Backing up this  speculation is dilatation of bronchial arteries observed in CTEPH patients.  These formed anastomoses supply the ischemic tissue with blood and at the same  time results in exposure to systemic pressures. Rarely, failure of this  anastomosis formation can lead to stasis of blood in the vessels distal to the  obstruction and cause formation of thrombosis. In summary, vascular  remodeling can be histologically detected not only in open pulmonary vessels but  also vessels distal to the occlusion.
Since small-vessel disease is not treatable with PEA or BPA, it may result in  persistent sPAP. Moreover, patients with advanced small-vessel disease  are at a higher risk of postoperative mortality. Microvasculopathy can be  suspected in cases of an unproportionate high sPAP compared to the extent of  proximal occlusion. In these patients, medical treatment with drugs like  riociguat is the main therapy.

4.2 Coagulation and Fibrinolysis Abnormalities
Most common hereditary thrombophilic conditions such as protein C/S deficiency,  factor V mutation and antithrombin deficiency, are not more frequent in CTEPH  patients compared to the healthy population. Antiphospholipid antibodies,  lupus anticoagulants, levels of clotting factor VIII and Von Willebrand factor  have been shown to be higher in CTEPH patients. ADAMTS13, responsible  for regulating the size of von Willebrand factor, is also decreased in CTEPH  patients even after reduction of sPAP by performing PEA.
Another important aspect is failure of a thrombus resolution, possibly due to  damage of the fibrinolytic system. Here, many potential enzymes and factors play  a role. In a study by Vuylsteke et al. tissue plasminogen  activators (t-PA) and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) were  significantly higher in CTEPH patients. In contrast, Lang et al.  could not observe any significant difference in t-PA and PAI levels. Therefore,  abnormalities of t-PA and PAI-1 alone cannot explain the incomplete dissolution  of thrombi in CTEPH. In another study, thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis  inhibitor (TAFI) was significantly higher in CTEPH patients and remained  unchanged after BPA, suggesting an important role in reduction of thrombolysis in  CTEPH pathophysiology.
Dysfibrinogenemia can also cause resistance of fibrinogen to the fibrinolytic  pathway. Up to now, many fibrinogen abnormalities have been shown to be higher in  CTEPH leading to thrombus stabilization. That being said, these  abnormalities are not unique to CTEPH and can be seen in other types of PH.  To conclude, although certain coagulopathies are more frequent in CTEPH patients,  no single disorder has been shown to be solely responsible for CTEPH.

4.3 Platelet Function
The fact that platelet-favoring conditions such as splenectomy and thyroid  hormone replacement therapy are predisposing factors for CTEPH, hinting at the  role of platelets in its pathophysiology. In CTEPH patients, platelets have  decreased count, higher mean volume, increased spontaneous aggregation and  decreased aggregation in response to agonists, suggesting a state of higher  platelet turnover. According to a study, platelets in CTEPH patients express  P-selectin, PAC-1 binding and guanosine-5’-triphosphate (GTP)-bound GPase RhoA more compared to the healthy  population. These markers are responsible for platelet aggregation.  Furthermore, platelets showed higher sensitivity to thrombin activation in the  CTEPH group. However, these changes were observed in other types of PH,  therefore it remains unclear if platelet activation is secondary to increased  pressure in the pulmonary vascular system. Lastly, in surgical specimens  from PEA, platelet factor 4 levels were increased. Although the  above-mentioned evidence does not clearly explain the role of platelets in the  pathophysiology of CTEPH, they do suggest that platelet dysfunction is a factor  in its pathology.

4.4 Impaired Angiogenesis
Pro- and antiangiogenic factors are generally physiologically balanced in way  that no angiogenesis happens. This can change under certain circumstances  such as tumor formation and wound healing. In animal studies vascular  endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), major  regulators of angiogenesis, are found in organizing thrombi and apparently play a  role in thrombus resolution. To further confirm the role of angiogenesis, in  an animal study, endothelial-cell-specific deletion of kinase domain protein  receptor resulted in ablation of thrombus vascularization and as a result delayed  thrombus dissolution. In PEA specimen factors such as platelet factor 4,  collagen type and interferon-γ-induced protein-10 (IP-10), which are angiostatic factors, were particularly  elevated. Conditions such as splenectomy may also result in higher levels of  angiostatic factors such as platelet microparticles and leukocyte-platelet  aggregates. Looking at this evidence, angiogenesis is an important step in  the resolution of a thrombus. Misguided or deficient angiogenesis can result in  thrombus persistence and progression into CTEPH. According to many studies,  impaired angiogenesis plays not only a key role in CTEPH pathobiology, but it is  also associated with poor prognosis, adverse outcomes, persistent PH post-PEA and  start of medical treatment.

4.5 Role of Inflammation
It is generally well known that inflammation can cause a procoagulant  environment. According to epidemiological data, chronic inflammatory conditions  such as systemic sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, inflammatory bowel  disease, anticardiolipin antibody syndrome and osteomyelitis have been linked to  CTEPH. In one case-control study comparing 187 acute PE patients without  signs of CTEPH and 109 patients who did develop CTEPH, it was found that up to  10% of the CTEPH patients had a chronic inflammatory condition (odds ratio 67,  95% CI 7.9–8.8). Ventriculo-atrial (VA) shunts, infected central  intravenous lines/pacemakers and chronic infections of indwelling venous  catheters are also known predisposing factors. In a study, 6 out of 7  thrombi of VA-shunt carrier patients who underwent PEA contained staphylococcus  aureus DNA with upregulation of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-)  and connective tissue growth factor resulting in fibrotic vascular remodeling  after thrombosis. These all indicate that persistent infiltration of  bacteria causing an inflammatory response and possible thrombus infection are  risk factors for CTEPH development.
It has been shown that in PH and CTEPH patients, C reactive protein levels are  significantly higher than in a healthy population, and after treatment, C  reactive protein levels tends to decrease. Levels of tumor necrosis factor  (TNF)-, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, IP-10, monokine induced by interferon- (MIG) and monocyte  chemoattractant protein-1  (MIP1) were also elevated in CTEPH  patients, while in idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) patients,  only MIG and IP-10 were significantly increased. Increased cytokine  (MIP1, IP-10, MIG, IL-6 and RANTES) levels could also be observed in  PEA specimens compared to healthy lung tissue. In immunohistological  samples of patients undergoing PEA, macrophages, neutrophils, T-lymphocytes and  less abundantly B-lymphocytes could be observed. These findings were not as  prominent in open vessels. To summarize, in CTEPH patients there is evidence  of an over stimulated inflammatory response.
Platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 (PECAM-1) is a receptor on  platelets, endothelial cells, macrophages, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and bone  marrow cells responsible for angiogenesis and leukocyte migration. In  patients with higher levels of the soluble form of PECAM-1 (sPECAM-1), generated  by proteolytic cleavage, delayed thrombus resolution after DVT were observed  . Furthermore, animal models with PECAM-1 deficiency led to larger thrombi,  further highlighting the possible role of this receptor in CTEPH genesis.  In short, it appears that receptors and pathways such as PECAM-1 regulating the  inflammatory response play a key role in thrombus resolution.

4.6 Genetic Factors
Besides the above mentioned genetic thrombophilic conditions, studies have  discovered further possible genetic predisposition factors. In a study using  oligonucleotide microarrays, the gene expression profile of pulmonary artery  endothelial cells of CTEPH patients were compared to healthy individuals.  More than 1600 genes that were differently upregulated or downregulated were  identified. Most significantly JAK3, GNA15, MAPK13,  ARRB2 and F2R were altered. Angiotensin-converting enzyme  polymorphism was shown to be possibly a prognostic factor in the treatment of  CTEPH patients. An insertion polymorphism of fibrinogen alpha gene has also  been linked to CTEPH susceptibility. Despite the report by Feng et  al. regarding bone morphogenetic protein type II receptor (BMPR2) and its  role in the pathogenesis of CTEPH, but this could not be shown in other studies  . Evidence shows the PAH-causing gene mutations, differentially  expressed plasma microRNAs as well as increased tissue factor expression also  play a role in the pathophysiology of this disease. Increased levels  of endothelin-1, a potent vasoconstrictor, and its receptors in the proximal  thrombus of CTEPH patients also hints at the role of this pathway and its  importance. In summary, not one single gene but rather a combination of  mutations and other risk factors seem to be responsible for the pathogenesis of  CTEPH.

4.7 Malignancy
It is well known that malignancy causes a hypercoagulable state. VTE is a  relatively frequent complication in cancer patients, with a 20–30% VTE  incidence rate and a three-fold higher risk of VTE compared to non-cancer  patients. As expected, Bonderman et al., comparing 433  CTEPH patients with 256 healthy individuals, demonstrated a correlation between  malignancy and CTEPH (Odds Ratio 3.76, 95% CI 1.47–10.43). Interestingly,  recurrent VTE contributed to higher CTEPH incidence, compared to first PE in  cancer patients. CTEPH incidence in cancer patients is dependent on the  type of cancer as well as the treatment, however the exact mechanism remains  disputed. Some of the more common cancers associated with CTEPH include:  breast cancer, gastrointestinal carcinoma, melanoma, prostate cancer and seminoma  . Possible contributing factors especially relevant in patients with  malignant diseases are either a delay in treatment due to lack of symptoms,  indwelling vein catheters or neutrophile reduction in the course of  chemotherapeutic treatment, which is important in thrombus resolution.  Although, management and severity of CTEPH has not been shown to be different in  cancer patients, the survival rate are lower in cancer patients (65%) compared  to non-cancer patients (89%). All this being said, the incidence of CTEPH  in patients with active malignancies is low and routine screening of CTEPH does  not seem to be feasible.

4.8 Calcium Homeostasis
Calcium homeostasis seems to be an influencing factor in vascular remodelling  . Using PEA samples of CTEPH patients, it was discovered that angiostatic  factors can lead to endothelial dysfunction by changing calcium homeostasis.  Firth et al. also discovered that exposure to fibrin and  fibrinogen causes abnormalities of intracellular calcium regulation of pulmonary  arterial smooth muscle and endothelial cells, which may be an exacerbating factor  for vascular changes of CTEPH patients. A summary of the above-mentioned  mechanisms is depicted in Fig. 1.
Pathophysiology of CTEPH und right ventricular remodeling. 
CTEPH, chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension; PAC, pulmonary artery 
compliance; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; RV, right ventricle.

5. RV Remodelling in CTEPH Patients
Consequences of CTEPH on the RV play a central role in the pathophysiology and  prognosis of this disease. An unresolved thrombus in the pulmonary vascular  system results in increased PVR and decreased pulmonary artery compliance (PAC)  . The increased stiffness of the proximal pulmonary artery results in an  early pulse wave reflection increasing RV afterload. Ultimately this leads  to an overall increase of pressure on RV due to the summation of backward and  forward waves. The magnitude of this reflected pressure is similar in both  proximal and distal lesions. However, in proximal lesions this pressure  reflection returns to the RV earlier, when the RV is more dilated and under more  stress. This is a possible explanation for a poorer RV adaption in these  proximal lesions. The increased afterload initially results in RV  hypertrophy, which maintains the stroke volume and the exercise capacity of these  patients. This initial response is beneficial, hence named the adaptive  phase. Eventually, chronic stress leads to exhaustion of the RV  adaptation and a so-called maladaptive phase begins. This phase is  characterized by eccentric hypertrophy, RV dilatation, reduced RV contractile  force and diastolic dysfunction. The increased oxygen consumption of the RV  predisposes the tissue to fibrosis, further exacerbating the RV function.  Due to ventricular interdependence in the pericardial space, the dilatation of RV  leads to septum shift and alterations in LV geometry, reduction of cardiac output  and reduction of the coronary perfusion. Similar to the above-mentioned  mechanisms of acute PE, the interventricular desynchrony that evolves leads to RV  contraction beyond pulmonary valve closure, therefore further increasing RV wall  stress. Annular dilatation of the RV and tricuspid insufficiency leads to  increased RV preload, further deteriorating this cycle (Fig. 1).
Tsubata et al. investigated pulmonary blood flow dynamics in  patients with CTEPH and discovered decreased flow velocity and wall shear stress  (WSS), an increased oscillatory shear index (an index of the fluctuation of the  WSS), and blood stagnation in CTEPH patients. These changes might be at least  partially responsible for the hypercoagulability in these vessels. These  dynamics were improved with some differences in both BPA and PEA.
Molecular mechanisms of this maladaptive response are not fully understood. The  TGF- pathway seems to play an important role in myocardial fibrosis  . Additionally, there is a shift of energy metabolism from fatty acid  oxidation to glycolysis leading to lactic acid accumulation and hence myocardial  damage. RV hypertrophy is linked with disturbed angiogenesis and reduced  expression of VEGF. Other possible molecular mechanisms are mitochondrial  dysfunction, beta-receptor overactivation, increased endothelin-1, increased  cytokine release and increased apoptosis. The above-mentioned changes and  maladaptive responses do not seem to be irreversible. There is evidence of  a dramatic improvement of RV function after successfully performing PEA in CTEPH  patients.

6. Discussion
By looking at the current literature it becomes clear that there are many  disparities in terms of prevalence of CTEPH varying from 0.1 to 10% and also  prevalence of prior PE in CTEPH patients. This indicates the lack of our  understanding of this complex disease and possibly difficulties that we have in  diagnosing it. Despite some competing theories, such as the above-mentioned  arteriopathy theory, prior PE is accepted as a central pathophysiological factor  by most scientists. Deriving from the statistical analysis that has been  completed, one can see many similarities between acute PE and CTEPH, again  highlighting a relationship between these two disorders. Although none of the  animal-based studies could replicate CTEPH thoroughly, they could show that  recurrent PE cannot cause CTEPH by itself. Important to keep in mind is  that, most of the data originate from statistical analysis and the molecular  background is yet to be discovered.
Another feature of CTEPH, which has been known and histologically proven for  many years by Dr. Moser, is the vascular remodelling resulting from changed  hemodynamics of the pulmonary vessels. Some of these changes for e.g.,  decreased flow velocity and WSS are not only responsible for vascular remodelling  but also increase coagulability, which could have direct clinical and therapeutic  implications. The data regarding coagulopathies and impaired fibrinolysis,  are less conclusive and many of the classical coagulopathies do not seem to  impact the genesis of CTEPH. However, their role cannot be disregarded and  t-PA abnormalities as well as dysfibrinogenemia have been correlated with CTEPH  . A similar pattern could also be observed by reviewing the literature  for platelet dysfunction, needing more research to define its exact role in the  pathophysiology of CTEPH. Angiogenesis and inflammation both seem to play a  central role in the resolution of a PE and there has been extensive evidence  gathered over the years in support of this. From the current evidence, not  a single inflammatory or angiogenetic factor could be recognized as being solely  responsible, and direct therapeutic as well as clinical consequences are yet to  be understood.
Many other mechanisms and risk factors, yet again mainly stemming from  statistical correlations, possibly play a role. These include malignancies,  genetic factors, hypothyroidism and blood-group type. Another  important aspect of CTEPH is its impact on RV-function. By understanding the  hemodynamics of RV in CTEPH patients, it becomes more evident that these changes  directly play a role in disease progression and possibly further exacerbate the  hypercoagulable state.

7. Conclusions
CTEPH remains an under-researched and largely under-diagnosed condition that is  generally associated with a poor outcome. By reviewing the current literature, we  could demonstrate that acute PE appears to be the initial trigger of this  disease. However, this alone cannot explain the reason behind thrombosis  non-resolution in these patients. Other important factors that play an important  role include: impaired angiogenesis, small-vessel disease, disbalances in  platelet function/coagulation, impaired fibrinolysis, genetics, malignancy and a  persistent activated inflammatory cascade. This is an accepted conclusion  according to the current published literature. Most of the data leading to these  conclusions are based on statistical analysis and the exact underlying molecular  mechanisms remain to be discovered. In order to understand the correlation of  acute PE and CTEPH better, we also analysed the pathobiology of PE. Similarities  in predisposing factors and pathophysiology of these two disorders therefore  became clearer. Additionally, consequences of CTEPH on RV function are not only a  bystander, but rather directly lead to further progression of this disease. A  deeper understanding of this disease could also facilitate the development of  more effective therapeutic approaches and improve the prognosis of CTEPH.
Publisher’s Note: IMR Press stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author Contributions
PS, LM, SB, DS, HT and KF made substantial contributions to conception and  design, or acquisition of data; and been involved in drafting the manuscript or  reviewing it critically for important intellectual content; and given final  approval of the version to be published. All the mentioned authors agreed to be  accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the  accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and  resolved.

Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

Funding
This research received no external funding.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
The Pathobiology of Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension
2022 ESC/ERS Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary hypertension
Comorbidities, Treatment and Survival Rates of Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension in a Regional Centre
Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension: An Update
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Thrombosis: a major contributor to global disease burden
Global Burden of Thrombosis: Epidemiologic Aspects
Trends in thrombolytic treatment and outcomes of acute pulmonary embolism in Germany
Risk factors for venous thromboembolism
Genetics of venous thrombosis
Incidence of venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer - a cohort study using linked United Kingdom databases
Epidemiology of cancer-associated venous thrombosis
Resistance to activated protein C as a basis for venous thrombosis
A common genetic variation in the 3’-untranslated region of the prothrombin gene is associated with elevated plasma prothrombin levels and an increase in venous thrombosis
Autoimmune diseases and venous thromboembolism: a review of the literature
Risk of pulmonary embolism in patients with autoimmune disorders: a nationwide follow-up study from Sweden
Risk Factor and Mortality in Patients with Pulmonary Embolism Combined with Infectious Disease
2019 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary embolism developed in collaboration with the European Respiratory Society (ERS)
Risk of venous thromboembolism from use of oral contraceptives containing different progestogens and oestrogen doses: Danish cohort study, 2001-9
Hormone therapies and venous thromboembolism: where are we now?
Venous thromboembolism risk in relation to use of different types of postmenopausal hormone therapy in a large prospective study
Combined oral contraceptives: venous thrombosis
Epidemiology, Pathophysiology, and Natural History of Pulmonary Embolism
The anatomy of deep venous thrombosis of the lower extremity
Risk factors associated with symptomatic pulmonary embolism in a large cohort of deep vein thrombosis patients
Clinical outcome of patients with upper-extremity deep vein thrombosis: results from the RIETE Registry
Upper limb deep vein thrombosis: a literature review to streamline the protocol for management
In Situ Pulmonary Arterial Thrombosis: Literature Review and Clinical Significance of a Distinct Entity
In situ Pulmonary Artery Thrombosis: A Previously Overlooked Disease
Pathophysiology, Diagnosis and Treatment of Pulmonary Embolism Focusing on Thrombolysis - New approaches
Acute pulmonary embolism: part I: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and diagnosis
Interventricular mechanical asynchrony in pulmonary arterial hypertension: left-to-right delay in peak shortening is related to right ventricular overload and left ventricular underfilling
Prolonged right ventricular post-systolic isovolumic period in pulmonary arterial hypertension is not a reflection of diastolic dysfunction
Alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient in the assessment of acute pulmonary embolism
Blood flow redistribution and ventilation-perfusion mismatch during embolic pulmonary arterial occlusion
Pulmonary physiology during pulmonary embolism
Pathophysiology and treatment of haemodynamic instability in acute pulmonary embolism: the pivotal role of pulmonary vasoconstriction
Pulmonary embolism causes endomyocarditis in the human heart
Growth differentiation factor-15 for prognostic assessment of patients with acute pulmonary embolism
Predictive value of the high-sensitivity troponin T assay and the simplified Pulmonary Embolism Severity Index in hemodynamically stable patients with acute pulmonary embolism: a prospective validation study
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension and impairment after pulmonary embolism: the FOCUS study
Evaluation of the incidence of rare diseases: difficulties and uncertainties, the example of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Monitoring for Pulmonary Hypertension Following Pulmonary Embolism: The INFORM Study
An epidemiological analysis of the burden of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension in the USA, Europe and Japan
Research progress on the pathogenesis of CTEPH
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH): results from an international prospective registry
The prevalence and pattern of pulmonary thromboembolism in the Chinese in Hong Kong
Balloon Pulmonary Angioplasty for Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension: Results of a Multicenter Registry
Incidence and risk factors of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension in patients after acute pulmonary embolism
Incidence of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension after pulmonary embolism
The pathophysiology of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Prevalence of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension after acute pulmonary embolism. Prevalence of CTEPH after pulmonary embolism
Risk factors and basic mechanisms of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension: a current understanding
Epidemiology and Pathophysiology of Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension: Risk Factors and Mechanisms
Pulmonary endarterectomy: experience and lessons learned in 1500 cases
Is pulmonary embolism a common cause of chronic pulmonary hypertension? Limitations of the embolic hypothesis
Do patients with primary pulmonary hypertension develop extensive central thrombi?
Epidemiology and risk factors for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Risk factors for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Risk factors for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Impact of Thrombolytic Therapy on the Long-Term Outcome of Intermediate-Risk Pulmonary Embolism
Derivation of a clinical prediction score for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension after acute pulmonary embolism
Rodent models of pulmonary embolism and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension: animal models
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Upregulation of canonical transient receptor potential channel in the pulmonary arterial smooth muscle of a chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension rat model
Factors contributing to increased vascular fibrinolytic activity in mongrel dogs
Impairment of Angiogenesis-Driven Clot Resolution Is a Key Event in the Progression to Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension: Validation in a Novel Rabbit Model
Successful surgical intervention in severe chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Microvascular disease in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension: a role for pulmonary veins and systemic vasculature
Dilatation of bronchial arteries correlates with extent of central disease in patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Preoperative partitioning of pulmonary vascular resistance correlates with early outcome after thromboendarterectomy for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary endarterectomy: the potentially curative treatment for patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Operative classification of thromboembolic disease determines outcome after pulmonary endarterectomy
Lung perfusion scans and hemodynamics in acute and chronic pulmonary embolism
Thrombotic risk factors in pulmonary hypertension
Medical conditions increasing the risk of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Hereditary and acquired thrombotic risk factors for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
The ADAMTS13-VWF axis is dysregulated in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Circulatory arrest versus cerebral perfusion during pulmonary endarterectomy surgery (PEACOG): a randomised controlled trial
Parallel analysis of tissue-type plasminogen activator and type 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor in plasma and endothelial cells derived from patients with chronic pulmonary thromboemboli
Thrombin-Activatable Fibrinolysis Inhibitor in Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension
High prevalence of dysfibrinogenemia among patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Fibrin derived from patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension is resistant to lysis
Fibrin resistance to lysis in patients with pulmonary hypertension other than thromboembolic
Platelet abnormalities in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Platelets are highly activated in patients of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Angiostatic factors in the pulmonary endarterectomy material from chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension patients cause endothelial dysfunction
Angiogenic and angiostatic factors in the molecular control of angiogenesis
Interleukin-8 administration enhances venous thrombosis resolution in a rat model
Defective angiogenesis delays thrombus resolution: a potential pathogenetic mechanism underlying chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Splenectomy is modifying the vascular remodeling of thrombosis
Contribution of inflammation and impaired angiogenesis to the pathobiology of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Incidence and risk factors of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension following venous thromboembolism, a population-based cohort study in England
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Risk factors for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension - Importance of thyroid disease and function
Role for staphylococci in misguided thrombus resolution of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
C-reactive protein: a new predictor of adverse outcome in pulmonary arterial hypertension
Comprehensive analysis of inflammatory markers in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension patients
Cytokine response to pulmonary thromboendarterectomy
Molecular cloning and adhesive properties of murine platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1
Platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 deficiency misguides venous thrombus resolution
Comparison of gene expression profiles and related pathways in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Angiotensin-converting enzyme gene polymorphisms and prognosis in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Susceptibility to chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension may be conferred by miR-759 via its targeted interaction with polymorphic fibrinogen alpha gene
BMPR2 germline mutation in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Sequence variants in BMPR2 and genes involved in the serotonin and nitric oxide pathways in idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension: relation to clinical parameters and comparison with left heart disease
Demographic features, BMPR2 status and outcomes in distal chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
The role of mononuclear cell tissue factor and inflammatory cytokines in patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Differentially expressed plasma microRNAs and the potential regulatory function of Let-7b in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
High Frequency of Pulmonary Hypertension-Causing Gene Mutation in Chinese Patients with Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension
Endothelin ETA receptors predominate in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension suspicion after pulmonary embolism in cancer patients
Impact of cancer on the prevalence, management, and outcome of patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Chronic exposure to fibrin and fibrinogen differentially regulates intracellular Ca2+ in human pulmonary arterial smooth muscle and endothelial cells
Right Ventricle Remodeling in Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension
A Comprehensive Assessment of Right Ventricular Function in Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension
Characteristics of pulmonary artery pressure waveform for differential diagnosis of chronic pulmonary thromboembolism and primary pulmonary hypertension
Early return of reflected waves increases right ventricular wall stress in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Right Ventricular Dyssynchrony in Patients With Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension and Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
Pulmonary artery blood flow dynamics in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Prolonged QRS duration as a predictor of right ventricular dysfunction after balloon pulmonary angioplasty
Getting to the heart of the matter: new insights into cardiac fibrosis
The ratio of (18)F-FDG activity uptake between the right and left ventricle in patients with pulmonary hypertension correlates with the right ventricular function
A metabolic remodeling in right ventricular hypertrophy is associated with decreased angiogenesis and a transition from a compensated to a decompensated state in pulmonary hypertension
Reverse right ventricular remodeling after pulmonary endarterectomy in patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension: utility of magnetic resonance imaging to demonstrate restoration of the right ventricle