Differential diagnoses of fibrosing lung diseases
Objectives:
To describe the challenges inherent in diagnosing fibrosing lung diseases (FLD) on CT imaging and methodologies by which the diagnostic process may be simplified.
Methods:
Extensive searches in online scientific databases were performed to provide relevant and contemporary evidence that describe the current state of knowledge related to FLD diagnosis. This includes descriptions of the utility of a working diagnosis for an individual case discussed in a multidisciplinary team (MDT) setting and challenges associated with the lack of consensus guidelines for diagnosing chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
Results:
As well as describing imaging features that indicate the presence of a fibrosing lung disease, those CT characteristics that nuance a diagnosis of the various FLDs are considered. The review also explains the essential information that a radiologist needs to convey to an MDT when reading a CT scan. Lastly, we provide some insights as to the future directions the field make take in the upcoming years.
Conclusions:
This review outlines the current state of FLD diagnosis and emphasizes areas where knowledge is limited, and more evidence is required. Fundamentally, however, it provides a guide for radiologists when tackling CT imaging in a patient with FLD.
Advances in knowledge:
This review encompasses advice from recent guideline statements and evidence from the latest studies in FLD to provide an up-to-date manual for radiologists to aid the diagnosis of FLD on CT imaging in an MDT setting.

Background
Interstitial lung diseases (ILD) comprise the spectrum of disorders that affect the connective tissue framework of the lungs, termed the pulmonary interstitium. Whilst there are many non-fibrotic ILDs, there are essentially eight FLDs which will be described in this review (Table 1). The importance in ascertaining a diagnosis of an FLD is the fundamental desire to inform a patient of the nature of their disease, and its likely evolution over time. In this manner, a diagnosis informs prognosis, and simultaneously guides patient management decisions. The challenge faced when classifying FLDs lies with the variable prognoses implicit in the potential diagnoses. For example, a diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) suggests a relentlessly progressive, aggressive disease where median survival might not extend beyond 5 years, yet fibrosis in the context of sarcoidosis can be associated with a more benign disease course.
The FLD
Fibrosing lung disease	Description	 	Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis	Long-term inflammation and fibrosis caused by an immune reaction to an allergen which may not be identified	 	Connective tissue disease-related interstitial lung disease	An assortment of diseases where FLD is diagnosed in conjunction with serology and clinical history	 	Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia	A clinical, histological and/or radiological appearance of inflammation and fibrosis secondary to lung injury of unknown cause	 	Drug-induced FLD	An uncommon form of FLD that results from toxic lung damage consequent to a variety of medications	 	Familial FLD	FLD presenting at a young age with heterogenous often cystic CT appearances	 	Idiopathic non-specific interstitial pneumonia	An increasingly uncommon entity following the change in IPF diagnostic guidelines.	 	IPF	An FLD of unknown cause, with a UIP picture on imaging and/or histology, with poor prognosis	 	Fibrotic sarcoidosis	A multisystemic granulomatous disorder of unknown aetiology, in which lung fibrosis occurs in a minority of cases
FLD, fibrosing lung diseases; IPF, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis; UIP, usual interstitial pneumonia.
Whilst diagnosis initially required histopathological confirmation, advances in CT interpretation largely resulting from meticulous radiological–pathological correlation studies in the late 1980’s and early 1990s laid the foundations by which CT gained primacy in FLD diagnosis, as outlined in the 2011 IPF ATS/ERS/ALAT/JRS diagnostic guidelines. However, the limitations of CT when used alone in FLD diagnosis gradually became apparent as did the improved diagnostic concordance resulting from a case-based discussion incorporating a multidisciplinary team (MDT). Accordingly, a move towards a specialist MDT diagnosis became the new diagnostic gold-standard. Today, an MDT primarily comprises respiratory physicians, radiologists, and histopathologists, but with the involvement of rheumatological and allied health professionals when required.
Whilst earlier IPF guidelines centered on reaching a single definitive diagnosis, the realization that FLDs are heterogenous and can evolve in a myriad of ways over time, has brought forward the concept of the “working diagnosis,” evaluating disease behavior over time. In the Fleischner Society diagnostic criteria for IPF, which expounds the use of a working diagnosis, a case reviewed at presentation is assigned the most probable diagnosis based on the available information at the time. However, the case is revaluated at a subsequent MDT six to twelve months later (or sooner should the patients conditions deteriorate acutely) and using clinical and radiological information indicating the aggressiveness of the disease, the diagnostic label may be modified. A recently developed diagnostic ontology for FLD, assigns cases discussed in an MDT a measure of diagnostic certainty, aiding the development of a single working diagnosis and allowing its evolution over time. In MDT discussions, CT appearances and evolution provide a large part of the evidence steering an MDT towards a working diagnosis.
With the recent publication of the 2018 update of the ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosing idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), and the Fleischner Society diagnostic criteria for IPF, it is an opportune moment to review the spectrum of FLD and specifically the discriminatory power of CT for FLD identification and classification. By reviewing recent evidence and recommendations, this review aims to facilitate diagnosis and help guide patient management.

CT scanning protocols
Given the importance associated with correctly diagnosing a FLD, it is imperative to obtain the best possible CT imaging in an individual patient. Current best practice guidelines for CT acquisition have evolved to reflect technological advances that allow improved spatial resolution of CT imaging. The latest consensus recommendations stipulate that all patients with a FLD should be imaged supine, at full inspiration using non-contrast enhanced volumetric CT imaging with a collimation <1 mm. Furthermore, expiratory CT imaging should be performed routinely to emphasize air-trapping, although expiratory imaging can be volumetric or interspaced.
Should a contrast-enhanced CT be necessary, a non-contrast enhanced CT is recommended (either volumetric or interspaced) during the same examination. The paired non-contrast study allows distinction of ground glass density arising in the lungs secondary to contrast material, from genuine pathological damage to the lungs resulting in ground glass changes. Prone CTs are still recommended for their utility in distinguishing atelectasis from genuine subtle/early disease. However, new dose reduction techniques such as iterative reconstruction and tube current modulation have allowed the acquisition of low-dose CTs (1–3 mSv) which are diagnostically comparable to routine dose CTs in FLD. CTs performed at ultra-low dose (<1 mSv), however, are not recommended for routine use in the work-up of FLD patients.

Classification of fibrosing lung disease on CT
There are three key features that suggest the presence of a FLD on HRCT: honeycomb cysts, traction bronchiectasis and volume loss. Honeycomb cysts refers to the presence of clustered, well-defined cystic spaces 3–10 mm in size (Figure 1a), which are typically in a peripheral, subpleural, and basal distribution. Destructive, paraseptal emphysema may lead to similar lung appearances, so close scrutiny of the morphology and distribution of the low attenuation regions, is key. For example, an absence of upper lobe emphysematous damage increases the likelihood that lower lobes cysts represent honeycombing over emphysema.
CT signs of lung fibrosis. Honeycomb cysts (arrow) lying in layers in the peripheral basal aspect of the lower lobes (a). Dilated varicose tortuous airways representing traction bronchiectasis (arrow) lying amidst dense fibrotic lung in the lower lobes (b). Volume loss in the lower lobes in a patient with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (c). In health, on axial CT images the most inferior aspect of the oblique fissures should reach the anterior chest wall at the level of the hemidiaphragms. However, in this patient, the right oblique fissure (arrows) has been pulled back and now only reaches the midpoint of the lung at a level where the right hemidiaphragm is visible (asterix).
Interstitial fibrosis causes traction bronchiectasis by inducing contraction of the connective tissue scaffold around the airways (Figure 1b), leading to varicose dilation of the bronchi and bronchioles. A key discriminating feature of traction bronchiectasis, when compared to other causes of bronchial dilatation, is its distribution. Traction bronchiectasis is typically found peripherally, where the underlying supportive structure of the lungs is less strong, and airways are therefore more susceptible to deformation. Traction bronchiectasis should be accompanied by evidence of underlying causative fibrosis, either as reticulation or as ground glass opacification surrounding the dilated airway. Traction bronchiectasis may mimic the appearance of honeycombing, if severe, but viewing the CT in coronal or sagittal planes should delineate the tubular nature of the dilated airway. Rarely, an ongoing insult that results in interstitial damage can result in traction bronchiectasis. Yet, the traction bronchiectasis may resolve once the antagonizing stimulus is removed. This is most frequently reported in patients exposed to nitrofurantoin and emphasizes the utility of assigning a “working diagnosis” FLDs, where the underlying diagnosis can be informed by monitoring disease behavior over time.
The final key feature of fibrosis on HRCT is volume loss. In IPF, volume loss is predominantly lower zone and often asymmetrical, making it easy to detect by comparing the right and left oblique fissures’ relative positions. In health, the anterior aspect of the oblique fissures should nearly reach the anterior chest wall at the level of the hemidiaphragms, but the fissures are retracted when the lower lobes shrinks secondary to fibrosis (Figure 1c). While volume loss is the least specific of the three key signs of FLD, it can be useful for understanding the distribution of disease, and whether or not FLD may be present in cases where honeycombing and traction bronchiectasis are not obvious.

UIP in IPF
Given the prognostic and management implications of a diagnosis of IPF, CTs of patients with FLD are primarily characterized according to how closely they mimic disease patterns and distributions classically seen in patients with IPF. A CT UIP pattern commensurate with a clinical diagnosis of IPF first needs to be ruled out before other CT diagnoses can be considered. Therefore, whilst the end-stage of most FLDs can manifest with a UIP pattern on CT, reasons for why the CT may reflect an alternative diagnosis need to be actively sought by the radiologist.
In essence, a CT demonstrating honeycombing with or without traction bronchiectasis in a subpleural and basal-predominant distribution (Figure 2a–c) and not exhibiting features suggestive of an alternative diagnosis is highly correlated to an underlying histological diagnosis of IPF. If honeycombing is present, but in an abnormal (i.e., non-basal) distribution, consideration should be given to an alternative FLD diagnosis.
Images of the upper, middle and lower zones of the lung in a patient with a CT pattern of UIP (a–c), probable UIP (d–f) and indeterminate for UIP (g–i). A UIP pattern is characterized by a peripheral basal predominant distribution of disease with honeycombing, with no features suggestive of an alternative diagnosis. A probable UIP pattern is characterized by a peripheral basal predominant distribution of disease with traction bronchiectasis and no honeycombing, and no features suggestive of an alternative diagnosis. Subtle reticulation (arrows) in the right lower lobe and no associated traction bronchiectasis suggests a CT pattern indeterminate for UIP (i). UIP, usual interstitial pneumonia.
An CT pattern of probable UIP can be most easily thought of as analogous to a UIP pattern but where traction bronchiectasis is present alone without honeycombing (Figure 2d–f). Again, disease should predominate in a peripheral, subpleural, and basal distribution, and CT features suggestive of an alternative diagnosis should be absent. A “Probable UIP” pattern had been labelled a “Possible UIP” pattern in the earlier iteration of the Consensus IPF Guidelines. However, the realization that patients with a “Possible UIP” pattern often had an 82–94% likelihood of UIP being diagnosed on histology, enhanced the prognostic importance of a possible UIP pattern, especially in older, male ex-smokers with idiopathic disease.
Scans that are indeterminate for UIP are those that do not fulfill the UIP or probable UIP pattern, and predominantly include CTs which demonstrate reticulation alone without honeycombing or traction bronchiectasis (Figure 2g–i). The cohort of patients with subtle CT changes or interstitial lung abnormalities that may or may not represent genuine disease is set to increase exponentially with the advent of lung cancer screening which will target patients (older heavy smokers) who are at high risk for developing FLD. Prone imaging might be necessary to confirm the presence of genuine fibrosis as distinct from dependent atelectasis. The other group of patients that may have scans indeterminate for UIP are patients that do not manifest a basal predominant distribution of fibrosis. Approximately, 30% of patients with an indeterminate UIP pattern are found to have a histological pattern of IPF, and accordingly the 2018 iteration of the consensus clinical practice guidelines suggest further diagnostic evaluation in this group with a surgical lung biopsy.
CT scans that contain patterns indicative of fibrosis but which exhibit additional CT features (including cysts, mosaic attenuation, multiple nodules, predominant ground glass, consolidation and non-basal predominant distributions of disease) suggestive of an alternative diagnosis will be discussed in the following sections. Two “alternative CT features” have provoked consternation over the years and merit elucidation.
For many years, the presence of ground glass density on CT was synonymous with inflammation as it was thought to represent fluid infiltration within the airspaces. Subsequent nuanced, predominantly longitudinal studies demonstrated that ground glass densities could represent either fine fibrosis beyond the resolution of CT or inflammation that could respond to therapy. A consequence of this uncertainty was that ground glass densities that were extensive on CT (more than the extent of reticulation) were incompatible with a UIP/IPF pattern on CT in the 2011 IPF guidelines. The current guidelines stipulate that if ground glass densities predominate on a CT one should consider an alternative diagnosis where inflammation is common. However a useful imaging caveat, highlighted by the Fleischner guidelines, distinguishes ground glass densities overlying fibrotic lung (Figure 3a), which frequently reflect fine fibrosis, from ground glass densities occurring separate to fibrotic lung (Figure 3b). When geographically distinct from lung containing reticulation and traction bronchiectasis, there is greater certainty that ground glass densities represent inflammation. When such isolated ground glass areas are extensive, the possibility of an acute exacerbation should be considered.
Axial CT image demonstrating ground glass density lying within areas of overlying reticulation and traction bronchiectasis (arrow) highly suggestive of fine fibrosis (a). When ground glass density lies separate to areas of fibrosis (arrow), it is far more likely to represent inflammation (b). Similarly, the low attenuation component of a mosaic attenuation pattern lying predominantly within fibrotic lung (arrow) is not specific for a diagnosis (c), but when it occurs in normal regions of lung (arrows), a diagnosis of chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis can be made with greater confidence (d).
The second CT feature suggestive of an alternative diagnosis but which requires interrogation is the low attenuation component of a mosaic attenuation pattern. A mosaic attenuation pattern has invariably been associated with a diagnosis of chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis where an inflammatory infiltrate can result in ground glass densities and granulomas can compress airway walls resulting in air-trapping. Yet, whilst air-trapping is a useful sign to distinguish CHP and IPF, air-trapping can also occur in IPF. Low attenuation lobules occurring in IPF (Figure 3c) invariably occur within regions of lung fibrosis and accordingly, a useful discriminator for CHP is the occurrence of spared pulmonary lobules (Figure 3d) within preserved normal lung parenchyma. Yet as fibrosis increases in extent, normal areas of lung become less frequent and distinguishing CHP from IPF becomes more challenging. In such cases, referring back to the patients earliest CT when disease was at its least extensive might prove beneficial.

Nodular ossification and PPFE
Two patterns that have been long identified as occurring in the context of FLD have also be emphasized in the 2018 IPF ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT clinical practice guidelines. Nodular ossification reflects calcific deposition amongst regions of fibrotic lung and has been shown to preferentially occur in IPF (Figure 4) when compared to CHP and connective tissue disease-related ILD (CTD-ILD). Nodular ossification has also been found to be more common in cases of UIP than NSIP, and therefore may act as a diagnostic aid, enhancing the confidence with which a UIP pattern is ascribed to a CT.
Nodular areas of parenchymal ossification (arrows) seen on axial CT images in the right lower lobe in a patient with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Images are shown on lung windows (a) and mediastinal windows (b).
Pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis (PPFE) has been recognized as an idiopathic condition, or one associated with graft vs host disease in the context of organ transplantation for several decades. But an increased recognition of the entity in the context of a variety of FLDs resulted in PPFE being included in the consensus classification of the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias in 2013. PPFE presents as aggregations of connective tissue which are often angular in shape and pleurally based (Figure 5a–c) and which predominate in the lung apices. Associated imaging features include a flattened anteroposterior thoracic diameter, a supraclavicular depression of the anterior chest wall (Figure 5d), and an increased incidence of upper lobe bronchiectasis (Figure 5a) and pneumothoraces. The 2018 consensus clinical practice guidelines advise reporting a CT with evidence of PPFE and FLD in the context of a UIP pattern. Until more is learnt about the superadded functional and mortality effects resulting from co-existing PPFE, diagnosis and patient management will remain centered on the FLD itself.
CT features of pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis in a patient with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis is characterized by pleurally based aggregations (arrow) of dense connective tissue in the lung apices (a). Honeycomb cysts in keeping with the underlying idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis diagnosis are evident at the lung bases (b + c). A suprasternal depression (arrow) and bronchiectasis in the upper lobes are also frequently associated with pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis (d).

UIP in other FLDs
As mentioned earlier, a confusing aspect in the study of the FLDs has been the conflation of a UIP pattern with a diagnosis of IPF. A UIP pattern on CT is a morphological pattern that reliably reflects histopathological features on a surgical lung biopsy. A UIP pattern therefore necessitates clinical confirmation of an idiopathic cause to the patients condition for an IPF diagnosis to be made. Accordingly, it is unfortunate that the terms UIP and IPF are often used interchangeably when in reality not infrequently, patients with CHP (Figure 6a + b) and rheumatoid arthritis-related interstitial lung disease (RAILD) (Figure 6c + d) and rarely sarcoidosis have honeycombing identified on CT.
A usual interstitial pneumonia pattern in a patient with chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, characterized by honeycomb cysts in the lung midzones (a) and more extensive cysts in the lower zones (b). The fibrosis in the midzones demonstrates a bronchocentric distribution (arrows) which is associated with chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (a). A usual interstitial pneumonia pattern can also occur in a patient with rheumatoid arthritis-related interstitial lung disease. Peripheral traction bronchiectasis is seen in the upper zones (c) and honeycombing is evident in the lower lobes (d).
Numerous studies have demonstrated that when honeycombing occurs in patients with CHP or RAILD patients outcomes are similar to those of IPF patients. At present given the differences in management between IPF and other FLDs, distinguishing CHP and RAILD from IPF with a UIP pattern remains important. However, ongoing clinical trials evaluating antifibrotic medication in patients with progressive fibrotic phenotypes may coalesce management strategies regardless of aetiology in patients with a CT UIP pattern, rendering diagnostic distinctions less important.

NSIP pattern
An NSIP pattern on CT represented one of the cardinal patterns of idiopathic interstitial pneumonia in early iterations of consensus guidelines. Though the 2013 update to the consensus guidelines retains NSIP as a key CT pattern, outside the confines of a CTD-ILD or CHP, NSIP is infrequently identified on CT and diagnoses of idiopathic NSIP are rarely made in MDT settings. Though NSIP is a common pattern in CHP, accessory CT features such as a bronchocentric distribution of fibrosis, an upper lobe predominance of disease and mosaic attenuation imply a diagnosis of CHP over a pattern of NSIP.
The change in diagnostic frequency of NSIP has primarily been a consequence of the 2011 ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT IPF diagnostic guidelines which required the interrogation of CTs through the prism of UIP. CTs without honeycombing but where traction bronchiectasis was evident in a basal predominant, peripheral distribution and which in 2009 would have been classified as NSIP, were now given the label of possible UIP. Furthermore, the recognition that idiopathic NSIP might be a precursor of an as yet undeclared CTD-ILD has brought about terms such as undifferentiated CTD and interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features (IPAF). Though these are yet to become established as formal diagnoses, they have reduced the proportion of MDT cases confidently diagnosed as idiopathic NSIP.
An NSIP pattern has been associated with more central traction bronchiectasis (Figure 7a) when compared to UIP where traction bronchiectasis occurs more peripherally in the lung. Subpleural sparing has been recognized as a hallmark of NSIP (Figure 7b) which is rarely seen in UIP and a more regular pattern to reticular lines has been suggested in NSIP, compared to irregularly spaced lines of varying thickness in UIP. When diagnosed in an MDT setting NSIP is often a working diagnosis demanding review at subsequent MDTs given the potential for the development of a CTD or the longitudinal evolution of an NSIP pattern to a UIP pattern on serial CT examination.
Subpleural sparing of fibrosis (arrows) in a patient with non-specific interstitial pneumonia (a). A patient with a non-specific interstitial pneumonia pattern (b) where traction bronchiectasis (arrows) is distributed more centrally than is typically seen in a usual interstitial pneumonia pattern.

CHP vs IPF
The most common diagnostic dilemma faced by an MDT is distinguishing CHP from IPF. CHP can be upper lobe predominant, diffusely distributed throughout the lung, or lower zone predominant in one-third of cases. The combination of an axially diffuse distribution of disease and more low attenuation lung (representing the low attenuation component of a mosaic attenuation pattern) than reticulation on CT was recently associated with a high specificity low false diagnosis risk for CHP. With regard to other CT features that might suggest CHP, a bronchocentric pattern to fibrosis (Figure 8a) can be a subtle sign that is far harder to identify than the well-described observation of nodules distributed in a centrilobular pattern (Figure 8b) or the presence of cysts (Figure 8c).
A bronchocentric distribution of fibrosis in a patient with chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (a). Centrilobular nodules (b) and pulmonary cysts (c) are seen in other examples of chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (arrows).
In practice, making a diagnosis of CHP has been handicapped by the lack of consensus diagnostic guidelines that over time has helped refine the diagnosis of IPF. The requirement for clear diagnostic guidelines in CHP is especially pertinent as clinical criteria such as evidence of antigen exposure may be lacking in up to 60% of cases and the diagnostic value of serum precipitants remains unclear. Furthermore, CT analysis forms just one aspect of the diagnostic pathway in CHP as bronchoalveolar lavage differentials can strongly contribute to diagnostic certainty. Yet, here again there is as yet no consensus on the level of lymphocytosis required to make a high likelihood diagnosis of CHP. Until consensus guidelines for a CHP diagnosis emerge, MDT meetings will continue to focus heavily on trying to disentangle cases of CHP and IPF, some of which will be labelled as unclassifiable FLD.

Unclassifiable FLD
The spectrum of unclassifiable FLD comprises a heterogenous assortment of patients which constitute between 10 and 25% of all ILD cases. Patients can be labelled unclassifiable FLD if there is no clear first-choice diagnosis that can be made with over 50% certainty despite evaluation of all available data, or if no clear diagnosis can be made following a surgical lung biopsy. Reaching a clear diagnosis on an individual case is also in part determined by the proclivities of an individual clinician. For example, a fastidious clinician might require that all diagnostic criterion need to be satisfied before advocating a single diagnosis, whilst another clinician might take a more pragmatic approach and manage a patient based on the most likely diagnosis given the available data. As the number of patients undergoing surgical lung biopsies reduces and whilst several FLDs lack diagnostic guidelines, diagnoses are often made on the basis of likelihoods.
Unclassifiable FLD is the exemplar condition for which the concept of a working diagnosis of a FLD could be employed. Here, given that there is no clear diagnosis, patient could be managed on the basis of a working diagnosis, with annual or biannual reviews of the clinical picture in future MDTs. Given that the CT will invariably exhibit features suggesting alternate patterns to UIP (Figure 9a–c), regular CT reviews will be essential both to monitor the evolution of CT patterns, and provide some statement on disease trajectory.
A diffuse distribution of fibrosis throughout the upper (a), middle (b) and lower zones (c) of the lungs in a patient diagnosed as unclassifiable fibrosing lung disease. There is no peripheral, basal-predominant distribution of disease as is commonly seen in a usual interstitial pneumonia pattern occurring in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Fibrotic sarcoidosis
When fibrotic, sarcoidosis results in a pattern of fibrosis that radiates from the hilar regions of the lung and extends into the posterior aspects of the upper lobes (Figure 10a–c) resulting in severe architectural distortion. Volume loss and traction bronchiectasis are invariably seen, whilst honeycomb appearances in the form of apical bullous destruction admixed with destructive emphysema is not uncommon. The upper lobe predominance of sarcoidosis allows distinction from a UIP pattern associated with IPF but can make distinguishing sarcoidosis from CHP challenging. Sarcoidosis can occasionally be seen in the lower zones of the lungs, where honeycombing (suggesting a UIP pattern) or nodular thickened interlobular septa might be present. Yet the degree of damage in the upper lobes, as well as subtle nodularity within the lungs and enlarged, potentially calcified mediastinal and hilar nodes, might suggest the underlying diagnosis.
Upper zone fibrosis (a) affecting the posterior aspects of the upper lobes in a patient with fibrotic sarcoidosis. Disease is limited in the middle zones (b), but honeycomb cysts are visible in the lower lobes in keeping with a usual interstitial pneumonia pattern (c). Note is also made of calcified mediastinal nodes on the right which are frequently seen in patients with sarcoidosis.

CTD-ILD, familial and drug-induced FLD
The spectrum of CTD-ILD is beyond the scope of the current review but has been well described in prior reviews. In practice, diagnosing a FLD in the context of CTD-ILD is less of a clinical conundrum for the radiologist as the patient often presents with a CTD diagnosis or will be evaluated by a rheumatologist if the pulmonologist harbours any suspicion of a CTD. CTD-ILDs can manifest a broad array of CT appearances. These range from airways disease, UIP and NSIP in RAILD, to UIP and NSIP in scleroderma, NSIP and organizing pneumonia (Figure 11) in polymyositis and dermatomyositis and Sjogrens syndrome and airways disease and NSIP in mixed connective tissue disease. Occasionally, accessory signs on a CT such as a patulous dilated oesophagus as seen in patients with scleroderma may suggest a diagnosis (Figure 11).
Organizing pneumonia in the upper (a) and middle (b) zones in a patient with polymyositis. The organizing pneumonia is predominantly located peripherally in the lung and is characterized by arcs of dense fibrosis surrounded by ground glass density in keeping with the reverse halo or Atoll sign. Organising pneumonia can demonstrate a wide variety of appearances on CT. A dilated patulous oesophagus (arrows) on axial (c) and sagittal (d) CT imaging in a patient with scleroderma. An air-fluid level is visible in the oesophagus on axial imaging; the trachea is demarcated with an Asterix.
Whilst it is increasingly apparent that cases of NSIP on CT might display clinical features suggestive of but not diagnostic of a CTD-ILD, until IPAF establishes itself as a formal diagnostic category, imaging clues that suggest the possibility of IPAF require consideration. These include evidence of multicompartmental disease on CT where airways disease, pleural disease and interstitial disease may all coexist. Patients may also display disproportionate pulmonary hypertension manifesting on CT as enlargement of the main pulmonary artery or an increase in the pulmonary artery aorta ratio. Recent reports in patients with IPAF features have demonstrated an IPF-like poor outcome when honeycombing has been identified on CT.
Though also out of the scope of this review, diagnosing drug-induced and familial FLD relies on a high level of clinical suspicion and appropriate clinical histories. CT patterns of drug-induced FLD are most frequently those of organizing pneumonia and NSIP, with UIP almost never identified. CT appearances of familial FLD can be very heterogenous, but cystic changes in a young patient are suspicious for a surfactant deficiency disorder.

MDT input from radiology
When discussing a case from a radiological standpoint in an MDT setting, several key aspects need to be conveyed. Firstly, the CT should be reported in UIP terms and categorized as: UIP, probable UIP, indeterminate for UIP or potential alternative diagnoses proffered. If the CT is indeterminate for UIP, reasons for this should be given and further imaging suggested if required (e.g., prone CTs).
If an alternate diagnosis is suggested, reasons for this should be highlighted and the differentials listed. Unclassifiable FLD should be considered as a potential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis list that arises will help in the formulation of a working diagnosis and a degree of certainty should be ascribed to the working diagnosis. The presence of disease complications on a CT should always be highlighted. These include a pneumothorax (Figure 12a) or pneumomediastinum, discrete nodules which could represent an early lung cancer (Figure 12b), foci of ground glass in normal regions of lung that could represent infection, pulmonary oedema or an acute exacerbation (Figure 12c) if extensive and the size of the main pulmonary artery indicating the possibility of pulmonary hypertension.
Important complications to identify on a CT in a patient with a fibrosing lung disease. A pneumothorax (a) can present as acute shortness of breath (arrow). Newly developing lung nodules (arrow) may represent early lung cancer which has a higher likelihood of developing, in patients with fibrosing lung disease (b). Widespread ground glass density occurring in normal regions of lung (arrows) should raise the possibility of an acute exacerbation of disease (c).
Lastly, further investigations that might progress reaching a diagnosis should be suggested. Documentation of an MDT discussion is a crucial but often neglected step. The formal working diagnosis and the alternative diagnoses should all be listed. CT complications and alternative investigations required should be highlighted and a date marked at which the patient is due to be rediscussed in the MDT.

The future
Despite the emergence of two diagnostic guidelines for the management of FLD in 2018, it is still possible that the diagnostic process for FLDs may change in the coming years. The main levers of change include the introduction of computer-based machine learning techniques for disease classification on CT which may help adjudicate challenging cases in expert centres or aid diagnosis in non-specialist centres. The results of clinical trials examining a progressive fibrotic phenotype of FLD may also simplify diagnosis as several conditions where fibrosis can be objectively shown to progress (identified using functional, symptomatic, exercise-related or computer-based imaging metrics) might have common management strategies. Lastly the development of guidelines for the diagnosis of CHP and the running of MDTs will standardize practice around the world and, it is hoped, introduce a common language to the evaluation of FLD.

Conclusion
Diagnosing FLD on CT remains challenging, yet is crucial as it is the starting point for optimizing patient care. Whilst the requirement to arrive at a single final diagnosis following MDT discussion has lessened with the advent of a working diagnosis, diagnostic certainties should improve as guidelines for conditions such as CHP emerge. A small number of complex cases require a disproportionate amount of MDT discussion and in these difficult cases, continued review of patients in an MDT setting, which may in the future include geneticists, immunologists, palliative care specialists amongst others, will allow better patient specific care. As our knowledge of the mechanisms and subtypes of FLD grows, the diagnostic landscape will change appropriately. Until then, this review aims to disentangle and simplify the diagnostic approach to this complicated array of conditions.
Acknowledgment: Joseph Jacob was supported by a Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Career Development Fellowship 209553/Z/17/Z.
Disclosures: Joseph Jacob reports fees from Roche and Boehringer Ingelheim unrelated to the submitted work.

REFERENCES
Radiological versus histological diagnosis in UIP and NSIP: survival implications
Interstitial lung diseases: characteristics at diagnosis and mortality risk assessment
Usual interstitial pneumonia: histologic correlation with high-resolution CT
Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis: high-resolution CT and radiographic features in 16 patients
Disease activity in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: CT and pathologic correlation
Subpleural micronodules in diffuse infiltrative lung diseases: evaluation with thin-section CT scans
An official ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT statement: idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: evidence-based guidelines for diagnosis and management
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonia: do community and academic physicians agree on diagnosis?
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonia: what is the effect of a multidisciplinary approach to diagnosis
Patient-centred management in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: similar themes in three communication models
Diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. An official ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT clinical practice guideline
Diagnostic criteria for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: a Fleischner Society white paper
A standardized diagnostic ontology for fibrotic interstitial lung disease. An international Working Group perspective
The predictive value of appearances on thin-section computed tomography in fibrosing alveolitis
High-resolution computed tomography in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: diagnosis and prognosis
Imaging: how to recognise idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Fleischner society: glossary of terms for thoracic imaging
HRCT of fibrosing lung disease
Honeycombing on CT; its definition, pathologic correlation, and future direction of its diagnosis
Progression of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: lessons from asymmetrical disease
Diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis with high-resolution CT in patients with little or no radiological evidence of honeycombing: secondary analysis of a randomised, controlled trial
CT scan findings of probable usual interstitial pneumonitis have a high predictive value for histologic usual interstitial pneumonitis
The use of pretest probability increases the value of high-resolution CT in diagnosing usual interstitial pneumonia
Clinical predictors of a diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Interstitial lung abnormalities and reduced exercise capacity
Association between interstitial lung abnormalities and all-cause mortality
Radiologic-pathologic discordance in biopsy-proven usual interstitial pneumonia
Serial CT in fibrosing alveolitis: prognostic significance of the initial pattern
Parenchymal opacification in chronic infiltrative lung diseases: CT-pathologic correlation
Fibrosing alveolitis: prognostic implication of ground-glass attenuation at high-resolution CT
Importance of ground-glass attenuation in chronic diffuse infiltrative lung disease: pathologic-CT correlation
Fibrosing alveolitis: chest radiography and CT as predictors of clinical and functional impairment at follow-up in 26 patients
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: progression of honeycombing at thin-section CT
Computed tomography findings in acute exacerbation of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Acute exacerbation of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: frequency and clinical features
Histologic diagnosis of extrinsic allergic alveolitis
The pulmonary pathology of farmer's lung disease
Bronchiolitis in chronic pigeon breeder's disease. morphologic evidence of a spectrum of small airway lesions in hypersensitivity pneumonitis induced by avian antigens
Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis: differentiation from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and nonspecific interstitial pneumonia by using thin-section CT
Development and validation of a radiological diagnosis model for hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Diffuse pulmonary ossification in fibrosing interstitial lung diseases: prevalence and associations
Idiopathic pulmonary upper lobe fibrosis (IPUF
Familial extensive idiopathic bilateral pleural fibrosis
Idiopathic pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis: description of a novel clinicopathologic entity
Pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis: one more walk on the wild side of drugs?
Pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis: a spectrum of histopathological and imaging phenotypes
An official American thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society statement: update of the International multidisciplinary classification of the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
The thoracic cage becomes flattened in the progression of pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis
Functional associations of pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis and emphysema with hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Rapid decrease in forced vital capacity in patients with idiopathic pulmonary upper lobe fibrosis
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias: diagnostic accuracy of thin-section CT in 129 patients
Utility of a lung biopsy for the diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
The diagnostic accuracy of high-resolution computed tomography in diffuse infiltrative lung diseases
Chronic diffuse infiltrative lung disease: comparison of diagnostic accuracy of CT and chest radiography
Diffuse lung disease: diagnostic accuracy of CT in patients undergoing surgical biopsy of the lung
Mortality in Mexican patients with chronic pigeon breeder's lung compared with those with usual interstitial pneumonia
The effect of pulmonary fibrosis on survival in patients with hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis: radiologic phenotypes are associated with distinct survival time and pulmonary function trajectory
Predicting outcomes in rheumatoid arthritis related interstitial lung disease
Usual interstitial pneumonia in rheumatoid arthritis-associated interstitial lung disease
Predictors of mortality in rheumatoid arthritis-associated interstitial lung disease
Pulmonary sarcoidosis mimicking cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis on CT
Design of the PF-ILD trial: a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase III trial of nintedanib in patients with progressive fibrosing interstitial lung disease
Pirfenidone in patients with unclassifiable progressive fibrosing interstitial lung disease: design of a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled Phase II trial
American thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society international multidisciplinary consensus classification of the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias. This joint statement of the American Thoracic Society (ats), and the European Respiratory Society (ERS) was adopted by the ats Board of Directors, June 2001 and by the ERS Executive Committee, June 2001
Distinct prognosis of idiopathic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) fulfilling criteria for undifferentiated connective tissue disease (UCTD
An official European Respiratory Society/American Thoracic Society research statement: interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features
Idiopathic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia: report of an American Thoracic Society project
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: changes in pattern and distribution of disease over time
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis: perspectives in diagnosis and management
Identification of diagnostic criteria for chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis: an international modified Delphi survey
Identifying an inciting antigen is associated with improved survival in patients with chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Radiographic fibrosis Score predicts survival in hypersensitivity pneumonitis
An official American Thoracic Society clinical practice guideline: the clinical utility of bronchoalveolar lavage cellular analysis in interstitial lung disease
Prevalence and prognosis of unclassifiable interstitial lung disease
A cohort study of interstitial lung diseases in central Denmark
Prevalence and prognosis of unclassifiable interstitial lung disease
Transbronchial lung cryobiopsy in the diagnosis of fibrotic interstitial lung diseases
Sarcoidosis with pulmonary fibrosis: CT patterns and correlation with pulmonary function
Pulmonary sarcoidosis: typical and atypical manifestations at high-resolution CT with pathologic correlation
High-resolution computed tomography of the pulmonary manifestations of connective tissue diseases
High resolution computed tomography of the lung in lifelong non-smoking patients with rheumatoid arthritis
Lung changes in rheumatoid arthritis: CT findings
Prognosis of fibrotic interstitial pneumonia: idiopathic versus collagen vascular disease-related subtypes
Correlations between high-resolution computed tomography of the chest and clinical function in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Prospective study in 75 patients
Histopathologic subsets of fibrosing alveolitis in patients with systemic sclerosis and their relationship to outcome
High resolution computed tomography in early scleroderma lung disease
Pulmonary involvement in progressive systemic sclerosis: sequential evaluation with CT, pulmonary function tests, and bronchoalveolar lavage
The major histopathologic pattern of pulmonary fibrosis in scleroderma is nonspecific interstitial pneumonia
Two distinct clinical types of interstitial lung disease associated with polymyositis-dermatomyositis
Pulmonary involvement in polymyositis and dermatomyositis: sequential evaluation with CT
Interstitial lung disease in primary Sjögren syndrome
Non-specific interstitial pneumonia as pulmonary involvement of systemic sclerosis
Pulmonary manifestations of primary Sjogren's syndrome: a clinical, radiologic, and pathologic study
High-resolution CT of lung disease related to collagen vascular disease
Interstitial lung diseases associated with collagen vascular diseases: radiologic and histopathologic findings
Respiratory complications in mixed connective tissue disease
CT findings, Radiologic-Pathologic correlation, and imaging predictors of survival for patients with interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features
Surfactant protein C mutations are the basis of a significant portion of adult familial pulmonary fibrosis in a Dutch cohort
Deep learning for classifying fibrotic lung disease on high-resolution computed tomography: a case-cohort study