The Causes and Diagnosis of Non-congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia Primary Adrenal Insufficiency in Children
Abstract
Primary adrenal insufficiency (PAI) is a critical condition that requires prompt diagnosis and initiation of treatment. Diagnosis can be challenging due to various underlying causes, including defects in adrenal gland development, resistance to adrenocorticotropic hormone, autoimmune causes, and metabolic problems. A specific diagnosis is essential for developing a treatment plan and identifying other possible accompanying pathologies. Biochemical studies, genetic analyses, and imaging techniques are helpful in establishing a specific diagnosis. This evidence-based guideline includes the specific diagnoses that cause PAI and their clinical and genetic features. It also provides evidence-based steps to follow when making a diagnosis.

Introduction
Primary adrenal insufficiency (PAI) is a rare but life-threatening condition that requires urgent diagnosis and treatment. It is characterized by inappropriate synthesis of glucocorticoids and/or mineralocorticoids and/or adrenal androgens. Unlike adults, congenital causes due to genetic disorders are predominant in the etiology of childhood PAI. Although most of these diseases start in the neonatal period and infancy, the diagnosis of mild or non-classical forms can occur at later ages or in adulthood. The most common cause of PAI is congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). Non-CAH, as a sub-group of PAIs, can be categorized into four groups: i) defects in adrenal gland development; ii) resistance to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and similar conditions; iii) autoimmune causes; and iv) metabolic causes.
In childhood, PAI may rarely develop due to physical conditions, such as adrenal hemorrhage, infiltration (e.g., neuroblastoma), and some viral (e.g., Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, human immunodeficiency virus) and bacterial infections (e.g., tuberculosis). In addition, medications that disrupt cortisol synthesis, such as ketoconazole, aminoglutethimide, and etomidate, and medications that accelerate glucocorticoid metabolism, such as phenytoin, phenobarbital, and rifampicin, are involved in the etiology of PAI.
This evidence-based review with good practice points was developed by the Adrenal Working Subgroup of the Turkish Society for Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes. We developed this evidence-based review for “The Causes and Diagnosis of Non-CAH Primary Adrenal Insufficiency in Children”.

Clinical Findings and Etiological Clues
Clinical signs of cortisol deficiency include fatigue, weakness, weight loss, arthralgia, orthostatic hypotension, hyponatremia, hypoglycemia, hypercalcemia, direct hyperbilirubinemia, lymphocytosis, and eosinophilia. Clinical signs of mineralocorticoid deficiency include growth retardation, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dizziness, hypotension, dehydration, and hypovolemic shock. Neonates have the highest predisposition to present with mineralocorticoid deficiency. Typically, aldosterone production in newborns is higher than in childhood. This may be due to the relative mineralocorticoid resistance in the kidneys during the neonatal period, unpredictable fluid intake, and/or low sodium content of the breast milk. Related to aldosterone deficiency, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia can be biochemically detected within the first two weeks of life. Mineralocorticoid deficiency is always associated with adrenocortical dysfunction.
Patients with PAI may present with adrenal crisis, causing signs of acute cardiovascular decompensation, such as hypotension, tachycardia, and shock. In contrast, chronic PAI may present with non-specific symptoms, such as malaise, fatigue, weakness, anorexia, and weight loss. Absence or delayed adrenarche suggests a deficiency of adrenal sex steroids. Hyperpigmentation (on the skin, areola, genitalia, axillae, nail beds, joints, and scars) does not occur in secondary adrenal insufficiency but is present in 90% of patients with PAI. However, it may not be detected in infancy until the sixth week or in the first episode of the disease.
The age at onset of adrenal insufficiency is an important clue in the diagnosis. A family history of similar cases is instructive, and a history of sudden death or death secondary to gastroenteritis or infection suggests potential missed cases. The presence of comorbid findings, such as intrauterine growth retardation, steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and enteropathy, and detailed examination of history and physical examination are essential in providing guidance to the specific diagnosis (Table 1).
Making a specific diagnosis of PAI is essential in determining the need for mineralocorticoid use and diagnosing and monitoring other related non-adrenal pathologies. Sanger sequencing or targeted next-generation sequencing techniques can help with a genetic diagnosis if a specific cause is suspected. In cases where the alleged mutation cannot be detected, next-generation sequencing and panel, whole exome analysis, or whole genome analysis are used as further investigations. Reaching a specific genetic diagnosis is also important for providing genetic counseling for families.
Adrenal imaging modalities that can be used as an aid in the diagnosis of PAI include ultrasound, radiography, magnetic resonance imaging, and computed tomography. They have limited indications for diagnostic use in childhood. In CAH and congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia, the adrenal glands are usually large but may be normal on adrenal imaging. In Cytochrome P450scc deficiency, adrenal glands may be small. In diagnosing PAI, they help to investigate etiological causes, such as hemorrhage, tuberculosis, and tumor infiltration. Calcifications are present in adrenal glands in Wolman’s disease, tuberculosis, and sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase (SGPL1) deficiency..
The clinical conditions associated with PAI and adrenal crisis have been adequately defined following previous studies and clinical experience (Table 1). Since the clinical presentation of chronic adrenal insufficiency in childhood may be insidious, there may be a delay in diagnosis. However, delayed diagnosis leads to high mortality, especially in case of adrenal crisis. Therefore, the indication for testing for adrenal insufficiency should be at an optimum level, avoiding delays in testing.

Good practice point:
1. Patients with clinical findings compatible with glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid deficiency should be investigated for adrenal insufficiency. Blood samples should be reserved for biochemical tests, and waiting for test results should not delay treatment (1⨁⨁⨁O).

Diagnostic Tests for Primary Adrenal Insufficiency
Serum and salivary cortisol: The most accessible assessment to confirm the diagnosis of PAI is low basal cortisol levels compared to high ACTH levels. ACTH levels above 300 pg/mL are sufficient for maximal cortisol response. However, the kit and reference ranges should be taken into consideration. Failure to reach adequate levels of cortisol synthesis despite elevated ACTH indicates that the adrenal cortex cannot adequately respond to ACTH stimulation and provides strong evidence for PAI.
In early PAI cases, adequate cortisol response to elevated ACTH may be found, and elevated ACTH may be the first finding. In infancy, basal serum cortisol level may not be reliable due to variations in circadian rhythm, sleep patterns, intrauterine growth retardation, maternal stress level, and corticosteroid-binding globulin levels. Threshold cortisol values indicating adequate cortisol levels may vary depending on the laboratory device and method used. The diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency should be confirmed with dynamic tests in the presence of low morning serum cortisol levels and normal or low serum cortisol levels in times of stress.
Circadian rhythm may not develop until the age of three years. There is no definite consensus regarding the serum cortisol level sufficient to exclude the diagnosis of PAI. Still, a cortisol level above 17.3-20 mcg/dL is considered sufficient in children without stress. Recently, the ability to evaluate serum cortisol with methods including liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) has become valuable in preventing drug, diet, and other steroid hormone interactions in immune methods. Another essential advantage of LC-MS/MS over immunoassays is the ability to evaluate multiple steroids in a single analysis, up to 15 or more in some methods, thus significantly expanding the identification of different forms and underlying causes of adrenal insufficiency.
A different method for assessing cortisol synthesis capacity is salivary cortisol. Since salivary cortisol is 10-50 times less abundant than serum cortisol levels, it should be evaluated with sensitive measurement methods. This method is less invasive because it does not require blood sampling. In contrast to serum cortisol, salivary cortisol assessed by LC-MS/MS is not affected by changes in corticosteroid-binding globulin levels. Salivary cortisol levels during Synachen test measured by LC-MS/MS method have been shown to correlate with serum cortisol levels when the cut-off values are set at 18 mcg/dL for serum cortisol and 500 ng/dL for salivary cortisol, respectively, for adrenal sufficiency with 100% sensitivity and specificity Although serum and salivary cortisol levels can be used for PAI assessment, exact cut-off values still need to be determined. However, the diagnosis based on serum and salivary cortisol levels is only valid in acute situations where it is not possible to wait for the Synacthen (cosyntropin or tetracosactide) test.
Synacthen (synthetic ACTH) tests: Tetracosactide or cosyntropin (Synacthen) is a synthetic peptide containing 39 amino acids with the same amino acid sequence as the N-terminal 24 amino acids of ACTH. In the high-dose Synacthen test, adrenal insufficiency is diagnosed by evaluating cortisol levels taken at 30 and 60 minutes following intravenous administration of the Synacthen. A peak cortisol level above 18-20 mcg/dL is considered as sufficient response. At the same time, a 2-3-fold increase in the cortisol level from basal cortisol or a rise of 7 mcg/dL at 30 or 60 minutes of the test is also considered a sufficient response. The one mcg Synacthen test is recommended for diagnosing PAI only in case of difficulty in accessing the 250 mcg Synacthen test.
Mineralocorticoid levels: Increased plasma renin concentration or plasma renin activity (PRA) and concomitant low aldosterone levels before deteriorating electrolyte levels are essential for mineralocorticoid deficiency. However, interpretation of the data obtained from these tests requires consideration of many variables, including sample storage and processing conditions, dietary salt intake, physical activity, sex steroids, and the patient’s position (supine or prone position) at the time of sample collection. PRA measurement is based on the level of angiotensin 1 produced during the renin-catalyzed conversion of angiotensinogen to angiotensin 1. Therefore, PRA is affected by conditions that alter both renin and angiotensinogen levels.
Plasma angiotensinogen levels increase in pregnancy, glucocorticoid and estrogen exposure, and decrease in liver diseases. Renin is synthesized as prorenin, an inactive zymogen. To prevent the conversion of prorenin to renin during measurement, it is recommended to centrifuge and freeze the sample, especially in laboratories where the sample cannot be studied rapidly. In addition, if the sample is kept at a high temperature, renin will continue to form angiotensin 1 from angiotensinogen and cause angiotensin 1 level to be higher than normal in PRA measurement. Whether the patient is supine or standing at the time of sampling and the change in the amount of daily sodium consumption cause fluctuations in renin levels. Since PRA levels vary for these reasons, it is recommended to be measured twice a day while the patient takes 100-200 mEq of sodium daily for precise evaluation. The most objective way of the assessment is to have the first measurement in the morning after spending the night in the supine position and the second measurement after spending four hours standing.
Methods are described at Part 1 (Clinical, Biochemical and Molecular Characteristics of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia Due to 21-hydroxylase Deficiency) of this supplement.

Good practice points:
1. A diagnosis of PAI can be made if the cortisol level taken between 06:00-10:00 a.m. is below five mcg/dL and the ACTH value is above two times the normal value for the kit used (1⨁⨁⨁O).
2. The “gold standard” method for diagnosing PAI is the high-dose Synacthen test. It should be administered at 250 mcg in patients over two years of age, 125 mcg in patients under two years of age, and 15 mcg/kg in infants. The test can be performed at any time of the day (2⨁⨁OO).
3. One mcg low-dose Synacthen test is recommended for diagnosing PAI only in case of difficulty in accessing the 250 mcg Synacthen test (2⨁⨁OO).
4. In patients with suspected PAI, plasma renin or PRA should be evaluated simultaneously for concomitant mineralocorticoid deficiency (1⨁⨁⨁O).
Authorship Contributions
Concept: Müge Atar, Leyla Akın, Design: Müge Atar, Leyla Akın, Literature Search: Müge Atar, Leyla Akın, Writing: Müge Atar, Leyla Akın.
Conflict of interest: None declared.
Financial Disclosure: The authors declared that this study received no financial support.

References
Diagnosis and treatment of primary adrenal insufficiency: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.
The spectrum of pediatric adrenal insufficiency: insights from 34 years of experience.
Pediatric Primary adrenal insufficiency: A 21-year single center experience.
Hughes CR, Man E, Achermann JC. The Adrenal Cortex and Its Disorders. In: Brook’s Clinical Pediatric Endocrinology, Oxford: Wiley 7th ed. 2020; p. 335-407.
Novel insight into etiology, diagnosis and management of primary adrenal insufficiency.
Primary adrenal insufficiency in children: diagnosis and management.
Primary adrenal failure due to viral infection in an infant.
The adrenal cortex and its disorders. ın: Sperling pediatric endocrinology, Philadelphia: Elsevier 5th ed.
Pediatric adrenal insufficiency: diagnosis, management, and new therapies.
Water balance and ‘salt wasting’ in the first year of life: the role of aldosterone-signaling defects.
Abnormalities of aldosterone synthesis and action in children.
Physiological partial aldosterone resistance in human newborns.
Adrenal insufficiency.
Genomic diagnosis for pediatric disorders: revolution and evolution.
An overview of inborn errors of metabolism manifesting with primary adrenal insufficiency.
Current insights into adrenal insufficiency in the newborn and young infant.
Imaging of nonmalignant adrenal lesions in children.
Adrenal cortical hyperplasia: diagnostic workup, subtypes, imaging features and mimics.
Delayed diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency is common: a cross-sectional study in 216 patients.
Dose-response relationships between plasma adrenocorticotropin (ACTH), cortisol, aldosterone, and 18-hydroxycorticosterone after injection of ACTH-(1-39) or human corticotropin-releasing hormone in man.
The diagnosis and treatment of adrenal insufficiency during childhood and adolescence.
Method-specific serum cortisol responses to the adrenocorticotrophin test: comparison of gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and five automated immunoassays.
Corticotropin tests for hypothalamic-pituitary- adrenal insufficiency: a metaanalysis.
Evaluation of adrenal function using the human corticotrophin-releasing hormone test, low dose Synacthen test and 9am cortisol level in children and adolescents with central adrenal insufficiency.
Novel liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) methods for measuring steroids.
Salivary cortisol in the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency: cost efficient and patient friendly.
Salivary cortisol levels by tandem mass spectrometry during high dose ACTH stimulation test for adrenal insufficiency in children.
Effect of the synthetic polypeptide beta-1-24 (Synacthen) on adrenocortical function.
SFE/SFEDP adrenal insufficiency French consensus: introduction and handbook.
Establishment of reference values for standard dose short synacthen test (250 microgram), low dose short synacthen test (1 microgram) and insulin tolerance test for assessment of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis in normal subjects.
Plasma renin activity in the management of congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Activity assays and immunoassays for plasma Renin and prorenin: information provided and precautions necessary for accurate measurement.
Renin, prorenin and the putative (pro)renin receptor.
Monitoring of therapy in congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Clinical, biochemical and molecular characteristics of congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency.
Disease	Gene	Associated clinical features	 	Developmental adrenal gland disorders	 	 X-linked congenital adrenal hypoplasia (DAX-1) 	NR0B1	 Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, gonadotropin independent precocious puberty 	 	 Adrenal hypoplasia associated with steroidogenic factor-1 defect 	NR5A1	 46, XY DSD and 46, XX DSD, primary ovarian failure, disorders of spermatogenesis 	 	 IMAGe syndrome 	CDKNC1	 IUGR, metaphyseal dysplasia, genital anomalies 	 	 IMAGEI syndrome 	POLE1	 IUGR, skeletal deformities, immune deficiency, developmental hip dysplasia, atypical facial appearance 	 	 Pallister-Hall syndrome 	GLI3	 Hypothalamic hamartoma, hypopituitarism, polydactyly, imperforate anus, bifid epiglottis 	 	 MIRAGE syndrome 	SAM9D	 Myelodysplasia, growth retardation, infections, enteropathy, genital anomalies 	 	 SeRKAL syndrome 	WNT4	 46, XY DSD, renal dysgenesis, pulmonary hypoplasia 	 	 Pena-Shokeir syndrome 	DOK7RAPSN	 Fetal akinesia, IUGR, arthrogryposis, facial anomalies, pulmonary hypoplasia, intestinal malrotations, cystic hygroma, cleft palate, cryptorchidism 	 	 Meckel-Gruber syndrome 	MKS1	 Cystic renal disease, CNS malformation, polydactyly, hepatic abnormalities 	 	 Galloway-Mowat syndrome 	WDR73	 Early onset severe encephalopathy, epilepsy, microcephaly, optic atrophy, hiatal hernia, nephrotic syndrome 	 	 Hydrolethalus syndrome 	HYLS1	 Hydrocephalus, absent midline structure of the CNS, micrognathia, polydactyly, pulmonary defects 	 	Resistance to the effect of ACTH and similar disorders	 	 Familial glucocorticoid deficiency type 1 	MC2R	 Mostly normal MC activity, tall stature, subclinical hypothyroidism, characteristic facial appearance (hypertelorism, medial epicanthus, frontal bossing) 	 	 Familial glucocorticoid deficiency type 2 	MRAP	 Normal MC activity 	 	 AAA-Triple A syndrome 	AAAS	 Alacrima, achalasia, mental retardation, deafness, hyperkeratosis, autonomic nervous system disorders 	 	 DNA repairing defects 	MCM4	 Natural killer cell defects, short stature, microcephaly, recurrent viral infections, chromosomal breaks 	 	 Bioinactive ACTH 	POMC	 Symptoms of POMC deficiency accompanied by high ACTH levels 	 	Mitochondrial ROS detoxification defects			 	 Nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase deficiency 	NNT	 Isolated GC deficiency, subclinical hypothyroidism, insulin-dependent type 1 DM, precocious puberty 	 	 Thioredoxin reductase deficiency 	TXNRD2	 Isolated GC deficiency, cardiac defects 	 	 Glutathione peroxidase deficiency 	GPX1	 Isolated GC deficiency 	 	 Peroxiredoxin deficiency 	PRDX3	 Isolated GC deficiency 	 	Autoimmunity	 	 Isolated autoimmune adrenalitis 	CLTA-4HLA-DR3HLA-DR4		 	 APS (autoimmune polyglandular syndrome) type 1 (APECED) 	AIRE	 Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and other autoimmune diseases (autoimmune thyroid diseases, type 1 DM, pernicious anemia, alopecia, vitiligo, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, hypophysitis) 	 	 APS type 2 	CLTA-4HLA-DR3HLA-DR4	 Autoimmune thyroid disease, type 1 DM, premature ovarian failure, vitiligo, and pernicious anemia 	 	 APS type 4 	CLTA-4HLA-DR3HLA-DR4	 One or more autoimmune diseases (atrophic gastritis, pernicious anemia, celiac disease, myasthenia gravis, hypophysitis, alopecia, vitiligo, hypogonadism) 	 	Metabolic causes	 	Disorders of cholesterol synthesis/metabolism			 	 Smith-Lemni Opitz syndrome 	DHCR7	 IUBG, mental retardation, microcephaly, atypical facial appearance, polydactyly, urogenital anomalies, syndactyly between 2nd and 3rd toes 	 	 Abetalipoproteinemia 	MTP	 Ataxia, retinopathy, acanthocytes in peripheral smear, fat malabsorption 	 	 Familial hypercholesterolemia 	LDLR	 Xanthomas, coronary artery disease, corneal arcus 	 	 Wolman disease 	LIPA	 Subcapsular punctate calcifications in the adrenal glands, growth retardation, malnutrition secondary to malabsorption, xanthomatous changes in the hematopoietic system and intestines, lungs, brain 	 	 Peroxisomal diseases 			 	 X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy 	ABCD1	 Progressive neurodegeneration, cognitive and behavioral changes, progressive hearing and vision loss, dementia, spasticity, seizures 	 	 Zellweger spectrum disorders 	PEX	 Hypotonia, seizures, encephalopathy, hepatic failure 	 	Endoplasmic reticulum defects			 	 Sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase 1 deficiency 	SGPL1	 Steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome, ichthyosis, neurological disorders, hypothyroidism, undescended testis 	 	Mitochondrial diseases			 	 Kearns Sayre syndrome 	 MtDNA deletions, MTTL1	 Progressive external ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, cardiac conduction defects 	 	 GFER-associated mitochondrial encephalopathy 	GFER	 Encephalomyelopathy, congenital cataract, hypotonia, hearing loss, lactic acidosis, respiratory failure 	 	 Mitochondrial DNA polymerase deficiency 	POLG	 Infantile epilepsy, metabolic strokes, chronic ataxia, neuropathy, ophthalmoplegia, type 1 DM, hypothyroidism 	 	 MELAS syndrome 	 Various mitochondrial genes 	 Mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, stroke-like attacks 	 	 Pearson syndrome 	 Various mitochondrial genes 	 Low birth weight, growth retardation, sideroblastic anemia, exocrine pancreatic dysfunction 	 	 Mitochondrial complex 1 deficiency 	NDUFAF5	 IUGR, agenesis of the corpus callosum, abnormal hair, congenital left diaphragmatic hernia, lactic acidosis 	 	Impaired synthesis and action of aldosterone			 	 Aldosterone synthase deficiency 	CYP11B2	 Isolated mineralocorticoid deficiency 	 	 Mineralocorticoid resistance 	NR3C2	 Isolated mineralocorticoid deficiency
ROS: reactive oxygen species, ACTH: adrenocorticotropic hormone, POMC: proopiomelanocortin, DM: diabetes mellitus, IUGR: intrauterine growth retardation, CAH: congenital adrenal hyperplasia, GC: glucocorticoid, CNS: central nervous system, DSD: disorders of sex development