A simplified algorithm to work up graft re-rupture following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
Abstract
The need to perform revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction (ACLR) has several etiologies such as infection, arthrofibrosis, cyclops lesions, and graft failure, which should be distinguished before revision ACLR. Even the definition of graft failure varies within the literature. ACLR graft failure falls into modifiable, surgeon-controlled factors, such as tunnel position, graft choice, and alignment, and nonmodifiable factors, such as patient age, tissue quality, or secondary traumatic reruptures. In this review, we describe a facile framework for the workup of modifiable ACLR graft failure.

Introduction
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstructions (ACLR) are performed at a rate of 74.6 per 1,00,000, with a rising incidence over the past 3 decades. Graft failure rates remain high at 3%–7%, requiring revision ACLR (rACLR). There are multiple etiologies for the need to perform revision ACLR, including but not limited to infection, arthrofibrosis, cyclops lesions, and graft failure, all of which should be defined before undergoing revision ACLR. Graft failure occurs when the reconstructed ligament does not restore knee stability. These patients typically undergo rACLR to restore function as well as to mitigate the risk of continued instability leading to chondral, ligamentous, or meniscal injuries and posttraumatic osteoarthritis. The causes of graft failure following ACLR may be divided into modifiable and nonmodifiable factors. An algorithm to define the etiology of graft failure is essential to avoid unaddressed risk factors leading to a repeat failure event, with an incidence of 3.3%–5.8% at mid-term follow-up.
Working up the failed ACL graft involves a detailed history, including obtaining prior operative reports for relevant revision surgery information such as fixation devices, physical examination, and when possible, arthroscopic images to evaluate the status of meniscal and chondral injuries. A comprehensive imaging workup (knee radiographs including posterior-anterior (PA) flexion views, alignment films, magnetic resonance imaging [MRI], and computed tomography [CT] when indicated). With such a broad array of tests and possible etiologies to consider, the purpose of this review is to describe a facile framework for the workup of modifiable ACLR graft failure.

Graft Choice

Allografts in ACL reconstruction
Perhaps the most vital information in working up prior ALCR graft failure and planning the possible revision is graft choice. The Multicenter Orthopedic Outcomes Network found ACLR failure to be 4 times more likely in patients who received allografts and 2.3 times more likely for every 10 years younger they were. The Multicenter Orthopedic Outcomes Network 5-year follow-up found rerupture rates over 5 times greater with allograft than autograft, with a similar correlation between increased risk and younger age. Thus, the diagnosis of ACLR graft failure etiology may simply be due to a young patient with prior allograft ACLR. No differences have been demonstrated in the literature between allograft tissue types for ACLR graft failure, which include bone-tendon-bone (BTB), quadriceps tendon (QT), hamstring (HS), Achilles, tibialis anterior, peroneus longus, and iliotibial band (ITB).

Autografts in primary ACL reconstruction
The most common autografts are HS, BTB, and QT for ACLR. Several studies have demonstrated small but significantly higher failure rates among HS vs. BTB or QT autografts. Although there exists no studies with long-term follow-up comparing failure rates between BTB and QT autograft, at short-term follow-up there have been no significant differences. Several meta-analyses have demonstrated no significant differences between autograft types in primary ACLR. Graft diameter, while less of a consideration in BTB and QT autografts, remains a possible downside with the use of HS autograft because of variations in size. Despite quadrupled or even quintupled grafts, some HS autografts may not reach 8 mm of diameter, which has been demonstrated as the cutoff for increased revision rates, and augmentation with allograft may even lead to higher retear rates.

Autograft choice in revision ACLR
For revision ACLR, similar to primary ACLR, allograft remains an inferior option. A recent study by the Multicenter ACL Revision Study group demonstrated rupture rates of 3.5% with autografts and 8.4% with allografts in patients undergoing revision ACLR, with no differences found between autografts. Revision ACLR autograft failure rates have been reported between 7.7% and 10% for BTB, 3.1% and 10% in QT, and 13.3% and 19% for HS grafts (Table 1).
Up-to-date recent literature reporting graft failure rates for both primary and revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction for 3 types of common autografts.
Study (primary ACLR)	BTB failure rates	Quadriceps failure rates	HS failure rates	 	Belk et al. (Arthroscopy 2018)	3.6% (8/225)	2.0% (6/297)	3.7% (4/166)	 	Dai et al. (AJSM 2022)	2.0% (47/2401)	3.7% (42/1141)	2.5% (383/15,210)	 	Samuelson et al. (CORR 2017)	2.8% (212/7560)	—	2.8% (1123/39,510)	 	MOON group (AJSM 2020)	7.1% (35/492)	—	13.0% (36/278)	 	Cavaignac et al. (AJSM 2017)	—	2.3% (1/44)	5.1% (2/39)	 	Nyland et al. (KSSTA 2020)	—	3.5% (47/1362)	4.6% (173/3754)	 	Runer et al. (AJSM 2020)	—	2.8% (6/217)	4.9% (32/658)	 	Hogan et al. (OJSM 2020)	4.2% (3/72)	2.9% (2/69)	—	 	Renfree et al. (OJSM 2023)	5.6% (2/36)	0.0% (0/32)	—
Study (revision ACLR)	BTB failure rates	Quadriceps failure rates	HS failure rates	 	Brinkman et al. (AJSM 2022)	7.7% (2/26)	3.1% (1/32)	—	 	Ashy et al. (KSSTA 2023)	8.7% (8/88)	7.6% (27/349)	13.3% (22/169)	 	Meena et al. (KSSTA 2023)	9.7% (3/31)	10.0% (4/40)	19.2% (5/26)
ACLR, anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction; BTB, bone-tendon-bone; MOON, Multicenter Orthopedic Outcomes Network.
When planning revision ACLR, prior graft harvest must also be factored into the workup. Reharvesting a prior BTB autograft has been noted to display significant abnormalities on MRI and histologic analysis within the patellar tendon, even >2 years after initial harvest. By contrast, a second graft from the extensor mechanism after prior BTB or QT harvest, using the alternative graft, was demonstrated by Setliff et al. to result in equivalent patient-reported outcomes and return to sports when compared with prior HS autograft ACLRs, and is an appropriate graft for revision ACLR. Contralateral BTB autograft has also demonstrated successful functional outcomes without residual symptoms or complications in the contralateral knee and remains a viable alternative.

Femoral and Tibial Tunnel Position and Tunnel Osteolysis

Femoral tunnel position and evaluation
The leading surgeon controlled cause of ACL graft rupture remains poor femoral tunnel positioning. The ACL's anteromedial bundle is tight in flexion and provides anteroposterior stability, while the posterolateral (PL) bundle is tight in extension and provides rotational restraint primarily. ACLR with a single-bundle graft has evolved from reconstructing the PL or anteromedial bundle, to maximizing to isometry, to simply recreating the anatomic center of the entire footprint, optimizing rotational and translational stability. When considering tunnel position, attention must be paid to the difference between arthroscopic anatomy (with the knee positioned in 90° of flexion) and standard anatomical references. With an arthroscopic view, a too-anterior femoral tunnel is the most common technical error, which results in a graft overly tight in knee flexion and lax in extension. A too-posterior tunnel, viewed arthroscopically, results in an ACL tight in extension and loose in flexion. Still viewing arthroscopically, a proximal femoral tunnel results in a vertical graft, reducing rotational stability, while a too-low femoral tunnel can lead to increased strain forces across the graft, increasing risk for graft failure.
Femoral tunnel position can be measured in both the coronal and sagittal planes. In the coronal plane, the most accurate method uses the femoral tunnel angle (FTA) on 45° flexion PA radiographs (Figure 1A). The FTA is the angle between the anatomic axis of the femur the femoral tunnel, with measurements <32.7° predictive of graft failure. The clock face method has been found to be less reliable and should be avoided. Sagittal positioning uses the Bernard and Hertel grid, a rectangular grid on a perfect lateral knee radiograph, with borders formed by Blumensaat line and the anterior, distal, and posterior apices of the femoral condyles (Figure 1B). Anatomic tunnel position is described as 29% from deep-to-shallow axis, and 35% from high-to-low axis.
Femoral tunnel position radiographic evaluation, including (A) the FTA measured on 45° flexion PA radiographs. (B) Sagittal position of the femoral tunnel is evaluated using the Bernard and Hertel grid. (C) Tibial tunnel radiographic evaluation includes (C) Stäubli and Rauschning, tunnel position along the anteroposterior axis of the tibial plateau, and (D) coronal tibial tunnel angle determined by an angle between the anatomic/mechanical axis of the tibia and the tibial tunnel. FTA, femoral tunnel angle; PA, posterior-anterior.

Tibial Tunnel Position and Evaluation
Similar to femoral tunnel positioning, poor tibial tunnel placement can also increase the risk of graft failure. Tibial tunnel position in the sagittal plane is best assessed on lateral knee radiographs using the Staubli and Raushing method, with the ACL anatomic center located a mean 42% (range 39%–46%) along the anteroposterior axis (Figure 1C). The too-anterior position leads to tightness in flexion and notch impingement in extension and can potentially increase the risk of cyclops lesions, whereas the too-posterior position causes the graft to be loose in flexion and tight in extension. The tibial tunnel angle in the sagittal plane is dictated intraoperatively by graft length, patient anatomy, and graft-tunnel mismatch. In the coronal plane, too-medial tunnel placement can lead to increased graft strain, impingement, and medial tibial spine injury, whereas too-lateral positioning can lead to anterior root of lateral meniscus injury and rotational laxity from a vertical graft. Coronal plane position of the anatomic tibial tunnel lies 46% ± 3% across the plateau from medial to lateral, while coronal plane tibial tunnel angle is often underappreciated, with large variability between surgeons (range of means between 69° and 80°), and increasingly vertical tunnels <15°–19° from the tibial axis increasing risk of laxity following ACLR (Figure 1D). In addition to radiographs, the femoral and tibial tunnel position may be evaluated using CT and MRI. CT and MRI allow for ACL graft inclination angles to be measured in the coronal, sagittal, and axial planes, in addition to standard radiographic measurements such as FTA or aperture position. While performing the radiologic evaluation, surgeons should note any prior hardware used for graft fixation, (ie, cortical button suspensory fixation, suture anchors, metal or radiolucent interference screws, staples, spiked screw and washers, or transfixion devices). Some centers are now taking advantage of 3D CT scans, which, when the medial condyle is subtracted from the analysis, can demonstrate the exact aperture of the tunnel on the lateral femoral condylar wall.

Tunnel osteolysis etiologies
Femoral and tibial tunnel evaluation also requires tunnel diameter measurements, as tunnel osteolysis can lead to widening, graft incompetence, and failure. Four distinct morphologies were described by Klein et al., including linear, conical, cavitary, and mushroom osteolytic patterns. Several etiologies of tunnel osteolysis exist. The “bungee-cord” and “windshield-wiper effect” are mechanical etiologies, with micromotion at the graft-tunnel interface leading to tunnel dilation. Graft choice has a controversial effect on tunnel osteolysis, with some studies demonstrating increased tunnel osteolysis with allografts and soft-tissue grafts compared with autografts and bone plugs. Among soft-tissue grafts, QT and HS autografts had lower osteolysis rates than HS allografts, supporting increased tunnel widening risk with allografts, although the exact etiology remains unclear, whether from sterilization processing, subclinical graft-versus-host response, or simply poorer bone in older patient receiving allografts. Early proponents in ACLR proposed that differences in tunnel enlargement may be explained by the graft fixation technique. Suspensory fixation relies on longer working lengths than aperture fixation; however, evidence of greater tunnel widening has been demonstrated for both suspensory and aperture fixation in prior randomized control trials. Screw fixation of bone plug grafts also affect tunnel osteolysis, as interference screw placement posterior to the tibial bone plug resulted in lower tibial tunnel osteolysis rates than anterior screws and an increased distance from bone plug to intraarticular aperture correlates with tunnel enlargement rates. Finally, overt and subclinical infection must be ruled out with inflammatory markers and, if elevated, preoperative or intraoperative knee aspiration. Flanigan et al. demonstrated in histologic analysis of revision ACLRs that femoral tunnel widening was significantly greater in cases with detectable bacterial DNA on the biopsied failed graft, as well as significantly greater bacterial DNA concentrations among patients with tunnel widening.

Tunnel osteolysis evaluation
Radiographs, CT, or MRI can be used to evaluate tunnel osteolysis, although measurement techniques are poorly standardized or described across the literature. Measuring diameters at the intraarticular apertures, a cm from the aperture, and the average of several diameters across the tunnel have all been described (Figure 2). Although advanced imaging allows for cross-sectional evaluation and assessment of bone plug integration, surgeons should be cautious of using aperture measurements without 3-dimensional reconstructions, as the plane of the CT or MRI may not be perpendicular to the tunnel aperture, resulting in falsely elongated tunnel diameter measurements. Significant tunnel widening, especially in conjunction with adequate, or near-adequate tunnel positioning, may necessitate staged revision ACLR, including bone grafting procedures, although there is no consensus in the literature on tunnel diameter cutoff. The Scientific Anterior Cruciate Ligament Network International group found no differences in side-to-side laxity or patient-reported outcomes between preoperative tunnel diameters less than and ≥12 mm, whereas a single-center study of 99 revision ACLRs demonstrated greater side-to-side laxity, Lachman, and pivot shift testing in patients with preoperative tunnel widening ≥12 mm. A systematic review of 12 studies assessing indications for 2-stage revision found a tunnel diameter threshold of 10 to 14 mm, with 1 outlier citing a >20 mm cutoff, while expert opinions have suggested 2-stage revision indications based 12–15 mm thresholds, particularly in cases of tunnel malposition with critical overlap. Bone grafting options for tunnel osteolysis can occur either in a single-stage or staged revision (during which tunnels are typically grafted at the first stage), are beyond the scope of this review, but include autograft, allograft cancellous chips, allograft cannulated bone dowels, demineralized bone matrix, and bone substitutes.
The radiographic evaluation of PTS may be performed with the circle (A) or posterior tibial crest (B) method on a perfect lateral knee radiographic with sufficient distal tibia. However, these measurements may underestimate the true PTS relative to the sagittal mechanical axis (C and D), which is best measured on a standing long leg lateral radiograph (E). PTS, posterior tibial slope.

Coronal and Sagittal Alignment

Coronal alignment and evaluation
Both coronal and sagittal plane alignment affects the forces experienced by the ACL graft following ACLR. A cadaveric biomechanical study by Mehl et al. found that increasing valgus alignment through distal femoral osteotomies (DFOs) led to significantly greater ACL graft forces with axial load applied, which was potentiated by loss of the posteromedial ligament complex (PMC). The authors then corrected the mechanical alignment and reconstructed the PMC and found reversing the DFO decreased ACL graft forces significantly more than PMC reconstruction. Varus malalignment has a similar effect on ACL graft forces, with 1 biomechanical study demonstrating a linear relationship between increasing varus alignment and ACL tension with axial load. Clinically, Noyes and Barber-Westin reported that varus alignment was the primary cause of graft failure in 25% (8/32) of their patients, whereas Won et al. found that 19% of rACLR patients had >5° of varus, vs. 8% of primary ACLRs. Evaluation of coronal alignment is best performed clinically and radiographically. Clinically, this involves a standing evaluation of the patient in shorts, with larger, dynamic components of varus, particularly unilateral, more likely to lead to increased strain through the ACL graft compared with static, symmetric, primary varus.
Coronal malalignment is best measured on standing long-leg alignment films, such as electrooptical stereo-radiography (EOS Imaging, Paris, France), using angular (hip-knee-angle[HKA]) or unit (mechanical axis deviation) measurements. Our preference is for HKA over mechanical axis deviation when possible, as HKA is not affected by patient size. Although HKA represents a simple and accurate measure in most cases, complex, multilevel deformities require use of the medial proximal tibia angle and anatomic or mechanical lateral distal femoral angle to more accurately target correction levels and avoid unacceptable joint line obliquity. The goal of correction in revision ACLR aims to achieve neutral alignment in the coronal plane, in contrast to treatment of medial compartment osteoarthritis, when the mechanical axis correction is targeted close to or at Fujisawa point 62.5% across the tibial plateau (medial to lateral) to provide 3° to 5° of mechanical valgus for medial compartment offloading.

Sagittal alignment and evaluation
The focus of sagittal malalignment in ACLR is primarily focused on posterior tibial slope (PTS), with increasing slope causing increased graft strain. Bernhardson et al. evaluated 10 cadaveric specimens after performing ACLR and found that with axial load applied, graft forces increased with increasing PTS. Imhoff et al. demonstrated that anterior closing wedge osteotomies (ACWOs) markedly reduced forces on ACLR grafts under axial load, with the ACWO significantly reducing anterior tibial translation (ATT) more than high tibial osteotomy in knees with increased PTS and varus malalignment. Combined slope and varus correction had the greatest reduction in ACL graft strain. These biomechanical studies as well as clinical studies including a retrospective review of 181 ACLRs by Webb et al. have suggested pathologic ACL graft forces and increased risk of graft failure with a cutoff of 12° of PTS.
PTS is traditionally measured on a perfect lateral knee radiograph. Recent studies have demonstrated questionable reliability of historical normative values (9°–11° for the medial plateau and 6°–8° for the lateral plateau), with both medial and lateral plateau slopes greater depending on study population and measurement method. Several radiographic measurement methods exist, such as the circle or posterior tibial crest method on a lateral knee radiograph with sufficient distal tibia; however, these measurements underestimate true PTS relative to the sagittal mechanical axis, which is what clinically matters during weight bearing and dynamic forces on the ACL graft. Often unused, the sagittal mechanical axis lies 33% from the anterior to posterior tibial plateau to a point 50% across the tibial plafond, which requires full-length lateral weight bearing tibial films (Figure 3). In addition, the weight-bearing aspect allows assessment of ATT, where static anterior subluxation of the tibia indicates chronic deficiency of the ACL graft, potentially providing another relative indication for ACWO.
Multiple methods exist for tunnel osteolysis measurements, with radiographic measurements performed at the aperture or an average of multiple tunnel diameter measurements on an AP (A) and lateral (B) radiograph. CT (C and D) and MRI (E and F) may be used which additionally allows graft/bone integration assessment and aperture cross-sectional measurements. AP, anteroposterior; CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance.
The circle MRI method described by Hudek et al. described the original advanced imaging method to measure PTS, which provides the advantage of independent measurements of the medial and lateral tibial slopes. Notably, MRI underestimates the PTS by a mean of 3.4° compared with radiographic assessment, affecting indications for ACWO. PTS measurement method should be noted clinically and in research studies, as multiple methods have demonstrated good-to-excellent interrater and intrarater reliability, but there is poor correlation between PTS measurement methods. Indications for ACWO includes PTS ≥12° or ATT ≥5 mm in revision ACLR, while relative contraindications include knee hyperextension ≥ 10°, posterior cruciate ligament deficiency, and patella alta in cases of supratubercle ACWO.

Anterolateral Ligament Complex

Anatomy and evaluation
ALC resists ATT and internal tibial rotation, functioning as a secondary stabilizer to the ACL. It is composed of the anterolateral ligament (ALL), superficial ITB, and deep ITB, of which the deep ITB can be broken down into proximal and distal Kaplan fibers. Age, sporting level, and physical examination (PE) is critical to assess whether ALC insufficiency should be addressed at primary or revision ACLR. Ligamentous laxity, knee hypertension ≥5°, and high-grade pivot shift are PE findings that are relative indication, whereas meniscal deficiency or greater PTS (particularly on the lateral tibial plateau) represent relative radiographic indications for ALC reconstructive procedure at the time of revision ACLR. Other radiologic signs may include Segond fractures on radiographs, and MRI demonstrating deep ITB Kaplan fiber edema. We prefer to include an ALC reconstructive procedure only with the presence of the prior indications, or in revision cases when no identifiable cause for graft failure is identified. Various techniques for ALC reconstruction have been described and may be categorized broadly into (1) lateral extraarticular tenodesis (LET) techniques, which include the modified Lemaire, Macintosh, and Ellison techniques and use a portion of the ITB to reconstruct the ALC and (2) isolated ALL reconstructions using an isolated graft.

Clinical outcomes
ALC augmentation, whether with a LET or ALL reconstruction, has demonstrated reduced failure rates in both primary and revision ACLR in several recent studies. Lee et al. retrospectively analyzed their cohort of 87 patients who underwent revision ACLR with or without concomitant ALL reconstruction, demonstrating significantly better functional outcome scores, rotational stability, and return to preinjury level of sport in the combined ACL–ALL group compared with the isolated ACL group. Grassi et al. also reported similar finding with LET augmentation in revision ACLR in a systematic review. The Scientific Anterior Cruciate Ligament Network International group recently published a matched cohort study of revision ACLR with either ALL reconstruction and HT grafts compared with modified Lemaire with BTB grafts, demonstrating no significant difference in clinical outcomes or graft failure rates between the 2 groups, indicating both are safe and effective techniques with equivalent rerupture rates.

Collateral Ligaments and Posterolateral and Posteromedial Corners

Lateral collateral ligament and posterolateral ligament complex
The posterolateral corner (PLC) is composed of the lateral collateral ligament, the popliteus, and the popliteofibular ligament, providing primary restraint to varus forces of the knee as well as to external tibial rotation. LaPrade et al. demonstrated significantly increased forces on ACLR grafts with varus and internal rotation (IR) stress on cadaveric knees at 0° and 30° flexion with sectioning of the PLC. The incidence of concomitant PLC injuries with ACL ruptures is relatively high, ranging from 13% to 20%, highlighting the importance of thorough clinical assessment. The PE of the lateral knee should include varus stress testing at 0° and 30°, dial test, external rotation (ER) drawer test, reverse pivot shift test, and ER recurvatum test. The presence of significant genu recurvatum along with ER instability may indicate the need for more biomechanically stable PLC reconstructions with 2 separate grafts and a fibular and tibial based reconstruction (LaPrade technique), as knee hyperextension has been associated with revision ACLR failure in a Multicenter ACL Revision Study group study. Varus stress radiographs should be obtained in the initial radiographic assessment of PLC injuries. Although the Heesterbeek method demonstrated the highest interobserver reliability, the LaPrade method is commonly used because of greater familiarity as well as its correlation to the Hughston grading scales. A side-to-side difference of lateral gapping of 2.7 mm is indicative of an isolated lateral collateral ligament injury, while 4 mm suggests a complete PLC disruption.

Medial collateral ligament and posteromedial ligament complex
The superficial medial collateral ligament, deep MCL, which is composed of the meniscotibial and meniscofemoral ligaments, as well as the structures of the PMC; the posterior oblique ligament, the semimembranosus tendon and its expansions, the oblique popliteal ligament, and the posteromedial joint capsule provide valgus stability as well as restraint against anteromedial rotatory instability. Previous studies have demonstrated increased forces across the ACL with sectioning of these structures, with return of normal kinematics upon reconstruction. Large registry studies demonstrate a 4% incidence of concomitant MCL injury among patients with ACL ruptures, with an increased risk of ACLR failure in patients with nonsurgically treated MCL injuries. The PE of the medial knee should include valgus testing at 0° and 30°, as well as evaluation of anteromedial rotatory instability with the Slocum test, which is indicative of a combined superficial medial collateral ligament and deep MCL injury. MRI is the gold standard to assess for these injuries, with special attention directed toward identifying “Stener-like” lesions, a distal tear of the superficial MCL with retraction and resultant interposition of the pes anserinus tendons between the torn ligament and its tibial insertion with resultant poor healing potential. Valgus stress plain radiographs may provide objective evaluation of laxity, with a side-to-side difference in laxity to valgus stress of 3.2 mm indicating complete MCL rupture.

Meniscal Tears and Deficiency

Medial meniscus, root, and ramp lesions
The menisci not only redistribute compressive loads across the knee through radial and circumferential fibers but also provide critical stability to the knee. The medial meniscus primarily acts as a “bumper” against ATT, given its C-shaped peripheral stability, particularly from the posterior horn. In a cadaveric study, Musahl et al. sectioned the ACL, then both the medial and lateral meniscus, and tested both Lachman and pivot shift. They found that cutting the medial meniscus in ACL-deficient knees significantly increased ATT, while sectioning the lateral meniscus did not. Samuelson et al. found that posterior medial meniscus root tears lead to significant increases in ACLR graft forces vs meniscus-intact knees, with root repairs effectively restoring stability. A similar destabilizing effect is seen with meniscal ramp lesions, which are posterior meniscocapsular separations of the posterior horn, as well as with medial meniscal posterior root tears. Stephen et al. demonstrated significant increases in ATT in ACL-deficient knees with ramp lesions, with combined ACLR and meniscocapsular repair restoring stability to a near-intact state.

Lateral meniscus, root, and lateral meniscus oblique radial tears
Complementary to the medial meniscus' role in secondary stability, the lateral meniscus confers restraint to internal tibial rotation. Musahl et al., in the same study as above, found that sectioning of the lateral meniscus in ACL-deficient knees leads to significant increases in pivot shift from anterior translation of the lateral tibial plateau, while sectioning only the medial meniscus in isolation did not lead to increased tibial IR. Recently, lateral meniscus oblique radial tears (LMORTs) have been described as lateral meniscal posterior root equivalent injuries by Krych et al. With 5 types, LMORTs are present in 9% in all ACL tears, and make up 36.4% of total lateral meniscal tears. Biomechanical analysis has demonstrated that untreated LMORT lesions as well as partial lateral meniscectomy increased ATT and tibial IR after ACLR, while meniscal repair restores kinematics to baseline levels. Lateral and medial meniscal lesions are best evaluated on MRI (Figure 4). The importance of the menisci are thus critical in the workup for all ACLR failures, and prior operative notes and arthroscopic imaging should be obtained to adequately assess the extent of any prior meniscectomies. Medial and lateral meniscal deficiencies are both recognized as independent risk factors for ACLR failure and should be addressed during revision ACLR.
MRI examples of various anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction related meniscal pathology, including (A, B) meniscal deficiency, (C, D) “ghost sign” indicative of meniscal root tears, (E) posterior horn LMORT which can occasionally be seen on a representative axial cut and (F) “Sail sign” representing a flipped fragment of LMORT, (G) medial meniscal ramp lesion (white arrows) with associated posteromedial tibial plateau edema on sagittal cut and (H) ramp lesion caught on axial cut. LMORT, lateral meniscus oblique radial tear; MRI, magnetic resonance.

Conclusion
The workup of modifiable ACLR graft failure remains challenging, even before surgical planning for revision ACLR. Without a stepwise algorithm to evaluate each factor that may be associated with graft failure, failure to address all etiologies of graft failure may occur. A simple and facile framework to assess common surgeon-controlled reasons for graft failure is essential.

References
Trends in incidence of ACL reconstruction and concomitant procedures among commercially insured individuals in the United States, 2002-2014
Revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
Revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
Analysis of 16,192 anterior cruciate ligament reconstructions from a community-based registry
Risk factors and predictors of subsequent ACL injury in either knee after ACL reconstruction: prospective analysis of 2488 primary ACL reconstructions from the MOON cohort
Evaluation of the anterior cruciate ligament integrity and degenerative arthritic patterns in patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty
The natural history of meniscal tears in anterior cruciate ligament insufficiency
Effect of graft choice on the outcome of revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction in the multicenter ACL revision study (MARS) cohort
Association between graft choice and 6-year outcomes of revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction in the MARS cohort
Allograft versus autograft anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: predictors of failure from a MOON prospective longitudinal cohort
Revision rates after primary allograft ACL reconstruction by allograft tissue type in older patients
Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction autograft choice: bone-tendon-bone versus hamstring: does it really matter? A systematic review
Hamstring autograft versus patellar tendon autograft for ACL reconstruction: is there a difference in graft failure rate? A meta-analysis of 47,613 patients
ACL reconstruction in high school and college-aged athletes: does autograft choice affect recurrent ACL revision rates?
Is quadriceps tendon autograft a better choice than hamstring autograft for anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction? A comparative study with a mean follow-up of 3.6 years
Quadriceps tendon autograft ACL reconstruction has less pivot shift laxity and lower failure rates than hamstring tendon autografts
Anterior cruciate ligament reconstructions with quadriceps tendon autograft result in lower graft rupture rates but similar patient-reported outcomes as compared with hamstring tendon autograft: a comparison of 875 patients
Patient-reported knee outcome scores with soft tissue quadriceps tendon autograft are similar to bone-patellar tendon-bone autograft at minimum 2-year follow-up: a retrospective single-center cohort study in primary anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction surgery
Comparison of bone-patella tendon-bone (BTB) and quadriceps autograft for ACL reconstruction
ACL reconstruction with quadriceps soft tissue autograft versus bone-patellar tendon-bone autograft in cutting and pivoting athletes: outcomes at minimum 2-Year follow-up
Quadriceps tendon autograft for primary anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a systematic review of comparative studies with minimum 2-year follow-up
Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a systematic review and meta-analysis of outcomes for quadriceps tendon autograft versus bone-patellar tendon-bone and hamstring-tendon autografts
Quadriceps tendon autograft versus bone-patellar tendon-bone and hamstring tendon autografts for anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Graft diameter as a predictor for revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction and KOOS and EQ-5D values: a cohort study from the Swedish national knee ligament register based on 2240 patients
Allograft augmentation of hamstring anterior cruciate ligament autografts is associated with increased graft failure in children and adolescents
Quadriceps autograft is a viable graft choice for arthroscopic ACL reconstruction in patients over 50 years of age
Quadriceps tendon autograft has similar clinical outcomes when compared to hamstring tendon and bone-patellar tendon-bone autografts for revision ACL reconstruction: a systematic review and meta-analysis
All-soft tissue quadriceps tendon autograft in revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction in athletes: comparison to bone-patellar tendon-bone autograft with at least a 2-year follow-up
A radiographic and histologic evaluation of the patellar tendon after harvesting its central third
Harvesting a second graft from the extensor mechanism for revision ACL reconstruction does not delay return of quadriceps function
Range of motion, strength, and function after ACL reconstruction using a contralateral patellar tendon graft
Descriptive epidemiology of the multicenter ACL revision study (MARS) cohort
Anatomical single bundle anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
Comparison of tunnel positions in single-bundle anterior cruciate ligament reconstructions using computer navigation
Nonanatomic tunnel position in traditional transtibial single-bundle anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction evaluated by three-dimensional computed tomography
A simple evaluation of anterior cruciate ligament femoral tunnel position: the inclination angle and femoral tunnel angle
Is the clock face an accurate, precise, and reliable measuring tool for anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction?
Femoral insertion of the ACL. Radiographic quadrant method
Tibial attachment area of the anterior cruciate ligament in the extended knee position. Anatomy and cryosections in vitro complemented by magnetic resonance arthrography in vivo
Radiological landmarks for placement of the tunnels in single-bundle reconstruction of the anterior cruciate ligament
Laterally shifted tibial tunnel can be the risk of residual knee laxity for double-bundle anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
The relationship between the angle of the tibial tunnel in the coronal plane and loss of flexion and anterior laxity after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
Tunnel expansion following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a comparison of hamstring and patellar tendon autografts
ACL graft with extra-cortical fixation rotates around the Femoral tunnel aperture during knee flexion
The incidence and significance of femoral tunnel widening after quadrupled hamstring anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using femoral cross pin fixation
Comparison of tibial tunnel enlargement after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using patellar tendon autograft or allograft
Tunnel widening in anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a prospective evaluation of hamstring and patella tendon grafts
Tunnel widening following all-inside anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction varies depending on soft tissue graft type
Tunnel widening after ACL reconstruction with aperture screw fixation or all-inside reconstruction with suspensory cortical button fixation: volumetric measurements on CT and MRI scans
Tunnel widening after ACL reconstruction with different fixation techniques: aperture fixation with biodegradable interference screws versus all-inside technique with suspensory cortical buttons. 5-year data from a prospective randomized trial
Comparison of tunnel enlargement and clinical outcome between bioabsorbable interference screws and cortical button-post fixation in arthroscopic double-bundle anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a prospective, randomized study with a minimum follow-up of 2 years
Anterior screw insertion results in greater tibial tunnel enlargement rates after single-bundle anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction than posterior insertion: a retrospective study
Increased bone plug depth from the joint increases tunnel enlargement in anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using bone-patellar tendon-bone autograft with suspensory femoral fixation
Bacterial DNA is associated with tunnel widening in failed ACL reconstructions
Comparison of plain radiography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of bone tunnel widening after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
How to evaluate bone tunnel widening after ACL reconstruction - a critical review
Influence of preoperative tunnel widening on the outcomes of a single stage-only approach to every revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: an analysis of 409 consecutive patients from the SANTI study group
One-stage revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: results according to preoperative bone tunnel diameter: five to fifteen-year follow-up
Consistent indications and good outcomes despite high variability in techniques for two-stage revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a systematic review
Tunnel management in revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: current concepts
Management of bone loss and tunnel widening in revision ACL reconstruction
Osseous valgus alignment and posteromedial ligament complex deficiency lead to increased ACL graft forces
Coronal limb alignment and indications for high tibial osteotomy in patients undergoing revision ACL reconstruction
Varus alignment leads to increased forces in the anterior cruciate ligament
Tibial slope and its effect on force in anterior cruciate ligament grafts: anterior cruciate ligament force increases linearly as posterior tibial slope increases
Anterior cruciate ligament revision reconstruction: results using a quadriceps tendon-patellar bone autograft
Managing intra-articular deformity in high tibial osteotomy: a narrative review
Radiologists should use the hip-knee-ankle angle rather than the mechanical axis deviation to describe knee alignment
High tibial osteotomy and anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction/revision
Tibial sagittal slope in anterior cruciate ligament injury and treatment
Effect of slope and varus correction high tibial osteotomy in the ACL-Deficient and ACL-reconstructed knee on kinematics and ACL graft force: a biomechanical analysis
Posterior tibial slope and further anterior cruciate ligament injuries in the anterior cruciate ligament-reconstructed patient
Reliability of plain radiographs versus magnetic resonance imaging to measure tibial slope in sports medicine patients: can they be used interchangeably?
High variability of tibial slope measurement methods in daily clinical practice: comparisons between measurements on lateral radiograph, magnetic resonance imaging, and computed tomography
Morphological analysis of the tibial slope in 720 adult knee joints
Passive anterior tibial subluxation in the setting of anterior cruciate ligament injuries: a comparative analysis of ligament-deficient states
Novel measurement technique of the tibial slope on conventional MRI
Steep posterior tibial slope and excessive anterior tibial translation are associated with increased sagittal meniscal extrusion after posterior lateral meniscus root repair combined with anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
Steep posterior tibial slope, anterior tibial subluxation, deep posterior lateral femoral condyle, and meniscal deficiency are common findings in multiple anterior cruciate ligament failures: an MRI case-control study
An eponymous history of the anterolateral ligament complex of the knee
Predictors of graft failure in young active patients undergoing hamstring autograft anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction with or without a lateral extra-articular tenodesis: the stability experience
Physiologic preoperative knee hyperextension is a predictor of failure in an anterior cruciate ligament revision cohort: a report from the MARS group
High rate of initially overlooked kaplan fiber complex injuries in patients with isolated anterior cruciate ligament injury
Lateral extra-articular tenodesis does not decrease graft failure in revision ACL-R when combined with quadriceps or patella tendon grafts
Lateral extra-articular tenodesis reduces failure of hamstring tendon autograft ACL reconstruction -two year outcomes from the STABILITY study randomized clinical trial
Anterolateral ligament reconstruction is associated with significantly reduced ACL graft rupture rates at a minimum follow-up of 2 years: a prospective comparative study of 502 patients from the SANTI study group
Clinical outcomes of isolated revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction or in combination with anatomic anterolateral ligament reconstruction
Good mid-term outcomes and low rates of residual rotatory laxity, complications and failures after revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction (ACL) and lateral extra-articular tenodesis (LET)
Revision anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using bone-patellar tendon-bone graft combined with modified lemaire technique versus hamstring graft combined with anterolateral ligament reconstruction: a clinical comparative matched study with a mean follow-up of 5 years from the SANTI study group
The effects of grade III posterolateral knee complex injuries on anterior cruciate ligament graft force. A biomechanical analysis
Incidence and MRI characterization of the spectrum of posterolateral corner injuries occurring in association with ACL rupture
Posterolateral corner of the knee: current concepts
Comparing the interobserver reliability of 4 methods used to measure knee laxity on coronal plane stress radiograph
The reproducibility and repeatability of varus stress radiographs in the assessment of isolated fibular collateral ligament and grade-III posterolateral knee injuries. An in vitro biomechanical study
The posteromedial corner of the knee: anatomy, pathology, and management strategies
Comparison of ACL strain in the MCL-Deficient and MCL-reconstructed knee during simulated landing in a cadaveric model
Increased risk of ACL revision with non-surgical treatment of a concomitant medial collateral ligament injury: a study on 19,457 patients from the Swedish National Knee Ligament Registry
Stener-like lesions of the superficial medial collateral ligament of the knee: MRI features
Correlation of valgus stress radiographs with medial knee ligament injuries: an in vitro biomechanical study
The effect of medial versus lateral meniscectomy on the stability of the anterior cruciate ligament-deficient knee
Posterior medial meniscus root tears potentiate the effect of increased tibial slope on anterior cruciate ligament graft forces
Posteromedial meniscocapsular lesions increase tibiofemoral joint laxity with anterior cruciate ligament deficiency, and their repair reduces laxity
Lateral meniscal oblique radial tears are common with ACL injury: a classification system based on arthroscopic tear patterns in 600 consecutive patients
Kinematic analysis of lateral meniscal oblique radial tears in anterior cruciate ligament-reconstructed knees: untreated versus repair versus partial meniscectomy
Factors that predict failure in anatomic single-bundle anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction