Informing the development of diagnostic criteria for differential diagnosis of alcohol-related cognitive impairment (ARCI) among heavy drinkers: A systematic scoping review
Background
Early detection and diagnosis of alcohol-related cognitive impairment (ARCI) among heavy drinkers is crucial to facilitating appropriate referral and treatment. However, there is lack of consensus in defining diagnostic criteria for ARCI. Uncertainty in attributing a diagnosis of suspected ARCI commonly arises in clinical practice and opportunities to intervene are missed. A systematic scoping review approach was taken to (i) summarise evidence relating to screening or diagnostic criteria used in clinical studies to detect ARCI; and (ii) to determine the extent of the research available about cognitive assessment tools used in ‘point-of-care’ screening or assessment of patients with suspected non-Korsakoff Syndrome forms of ARCI.
Methods
We searched Medline, PsycINFO, Cinahl and the Web of Science, screened reference lists and carried out forward and backwards citation searching to identify clinical studies about screening, diagnosis or assessment of patients with suspected ARCI.
Results
In total, only 7 studies met our primary objective and reported on modifications to existing definitions or diagnostic criteria for ARCI. These studies revealed a lack of coordinated research and progress towards the development and standardisation of diagnostic criteria for ARCI. Cognitive screening tools are commonly used in practice to support a diagnosis of ARCI, and as a secondary objective we included an additional 12 studies, which covered a range of settings and patient populations relevant to screening, diagnosis or assessment in acute, secondary or community ‘point-of-care’ settings. Across two studies with a defined ARCI patient sample and a further four studies with an alcohol use disorder patient sample, the accuracy, validity and/or reliability of seven different cognitive assessment tools were examined. The remaining seven studies reported descriptive findings, demonstrating the lack of evidence available to draw conclusions about which tools are most appropriate for screening patients with suspected ARCI.
Conclusion
This review confirms the scarcity of evidence available on the screening, diagnosis or assessment of patients with suspected ARCI. The lack of evidence is an important barrier to the development of clear guidelines for diagnosing ARCI, which would ultimately improve the real-world management and treatment of patients with ARCI.

Introduction
Chronic excessive alcohol consumption has long been recognised as a cause of cognitive impairment, although understanding of the underlying neurobiology is limited. Nevertheless, several neurodegenerative changes are thought to be caused by heavy drinking. Indeed, patients with an Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD) often present with a variety of cognitive deficits and this leads to difficulties in determining the cause, severity and duration of symptoms because features are present in other causes of brain injury such as Wernicke’s or hepatic encephalopathy. Reflecting etiological and nosological debates in the field, variant terms have come into use as umbrella terms to characterise cognitive impairment in heavy drinkers, including “alcohol-related brain damage”, “alcohol-related dementia”, and “alcoholic amnesia syndrome”. A further source of variation has arisen in how these umbrella terms have been used by clinicians and researchers, both to encompass and to provide a distinction from the more severe Wernicke-Korsakoff’s Syndrome (WKS). For the purposes of this scoping review and reflecting the variant terms in use, we have applied the term ARCI it in its broadest sense. We have included articles following either application of the terminology, for example, by recognising that alcohol-related dementia and ARCI may be used to refer to the same suspected condition, and that umbrella terms such as alcohol-related brain damage may either encompass or exclude WKS.
The diagnostic landscape and associated nomenclature have hindered clarity and certainty in both clinical practice and research studies. Relevant to this context is that the diagnostic criteria within the two major classification systems, the International Classification of Disease (ICD) manual and the Diagnostic Statistical Manual (DSM), have previously focused on the two main syndromes of WKS and ARD, rather than providing unified criteria. For example, within the ICD-10 (and ICD-11, which came into effect from 1st January 2022) a diagnostic distinction is made between amnestic disorder (WKS) and alcohol-induced dementia. However, ARD has not consistently been recognised as a discrete clinical entity. Further, based on criticisms directed at the DSM-IV criteria for alcohol-related dementia, Oslin et al. proposed alternative diagnostic criteria in 1998 (Table 1). These criteria were later adapted by Wilson et al. into a ‘probable diagnosis of alcohol-related brain damage’ and have, to an extent, been adopted into UK clinical practice. More recently the DSM-5 has adopted the term “alcohol-related neurocognitive disorders”, distinguishing both between the type (non-amnestic-type versus confabulating-amnestic type) and severity (major or minor) of the impairment. This new classification is therefore more aligned with the current, prevailing concept of ARCI as being on a continuum. Key issues remain, however, with more rigorous empirical research needed to validate both new and existing criteria for ARCI among heavy drinkers in clinical practice.
Classification of ‘probable’ ARD (reproduced from).
Probable Alcohol Related DementiaA. The criteria for the clinical diagnosis of Probable Alcohol Related Dementia include the following:    1. A clinical diagnosis of dementia at least 60 days after the last exposure to alcohol.    2. Significant alcohol use as defined by a minimum average of 35 standard drinks per week for men (28 for women) for greater than a period of 5 years. The period of significant alcohol use must occur within 3 years of the initial onset of Dementia.B. The diagnosis of Alcohol Related Dementia is supported by the presence of any of the following:    1. Alcohol related hepatic, pancreatic, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, or renal disease i.e. other end-organ damage.    2. Ataxia or peripheral sensory polyneuropathy (not attributable to other specific causes).    3. Beyond 60 days of abstinence, the cognitive impairment stabilizes or improves.    4. After 60 days of abstinence, any neuroimaging evidence of ventricular or sulcal dilatation improves.    5. Neuroimaging evidence of cerebellar atrophy, especially of the vermis.C. The following clinical features cast doubt on the diagnosis of Alcohol Related Dementia.    1. The presence of language impairment, especially dysnomia or anomia.    2. The presence of focal neurologic signs or symptoms (except ataxia or peripheral sensory polyneuropathy).    3. Neuroimaging evidence for cortical or subcortical infarction, subdural hematoma, or other focal brain pathology.    4. Elevated Hachinski Ischemia Scale score.D. Clinical features that are neither supportive nor cast doubt on the diagnosis of Alcohol Related Dementia included:    1. Neuroimaging evidence of cortical atrophy.    2. The presence of periventricular or deep white matter lesions on neuroimaging in the absence of focal infarct(s).    3. The presence of the Apolipoprotein e4 allele.
Detection and diagnosis of ARCI at the earliest opportunity is crucial to facilitating appropriate referral and treatment. The major features of presentation in this patient group relate to cognitive impairments that affect memory and executive functioning with subsequent behavioural change, features known to adversely affect outcomes. People with ARCI may experience variable psychiatric and social problems as a result of these impairments including difficulties with reasoning and problems with impulse control. This may go some way to explaining why they have difficulties with adherence to traditional approaches to alcohol treatment, leading to development of multiple co-morbidities and poor treatment outcomes overall.
Evidence from the broader spectrum of conditions associated with cognitive impairment suggests that recognition and a diagnosis of ARCI would significantly improve the long-term prognosis for patients. Among patients with Korsakoff’s Syndrome, Smith and Hillman estimated that with treatment, full recovery can be achieved in approximately 25%, and among the remainder, 50% can achieve a partial or minor recovery. However, there are currently significant barriers to the timely recognition and diagnosis of ARCI including a lack of training and clear guidance for clinicians, stigma towards the patient group and fragmentation of care, resulting in a disproportionate burden being placed on health services. This underlines the importance of the need for the rapid identification of patients who present within acute hospital or community settings with an AUD and cognitive impairment. Extensive neuropsychological assessment is the gold standard for identifying cognitive impairments among patients with a history of heavy drinking. Unfortunately, most acute and community setting do not have timely access to the expertise needed to perform these assessments, and it follows that this approach is not feasible outside of specialist psychiatric or neuropsychiatric settings. Brief cognitive assessment tools, such as the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) have therefore been used in combination with other criteria to identify patients with suspected ARCI in non-specialist settings. Heirene et al. recently published a systematic review that examined evidence for neuropsychological tests used to assess ARCI, including brief cognitive screening instruments. However, the majority of the studies included in the review investigated WKS and studies on non-WKS forms of ARCI were lacking.
Without a consensus on the best diagnostic criteria for suspected ARBI, a lack of clarity and uncertainty in attributing a diagnosis will continue, and opportunities to intervene will be missed. The aim of this scoping review was two-fold. Our primary objective was to systematically map the literature and summarise evidence relating to screening or diagnostic criteria used in clinical studies to detect ARCI and explore how criteria have been adapted or validated over time. In practice, few studies met these criteria, and so a secondary objective was established to review the extent of the literature available on cognitive assessment tools used in ‘point-of-care’ screening or assessment of patients with suspected non-WKS forms of ARCI.

Materials and methods
The review was carried out in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) and a checklist is presented in the supporting information. A scoping review protocol was developed in advance (but not prospectively registered) and is provided in the S1 Protocol. We included papers reporting on the screening, diagnosis, or assessment of people with suspected ARCI.

Inclusion criteria
To meet our primary objective, we included articles that reported on modifications to existing definitions or diagnostic criteria or that presented new diagnostic criteria (including original research and consensus/statement articles), as well as those that referred to, discussed, or compared existing definitions of ARCI as per our protocol. Original, primary research and consensus/statement articles published in English since 1990 were eligible for inclusion as Oslin et al. proposed the first diagnostic criteria for alcohol-related dementia in 1998 with the purpose of stimulating further research (Table 1). We planned to exclude studies that solely used the ICD-10 or DSM-IV criteria, on the basis that these diagnostic systems don’t provide unifying criteria for ARCI. Articles solely about the treatment and management of ARCI were excluded as were studies that solely assessed WKS or Wernicke encephalopathy.
To meet our secondary objective, we selected studies relevant to the screening, diagnosis, or assessment of patients with suspected ARCI, or cognitive impairment among patients with an alcohol use disorder, in acute, secondary or community ‘point-of-care’ settings. Studies that described screening tools with the following characteristics were included: (i) designed to screen for cognitive impairment, (ii) duration of the tool was described as brief or could be administered in 30 minutes or less, (iii) tool administered directly to patients, and (iv) patients selected for inclusion in accordance with diagnostic criteria for either ARCI (e.g. studies referring to ‘alcohol-related brain damage’ or ‘alcohol-related brain injury’) or DSM (or other recognised) criteria for alcohol dependence.

Searching for and selecting relevant studies
A database of English-language articles was compiled in EndNote based on systematic searches of the literature. We developed an initial targeted search strategy for key index papers in Medline and PsycINFO, by combining keyword terms for alcohol and brain injury, with terms for screening, diagnosis, and assessment. These initial searches were conducted in October 2019 and rapidly screened by a single reviewer. A revised search strategy, which focused on a narrower set of terms for ARCI without the diagnosis terms from the original framework, was subsequently developed (supporting information). This search strategy is provided in the S1 Table. Searches were conducted in Medline (Ovid), PsycINFO (Proquest), Cinahl (EBSCOhost), Social Citation Index and Social Sciences Citation Index (Web of Knowledge) in December 2019. The searches were updated in September 2020 and February 2021 and finally in October 2021.We also sought relevant literature through supplementary searches of Google Scholar for grey literature, relevant websites (e.g. Alcohol Change UK, Public Health England, Scottish Executive), manual screening of reference lists, and forwards and backwards citation searching in Scopus.
We screened the results of the searches to identify relevant studies in two stages. Firstly, two reviewers (LJ & AA) double screened 20% of the titles and abstracts identified for potential inclusion. Interrater reliability was not recorded as a level of disagreement was anticipated based on the wide use of terminology in the field. Discrepancies in study selection were discussed and resolved and used to develop confidence in the screening of the remaining titles and abstracts, which was carried out by a single reviewer (LJ). Next, full-text publications of any potentially relevant titles were obtained and assessed against the inclusion criteria. Three reviewers (LJ, LO & AT) independently screened all potentially relevant articles, and decisions on inclusion were reached through consensus.

Data charting process and quality assessment
We used a coding strategy to concisely record and chart the information from the included literature (S1 Appendix). This included details about study type and setting (e.g. community or hospital), the eligibility criteria for participants, methods used to screen, diagnose, or assess patients, and brief details of the study findings. Data charting was done independently by one reviewer (LJ). For studies that reported on the accuracy, validity and/or reliability of a cognitive assessment tool test validity, a quality assessment tool developed by Heirene et al. was used to assess the quality of these studies. Quality assessment was done independently by one reviewer (LJ) (S2 Table).

Data synthesis
Studies were grouped according to which of the objectives they addressed; whether they (i) presented new or adapted screening or diagnostic criteria for ARCI (primary objective); (ii) evaluated the accuracy, validity and/or reliability of a cognitive assessment tool (secondary objective); or (iii) presented a descriptive summary of a population based on cognitive assessment of patients with suspected ARCI (secondary objective). The limited availability of outcome data meant that the data are reported as a descriptive summary of the evidence.

Results
In total, 3,568 unique records were identified up to October 2021 and screened for inclusion in the review following the removal of foreign language articles (Fig 1).
Study inclusion flow diagram.
A total of 139 studies were excluded at the full text screening stage (Fig 1). Twelve studies were considered ‘near misses’ and judged to have narrowly failed to meet the inclusion criteria in respect of the review’s secondary objective as the samples included patients with diagnoses of dependence on substances other than alcohol. We chose to exclude those studies post hoc, where the sample included patients with a primary diagnosis (based on DSM or other recognised criteria) of abuse or dependence on a substance other than alcohol.
Nineteen records were kept and comprised the final set of included studies in the review. Three studies contributed to both scoping review objectives. Eight studies included participants with alcohol-related dementia or ARCI and were included in the summary of evidence addressing our primary objective relating to new or adapted diagnostic or screening criteria for ARCI. Twelve studies were included in the summary of evidence addressing our secondary objective relating to cognitive assessment tools. Seven studies evaluated the accuracy, validity and/or reliability of a cognitive assessment tool; two studies included patients with a diagnosis of ARCI and five studies with patients with a diagnosis of AUD. Seven further studies were descriptive reports about the use of cognitive assessment tools in screening and/or assessment. Two studies included patients with a diagnosis of ‘alcohol-related brain damage’ and five studies included samples with an AUD diagnosis.

New or adapted screening or diagnostic criteria for ARCI
Diagnostic/screening criteria are summarised for eight studies in Table 2. Four studies were from the UK, two from the USA, and one each from Canada and the Netherlands. Provisional diagnostic criteria for ‘probable’ alcohol-related dementia were published by Oslin et al. in 1998. The study by Carlen et al. preceded these criteria but are largely similar, for example, with respect to history of chronic and excessive alcohol use. Oslin & Cary sought to validate the 1998 criteria through a longitudinal study which explored the functional and cognitive course of alcohol-related dementia, and two further studies reported being based on adapted Oslin 1998/Oslin & Cary 2003 criteria. Schmidt et al. incorporated additional criteria for the diagnosis of alcohol-related dementia, specifying the exclusion of patients with a history of an acute onset of symptoms associated with WE. Wilson et al. reported screening criteria for referral to a specialist service. The criteria they developed were designed to be used by non-trained generic nurses in an acute hospital setting and included additional items relating to hospital admissions and delayed discharges. In keeping with their design for non-trained medical staff, they don’t state that a clinical diagnosis of dementia is required, referring instead to “confusion, memory problems” and “doubt about capacity”.
Summary of reported diagnostic criteria for ARCI.
Author, Year	Country	Diagnosisa	Setting	Diagnostic/screening criteria	 	Cognitive impairment	Alcohol-related	Other	 	Carlen et al., 1994 	Canada	ARD	Long-term care facilities	MMSE score <24 OR performance scores >2 SD below control means on CERAD screening tests in at least two areas of function (language, memory, or praxis).	History of alcohol use for >5-year period and average >6 oz/day.	Lack of progression in cognitive decline for at least the 1st year subsequent to institutionalization; exclusion of other causes of dementia.	 	Oslin & Cary, 2003 (validation of Oslin et al., 1998)	USA	Probable ARD	Nursing Home	Clinical diagnosis of dementia at least 60 days after the last exposure to alcohol.	Minimum average of 35 standard drinks per week for men (28 for women) for >5 years and within 3 years of the initial onset of dementia.	Also specifies additional criteria supporting a diagnosis of ARD and criteria which may cast doubt.	 	Schmidt et al., 2005 (adapted from Oslin et al., 1998)	USA	ARD	Memory assessment programme	Diagnosis of dementia at least 60 days after last exposure to alcohol.	35 alcoholic drinks per week for men (28 for women) for >5-year period.	No history of an acute onset of symptoms associated with WE; lack of focal neurological signs (except ataxia or peripheral sensory polyneuropathy).	 	Gilchrist & Morrison, 2005 	UK	ARBD	Homeless hostel	ACE score <88.	Hazardous drinking in the last year identified by FAST score ≥3; current alcohol dependence based on LDQ last week score ≥9 OR LDQ lifetime score ≥9.		 	Wilson et al., 2012 (adapted from Oslin & Cary, 2003)	UK	ARBD	Tertiary service for patients with severe ARBI	Confusion, memory problems, doubt about capacity and concerns about risk on discharge, after withdrawal/ physical stabilization.	Probable history of heavy, long-standing alcohol drinking: ≥35 units/week for ≥5 years; 3+ hospital admissions &/or A&E in 1 year directly or indirectly with alcohol ingestion OR 1+ delayed hospital discharges in last 12 months.		 	Wester et al., 2013 	The Netherlands	Non-WKS forms of ARCI	Clinic for patients with suspected cognitive impairments due to alcohol-use disorder	Suspected cognitive impairments due to alcohol-use disorder; no severe memory deficits.	DSM-IV-TR criteria for alcohol dependence.	Not fulfilling the criteria for KS.	 	Brown et al., 2019 (based on Wilson et al., 2012)	UK	ARBD	Glasgow specialist ARBD service	Evidence of cognitive deficits typically associated with alcohol-dependence.	Chronic and excessive alcohol history (not defined).	Neuroimaging evidence of structural brain change; psychosocial deterioration.	 	Thompson et al., 2020 (based on Wilson et al., 2012)	UK	ARBI	Acute hospital	MoCA score ≤23.	3+ alcohol-related admissions in 1 year; OR 2 alcohol-related admissions in any given 30-day period; OR patient/ significant other had concerns regarding cognition.
a Based on terms used by the authors of the studies.
ARBD, alcohol-related brain damage; ARBI, alcohol-related brain injury; ARCI, alcohol-related cognitive impairments; ARD, alcohol-related dementia; CERAD, Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease; FAST, Fast Alcohol Screening Test; KS, Korsakoff’s Syndrome; LDQ, = Leeds Dependence Questionnaire; MMSE, Mini Mental State Examination; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment; WE, Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
Two studies incorporated screening/diagnostic cut-offs on a cognitive screening tool as part of screening processes for ARCI. Gilchrist & Morris explored the prevalence of ARCI among homeless people living in five large hostels in Glasgow. The screening criteria for ARCI was based on an assessment of cognitive impairment with the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination (ACE; scoring less than 88) and meeting criteria for hazardous drinking and current or lifetime alcohol dependence (Table 3). The study by Thompson et al. was set in an acute hospital. The screening criteria for ARCI were based on Wilson et al. but also incorporated an assessment with MoCA, with a score of 23 or less considered evidence of ARCI. Two studies reported on ARCI patients sampled from clinics or service with a specialist remit for treating ARCI. Wester et al. established a group of patients with non-KS forms of ARCI based on fulfilling the DSM-IV-TR criteria for alcohol dependence but without severe memory deficits (the criteria for Korsakoff Syndrome). Brown et al. included participants from a specialist service but the criteria for the diagnoses was unclear. However, Brown et al. reported that diagnoses were based on ‘most or all’ of a set of criteria that were in line with those of Wilson et al..
Summary of cognitive screening tools.
Assessment or Screening Test	Summary	Tasks & functions assessed	Admin. / scoring time	Max score	Reference(s)	 	ACE, ACE-R, ACE-III	Brief cognitive test battery. ACE and ACE-R versions incorporated the MMSE.	Orientation, Attention, Memory, Verbal fluency, Language, Visuospatial	15–20 mins	100	Brown et al., 2019*; Gilchrist & Morrison, 2005*; Wilson et al., 2012*; Rao, 2016 	 	BEARNI	Brief assessment giving five sub-scores	Episodic memory, Working memory, flexibility, visuospatial, ataxia	15–20 mins	30; cognitive (no ataxia) 22	Pelletier et al., 2018; Ritz et al., 2015 	 	CANTAB	Computerised assessment comprising 7 subtests.	Episodic memory, sustained visual attention, spatial planning, working memory, rule acquisition	3 mins for screening, 3–10 mins for primary tests	Unclear	Horton et al., 2015*	 	MMSE	Brief cognitive assessment. Subtest & total score	Spatial and temporal orientation, Attention Calculation, Language, Memory, Comprehension, Copy design	5–10 mins	30, standard cut-off <24	Oslin & Cary, 2003*; Reid et al., 2002; Carlen et al., 1994*; Schmidt et al., 2005*	 	MoCA	Brief cognitive screening measure. 14 tasks.	Memory, Executive function, Attention & Concentration, Language, Visuospatial, Orientation		30, standard cut-off <26	Thompson et al., 2020*; Wester et al., 2013*; Alarcon et al., 2015; Ewert et al., 2018; Pelletier et al., 2018 	 	MST	Short screening instrument for cognitive impairment. Consists of three recall task: word recall, sentence recall and figure recall.	Not reported	Not reported	Not reported	Taylor et al., 1997 	 	NIS	50-item self-report scale with eight sub-scales: Global Measure of Impairment, Total Items Checked, Symptom Intensity Measure, Lie scale, General scale, Pathognomic scale, Learning-Verbal scale, and Frustration scale.	Attention, memory, language	Unclear	Optimal NIS scale score defined as impaired T-score >60.	Errico et al., 1990 	 	RBANS	12 subtests & overall performance score. Converted to age-adjusted norms scores. Does not provide a targeted assessment of executive functioning.	Visuospatial/ constructional, Language, Attention, Memory	20–30 mins	Mean 100 (sd 15), standard cut-off <88 & <83	Brown et al., 2019*; Cao et al., 2021 	 	TEDCA	Developed as a screening test specifically for patients with a history of alcoholism. Test/items used to construct the tool: ROCF, Bender Test, Direct Digits, Inverse Digits, Numbers and Letters, Learning List, TMT-B, Similarities, Go-No Go.	Visuospatial cognition, memory/learning, executive function	8–10 mins	Unclear	Jurado-Barba et al., 2017
*ARCI patient sample
ACE, Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination; BEARNI, Brief Evaluation of Alcohol-Related Neuropsychological Impairments; CANTAB, Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment; NIS, Neuropsychological Impairment Scale; RBANS, Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status; ROCF, Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure; TEDCA, TEst of Detection of Cognitive impairment in Alcoholism; TMT-B, Trail Making Test Part B.

Cognitive assessment tools used in point-of-care screening or assessment
A definitive diagnosis of cognitive impairment among patients with a history of heavy drinking is achieved through extensive neuropsychological assessment, but this approach is not feasible outside of specialist psychiatric or neuropsychiatric settings. Therefore, brief cognitive screening tools are commonly used in practice to support a diagnosis of suspected ARCI. A summary of the nine different cognitive screening tests examined or described across the included studies is presented in Table 3. The most commonly used tool across the included studies was the MoCA. Across the nine studies that included patients with ARCI, tools used were the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination (ACE), MoCA, Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB) and the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS).

Studies about the accuracy, validity and/or reliability of a cognitive assessment tool
Seven studies examined the accuracy, validity and/or reliability of a cognitive assessment tool (Table 4). The results of the full quality assessment is provided in the S2 Table). Heirene et al. draw attention to several individual level factors that may impact on cognitive test outcomes including, illicit substance use, comorbid psychopathology, psychiatric medication use, and cerebrovascular disease and traumatic brain injuries. An abstinence period from illicit substances, of at least 6 weeks is typically needed before reliable neurological assessment can be carried out. Periods of abstinence prior to assessment varied across the seven studies, with only one study reporting a period close to the minimum 6 weeks. All seven studies provided adequate descriptions of the included patient samples, but exclusions based on comorbid or confounding conditions were not consistent across the studies. For two studies, exclusions were not clear or not reported. Three studies excluded patients with comorbid psychopathology and two studies referred to the exclusion of patients with brain injuries. Effect sizes were only reported in two of six studies where this was deemed appropriate. As shown in Table 4, studies typically included small to moderate sample sizes. Four studies reported clearly that they had adjusted for the risk of type 1 error in their analyses.
Summary of studies: Accuracy, validity and/or reliability of a cognitive assessment tool.
Reference	Country	Setting	Participants	Assessment(s) Period of abstinence	Main findings	 	Brown et al., 2019 	UK	Glasgow specialist ARBD service and others (for AUD)	28 ARBD based on Wilson 2012 criteria (11 KS, 17 other)	ACE-III; RBANSAbstinent from alcohol and other substances for min. 5 weeks.	Both tests differentiated between AUD and ARBI groups. Findings considered to support the use of both tests in clinical assessments of alcohol users.	 	Wester et al., 2013 	The Netherlands	Clinic for patients with suspected cognitive impairments due to alcohol-use disorder	26 ARCI (defined as non-KS); AUD based on DSM-IV-TR but did not meet criteria for KS. (20 KS; 33 controls)	MoCA; RBMT-3.MoCA administered at intakeRBMT-3 administered 6–8 weeks after admission	MoCA was able to discriminate mild and more severe forms of memory impairment. Moderate discriminatory power to distinguish between WKS and non-WKS forms of ARBI.	 	Errico et al., 1990 	USA	Veterans Administration Medical Center	73 AUD (254 controls)	NISAdministered 7 days after admission to treatment programme	Higher NIS scale scores associated with poorer the performance on the NP tests (association ‘only modest’)	 	Ewert et al., 2018 	France	Hospital‐based substance use disorder rehabilitation centre	56 AUD (cognitive impairment, 31; no cognitive impairment, 25)	MoCAAdministered within 2 weeks and at least 7 days after alcohol withdrawal	NP tests were significantly correlated with the MoCA and more than 80% of AUD patients with one or more cognitive deficits were classified correctly using either corrected or uncorrected MoCA scores.	 	Jurado-Barba et al., 2017 	Spain	Hospital-based Addictive Behaviour Unit	90 patients with an AUD (DSM-5)	TEDCANot reported	Test demonstrated reliability and good diagnostic validity	 	Pelletier et al., 2018 	France	Rehabilitation centre	90 AUD	MoCA, BEARNIAdministered about 7–10 days after alcohol withdrawal	Cognitive domains assessed matched well with gold standard NP tests. BEARNI showed poor sensitivity. PPV for MoCA significantly better than BEARNI.	 	Ritz et al., 2015 	France	Hospital-based, receiving withdrawal treatment	73 AUD (58 controls)	BEARNIAdministered immediately after withdrawal	Specificity and PPV showed test had high sensitivity for mild and moderate-to-severe impairment. Specificity was poor.
ACE, Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination; AUD, Alcohol Use Disorder; BEARNI, Brief Evaluation of Alcohol-Related Neuropsychological Impairments; CANTAB, Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery; KS, Korsakoff Syndrome; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment; NIS, Neuropsychological Impairment Scale; NP, neuropsychological; RBANS, Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status; RBMT, Rivermead Behavioral Memory Test; TEDCA, TEst of Detection of Cognitive impairment in Alcoholism.

ARCI patients
Two studies examined test validity with ARCI samples. Brown et al. examined the suitability of the third edition of the ACE (ACE-III) and the RBANS. Both the ACE-III and RBANS distinguished between the AUD and ARCI patient groups. Wester et al. examined the discriminatory power of the MoCA screening tool finding that it had moderate discriminatory power to distinguish between WKS and non-WKS forms of ARCI. However, neither study included a comparison with a reference standard.

AUD patients
Five studies examined the validity of a range of cognitive assessment tools among AUD patients with compared to the reference standard of a more extensive neuropsychological assessment. Higher scores on the Neuropsychological Impairment Scale (NIS; a self-report scale) were associated with poorer the performance on the reference standard neuropsychological tests, but this association was noted to be ‘only modest’. The MoCA was examined in two studies. Ewert et al. found that the reference standard neuropsychological tests were significantly correlated with the MoCA and that more than 80% of AUD patients with one or more cognitive deficits were classified correctly using either corrected or uncorrected MoCA scores. Pelletier 2018 compared the performance of another cognitive assessment tool, BEARNI with MoCA. In both tests, the cognitive domains matched well with the reference standard neuropsychological tests. However, BEARNI showed poor sensitivity. The psychometric properties of BEARNI were also examined by Ritz et al.. Based on specificity and the positive predictive value, the test had high sensitivity for both mild and moderate-to-severe impairment, but its specificity was poor. Jurado-Barba et al. reported on a two-phase process to select items to compose the TEDCA (Test of detection of cognitive impairment in alcoholism). In phase 2 tests, TEDCA was used to assess 90 patients with an AUD (DSM-V) and demonstrated reliability and good diagnostic validity.

Descriptive reports about cognitive assessment tools
Six studies provided descriptive reports about a cognitive assessment tool (Table 5).
Summary of studies: Descriptive reports of a cognitive assessment tool.
Reference	Country	Setting	Participants	Assessment(s) Period of abstinence	Main findings	 	Alarcon et al., 2015 	France	Hospital-based addiction treatment unit	166 AUD (DSM-IV)	MoCAParticipants abstinent for 1–2 weeks	High rate of cognitive deficits identified. Visuospatial construction, fluency, abstraction and delayed recall were shown to be impaired, while naming, attention, orientation and repeat (language domain) were not.	 	Cao et al., 2021 	China	Hospital-based, psychiatric department	60 male AUD (40 controls)	RBANSParticipants abstinent for 7 days	Speech function, attention function, delayed memory and immediate memory significantly reduced compared to control. No difference in visual breadth.	 	Horton et al., 2015 	UK	Abstinence-based ‘ARBD residential rehabilitation service’	20 ARBD patients	CANTABPeriod of abstinence not reported	Participants performed below the normative average on all 5 subtests: episodic memory, sustained visual attention, spatial planning, working memory and rule acquisition and attentional set shifting.	 	Rao, 2016 	UK	Four community mental health teams’ caseloads	25 older patients with ICD-10 diagnosis of alcohol dependence	ACE-IIIPeriod of abstinence not reported	Scores based on pre-defined cut-off suggest deficits in attention/orientation, fluency, visuospatial function and memory (68–84% scoring below cut-off). Only 45% scored below cut-off for language.	 	Reid et al., 2002 	USA	Hospital-based geriatric assessment centre	801 older patients	MMSEPeriod of abstinence not reported	No difference in total scores across alcohol exposure categories or on history of alcohol abuse or dependence for patients with MMSE <24.	 	Taylor et al., 1997 	Australia	Detoxification unit	16 AUD (3 had ARBI diagnosis) (16 controls)	Memory Screening TestPeriod of abstinence not reported	AUD patients made a greater number of errors on each recall task than controls. No difference in mean number of errors between groups on individual task. Group mean for total errors was higher in AUD patients	 	Wilson et al., 2012 	UK	Tertiary service for patients with severe ARBI	41 ARBI patients	ACE-RPeriod of abstinence unclear	Group average ACE-R score indicated a considerable range of cognitive impairment.
ACE, Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination; ARBD, alcohol-related brain damage; ARBI, alcohol-related brain injury; AUD, Alcohol Use Disorder; CANTAB, Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment; RBANS, Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status.

ARCI patients
Two studies explored cognitive functioning among ARCI patients admitted to specialist tertiary care settings. Patients in the study by Wilson et al., underwent assessment at admission to the service with a revised version of the ACE (ACE-R). The group average score for 22 patients was 65.7 (range 30–93), indicating a considerable range of cognitive impairment. Horton et al. investigated the neurocognitive, psychosocial and everyday functioning of a group of individuals with ARCI. Neurocognitive assessment was undertaken with CANTAB and participants were found to have performed below the normative average on five subtests. The findings showed compromised performance in the domains of memory, attention and executive functioning, which the authors suggest are indicative of episodic memory impairments.

AUD patients
Five further studies were descriptive reports of cognitive functioning among AUD patients. A range of different cognitive assessment tools were used across the included studies. Settings included hospital-based treatment units for alcohol dependence and a detoxification unit. Based on assessment with MoCA, Alarcon et al. identified a high rate of cognitive deficits in a sample of 166 AUD patients. Visuospatial construction, fluency, abstraction and delayed recall were shown to be impaired, while naming, attention, orientation and repeat (language domain) were not. Cao et al. also found that based on assessment with RBANS, alcohol dependent patients had impairments in immediate memory, attention function, delayed memory and speech function compared to controls. Taylor et al. administered the Memory Screening Test to 16 participants recruited from a detoxification unit. Compared to controls, hazardous drinking participants made a greater number of errors on the Memory Screening Test recall task.
Two studies focused on older adults aged 65 years and older in hospital-based and community settings, respectively. Reid et al. assessed cognitive function with the Mini Mental State Examination but found that increased current alcohol consumption or a lifetime history of alcohol abuse and/or dependence was not associated with characteristic cognitive differences among older patients. Rao carried out a case note analysis of 25 patients under the care of a community mental health team. Using normative data for ACE-III scores in older people, they study found that 76% of AUD patients scored below the cut-off score of 82 with deficits indicated in attention/orientation, fluency, visuospatial function and memory (68–84% scoring below cut-off).

Discussion
This systematic scoping review identified 19 papers reporting on the screening, diagnosis or assessment of patients with suspected ARCI. Due to limitations in the number of studies identified that reported on modifications to existing definitions or diagnostic criteria for ARCI, or that presented new diagnostic criteria, the scope of this review was broadened. The included studies covered a range of settings and patient populations relevant to screening, diagnosis, or assessment of suspected ARCI in acute, secondary or community ‘point-of-care’ settings. Details about diagnostic or screening criteria for ARD or ARCI were available across seven studies. Two studies, Schmidt et al. and Wilson et al., reported using adaptions of the Oslin et al. and Oslin and Cary criteria. Schmidt et al. incorporated additional criteria so as to distinguish ARD cases from those meeting criteria for WKS and Wilson et al. included additional items relating to hospital admissions and delayed discharges. Two further studies, both from the UK, were then largely based on the Wilson et al. criteria. Although the included studies reported information about the diagnostic or screening criteria used to identify suspected ARCI, except for Oslin and Cary, they did not have a primary aim of exploring modifications to existing criteria or present new criteria. There was a lack of discussion across the studies about how and why adaptations were made, and this limits our understanding of any emerging themes or issues that could have been gathered in the context of carrying out this review. Our review therefore shows that although there have been many calls for the diagnostic criteria for ARCI to adequately tested there remains a lack of coordinated research and progress towards the development and standardisation of diagnostic criteria for ARCI.
According to a recent study carried out in South Wales, UK, cognitive screening tools are commonly used in practice to support a diagnosis of ARCI. Only two of the studies identified for inclusion in our review, Gilchrist & Morris and Thompson et al., however, reported incorporating a diagnostic cut-off on a brief cognitive screening tool as part of screening processes for ARCI. Further, we only identified two studies that examined test validity with a defined ARCI patient sample. Broadening the criteria out to patients with AUD, five further studies that examined test validity met the inclusion criteria for our review. Two recent systematic reviews by Heirene et al. and Ko et al., respectively, provide a comprehensive picture of the current evidence available for the use of cognitive screening tools with populations relevant to those with suspected ARCI. MoCA is the best evidenced tool, but methodological limitations across studies demonstrates a need for further research and better translation of evidence to inform real-world clinical practice. There is a clear need for further research efforts to explore whether and how cognitive screening tools should form part of the assessment for suspected ARBI and which of the available tools are most appropriate. With no one tool currently validated, further research on the clinical applicability of the available screening tools is required. Studies should provide information about both the clinical utility (including ease of use and administration time) and psychometric properties (sensitivity and specificity). As shown in this review, although a range of tools have been used to screen for cognitive impairments with ARCI and AUD patient samples, few studies are available on these tools’ psychometric properties. MoCA was the only tool for which we identified studies that examined test validity in both an ARCI and an AUD patient sample. As highlighted by Heirene et al., another important area is decisions about when tools should be administered. Neuropsychological functioning improves with the duration of abstinence and for patients at-risk of ARCI who present in acute care, screening must take place “within a very small window of time”. Many studies included in this review did not report abstinence rates among their samples, and this was consequently another area from which we are not able garner much from the currently available research.
It is important to emphasise that the mechanisms underlying the development of ARCI remain unknown but are almost certainly multifactorial. Alcohol-related mechanisms including vitamin B1 deficiency, genetic predisposition and co-occurring non-alcohol-related factors such as head injury, vascular dementia and age-related changes are all thought to contribute to the aetiology of ARCI. Until we have a greater mechanistic understanding of ARCI, it is highly unlikely that a reproducible single set of diagnostic criteria will be developed. However, in the meantime, it is vital that consensus is sought, and standardised criteria agreed to aid clinical judgement, particularly as ARCI is often partially reversible. The ongoing lack of a consensus on standardised criteria has resulted in under recording and reporting of ARCI, with deleterious consequences for patients, families, health, and social care services. Ongoing evaluation of the practical application of new or existing ARCI criteria, either through formal research or routine monitoring, will be needed to confirm they have utility in clinical practice and that healthcare professionals do not face barriers to their use. The role of cognitive screening tools in supporting a suspected ARCI diagnosis requires greater attention, and in line with Ko et al.,, we would caution against an over reliance on cut-off scores. Confounding factors may complicate assessment, and patients with suspected ARCI may commonly present with physical and psychiatric comorbidities. Another important consideration is the ‘double stigma’ experienced by patients with ARCI within healthcare settings. Negative attitudes among healthcare professionals towards people with problems with alcohol or other substances are known to undermine access to diagnosis, treatment, and successful health outcomes. Poor compliance with treatment is erroneously perceived as “feckless” with very little recognition of this patient group’s diminished ability to understand, remember, and therefore comply with clinical advice and treatment. ARCI criteria must therefore be both practical for screening the large numbers of patients presenting in acute hospital and community settings, cognisant of the range of contributing factors that may form part of an ARCI patient’s presentation (including comorbid diagnoses and ongoing alcohol and poly-substance use) and allow for comparisons of different interventions to be made. Until we are comparing patients who are ’like with like’ in research studies, confusion will hamper progress.

Limitations of the scoping review process
We prospectively developed a protocol for this scoping review, but it was not prospectively registered as it was not eligible for registration with PROSPERO—the international prospective register of systematic reviews. Prospective registration of systematic reviews and scoping reviews aims to reduce bias in the conduct and reporting of research, and we therefore acknowledge this is a key limitation in our scoping review process, Further, as previously noted, the inclusion criteria for this review were broadened out during the review process and a wide range of study designs and approaches are subsequently included in the review. This limits the extent to which the evidence can be considered as a whole, and its overall coherence discussed. There is a lack of consistency across the studies identified in terms of the approach to exploring the screening, diagnosis, or assessment of patients with suspected ARCI, which reflects a lack of consensus on definitions of ARCI. Diagnostic criteria relevant for ARCI have not been extensively tested and the reasons underlying the adaptions of the existing criteria for ARD were not well described. It is possible that relevant studies were missed for inclusion in the review. However, as the review team had an expectation that the identification of relevant studies would be complicated by the wide use of terminology in the field, systematic literature searches were carried out across two phases. Further the review team included people with expertise both in systematic review methodologies and primary research and clinical practice with the patient group.
Further, the review of studies relevant to the screening, diagnosis, or assessment of cognitive impairment among patients with AUD excluded studies with heterogenous samples of patients with substance use disorder. Focusing on homogenous samples of AUD patients may limit the generalisability of this aspect of the review in terms of how representative the findings are of real-world clinical practice.

Conclusion
The findings of this review confirm the scarcity of evidence available on the screening, diagnosis or assessment of patients with suspected ARCI. The lack of evidence is an important barrier to the development of clear guidelines for diagnosing ARCI, which would ultimately improve the real-world management and treatment of patients with ARCI. Progress is therefore urgently needed in the development of a consensus in defining the diagnostic criteria for ARCI.

Supporting information

References
A role for cognitive rehabilitation in increasing the effectiveness of treatment for alcohol use disorders
The neuropathology of alcohol-related brain damage.
Alcohol-related dementia and neurocognitive impairment: a review study.
Executive functions in alcohol-dependence: A theoretically grounded and integrative exploration.
Professional perspectives on supporting those with alcohol-related neurocognitive disorders: challenges & effective treatment.
Alcohol and brain damage in adults with reference to high-risk groups
Neurocognitive impairment associated with alcohol use disorders: implications for treatment
Alcohol-related cognitive impairment: current trends and future perspectives.
Alcohol-related brain injury: An unrecognized problem in acute medicine
Identification and evaluation of neuropsychological tools used in the assessment of alcohol-related cognitive impairment: a systematic review.
Alcohol-related dementia: an update of the evidence.
Alcohol related dementia: proposed clinical criteria
The psycho-social rehabilitation of patients with alcohol-related brain damage in the community
Alcohol-Related Neurocognitive Disorders: A Naturalistic Study of Nosology and Estimation of Prevalence in South Wales, United Kingdom.
Alcohol-related cognitive impairment and the DSM-5.
Group and case study of the dysexecutive syndrome in alcoholism without amnesia
Management of alcohol Korsakoff syndrome
Alcohol-related brain damage: report from a Medical Council on Alcohol Symposium, June 2010.
PWE-138 Increasing burden of alcohol related brain injury is disproportionate to hospital admissions with liver disease
The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment
Applicability of the ACE-III and RBANS cognitive tests for the detection of Alcohol-Related Brain Damage
The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) as a measure of severity of amnesia in patients with alcohol-related cognitive impairments and Korsakoff syndrome. Clinical Neuropsychiatry
Alcohol-related dementia in the institutionalized elderly
Prevalence of alcohol related brain damage among homeless hostel dwellers in Glasgow.
Alcohol-related dementia: validation of diagnostic criteria.
The neuropsychological profile of alcohol-related dementia suggests cortical and subcortical pathology.
MoCA as a screening tool of neuropsychological deficits in alcohol‐dependent patients
The evaluation of cognitive impairment in alcohol-dependent patients through RBANS combined With ERPs.
Screening for neuropsychological impairment in alcoholics. Psychological Assessment
Determination of MoCA cutoff score in patients with alcohol use disorders
Neurocognitive, psychosocial and functional status of individuals with alcohol-related brain damage (ARBD) on admission to specialist residential care.
Development of a screening test for cognitive impairment in alcoholic population
Comparison of the MoCA and BEARNI tests for detection of cognitive impairment in in-patients with alcohol use disorders
Cognitive impairment in older people with alcohol use disorders in a UK community mental health service
Relationship between alcohol consumption and Folstein mini-mental status examination scores among older cognitively impaired adults
Validation of a brief screening tool for alcohol‐related neuropsychological impairments
Screening cognitive impairment in alcohol abusers
Neuropsychologische diagnostiek en cognitieve functies bij alcoholabstinentie [The neuropsychology of cognitive functions in alcohol abstinence].
The needs of people with alcohol-related brain injury (ARBI): a review of the international literature.
Screening tools for cognitive impairment in adults with substance use disorders: a systematic review
Stigma among health professionals towards patients with substance use disorders and its consequences for healthcare delivery: Systematic review
Stigma in health facilities: why it matters and how we can change it.
10.1371/journal.pone.0280749.r001

Decision Letter 0
Manning
Victoria
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

Transfer Alert
This paper was transferred from another journal. As a result, its full editorial history (including decision letters, peer reviews and author responses) may not be present.
10 Mar 2022
PONE-D-22-01818Development of diagnostic criteria for differential diagnosis of alcohol-related brain injury (ARBI) among heavy drinkers: a systematic scoping reviewPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Jones,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 24 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
A/Prof Victoria Manning
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
1. When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match.
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
3. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript:
(We are grateful to Dr Amanda Atkinson, Public Health Institute, Liverpool John Moores University who contributed to study screening in the initial phase of the project, and Professor Harry Sumnall, also of Public Health Institute, Liverpool John Moores University who provided advice on the development of the systematic scoping review methods. This study was funding by charitable funds from the Gastroenterology Fund, (formerly) Royal Liverpool and Broadgreen University Hospitals NHS Trust. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.)
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form.
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows:
(No. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.)
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Thank you for submitting your paper. I am very grateful to the two expert reviewers for their thorough read of your manuscript and for their insightful suggestions. Like the reviewers, I feel the paper has its strengths and addresses an important issue, but feel it would benefit from a much stronger rationale –by explaining some of issues, limitations with the existing criteria. At the moment it lacks a clearly defined purpose and reads more of a summary of what others have done and where they overlap. By providing some context in terms of the complexity, difficulties we face in defining/diagnosing alcohol-related cognitive impairment its contribution to the literature will become a lot clearer.
When revising your manuscript, I would encourage you to refer the recent systematic review by Ko et al (2021) and to look carefully at the conditions under which cognitive impairment screening tools can be used.
Other minor issues
Make it clear that the statement below refers to people with Korsakoff’s, particularly since this is a criticism of the recent, similar Heirene et al. (17) review
With treatment, Smith and Hillman (13) estimated that full recovery can be achieved in approximately 25% of patients, and among the remainder, 50% can achieve a partial or minor recovery
The paper would benefit from starting clearer objectives. Currently aim 2 (on page 4) seems rather weak, “the identification of further work in identifying the best tools”, surely this would be a by-product of addressing aim 1 “summarising the evidence of existing tools/criteria and any validations of those”.
As noted by one of the reviewers, the fact that a protocol was developed in advance (but not registered) is a major limitation and should be acknowledged.
Finally with regards to the title - perhaps it needs a word like "Towards developing" or "Informing the development" as it appears rather overstated in its current form, relative to what the paper describes.
I am confident you will find the reviewers comments helpful in the revision of the manuscript
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the opportunity to review this manuscript entitled Development of diagnostic criteria for differential diagnosis of alcohol-related brain injury among heavy drinkers: a systematic scoping review. This manuscript is a timely and useful review highlighting an important issue in the addiction field regarding the lack of criteria for diagnosing alcohol related brain injury.
Overall the manuscript is of an appropriate quality and followed a systematic scoping review methodology to extract key themes from the included literature. Prior to recommendation for publication, however, I would like to see the following comments addressed.
General comments
Overall I missed a more in-depth critique of the currently available criteria. For instance, specifically what are the current issues or practical concerns with applying the available criteria? I think inclusion of this within the introduction and discussion would be helpful for readers in highlighting the specific issues experienced by clinicians along with some potential avenues for improvement that future studies could incorporate or explore. This would help strengthen the discussion which has only a very small section devoted to this issue before moving onto screening tools.
Introduction
In the introduction/methods, it might be helpful for Table 1 to be expanded to include all available formal diagnostic classification systems for ARBI/ARD. This would help summarise the lay of the land for readers and provide a better context for the review.
Further to this, I think the manuscript could benefit from some additional commentary about the DSM and ICD diagnostic classification systems including any strengths and identified limitations.
Methods
The systematic scoping review procedure was well executed and described.
Please provide a stronger justification for excluding studies that solely used DSM/ICD classifications and a statement regarding the number of studies that were excluded on this basis.
The exclusion criteria regarding mixed samples of drug and alcohol users is a reasonable one, however, this should be acknowledged as a general limitation given the clinical reality that polysubstance use is often the norm in AOD settings rather than the exception and research studies often struggle to reflect this.
Page 6 paragraph 3: Typo. Diagnosis should be diagnose.
Results
Table 3 – Note that the MoCA now requires training certification to administer. Note also that some assessment measures have user restrictions that prevent unqualified individuals being able to purchase or administer the measure. For instance, the RBANS and NIS have a User Level B (Psychologist, Speech Pathologist, Occupational Therapist, Special Education Teacher, Human Resources Professional, Psychiatrist, Paediatrician). Check with each test publisher to determine the User level.
In highlighting these screening tools I would recommend a note of caution that they ought to be administered and interpreted by an appropriately qualified health professional with experience in the field of cognition. For instance, I note that the TEDCA personnel use is “unclear” given the lack of formal guidance by a test publisher or equivalent, however, it is clear that the measure contains several neuropsychological assessment tools that are generally recommended for use by clinical neuropsychologists and I would not consider them to fall into the category of “easy brief administration by non-specialised healthcare personal in the clinical and research field”, as was concluded by the TEDCA study authors!
A good description of the concerns associated with the use of screening tools in the AOD sector is in the second paragraph of the clinical recommendations section of the following paper: doi:10.1017/S135561772100103X.
This paper also includes an extensive review of screening tools utilised in the AOD sector and would be worth cross checking and discussing where appropriate. For instance, their conclusions are quite similar in that very few studies have validated the use of screening tools in AOD populations with the MoCA being the most commonly used.
Table 3 includes abbreviations that were not described in the table notes: ROCFT, TMT.
In the section describing the findings of studies using screening measures (page 16-17), was abstinence discussed in any of these studies? If this data is available in the included studies it may be worth including as a column in Tables 4 & 5 to aid interpretation of the findings.
Did any of the included studies present information regarding comorbid diagnoses that could impact on the provision of a diagnosis of ARBI?
Discussion
The discussion may benefit from commentary on the ICD-11 now being in effect given there has been a change in the diagnostic criteria for alcohol related dementia compared with the ICD-10. Highlighting this and discussing any avenues for further development could be valuable for readers.
Within paragraph three could the authors provide some commentary on any observations regarding the presence of psychiatric comorbidity or other factors observed in the included studies that may impact the differential diagnosis of ARBI in this cohort?
Reviewer #2: You Plos One
Feb 2022
OVERALL COMMENTS
Thank you for the opportunity to review this interesting manuscript. This is a very important systematic review that highlights a real gap in the literature regarding this condition. It notes a paradox: we (myself included) consistently call for valid diagnostic criteria for ARBD/ARBI/ARNI but have failed to invest resources into developing them through rigorous empirical work. There are a few areas where I think the introduction/ discussion could be expanded to better account for the complexity involved in defining and diagnosing this condition, but these can be easily addressed in a revision of the paper.
Below I provide specific comments on each of the individual sections within the manuscripts.
INTRODUCTION
The authors choose to use the term “alcohol related brain injury”. This term is not widely used outside of very small circles in the UK and is semantically confusing/ambiguous — “injury” suggests the person has sustained a physical injury, and the term overall insinuates that somebody has experienced a brain injury that occurred whilst intoxicated, which is certainly not what the authors are referring to. I strongly suggest the authors consider alternative terms if they wish to attract international attention with this work, some of which I discuss below:
• Alcohol related brain damage - this phrase has been used in several studies published by myself and others in the UK over the last few years and is widely recognised by many clinicians in the UK, although it is admittedly not widely used outside of the UK. Further, some clinicians dislike the use of terms like “damage” and “injury” as they imply permanent physical damage. See the following paper (please note, I am referring you to this paper that I authored as I think it is relevant to this point and several others in your paper, but I do not expect you to cite the paper or discuss it in any way if you do not feel it is suitable/relevant to your work):
Heirene, R. M., John, B., O’Hanrahan, M., Angelakis, I. & Roderique-Davies, G. (2021). Professional Perspectives on Supporting Those with Alcohol-Related Neurocognitive Disorders: Challenges & Effective Treatment. Alcoholism Treatment Quarterly, 39(3), 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1080/07347324.2021.1898294
Full text access: https://robheirene.netlify.app/publication/heirene_et_al_2021_perspectives_on_arbd_treatment/Heirene_et_al_%282021%29_Perspectives_on_ARBD_treatment.pdf
Alcohol-related cognitive impairment - this phrase is unambiguous, uncontroversial, and widely accepted worldwide
• alcohol-related neurocognitive impairment - again, this phrase is unambiguous, uncontroversial, and widely accepted worldwide. This term is also more semantically accurate and simply cognitive impairment”.
It is good that the authors note the other diagnostic terms used in the confusion this brings.
Third paragraph: the Smith and Hillman study referred to here only discussed recovery rates in those with Korsakoff’s syndrome. The authors appear to exclude this manifestation from ”ARBI” in their introduction, no? If they include this syndrome under their definition of ARBI then this needs to be clarified in the first paragraph or two.
Final paragraph: further to my first comment, the authors state that criteria for ARD have been adapted for a probable diagnosis of “ARBI” but Wilson actually used the term “alcohol related brain damage” in the article cited.
Given the overall purpose of this review, the authors need to better clarify what they mean by “ARBI” at the start of the manuscript. What is and isn’t included under this definition? Can you detailed description of the symptomology be provided, whilst acknowledging heterogeneity in presentation and noting this as key? It needs to be absolutely clear what “condition” is been referred to before we move on to determining how best to screen for it. Later in the article, the authors refer to a variety of different study populations as having “ARBI” including those in Brown et al. and Wester et al., but these are described differently by their respective authors. Perhaps the authors could discuss some of these studies and the samples studied in the introduction as examples of populations with ARBI according to their definition?
METHODS
Why was the protocol not registered in advanced if it was developed prior to conducting the review? This seems very strange and needs clarifying.
INCLUSION CRITERIA
the objectives stated here differ slightly from those stated at the end of the introduction? There is some inconsistency here.
Were reviews included? Please clarify
Was there a language restriction? Please clarify
The authors state they excluded samples “where they included mixed samples of drug and alcohol users.” Did this include samples will use both alcohol and drugs simultaneously? Please clarify. Polysubstance misuse is common and among this group.
SEARCHING FOR AND SELECTING RELEVANT STUDIES
This process of searching for and selecting articles seems scientifically valid and thorough. It is great that the authors used three reviewers to independently screen for potential studies at the full text level. At the title and abstract screening level, did the authors record the level of consistency between the two reviewers when screening the initial 20% of articles? It would be good to have some indication of interrater reliability.
DATA CHARTING PROCESS AND QUALITY ASSESSMENT
DATA SYNTHESIS
I have no other concerns or comments regarding the other subsections of the methods section—everything is clearly explained.
RESULTS
in the first paragraph of this section, the authors state that “20 records were kept and comprised the final set of included studies in the review”, but figure 1 shows only 19 studies were kept. Please clarify which is correct.
The authors state that only one study (32) included patients with a diagnosis of ARBI. However, our study (19; see below) included participants with a diagnosis of alcohol related brain damage, which the authors appear to include in the definition of ARBI. Please clarify whether this is because you only included studies that diagnose participants according to the ARD criteria.
19: Brown P, Heirene RM, John B, Evans JJ. Applicability of the ACE-III and RBANS cognitive tests for the detection of Alcohol-Related Brain Damage. Frontiers in psychology. 2019;10:2636.
Page 14: can the authors please provide a brief narrative summary of the results from the quality assessment process? I think it’s fine to include the full table of outcomes in supplemental information, but the readers need to have some indication of what the outcomes were here for ease of interpretation. A simple sentence or two stating what percentage of studies met each of the criteria in the assessment would suffice.
DISCUSSION
First paragraph: the authors provide a clear and succinct summary of the findings here and make some important inferences regarding the lack of research in this area despite calls for validation of diagnostic criteria.
Third paragraph: the varied mechanisms underlying ARBI is an important point here. I think we have a good enough understanding of the mechanisms involved to know that they are multiple and varied. As a corollary, we shouldn’t expect there to be strict diagnostic/ screening criteria that apply to every case of ARBI/ARBD/ARNI. I think the authors need to make more of a point of this and, although we need to better test existing and new criteria and cut-off scores for these, we should recognise that there will always be some degree of clinical judgement involved in making this diagnosis. It seemed like the complexity diagnosis and heterogeneity in presentation is not fully appreciated here and could be expanded upon.
The conclusions derived are appropriate and important.
FINAL COMMENTS
I hope the authors find the above comments useful in revising their manuscripts for publication.
Sincerely,
Rob Heirene (I sign my reviews)
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Dr James R. Gooden
Reviewer #2: Yes: Robert Heirene
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0280749.r002

Author response to Decision Letter 0
12 Jul 2022
EDITOR COMMENTS (E): Thank you for submitting your paper. I am very grateful to the two expert reviewers for their thorough read of your manuscript and for their insightful suggestions. Like the reviewers, I feel the paper has its strengths and addresses an important issue, but feel it would benefit from a much stronger rationale – by explaining some of issues, limitations with the existing criteria. At the moment it lacks a clearly defined purpose and reads more of a summary of what others have done and where they overlap. By providing some context in terms of the complexity, difficulties we face in defining/diagnosing alcohol-related cognitive impairment its contribution to the literature will become a lot clearer. When revising your manuscript, I would encourage you to refer the recent systematic review by Ko et al (2021) and to look carefully at the conditions under which cognitive impairment screening tools can be used.
RESPONSE: Thank you for you positive and constructive comments on the paper. We have reorganised and added to the Introduction to make the context and purpose of the paper clearer to the reader.
EC: Make it clear that the statement below refers to people with Korsakoff’s, particularly since this is a criticism of the recent, similar Heirene et al. (17) review
With treatment, Smith and Hillman (13) estimated that full recovery can be achieved in approximately 25% of patients, and among the remainder, 50% can achieve a partial or minor recovery
RESPONSE: This has been clarified in the text as follows (pg 4, 1st para): "Evidence from the broader spectrum of conditions associated with cognitive impairment suggests that recognition and a diagnosis of ARCI would significantly improve the long-term prognosis for patients. Among patients with Korsakoff’s Syndrome (KS), Smith and Hillman..."
EC: The paper would benefit from starting clearer objectives. Currently aim 2 (on page 4) seems rather weak, “the identification of further work in identifying the best tools”, surely this would be a by-product of addressing aim 1 “summarising the evidence of existing tools/criteria and any validations of those”.
RESPONSE: We have deleted the following part of the sentence to ensure that the objectives of the paper/review are clearer: “the purpose of supporting further work to explore which of the available tools and/or operational criteria best facilitate the rapid identification of patients with suspected ARBI”.
EC: As noted by one of the reviewers, the fact that a protocol was developed in advance (but not registered) is a major limitation and should be acknowledged.
RESPONSE:At the time of developing the protocol, we were aware of PROSPERO, the international prospective register of systematic reviews. We planned to register the protocol with PROSPERO but found that it does not accept scoping reviews. We were not aware of other free options for prospective registration at the time of developing the protocol. We now understand that paid options are available and/or the protocols can be published on free open science platforms. We have acknowledged that the protocol was not prospectively available in the limitations.
EC: Finally with regards to the title - perhaps it needs a word like "Towards developing" or "Informing the development" as it appears rather overstated in its current form, relative to what the paper describes.
RESPONSE: ‘Informing’ added
EC: I am confident you will find the reviewers comments helpful in the revision of the manuscript.
RESPONSE: We have. Thank you.
REVIEWER #1 COMMENTS
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the opportunity to review this manuscript entitled Development of diagnostic criteria for differential diagnosis of alcohol-related brain injury among heavy drinkers: a systematic scoping review. This manuscript is a timely and useful review highlighting an important issue in the addiction field regarding the lack of criteria for diagnosing alcohol related brain injury.
RESPONSE: Thank you for your comments. No response needed.
R1:Overall the manuscript is of an appropriate quality and followed a systematic scoping review methodology to extract key themes from the included literature. Prior to recommendation for publication, however, I would like to see the following comments addressed.
RESPONSE: Please see below for how individual comments have been addressed.
GENERAL COMMENTS
R1: Overall I missed a more in-depth critique of the currently available criteria. For instance, specifically what are the current issues or practical concerns with applying the available criteria? I think inclusion of this within the introduction and discussion would be helpful for readers in highlighting the specific issues experienced by clinicians along with some potential avenues for improvement that future studies could incorporate or explore. This would help strengthen the discussion which has only a very small section devoted to this issue before moving onto screening tools.
RESPONSE: Please see below under Introduction for how we have responded to the comment about the need for more information about the currently available criteria.
INTRODUCTION
R1: In the introduction/methods, it might be helpful for Table 1 to be expanded to include all available formal diagnostic classification systems for ARBI/ARD. This would help summarise the lay of the land for readers and provide a better context for the review. Further to this, I think the manuscript could benefit from some additional commentary about the DSM and ICD diagnostic classification systems including any strengths and identified limitations.
RESPONSE: We have expanded the section on ICD and DSM systems in the second paragraph to explain why they are not used in clinical practice to diagnosis ARCI. One the main issues, which we have sought to make clearer, is that there is a shortage of rigorous empirical research done in clinical practice to establish the validity/usefulness of the new and existing criteria.
METHODS
R1: The systematic scoping review procedure was well executed and described.
RESPONSE: Thank you for your comments. No response needed.
R1: Please provide a stronger justification for excluding studies that solely used DSM/ICD classifications and a statement regarding the number of studies that were excluded on this basis.
RESPONSE: We have clarified in the text that this exclusion was specific to ICD-10/11 and DSM-IV as neither version provides unifying criteria for ARCI. We dropped the diagnosis terms in our revised strategy and in practice no exclusions were made because of this criterion.
R1: The exclusion criteria regarding mixed samples of drug and alcohol users is a reasonable one, however, this should be acknowledged as a general limitation given the clinical reality that polysubstance use is often the norm in AOD settings rather than the exception and research studies often struggle to reflect this.
RESPONSE: We have added a paragraph about the exclusion of studies at the start of the results section. We acknowledge that polysubstance use is common among the patient group and did not exclude samples reporting polysubstance use. As we did not include explicit inclusion criteria in relation to other substance use disorders, we have added the following text to clarify what types of studies were excluded (pg 7; 4th para):"Twelve studies were considered ‘near misses’ and judged to have narrowly failed to meet the inclusion criteria in respect of the review’s secondary objective as the samples included patients with diagnoses of dependence on substances other than alcohol. We agreed post hoc to exclude these studies where the sample included patients with a primary diagnosis (based on DSM or other recognised criteria) of abuse or dependence on a substance other than alcohol." We have acknowledged that this may be a limitation in the Discussion (pg 20, 2nd para of Limitations).
R1: Page 6 paragraph 3: Typo. Diagnosis should be diagnose.
RESPONSE: This typo has been corrected.
RESULTS
R1: Table 3 – Note that the MoCA now requires training certification to administer. Note also that some assessment measures have user restrictions that prevent unqualified individuals being able to purchase or administer the measure. For instance, the RBANS and NIS have a User Level B (Psychologist, Speech Pathologist, Occupational Therapist, Special Education Teacher, Human Resources Professional, Psychiatrist, Paediatrician). Check with each test publisher to determine the User level. In highlighting these screening tools I would recommend a note of caution that they ought to be administered and interpreted by an appropriately qualified health professional with experience in the field of cognition. For instance, I note that the TEDCA personnel use is “unclear” given the lack of formal guidance by a test publisher or equivalent, however, it is clear that the measure contains several neuropsychological assessment tools that are generally recommended for use by clinical neuropsychologists and I would not consider them to fall into the category of “easy brief administration by non-specialised healthcare personal in the clinical and research field”, as was concluded by the TEDCA study authors! A good description of the concerns associated with the use of screening tools in the AOD sector is in the second paragraph of the clinical recommendations section of the following paper: doi:10.1017/S135561772100103X. This paper also includes an extensive review of screening tools utilised in the AOD sector and would be worth cross checking and discussing where appropriate. For instance, their conclusions are quite similar in that very few studies have validated the use of screening tools in AOD populations with the MoCA being the most commonly used.
RESPONSE: Thank you for the orientation to the Ko et al., paper this has usefully informed our revisions. With respect to clinical utility, we have removed the column that refers to Personnel in Table 3, as on reflection this was not helpful with respect to the purposes of the paper and based on that (overall) this information was incomplete and partial across the different tools.
R1: Table 3 includes abbreviations that were not described in the table notes: ROCFT, TMT.
RESPONSE: The list of abbreviations has been checked and the missing abbreviations added.
R1: In the section describing the findings of studies using screening measures (page 16-17), was abstinence discussed in any of these studies? If this data is available in the included studies it may be worth including as a column in Tables 4 & 5 to aid interpretation of the findings.
RESPONSE: Information about abstinence was extracted and is presented in the data extraction tables and quality assessment information in the supporting information. We have added a paragraph about the exclusion of studies at the start of the results section (based on Reviewer #2 comment) and included additional information here about abstinence. Brief information has also been added to Tables 4 and 5.
R1: Did any of the included studies present information regarding comorbid diagnoses that could impact on the provision of a diagnosis of ARBI?
RESPONSE: Information about sample exclusions was extracted and is presented in the data extraction tables and quality assessment information in the supporting information. We have added a paragraph about the exclusion of studies at the start of the results section (based on Reviewer #2 comment) and included additional information here about exclusions based on co-morbidity.
DISCUSSION
R1: The discussion may benefit from commentary on the ICD-11 now being in effect given there has been a change in the diagnostic criteria for alcohol related dementia compared with the ICD-10. Highlighting this and discussing any avenues for further development could be valuable for readers.
RESPONSE: We have added information to the Introduction about the DSM and ICD classification systems. Although we accept the comment and agree that is could be beneficial to add further commentary in the Discussion we are have chosen not to address this comment as it would add significantly to the word count.
R1: Within paragraph three could the authors provide some commentary on any observations regarding the presence of psychiatric comorbidity or other factors observed in the included studies that may impact the differential diagnosis of ARBI in this cohort?
RESPONSE: We have added to paragraph three, noting that confounding factors may complicate assessment of patients with suspected ARCI.
REVIEWER #2 COMMENTS
OVERALL COMMENTS
R2: Thank you for the opportunity to review this interesting manuscript. This is a very important systematic review that highlights a real gap in the literature regarding this condition. It notes a paradox: we (myself included) consistently call for valid diagnostic criteria for ARBD/ARBI/ARNI but have failed to invest resources into developing them through rigorous empirical work. There are a few areas where I think the introduction/ discussion could be expanded to better account for the complexity involved in defining and diagnosing this condition, but these can be easily addressed in a revision of the paper. RESPONSE: Thank you for your comments. Please see below for our responses to each comment.
INTRODUCTION
R2: The authors choose to use the term “alcohol related brain injury”. This term is not widely used outside of very small circles in the UK and is semantically confusing/ambiguous — “injury” suggests the person has sustained a physical injury, and the term overall insinuates that somebody has experienced a brain injury that occurred whilst intoxicated, which is certainly not what the authors are referring to. I strongly suggest the authors consider alternative terms if they wish to attract international attention with this work, some of which I discuss below:
• Alcohol related brain damage - this phrase has been used in several studies published by myself and others in the UK over the last few years and is widely recognised by many clinicians in the UK, although it is admittedly not widely used outside of the UK. Further, some clinicians dislike the use of terms like “damage” and “injury” as they imply permanent physical damage. See the following paper (please note, I am referring you to this paper that I authored as I think it is relevant to this point and several others in your paper, but I do not expect you to cite the paper or discuss it in any way if you do not feel it is suitable/relevant to your work):
Heirene, R. M., John, B., O’Hanrahan, M., Angelakis, I. & Roderique-Davies, G. (2021). Professional Perspectives on Supporting Those with Alcohol-Related Neurocognitive Disorders: Challenges & Effective Treatment. Alcoholism Treatment Quarterly, 39(3), 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1080/07347324.2021.1898294
Full text access: https://robheirene.netlify.app/publication/heirene_et_al_2021_perspectives_on_arbd_treatment/Heirene_et_al_%282021%29_Perspectives_on_ARBD_treatment.pdf
Alcohol-related cognitive impairment - this phrase is unambiguous, uncontroversial, and widely accepted worldwide
Alcohol-related neurocognitive impairment - again, this phrase is unambiguous, uncontroversial, and widely accepted worldwide. This term is also more semantically accurate and simply cognitive impairment”. It is good that the authors note the other diagnostic terms used in the confusion this brings.
RESPONSE: Thank you for providing your considerations on this issue. The authors have discussed the terminology used and we have agreed with the suggestion to change the overarching term used to ‘Alcohol Related Cognitive Impairment’. The introduction has been reorganised to better clarify the sources of variation and how they have been used by clinicians and researchers.
Please see our responses to the next set of comments.
R2: Third paragraph: the Smith and Hillman study referred to here only discussed recovery rates in those with Korsakoff’s syndrome. The authors appear to exclude this manifestation from ”ARBI” in their introduction, no? If they include this syndrome under their definition of ARBI then this needs to be clarified in the first paragraph or two.
RESPONSE: This has been clarified in the text as follows (pg 4, 1st para): "Evidence from the broader spectrum of conditions associated with cognitive impairment suggests that recognition and a diagnosis of ARCI would significantly improve the long-term prognosis for patients. Among patients with Korsakoff’s Syndrome (KS), Smith and Hillman..."
R2: Final paragraph: further to my first comment, the authors state that criteria for ARD have been adapted for a probable diagnosis of “ARBI” but Wilson actually used the term “alcohol related brain damage” in the article cited.
RESPONSE: We have clarified this by changing to the phrasing used in the original paper: ‘probable diagnosis of alcohol-related brain damage’.
R2: Given the overall purpose of this review, the authors need to better clarify what they mean by “ARBI” at the start of the manuscript. What is and isn’t included under this definition? Can you detailed description of the symptomology be provided, whilst acknowledging heterogeneity in presentation and noting this as key? It needs to be absolutely clear what “condition” is been referred to before we move on to determining how best to screen for it. Later in the article, the authors refer to a variety of different study populations as having “ARBI” including those in Brown et al. and Wester et al., but these are described differently by their respective authors. Perhaps the authors could discuss some of these studies and the samples studied in the introduction as examples of populations with ARBI according to their definition?
RESPONSE: As noted above, we have reorganised the opening paragraphs of the Introduction. This now establishes that alongside the use of variant terms, that as umbrella terms, they have also been used to both encompass and exclude WKS. We have added the following text as clarification about the focus of the scoping review (pg 3, end of 1st para): "For the purposes of this scoping review, we have used the term Alcohol-Related Cognitive Impairment (ARCI) and applied it in its broadest sense. We have included articles following either application of the terminology, for example, by recognising that ARD and ARCI may be used to refer to the same suspected condition, and that umbrella terms such as ARBD may either encompass or exclude WKS."
METHODS
R2: Why was the protocol not registered in advanced if it was developed prior to conducting the review? This seems very strange and needs clarifying.
RESPONSE: At the time of developing the protocol, we were aware of PROSPERO, the international prospective register of systematic reviews. We planned to register the protocol with PROSPERO but it does not accept scoping reviews. We were not aware of other free options for prospective registration at the time of developing the protocol. We now understand that paid options were available or free open science platforms.
INCLUSION CRITERIA
R2: The objectives stated here differ slightly from those stated at the end of the introduction? There is some inconsistency here.
RESPONSE: We have checked the text for consistency between the end of the Introduction and the Inclusion criteria. We have amended the text to make it clearer that there were different selection criteria applied in respect of the two objectives for the review.
R2: Were reviews included? Please clarify
RESPONSE: Reviews were not included and we have clarified that original, primary research were eligible.
R2: Was there a language restriction? Please clarify
RESPONSE: We have made it clear that only studies published in English were eligible.
R2: The authors state they excluded samples “where they included mixed samples of drug and alcohol users.” Did this include samples will use both alcohol and drugs simultaneously? Please clarify. Polysubstance misuse is common and among this group.
RESPONSE: We have added a paragraph about the exclusion of studies at the start of the results section. We acknowledge that polysubstance use is common among the patient group and did not exclude samples reporting polysubstance use. As we did not include explicit inclusion criteria in relation to other substance use disorders, we have added the following text to clarify what types of studies were excluded (pg 7; 4th para): "Twelve studies were considered ‘near misses’ and judged to have narrowly failed to meet the inclusion criteria in respect of the review’s secondary objective as the samples included patients with diagnoses of dependence on substances other than alcohol. We agreed post hoc to exclude these studies where the sample included patients with a primary diagnosis (based on DSM or other recognised criteria) of abuse or dependence on a substance other than alcohol." We have acknowledged that this may be a limitation in the Discussion (pg 20, 2nd para of Limitations).
SEARCHING FOR AND SELECTING RELEVANT STUDIES
R2: This process of searching for and selecting articles seems scientifically valid and thorough. It is great that the authors used three reviewers to independently screen for potential studies at the full text level. At the title and abstract screening level, did the authors record the level of consistency between the two reviewers when screening the initial 20% of articles? It would be good to have some indication of interrater reliability.
RESPONSE: Interrater reliability was not recorded. Because of the wide use of terminology in the field it was difficult on occasion to discern from the titles/abstracts whether a study contained relevant information or not, so a level of disagreement was expected in the dual screening process. The discussions about disagreements were therefore used to develop confidence in the selection process conducted by the single reviewer. The following text has been added (pg 6, 2nd para): "Interrater reliability was not recorded as a level of disagreement was anticipated based on the wide use of terminology in the field. Discrepancies in study selection were discussed and resolved and used to develop confidence in the screening of the remaining titles and abstracts which was carried out by a single reviewer (LJ)."
RESULTS
R2: In the first paragraph of this section, the authors state that “20 records were kept and comprised the final set of included studies in the review”, but figure 1 shows only 19 studies were kept. Please clarify which is correct.
RESPONSE: The correct number of included studies is 19. The flowchart has been corrected for the errors that have crept into the final number of included studies and reasons for full-text exclusions.
R2: The authors state that only one study (32) included patients with a diagnosis of ARBI. However, our study (19; see below) included participants with a diagnosis of alcohol related brain damage, which the authors appear to include in the definition of ARBI. Please clarify whether this is because you only included studies that diagnose participants according to the ARD criteria.
RESPONSE: We have clarified in the text that this description applies to the six studies that were descriptive reports. Reference 19 is not referred to within this set of studies and is reported in the sentences preceding as examining the diagnostic criteria for ARBI (now referred to as ARCI).
R2: Page 14: can the authors please provide a brief narrative summary of the results from the quality assessment process? I think it’s fine to include the full table of outcomes in supplemental information, but the readers need to have some indication of what the outcomes were here for ease of interpretation. A simple sentence or two stating what percentage of studies met each of the criteria in the assessment would suffice.
RESPONSE: A short paragraph has been added about quality assessment (pg 14, 1st para): "All seven studies provided adequate descriptions of the included patient samples, but exclusion based on comorbid or confounding conditions was not clear or not reported in two studies (20, 27). Further, effect sizes were only reported in two of six studies where this was deemed appropriate (19, 31). As shown in Table 4, studies typically included small to moderate sample sizes. Four studies (19, 20, 28, 34) reported clearly that they had adjusted for the risk of type 1 error in their analyses."
DISCUSSION
R2: First paragraph: the authors provide a clear and succinct summary of the findings here and make some important inferences regarding the lack of research in this area despite calls for validation of diagnostic criteria.
RESPONSE: Thank you for your comment. No response required.
R2: Third paragraph: the varied mechanisms underlying ARBI is an important point here. I think we have a good enough understanding of the mechanisms involved to know that they are multiple and varied. As a corollary, we shouldn’t expect there to be strict diagnostic/ screening criteria that apply to every case of ARBI/ARBD/ARNI. I think the authors need to make more of a point of this and, although we need to better test existing and new criteria and cut-off scores for these, we should recognise that there will always be some degree of clinical judgement involved in making this diagnosis. It seemed like the complexity diagnosis and heterogeneity in presentation is not fully appreciated here and could be expanded upon.
RESPONSE: We have added the additional considerations to the Discussion (pg 19, 2nd para): "However, evaluation of the practical application of new or existing ARCI criteria, either through formal research or routine monitoring, is needed to confirm that they have utility in clinical practice and that healthcare professionals do not face barriers to their use. Further, patients with ARCI report experiencing a ‘double stigma’ within healthcare settings (10, 40) and negative attitudes towards people with problems with alcohol or other substances among healthcare professionals are known to undermine access to diagnosis, treatment, and successful health outcomes (41, 42)."
R2: The conclusions derived are appropriate and important.
RESPONSE: Thank you for your comment. No response required.
10.1371/journal.pone.0280749.r003

Decision Letter 1
Manning
Victoria
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
29 Aug 2022
PONE-D-22-01818R1Informing the development of diagnostic criteria for differential diagnosis of alcohol-related brain injury (ARBI) among heavy drinkers: a systematic scoping reviewPLOS ONE
Dear Dr Jones,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. Thank you for carefully addressing the reviewers comments -the paper is much improved. We invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the final remaining point raised during the second review.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 13 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
A/Prof Victoria Manning
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
I agree with reviewer 1 that the paper would be strengthened with the addition of just a few sentences explaining how and why there were adaptations to the criteria.
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the opportunity to review this revised manuscript and I thank the authors for addressing the comments with some excellent additions to the manuscript.
I have some minor comments that the authors and editor may wish to consider prior to publication.
Discussion
I recognise this is a challenging point to address so it may not feasible, however, I still think the discussion could benefit from some elaboration on the available criteria and any emerging themes or issues from the included studies to help advance our thinking and maybe guide some next steps. For instance, a few of the included studies made adaptions to existing criteria, so what were these adaptions? Where they similar or not? Why did these authors feel the need to made such adaptions?
Another example worth raising is highlighting how disparate the criteria are vs rates of abstinence reported in the screening studies. Your description of the abstinence rates in the results is very illuminating because it shows many studies don’t adhere to the criteria, if indeed they even report abstinence rates in the first place! This is a worthy theme regarding any future criteria for clinicians and researchers to think about given the limitations in existing research and the practicalities of having patients maintain abstinence long enough to this meet criterion.
Minor:
As a reader there are a lot of abbreviations to keep track of and this risks adding to the already slightly confusing nature of all the different terms for alcohol related cognitive impairment. I would suggest considering a quick review of which abbreviations are absolutely necessary and which ones would read better in full. I realise this might add to the word count but I think for ease of reading it would be worthwhile.
Results (page 15): I was a little lost with the revised sentence following mention of Table S4 referring to “The tool from the review by Heirene…”. I was trying to understand “what tool” so maybe this paragraph just needs a slight restructure or framing for the reader to link the previous sentence with the next.
Reviewer #2: The authors have appropriately revised their manuscript according to the comments provided. I have no further concerns.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: James R. Gooden
Reviewer #2: Yes: Robert Heirene
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0280749.r004

Author response to Decision Letter 1
9 Dec 2022
We have responded to the specific reviewer and editor comments in our Response to Reviewer attachment.
10.1371/journal.pone.0280749.r005

Decision Letter 2
Manning
Victoria
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
8 Jan 2023
Informing the development of diagnostic criteria for differential diagnosis of alcohol-related cognitive impairment (ARCI) among heavy drinkers: a systematic scoping review
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Victoria Manning
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Thank you for your considered response to the issues and comments raised in the peer-review process. I think the review now provides a much more contextualised and nuanced account of what has been established to date and remaining knowledge gaps in relation to screening tools for alcohol-related cognitive impairment, and as a result it makes a useful contribution to the literature.
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0280749.r006

Acceptance letter
Manning
Victoria
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
16 Jan 2023
PONE-D-22-01818R2
Informing the development of diagnostic criteria for differential diagnosis of alcohol-related cognitive impairment (ARCI) among heavy drinkers: a systematic scoping review
Dear Dr. Jones:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Victoria Manning
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE