Development, implementation, and evaluation of a novel fellowship coaching program
Abstract
Background
Coaching for professional development contributes to improved performance, personal satisfaction, and well-being. Although coaching programs have been widely introduced at the undergraduate medical education level and in certain residency programs, coaching programs targeting the unique experiences of fellows are less well described. Given high rates of burnout, pulmonary and critical care medicine (PCCM) fellows may benefit from professional development coaching.
Objective
To design, implement, and evaluate an individual coaching program for PCCM fellows.
Methods
Alumni surveys and trainee and faculty focus groups identified key needs of a coaching program. Coaches received salary support and were trained in competencies including positive psychology, learner engagement, and communication. Starting in 2019, 3 coaches were assigned 7 fellows each, spanning the 3 Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) years. The program was evaluated through ACGME surveys, Likert scale–based end-of-year surveys, and qualitative analysis of fellows’ written feedback.
Results
Coaching was associated with improved overall training program satisfaction (ACGME survey overall satisfaction [survey range 1–5, with 5 highest] was 4.2, 3.9, and 4.3 in the 3 years preintervention, and 4.6, 4.6, and 4.6 in the 3 years postintervention). Compliant responses in the ACGME survey domain of Evaluation increased above our program benchmark of 90% from a baseline of 75%. Fellow well-being demonstrated slight improvements through the evaluation period (2018-2022). Fellows rated the coaching program highly, especially in support and well-being, feedback, and goal-setting. Only 66% reported a direct impact on choosing a specific career path.
Conclusions
Implementation of this fellowship coaching program was associated with improvements in fellows’ satisfaction with the training experience, evaluation and feedback, career development, and well-being, despite the added challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic. Future directions include standardizing coaching frameworks, exploring long-term impacts on career trajectories, and evaluating coaches’ satisfaction with the program.

Introduction
New pulmonary and critical care medicine (PCCM) fellows enter a demanding clinical environment with high burnout risk, increasing career obligations, and a need for time-sensitive career decisions. Professional development coaching has been adapted to medical education to increase well-being and improve technical and nontechnical skills. Although more is known about coaching medical students, its role in graduate medical education is gaining recognition for improving performance, satisfaction, and well-being.
Given that PCCM has the highest risk of burnout among specialties—51% of fellows reporting burnout or depressive symptoms—strategies to support fellows in developing resilience, career satisfaction, and self-efficacy are critical. Coaching adds to traditional mentorship by focusing on skill development through observations, goal-setting, feedback, and suggestions for performance improvement. Studies in residency programs have shown that coaching enhances reflection, coping and relational skills, and feedback conversations.
Although nearly all PCCM fellows have either assigned or acquired research and project mentors during training, structured coaching programs targeting PCCM fellows are less well described. To address this gap, we report on the development, implementation, and multiyear longitudinal evaluation of a novel coaching program directed at PCCM fellows at our institution.

Methods

Conceptual model of the coaching program
The University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) PCCM fellowship program focuses on training physicians for careers in research, medical education, or other career paths, and includes 21 Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) learners. Using data from a PCCM fellowship alumni survey and focus groups with fellows and faculty, a needs assessment was performed to ascertain the priorities of the coaching program. We designed an individual coaching program for our PCCM fellowship program based on specific objectives identified in the needs assessment, including improvement in overall program satisfaction, enhanced fellow well-being, assistance in the identification of mentors, and satisfaction with feedback to promote goal-setting, self-efficacy, autonomy, and clinical performance. Each coaching activity was mapped to an unaddressed need and expected outcome (Table 1). Using available literature and local expertise from within the medical school faculty, a coaching job description was developed, which included expectations for training, meeting cadence, and a nonevaluative, confidential relationship.
Coaching mechanisms of action.
Context	Mechanisms	Expected result	 	Low program satisfaction	1:1 meetings, personal connection, deep knowledge of learner, guided reflection, shape vision, positive psychology	Higher satisfaction with training, appreciation of individualized path, clearer personal vision	 	Time pressure to find mentor, uncertainty about options and skills needed	Deliver array of options/targeted opportunities informed by personal priorities, goals around choice exploration	Satisfaction with career choice, absence of FOMO, higher motivation to continue training	 	Inadequate quality and quantity of feedback	Direct observation, process/solicit feedback from others and deliver as growth-promoting, develop SMART goals	Greater satisfaction/utility of feedback, improved self-efficacy, skills of life-long learning	 	Stress, feeling unsupported, lack of well-being	Trust/familiarity/comfort, level hierarchy, knowledgeable of resources available, goals around self-regulation	Connection to resources, greater sense of support and well-being, less burnout	 	Low self-efficacy with skills/procedures	Direct observation, trust, reveal blind spots, encouragement, metacognition, create opportunity, provide scaffolding	Procedure competency, improved self-efficacy, satisfaction with training
Our needs assessment involved semi-structured surveys of alumni, focus groups with recent graduates and current fellows, and expert input from program leadership. Emergent themes revealed low program satisfaction, time pressure to find mentors, inadequate feedback, stress, and low self-efficacy with skills. We developed discrete actions of the coaching program as mechanisms to target these needs and included the intended downstream outcome.
Abbreviations: FOMO, fear of missing out on an opportunity or experience; SMART, Specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, time-bound.

Program design
Our needs assessment highlighted several areas of focus, and we used a realist approach to consider how coaching might address specific program deficiencies perceived by fellows (Table 1). For example, one-on-one meetings using guided reflection, career vision planning, and establishing goals based on personal priorities aimed to improve overall program satisfaction. Direct observation, feedback, and goal-setting strategies targeted evaluation concerns. Fellow well-being could be enhanced through the development of a trusted coaching relationship, including a leveled hierarchy, a nonevaluative relationship, and the guarantee of follow-up.

Funding and recruitment for the coaching program
Coaches were recruited through an open search of the PCCM faculty with a focus on a passion for training fellows. We designed the program to include 3 coaches, each working with 7 fellows across the 3 ACGME years. Given the significant time commitment required of each coach, implementation of the coaching program included salary support (10% full-time equivalent [FTE]) from a Nina Ireland Program in Lung Health grant and an agreement with UCSF divisional and departmental leadership.

Training and faculty development for the coaching program
Coach training was designed and delivered by the fellowship leadership team and was informed by previously described coaching competencies. Training included two 90-minute sessions focused on coaching practice, positive psychology, self-determination theory, learner engagement, and self-reflection, as well as other strategies and resources to support fellows. Coaches also completed a UCSF-sponsored half-day communication skills and feedback course. Thereafter, monthly faculty development sessions provided training in a range of topics, including communication skills, giving and receiving feedback, bias, and allyship. Coach development materials also included resources for meetings and a calendar highlighting milestones throughout fellowship time. Each coach also created an individual coach development plan that was updated annually, and coaches received structured feedback from learners at the end of each academic year.

Content addressed by the coaching program
Coaches met with fellows at least once monthly throughout the year. Additional meetings occurred at the discretion of the fellow, coach, or program leadership. Meetings were guided by a calendar designed around training milestones for the fellowship program. The specific milestones related to unique program goals (Table S1). Sessions early in the first year emphasized relationship building, goal setting, expectation alignment, and positive-psychology tools such as strength finding, while also covering fellowship transition, work-life integration, mentor selection, and resource navigation. Mid-year check-ins for first-year fellows reviewed clinical competency progress and any specific challenges that arose. At the end of the first year, meetings ensured a successful transition to protected research time, mapping out fellows’ scholarly interests and mentorship plan. Coaches and fellows were free to change meeting agendas based on individual needs. The coaching program was structured such that coaches do not provide clinical evaluations of their fellows to program leaders, and the coach-fellow relationship included the expectation of confidentiality.

Program evaluation outcomes
The primary outcomes of interest for this project included overall program satisfaction, fellow well-being, and compliant responses in the category of Evaluation, which includes satisfaction with feedback, as assessed on the annual ACGME surveys. Fellows (n = 45) also completed Likert scale and written response surveys annually, summarized in Figure 1. Survey items were developed by a panel of educational leaders in the PCCM fellowship who met iteratively to consider the potential mechanisms through which coaching might impact fellows, based on published literature and expert opinion. Table 1 summarizes the elements considered in survey development. The survey questions were revised until group consensus was reached. Three independent reviewers analyzed qualitative survey responses until consensus was reached regarding the emergent themes. This protocol was reviewed by our institutional review board and deemed exempt from the Committee on Human Research Review.
Fellow evaluations of the coaching program. Survey responses from fellows (n = 45) collected at the end of each academic year.

Results

ACGME survey outcomes
Following program implementation, annual ACGME survey data showed that coaching was associated with improvement in overall training program satisfaction (ACGME survey overall satisfaction [survey range 1–5, with 5 highest] was 4.2, 3.9, and 4.3 in the 3 years preintervention, and 4.6, 4.6, and 4.6 in the 3 years postintervention). ACGME survey domains deliberately targeted by coaching, such as evaluation and resources, demonstrated similar upward trends, whereas unrelated areas, such as work hours or patient safety, were not changed by coaching (Figure 2). More specifically, satisfaction with feedback rose after the implementation of the coaching program. The Evaluation domain of the ACGME survey contains items focused on fellow perceptions of feedback and opportunities for evaluation. Compliant responses were consistently <80% before the coaching program and rose to >90%, our internal benchmark for the program, after the coaching intervention (Figure 2). Note that specific item content on the ACGME survey is not available for direct comparison and specific items likely changed to some extent over the study period.
Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) survey data by domain over time. Domains of the ACGME survey that incorporate fellows’ experience in the program, as well as satisfaction with feedback and training, improved as compared to our internal benchmark of 90% compliant responses following the implementation of individual coaching at the end of academic year (AY) 2018-2019 (box). Survey domains that included fewer questions related to program factors addressed by coaching, such as work hours and patient safety, did not change following the launch of the coaching program.
ACGME well-being survey data remained steady, with numerical increases in the percentage of fellows answering “strongly agree” to items related to domains of well-being, when comparing the year prior to the launch of the coaching program through the subsequent 3 years. In the academic years 2018-2019 through 2021-2022, the percentage of fellows responding “strongly agree” to survey items favoring well-being was 44% in 2018-2019, 45% in 2019-2020, 49% in 2020-2021, and 50% in 2021-2022. Prior to 2018, the ACGME well-being survey was either not administered or had a different structure, making direct comparisons to earlier years more difficult.

Internal survey findings
All respondents described the coaching relationship as supportive and inclusive; 98% felt heard, and 96% found their coaches accessible when needed. Most fellows felt satisfied with the coaching program and recognized its value (89%). Only 48% of fellows wanted additional meeting time. While 100% of fellows felt coaches supported their career goals, only 66% reported a direct impact of coaching on choosing a career path. Importantly, 91% of fellows agreed or strongly agreed that their coach helped them set goals that were important to them as individuals, and 82% of fellows agreed or strongly agreed that their coach helped them achieve their goals. Not all areas targeted by coaching showed the same improvement. Nearly one-quarter of fellows did not think coaching improved their ability to self-evaluate, though most fellows received actionable feedback on professional development and clinical performance (94% and 84%, respectively).
Qualitative comments consistently underscored fellow appreciation of the impartial, nonevaluative nature of the coaching relationship, as the neutrality allowed for open and honest discussion that built a trusting mentoring relationship. Furthermore, the longitudinal continuity provided a consistent forum for personalized goal-setting. Finally, fellows enjoyed having a single, accessible point of contact who understands the institution and is knowledgeable about available resources.

Discussion
This evaluation demonstrates that a deliberately structured, nonevaluative coaching model can enhance PCCM fellows’ training experience. We observed improvement in targeted domains, such as overall satisfaction and perceptions of evaluation and feedback, while unrelated domains, such as work hours or patient safety, remained stable. The launch of the coaching program occurred in the context of other program changes over the course of several years; however, there were no other program changes of this magnitude in the reported time frame. Based on the design of the program and the specific areas targeted by coaching alone, we propose that most of the observed changes reported here were attributable to the coaching intervention.
Several features likely underpin the effectiveness of coaching. First, coaches occupy a nonevaluative, confidential role that promotes psychological safety, which was highlighted repeatedly in fellows’ comments and was reflected in ACGME and end-of-year surveys. The supportive environment, the longitudinal relationship, and the milestone-based calendar agenda allowed for the consistent provision of feedback. The program also provided an opportunity for reflection on multiyear personal and career goal-setting as trainees progressed through fellowship.
The coaching program was not universally transformative across the domains that were predicted to be affected. A sizable minority (24%) of fellows did not feel more adept at self-evaluation, indicating that effective feedback and coach-led reflection did not always translate into self-evaluation capabilities. Furthermore, only two-thirds of fellows perceived a direct influence of coaching on selecting a career path. This may be because many trainees enter fellowship with predetermined trajectories, or alternatively, big-picture career decisions may go beyond the scope of a coach at this stage of training. It is possible that coaching is either less effective in career decision making or that fellows prefer to seek this guidance from other mentors. Last, the nearly even split between fellows satisfied with monthly meetings and those wanting more contact indicates the current cadence is acceptable but could be flexibly augmented for trainees who desire more support.
There are limitations to the program evaluation. First, our primary ACGME survey metric relies on self-reported survey data that are available only as aggregate, domain-level percentages without statistical consideration of variability within a given year. Aggregate data contain both repeated and nonrepeated measures of across respondents. The primary data may also be susceptible to response bias. Furthermore, the exact wording of survey questions is not publicly available and most likely changed over time. Second, coaching interactions were intentionally flexible, so variability in the frequency and nature of coaching interactions may have contributed to differing experiences among fellows. Third, other program changes implemented concurrently (changes in structured didactic series, adjustments to specific schedules) may introduce confounding variables; however, no large-scale curricular changes were made during the study period. Fourth, the program and evaluation occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic, which may have contributed to stress and burnout. Because of the potentially confounding effects of the pandemic on well-being, conclusions about the impact of the coaching program on burnout and well-being are more limited. In addition, the specific questions on the ACGME well-being survey changed over the reported period, further limiting potential conclusions. We did not observe a decrease in fellow well-being, as assessed by the proportion of fellows indicating “strongly agree” to well-being–related survey items, during the pandemic as might have been expected, but further studies would be required to draw definitive conclusions about the relationship between coaching and well-being. Finally, we did not capture coaches’ perceptions of the program or motivations for taking on the role; the 10% FTE salary support may limit external generalizability, but the impact of this support on the individuals’ decisions to take on the coach role was not assessed.
Despite these limitations, longitudinal coaching relationships for PCCM fellows added measurable value in a high-intensity specialty, particularly in program satisfaction, evaluation and feedback, and goal-setting. Future improvements to the coaching program might include additional standardization of the coaching framework for meeting frequency and content, combined with enhanced resources for coaches to provide tailored guidance regarding career planning. Additional improvements could include alternative approaches for coaches to promote fellows’ self-efficacy. Future evaluation of the coaching program will include long-term impacts of coaching on career trajectories, satisfaction, and well-being, as well as assessment of coaches’ satisfaction with the program and motivations.

Supplementary Material

Author contributions
Conception and design: J.F. and L.S. Analysis and interpretation: J.F., L.S., K.V., and J.L. Drafting manuscript for important intellectual content: J.F., L.S., K.V., and J.L.

Supplementary material
Supplementary material is available at ATS Scholar online.

Conflicts of interest
Please see the ICMJE disclosure forms, which have been provided as supplementary material.

Artificial intelligence disclaimer
No artificial intelligence tools were used in writing this manuscript.

References
The leader as coach
What do we know about coaching in medical education? A literature review
Positive psychological coaching tools and techniques: a systematic review and classification
A definition for coaching in medical education
Future research in feedback: how to use feedback and coaching conversations in a way that supports development of the individual as a self-directed learner and resilient professional
A national survey of burnout and depression among fellows training in pulmonary and critical care medicine: a special report by the Association of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Program Directors
Promoting success: a professional development coaching program for interns in medicine
Professional development coaching for residents: results of a 3-year positive psychology coaching intervention
The R2C2 model in residency education: how does it foster coaching and promote feedback use?
It’s all about the trust and building a foundation”: evaluation of a longitudinal medical student coaching program
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on internal medicine training in the United States: results from a national survey