Tirzepatide: a novel therapeutic approach for Alzheimer’s disease
Tirzepatide (TRZ) is a dual agonist of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) receptors that were recently approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and obesity. Of note is that T2D and obesity, by inducing peripheral low-grade inflammation and oxidative stress, provoke the development of central neuroinflammation and oxidative stress. Together, T2D and obesity are regarded as potential risk factors implicated in the development and progression of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), which is the most common neurodegenerative disease and represents the most typical cause of dementia. Hence, targeting low-grade inflammation and oxidative stress in T2D and obesity by TRZ may reduce AD neuropathology. In addition, TRZ can inhibit the production of amyloid beta (Aβ) and associated neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, and neuronal apoptosis. However, the underlying neuroprotective mechanism of TRZ against AD is not entirely explained. Consequently, this mini-review aims to discuss the possible molecular mechanism of TRZ in AD.

Introduction
Tirzepatide (TRZ) is an analog of the gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) and acts as a dual agonist for glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and GIP receptors (Rhea et al.). Activation of GIP/GLP-1 results in systemic beneficial effects by modulating adipose tissue function and improvement of insulin sensitivity (Perovic et al.) by inhibiting the release of glucagon hormone from pancreatic α cells and activating the release of insulin from pancreatic β cells (Forzano et al.) (Fig. 1). TRZ activates GIP receptors more than GLP-1 receptors, leading to weight loss and activating the release of cytoprotective adiponectin (Willard et al.). TRZ was approved in 2022 for the treatment of T2D and obesity, mainly in patients with cardio-metabolic disorders (Boutari et al.). TRZ is more effective than GLP-1 receptor agonists such as dulaglutide in managing obesity and T2D (Powell and Taylor). Furthermore, TRZ has diverse pleiotropic effects, such as anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and anti-atherosclerotic effects, thereby decreasing cardiovascular complications (Taktaz et al.).
Mechanism of action of TRZ
TRZ is given by subcutaneous route only once per week, has a long half-life, and crosses BBB, leading to the induction of a satiety center in the hypothalamus (Boer et al.). Extended use of TRZ is associated with the development of gastrointestinal adverse effects such as nausea, dyspepsia, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea or constipation, and hypoglycemia. The rate for the development of adverse effects is correlated with the high dosage of TRZ (Jensen et al.). The effective therapeutic dose of TRZ is 0.25 mg, though the toxic dose is > 10 mg. Therefore, TRZ has a good therapeutic window with minimal toxicity (Min and Bain). TRZ is contraindicated in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type 2 and medullary thyroid cancer (Krauss et al.).
Interestingly, GLP-1 and GIP receptors are widely expressed in the central nervous system (CNS), and insulin signaling regulates synaptic and cognitive functions (Zhang et al.). It has been shown that dysregulation of the expression of GLP-1 and GIP receptors and impairment of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) are implicated in the development and progression of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Talbot et al.). Of note, AD-related pathologies prompt the activation of microglia and the release of pro-inflammatory/inflammatory cytokines, which inhibit insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) (Zheng and Wang). Consequently, dysregulation of brain insulin signaling is implicated in the development of neurodegeneration, cognitive impairment, and AD. Findings from preclinical and postmortem studies highlighted that brain insulin signaling is dysregulated in AD mouse and human brains (Griffith et al.). Dysregulation of brain IRS-1 contributes to developing brain insulin resistance (BIR), a hallmark of AD and other neurodegenerative diseases (Craft et al.).
Furthermore, GLP-1 and GIP signaling, which regulate insulin signaling, are dysregulated in AD (Nowell et al.). Recently, activating brain GLP-1/GIP receptors or using analogs of these hormones can reduce AD neuropathology (Nowell et al.). Also, findings from different studies confirmed that TRZ mitigates AD neuropathology (Craft et al.; Talbot). In addition, T2D and obesity are considered potential risk factors in the development of AD (Pugazhenthi et al.). Thus, TRZ may mitigate the cardio metabolic profile in T2D and obesity by alleviating AD neuropathology. However, the underlying neuroprotective mechanism of TRZ against AD is not entirely explained. Hence, this mini-review aims to discuss the probable neuroprotective molecular effect of TRZ in the management of AD.

Pathogenesis of AD
AD is the most common neurodegenerative disease and represents the most typical cause of dementia (Al-Kuraishy et al.). AD is caused by the progressive accumulation of extracellular amyloid beta (Aβ) peptide and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) (Al-Kuraishy et al.; Alrouji et al.). Aβ is produced from amyloid precursor protein (APP) by α, β and γ secretase that regulates neurotransmitter release from presynaptic neurons (Ali et al.). APP is processed by two main pathways including amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic pathways. In the amyloidogenic pathway, APP via β and γ secretases is converted to the neurotoxic Aβ which promote the formation of amyloid plaque. However, in the non-amyloidogenic pathway, APP via α secretase is converted to the soluble APP alpha (sAPP α) which has a neuroprotective effect by reducing the accumulation of neurotoxic Aβ and the formation of amyloid plaque (Pradeepkiran et al.). Furthermore, Aβ aggregates increase the hyperphosphorylation of tau by mediating the activation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5). Caspases are cysteine aspartate proteases that directly cleaved APP during apoptosis and lead to the formation of elevated Aβ. An increase in the interaction between tau protein and Aβ was found to be associated with a damaged neuronal condition that could cause cognitive deficits in AD patients (Pradeepkiran et al.). Interestingly, γ-secretase is mainly mediating the interaction between Aβ and tau protein. It has been shown that γ-secretase modulators such as ibuprofen inhibit tau protein hyperphosphorylation (Lanzillotta et al.).
Importantly, Aβ is eliminated from the brain across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) into the systemic circulation when it metabolized by the liver and excreted by kidney (Al-Kuraishy et al.; Alsubaie et al.; Ali et al.). In addition, Aβ is eliminated by cellular proteostasis and neuronal autophagy (Barmaki et al.). Furthermore, Aβ is degraded by brain enzymes neprilysin (NEP) and insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) (Kato et al.). In this state, mutations of the APP gene augment the assembly of aberrant insoluble Aβ, leading to the formation of amyloid plaque (Tomiyama and Shimada). Moreover, dysregulation of tau protein phosphorylation, which regulates axonal transport and neuronal stability, is implicated in the pathogenesis of AD by inducing the formation of NFTs (Tomiyama and Shimada).
Of note, genetic factors such as mutations in APP and presenilin-1 (PSN-1) genes are intricate in the development of early-onset AD, also called familial AD (Ayodele et al.). However, sporadic AD, which forms 95% of AD, is caused by environmental factors and is involved in developing late-onset AD (Arnsten et al.). Mainly, familial AD is caused by the overproduction of Aβ (Ayodele et al.), though sporadic AD is caused by defective clearance of Aβ (Arnsten et al.).
These neuropathological changes initiate microglia activation, neuroinflammation, progressive neuronal apoptosis, synaptic dysfunction, impairment of cholinergic neurotransmission, synaptic dysfunction, and the development of cognitive decline in AD (Chen et al.) (Fig. 2).
Pathophysiology of AD

The neuroprotective effect of TRZ in AD
Neuroinflammation and oxidative stress are the potential hallmarks of AD neuropathology. Notably, Aβ-induced neuroinflammation and oxidative stress are induced by activating inflammatory signaling pathways such as NLRP3 inflammasome and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) (Kim et al.; Yang et al.). A preclinical study found that TRZ attenuates high-fat diet-induced cognitive impairment in mice by inhibiting the expression of NLRP3 inflammasome (Ma et al.). Also, intra-peritoneal administration of TRZ inhibits the expression of amyloid plaque and associated neuronal apoptosis in transgenic mice. The regulation of neuronal glucose transporter, neuronal mitochondrial function, and insulin sensitivity in the brain mediates this effect. In addition, TRZ up-regulates many enzymes involved in the improvement of neuronal glucose metabolism such as glucose-6 phosphatase, hexokinase, and phosphofructokinase (Craft et al.). Guo et al. (Guo et al.) confirmed that TRZ mitigates memory and learning impairment by reducing BIR and Aβ accumulation in the hippocampus of diabetic rats. Besides, TRZ improves neurogenesis, neurodegeneration, neuronal apoptosis, and neuronal IR in the SHSY5Y cell line (Fontanella et al.). TRZ has a neuroprotective effect against high-fat diet-induced cognitive impairment in mice. The exact impact of TRZ against the development of cognitive decline is related to the inhibition of microglial activation, neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, and BIR (Ma et al.).
Inversely, findings from a preclinical study illustrated that GLP-1 agonist semaglutide and TRZ did not ameliorate cognitive deficits in transgenic mice (Forny Germano et al.). In addition, neither TRZ nor semaglutide reduced hippocampal amyloid load and associated neurodegeneration in transgenic mice. However, the ideal-induced neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation were not identical to the other AD models. In addition, the short duration of the study (4–5 weeks) and low effective doses of TRZ and semaglutide may limit the neuroprotective effects of these agents in AD models. In addition, this study did not evaluate brain size, rate of neurodegeneration, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction (Forny Germano et al.). Hence, this single experimental study may not be valuable in determining the therapeutic efficacy of TRZ or semaglutide.
These findings emphasized that TRZ can alleviate AD neuropathology either directly by inhibiting Aβ-induced neurodegeneration and associated neuroinflammation and oxidative stress or indirectly by reducing BIR. Moreover, TRZ can act peripherally to mitigate the detrimental effects of T2D and obesity on the development and progression of AD.

TRZ attenuates obesity-induced AD
Obesity and related cardio-metabolic disorders are associated with the development of AD (Flores-Cordero et al.). In addition, obesity-induced oxidative stress, inflammation, and peripheral IR aggravate the development and progression of AD. It has been shown that adiposity induces the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome, which activates the synthesis and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β and IL-18 through induction of peripheral IR or by activating neuroinflammatory cascades trigger AD neuropathology (Litwiniuk et al.).
Furthermore, dysregulation of adipocytokines, such as leptin, which has a neuroprotective effect against neurodegeneration, is implicated in AD pathogenesis (Bayhaghi). Numerous studies designated that low plasma leptin level was associated with cognitive impairment and AD development (McGuire and Ishii; Albala et al.). It has been revealed that low plasma leptin level is reduced in AD patients compared to healthy controls (Johnston). However, a case-control study found that plasma leptin level was not correlated with cognitive impairment and the severity of AD (Ülker and Kenangil). Consequently, the link between obesity and AD may not be explained concerning the leptin plasma level. Moreover, developing leptin resistance in obesity triggers the dysregulation of hippocampal neurotransmitter release and synaptic plasticity, resulting in AD neuropathology (Thawabteh et al.). Low-grade inflammation due to exaggeration of inflammatory signaling pathways and increasing the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, mainly IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α induce brain leptin resistance in obesity (Paz-Filho et al.; Liu et al.). Because of that, brain leptin resistance could be the potential link between obesity and AD. Direct administration of leptin in AD brains improves hippocampal memory and learning in transgenic mice (McGregor and Harvey). Furthermore, brain leptin resistance promotes Aβ accumulation and tau protein hyper phosphorylation with subsequent deterioration of hippocampal synaptic plasticity (McGregor and Harvey). Maioli et al. (Maioli et al.) illustrated that dysregulation of brain leptin signaling rather than dysregulation of circulating leptin level is implicated in the pathogenesis of AD. Hence, visceral obesity and linked leptin resistance are involved in the pathogenesis of AD (Fig. 3).
The detrimental effects of obesity in the pathogenesis of AD
TRZ reduces of body weight by 20% and improves lipid profile in obese patients (Chavda et al.). A phase III clinical trial detected that once-weekly TRZ produced a dose-dependent effect in the sustained reduction of body weight of obese patients (Jastreboff et al.). Also, a multicenter, double-blind clinical trial demonstrated that once-weekly TRZ for 72 weeks at a dose of 10 mg and 15 mg was safe and well-tolerated compared to other incretin-based treatments for weight reduction (Jastreboff et al.). A systematic review and meta-analysis revealed that once-weekly TRZ was linked with few adverse effects compared to other anti-obesity drugs (Tan et al.). Moreover, the SURMOUNT-4 clinical trial in 2024 indicated that continued once-weekly TRZ sustained weight reduction in obese patients. However, withdrawal of TRZ therapy leads to a regain of lost body weight (Aronne et al.). Furthermore, a recent cohort study confirmed that TRZ was more effective than semaglutide for reducing body weight in obese patients (Rodriguez et al.). However, this study did not measure the confounding factors, and the rate of withdrawal due to adverse drug reactions was not evaluated that limit the study’s clinical efficacy.
The fundamental mechanism of TRZ in weight reduction is related to the dual activation of GIP and GLP-1 receptors. Diverse studies highlighted that simultaneous stimulation of GIP and GLP-1 receptors by agonists leads to more weight reduction than activation of either of these receptors in diet-induced obesity (Baggio and Drucker; Finan et al.). Thus, dual activation of GIP and GLP-1 receptors may have more significant metabolic enhancement effects than activating either. Nevertheless, activation of GIP and GLP-1 receptors did not significantly affect the energy expenditure in obese and diabetic patients (Bergmann et al.). In addition, preclinical findings highlighted that energy intake in animals treated with TRZ was not considerably different from that treated with semaglutide, signifying that weight reduction mechanism related to TRZ does not differ from that of semaglutide. Hence, other mechanisms are suggested for weight reduction in obesity. TRZ mainly activates GIP receptors more than GLP-1 receptors (Powell and Taylor). Thus, the weight loss mechanism from TRZ may be mediated by the activation of GIP receptors. It has been illustrated that GLP-1 receptors are compromised in obesity (Irwin and Flatt). Interestingly, in chronic hyperglycemia, IR, T2D, and obesity, the GIP signaling is impaired and not able to inhibit appetite and metabolic derangements (Bergmann et al.; Thondam et al.). Hence, restoring GIP signaling by TRZ can reduce body weight and improve the insulin sensitivity in obesity.
Concerning the role of TRZ in reducing the deleterious effects of obesity on the pathogenesis of AD, it has been demonstrated that TRZ can alleviate brain GIP signaling. GIP receptors have neuroprotective effects against AD neuropathology by inhibiting the formation and progression of amyloid plaques and linked neuroinflammation. Therefore, GIP agonists such as TRZ attenuate progressive neurodegeneration in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases (Roh and Choi; Ji et al.). Significantly, activation of GIP receptors alone may induce metabolic disorders (Bailey); hence, dual activation of GIP and GLP-1 receptors by TRZ effectively reduces body weight.
Moreover, similarly, TRZ attenuates oxidative stress and neuroinflammation in obesity (Ma et al.). In addition, TRZ can mitigate brain leptin resistance, which is the possible link between obesity and AD. A preclinical study found that TRZ-inducing weight loss regulates adipocytokines, including adiponectin and leptin, in obese mice (Samms et al.). By inducing the expression of adiponectin, TRZ regulates leptin sensitivity in obese T2D patients and animal models (Roh and Choi; Handy et al.; Rao et al.; Simental-Mendía et al.).

TRZ attenuates T2D-induced AD
T2D is considered a possible risk factor for the development of AD by inducing BIR and accompanying neuroinflammation and oxidative stress (Sebastião et al.; Craft). It has been shown that T2D and AD share common mechanistic pathways, such as IR, which deteriorate peripheral and central glucose metabolisms. Interestingly, AD is regarded as type 3 diabetes (T3D) due to dysregulation of brain insulin signaling and BIR development, which may be independent of peripheral IR (Sebastião et al.; Nguyen et al.; Craft et al.; Schiöth et al.). While both peripheral IR and BIR may involve dysregulated insulin signaling, the two conditions are not identical and not always interrelated. BIR is a distinct entity from that of peripheral insulin resistance. Though both can contribute to cognitive decline in general and contribute to AD, they likely do so through different pathways. BIR can include low levels of brain insulin as well as resistance at the receptor level and therefore would be better described as a deficiency in brain insulin action (Rhea et al.).
It has been suggested that exaggerated the expression of human islet amyloid polypeptide (hIAPP) in T2D is implicated in the pathogenesis of AD. Inhibition of the brain deposition of hIAPP by GLP-1 agonists and dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors can reduce the development of AD in T2D (Alrouji et al.). Moreover, low-grade inflammation and oxidative stress in T2D provoke AD development by inducing neuroinflammation and neuronal injury (Barone et al.). Moreover, T2D promotes the generation of neurotoxic advanced glycation end-products, which are implicated in the pathogenesis of AD (Xia et al.). In addition, T2D prohibits neuronal autophagy, which involves the elimination of Aβ, leading to the accumulation of Aβ and other misfolded proteins with subsequent exaggeration of AD neuropathology (Lai et al.; Cui et al.). These verdicts emphasized that T2D can induce the development of AD (Fig. 4).
The detrimental effects of T2D in the pathogenesis of AD
Hence, targeting peripheral alterations in T2D by TRZ may prevent AD development. A recent preclinical study confirmed that TRZ inhibits adipose tissue inflammation and associated peripheral IR by modulating the ERK signaling pathway and induction of M1-type macrophage apoptosis in obese mouse models (Xia et al.). It has been shown that TRZ inhibits the expression of amyloid plaque and associated neuronal apoptosis in transgenic mice by inhibiting the generation of ROS and the development of brain oxidative stress (Craft et al.). TRZ suppresses oxidative stress and associated inflammation by inhibiting IL-17 signaling in diabetic models (Yang et al.). Hence, TRZ seems to have a neuroprotective effect against T2D-induced oxidative stress and inflammation in AD.
Furthermore, TRZ can reduce the neurotoxic effects of advanced glycation end-products in the induction of the pathogenesis of AD. TRZ attenuates the generation of advanced glycation end-products by ameliorating chronic hyperglycemia in patients with chronic kidney disease (Caruso and Giorgino). TRZ regulates neuronal autophagy, which is highly dysregulated in AD and T2D. Defective autophagy could also link AD and T2D (Wilson et al.). Therefore, activation of cellular autophagy may reduce the pathogenesis of T2D and associated AD neuropathology. Findings from a preclinical study observed that TRZ attenuates diabetic-induced cardiac injury and the development of heart failure by activating cellular autophagy (Taktaz et al.). Similarly, TRZ reduces colistin-induced neurotoxicity by activating neuronal autophagy by modulating PI3 K/AKT/GSK3β in rat models (Hassan et al.). Thus, TRZ, by inhibiting oxidative stress, inflammation, advanced glycation end-products, and activating cellular autophagy, can attenuate the harmful effect of T2D on AD pathogenesis. Taken together, TRZ, by regulating insulin sensitivity and obesity profile, reduces the detrimental effects of T2D and obesity on AD development.

The molecular mechanism of TRZ in AD

Neuronal glucose metabolism
It has been shown that brain neuronal glucose metabolism is highly reduced in AD due to oxidative stress-induced damage of enzymes involved in neuronal glycolysis. Consequently, a reduction in ATP production triggers neurodegeneration, synaptic dysfunction, and the development of cognitive impairment in AD (Butterfield and Halliwell). It has been established that NFTs attenuate the uptake and metabolism of glucose by brain neurons in animal models (Huang et al.). Reduction of neuronal glucose metabolism reduces O-GlcNAcylation, which regulates mitochondrial function and leads to neuronal dysfunction and progression of AD neuropathology (Huang et al.; Dewanjee et al.). Interestingly, brain glucose transporters, mainly GLUT1, GLUT3, and GLUT4, are downregulated and induce progressive neurodegeneration in patients with AD (Dewanjee et al.).
Furthermore, TRZ improves brain neuronal glucose metabolism via activation of the GLP-1 receptor, which upregulates the expression of GLUT1, GLUT3, and GLUT4 by regulating the expression of the SORB1 gene which regulates insulin signaling (Chang et al.). GLP-1 receptor agonists are effective against AD by reducing neuroinflammation and oxidative stress, neurotrophic effects, decreasing Aβ deposition and tau hyperphosphorylation in AD models (Du et al.). A placebo-controlled, double-blind, phase II clinical trial (the ELAD trial) testing liraglutide in over 200 patients with mild cognitive impairments/AD for 1 year showed that neuronal loss was reduced by the drug (Colin et al.; Edison et al.).
As well, TRZ mitigates BIR by regulating the expression of phosphoinositol triphosphate (PI3 K/AKT) and glycogen synthase kinase three beta (GSK3β) (Guo et al.). It has been established that TRZ inhibits Aβ-induced BIR and associated synaptic dysfunction, memory dysfunction, and cognitive impairment by restoring the PI3 K/AKT/GSK3β signaling pathway in the AD mouse model (Guo et al.). Consistently, many experimental studies revealed that a dual GIP/GLP-1 receptor agonist DA4-JC has a neuroprotective effect against AD neuropathology by regulating the PI3 K/AKT/GSK3β signaling pathway in AD mouse model (Maskery et al.; Cai et al.). PI3 K/AKT is a conserved signaling pathway that regulates signal transduction and many biological processes, such as neuronal proliferation, differentiation, and metabolism. PI3 K/AKT is deregulated in AD due to Aβ and tau protein-induced neurotoxicity (Long et al.). It has been shown that the PI3 K/AKT signaling pathway has a neuroprotective effect against the development and progression of AD (Kumar and Bansal). In addition, PI3 K/AKT is a major regulator of brain insulin signaling and controls the functional activity of astrocytes and microglia (Gabbouj et al.). Therefore, deregulation of brain PI3 K/AKT is linked with the development of BIR and neuroinflammation and progression of AD neuropathology.
Furthermore, GSK3β is a multi-functional enzyme that regulates neurodevelopmental processes and synaptic function. However, mutation of genes involved in the expression of GSK3β and exaggerated signaling provokes the development and progression of AD by inducing the production and the accumulation of Aβ and tau protein (Chauhan et al.; Shri et al.). Additionally, GSK3β inhibitors remarkably manage AD by reducing neurodegeneration, neuroinflammation, and oxidative stress (Shri et al.). Furthermore, AD exaggerates neuronal GSK3β signaling pathway which is implicated in developing BIR by distorting neuronal insulin signaling. Deleting of neuronal GSK3β restores brain insulin signaling and improves neuronal energy homeostasis in the AD rat model (Gupta et al.). Therefore, restoring the balance of the PI3 K/AKT/GSK3β signaling pathway by TRZ improves neuronal glucose metabolism in AD.

Neuronal survival and neurogenesis
Neuronal survival is reduced in AD due to the induction of neuronal apoptosis, necrosis, ferroptosis, and pyroptosis by Aβ and tau protein, and associated neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, ER stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction (Mangalmurti and Lukens; Shim et al.; Mohamed and Bars). Interestingly, deficiency of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), which enhances neuronal survival, is highly reduced in AD and associated with Aβ-induced neurodegeneration (Shim et al.). In addition, adult hippocampal neurogenesis that persists through life is highly reduced and contributes to cognitive dysfunction in AD. Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is responsible for brain development in neonates and synaptic plasticity in adult life (Choi and Tanzi). It has been shown that adult hippocampal neurogenesis sharply declined in the early stage of AD neuropathology (Belsham et al.). Reduction of adult hippocampal neurogenesis is correlated with cognitive impairment in AD patients (Yassa et al.). The underlying molecular mechanisms for the impairment of adult hippocampal neurogenesis and neuronal survival in AD are related to reduction the expression and release of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (Bhattarai et al.). BDNF has a neuroprotective effect against the development and progression of AD by enhancing neuronal survival, neurogenesis, synaptic plasticity, and remyelination of neurons by activating the proliferation and differentiation of neural stem cells (Zota et al.). BDNF also improves the expression of cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB), which enhances neuronal survival and neurogenesis. CREB is a ubiquitous transcription factor that regulates neuronal survival, neurogenesis, neuronal differentiation, synaptic plasticity, memory, and cognitive functions. Impairment of CREB signaling is linked with the development of neurodegenerative diseases, including AD (Sharma and Singh). CREB controls neuronal survival by modulating the expression of miR-212-3p, which controls apoptotic and anti-apoptotic pathways. Findings from the preclinical study confirmed that miR-212-3p has a neuroprotective effect against the pathogenesis of AD by inhibiting the expression of NLRP3 inflammasome, attenuating the expression of β-secretase and reducing neuronal pyroptosis in AD rat model (Nong et al.). However, aberrant expression of miR-43a-5p by inhibiting CREB signaling is implicated in developing AD neuropathology in AD patients (Cosín-Tomás et al.). Therefore, activation of brain BDNF signaling and regulating downstream and associated signaling could be a potential therapeutic strategy in managing AD.
It has been shown that TRZ improves neuronal survival in different neurodegenerative diseases, including AD, by activating brain GIP receptors, which enhance transduction pathways involved in neural growth (Talbot). In addition, TRZ alleviates cognitive impairment and memory deficits in animal models by activating hippocampal neurogenesis (Guo et al.). Findings from the preclinical study indicated that TRZ attenuates high-fat diet-induced cognitive impairment through modulation of different signaling pathways, including BDNF (Ma et al.). Likewise, TRZ, through modulation of GIP/GLP-1 signaling, promotes CREB signaling (Mayendraraj et al.). Furthermore, TRZ regulates neuronal survival and apoptosis by regulating the expression of miR-212-3p and miR-43a-5p (Fontanella et al.). However, TRZ, by activating GIP/GLP-1 signaling, promotes the expression of neuroprotective miR-29c-5p, which modulates Aβ production and associated neurotoxicity (Wohlers et al.). In addition, the activated miR-29c-5p via induction of AKT signaling promotes the expression of growth-associated phosphoprotein 43 (GAP-43), improving neuronal growth and synaptic plasticity (Holahan). GAP-43 gene expression is necessary for structural remodeling of synapses. It has been shown that the downregulation of GAP-43 precedes the onset of AD neuropathology, signifying that GAP-43 has a neuroprotective effect against the pathogenesis of AD (Perovic et al.). In addition, activated miR-29c-5p promotes the expression of microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) to regulate neurite outgrowth and synaptic function (Kim et al.). Significantly, dysregulation of the expression of the MAP2 gene may be associated with tauopathy and cognitive impairment in AD (Fray et al.). Furthermore, GLP-1 receptor agonist liraglutide improves the expression of MAP2 and exerts a neuroprotective effect against brain ischemia in animal models (Zhu et al.). GAP-43 and MAP2, via increasing the expression of ATP/GTP binding protein-like 4 (AGBL4), promote neuronal differentiation of cholinergic neurons in AD (Baskerville et al.). Therefore, indirect activation of GAP-43, MAP2, and AGBL4 by TRZ can improve neuronal differentiation in AD (Fig. 5).
The molecular mechanism of TRZ in AD
Taken together, TRZ attenuates the detrimental effects of T2D and obesity on the development and progression of AD by mitigating chronic hyperglycemia in T2D and reducing body weight in obesity. TRZ acts peripherally to attenuate the central effects of low-grade inflammation and oxidative stress in T2D and obesity. In addition, TRZ acts centrally by attenuating the development and progression of AD neuropathology by inhibiting neuroinflammation and brain oxidative stress. TRZ regulates and restores different signaling pathways such as PI3 K/AKT, GSK3β, BDNF, CREB signaling, miR-212-3p, and miR-43a-5p that are involved in the regulation of neuronal survival, growth, and differentiation in AD. Despite of these findings, most findings regarding the neuroprotective effects of TRZ are obtained from preclinical studies that have not been completely translated into clinical settings. Therefore, future clinical studies are recommended in this regard.

Conclusions
TRZ is a dual agonist of GLP-1 and GIP receptors that was recently approved for treating T2D and obesity. T2D and obesity, by inducing peripheral low-grade inflammation and oxidative stress, aggravate the development of central neuroinflammation and oxidative stress. T2D and obesity are regarded as potential risk factors involved in the development and progression of AD. TRZ, by inhibiting oxidative stress, inflammation, advanced glycation end-products, and activating cellular autophagy, can attenuate the harmful effect of T2D on AD pathogenesis. TRZ can mitigate brain leptin resistance, which is the possible link between obesity and AD. TRZ also induces adiponectin expression, and TRZ regulates leptin sensitivity in T2D patients with obesity. Thus, TRZ, by regulating insulin sensitivity and obesity profile, reduces the detrimental effects of T2D and obesity on the pathogenesis of AD.
Collectively, TRZ attenuates the detrimental effects of T2D and obesity on the development and progression of AD by mitigating chronic hyperglycemia in T2D and reducing body weight in obesity. TRZ acts peripherally to attenuate the central effects of low-grade inflammation and oxidative stress in T2D and obesity. TRZ acts centrally by attenuating the development and progression of AD neuropathology by inhibiting neuroinflammation and brain oxidative stress. TRZ regulates and restores different signaling pathways such as PI3 K/AKT, GSK3β, BDNF, CREB signaling, miR-212-3p, and miR-43a-5p that are involved in the regulation of neuronal survival, growth, and differentiation in AD. Despite of these findings, most findings regarding the neuroprotective effects of TRZ are gained from preclinical studies that are not entirely translated into clinical settings. Accordingly, future clinical trials and clinical studies are suggested in this concern.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
Ghadah H. Alshehri; Revision, Hayder M. Al-kuraishy; Validation and project administration, Huda Jaber Waheed; Validation and writing—review and editing, Ali I. Al-Gareeb; Data curation and writing—original draft preparation, Safaa A Faheem; Visualization and writing—review and editing, Athanasios Alexiou; Validation and writing—review and editing. Marios Papadakis; Conceptualization and writing—review and editing Gaber El-Saber Batiha; Conceptualization and investigation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations
The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Clinical trial
Not applicable.

References
Al-Kuraishy HM et al. (2023a) The link between metabolic syndrome and Alzheimer disease: a mutual relationship and long rigorous investigation. Ageing Res Rev 91:102084
Benzodiazepines in alzheimer’s disease: beneficial or detrimental effects
A potential link between visceral obesity and risk of alzheimer’s disease
Long-term use of Metformin and alzheimer’s disease: beneficial or detrimental effects
Insights on benzodiazepines’ potential in alzheimer’s disease
Al-Kuraishy HM et al (2023f) Evaluation and targeting of amyloid precursor protein (APP)/amyloid beta (Aβ) axis in amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic pathways: a time outside the tunnel. Ageing Res Rev 92:102119
Al-Kuraishy HM et al (2024a) Role of ketogenic diet in neurodegenerative diseases focusing on Alzheimer diseases: the guardian angle. Ageing Res Rev 95:102233
Al-Kuraishy HM et al (2024b) New insight on the possible role of statins in Vascular Parkinsonism: a need for presumptive therapy. Ageing Res Rev 95:102209
Low leptin availability as a risk factor for dementia in Chilean older people
Neprilysin inhibitors and risk of alzheimer’s disease: A future perspective
New insight on the potential detrimental effect of metabolic syndrome on the alzheimer disease neuropathology: mechanistic role
Alrouji M et al (2023) The potential role of human islet amyloid polypeptide in type 2 diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer’s diseases. Diabetol Metab Syndr 15(1):101
Role of uric acid in neurodegenerative diseases, focusing on alzheimer and Parkinson disease: A new perspective
Statins use in alzheimer disease: Bane or Boon from frantic search and narrative review
Hypothesis: Tau pathology is an initiating factor in sporadic alzheimer’s disease
Continued treatment with Tirzepatide for maintenance of weight reduction in adults with obesity: the SURMOUNT-4 randomized clinical trial
Early-onset alzheimer’s disease: what is missing in research?
Baggio LL, Drucker DJ (2021) Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor co-agonists for treating metabolic disease. Mol Metab 46:101090
GIP analogues and the treatment of obesity-diabetes
Proteostasis and neurodegeneration: a closer look at autophagy in alzheimer’s disease
The interplay among oxidative stress, brain insulin resistance and AMPK dysfunction contribute to neurodegeneration in type 2 diabetes and alzheimer disease
Aging elevates metabolic gene expression in brain cholinergic neurons
Bayhaghi G (2024) Assessing obesity-related risk factors in a heterogeneous adult population in the Southeast of the United States: a genetic and food intake behavioral study. Augusta University
Ciliary neurotrophic factor recruitment of glucagon-like peptide-1 mediates neurogenesis, allowing immortalization of adult murine hypothalamic neurons
Effects of combined GIP and GLP-1 infusion on energy intake, appetite and energy expenditure in overweight/obese individuals: a randomised, crossover study
No acute effects of exogenous glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide on energy intake, appetite, or energy expenditure when added to treatment with a long-acting glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist in men with type 2 diabetes
Neuron-glia interaction through Serotonin-BDNF-NGFR axis enables regenerative neurogenesis in alzheimer’s model of adult zebrafish brain
Obesity pharmacotherapy: incretin action in the central nervous system
Boutari C, DeMarsilis A, Mantzoros CS (2023) Obesity and diabetes. Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice 110773
Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and alzheimer disease
A GLP-1/GIP dual receptor agonist DA4-JC effectively attenuates cognitive impairment and pathology in the APP/PS1/Tau model of alzheimer’s disease 1
Renal effects of GLP-1 receptor agonists and tirzepatide in individuals with type 2 diabetes: seeds of a promising future
Genetic variation of SORBS1 gene is associated with glucose homeostasis and age at onset of diabetes: A SAPPHIRe cohort study
GSK-3β and its inhibitors in alzheimer’s disease: a recent update
Tirzepatide, a new era of dual-targeted treatment for diabetes and obesity: a mini-review
Role of cholinergic signaling in alzheimer’s disease
Adult neurogenesis in alzheimer’s disease
Emerging evidence for the use of antidiabetic drugs, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists, for the treatment of alzheimer’s disease
Plasma miR-34a-5p and miR-545-3p as early biomarkers of alzheimer’s disease: potential and limitations
The role of metabolic disorders in alzheimer disease and vascular dementia: two roads converged
Intranasal insulin therapy for alzheimer disease and amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a pilot clinical trial
Insulin and alzheimer’s disease: untangling the web
Craft S et al (2019) 1561-P: associations between ß-cell function and cognitive measures differ in youth vs. adults with impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) or early type 2 diabetes (T2D). Diabetes 68(Supplement_1)
Melatonin prevents diabetes-associated cognitive dysfunction from microglia‐mediated neuroinflammation by activating autophagy via TLR4/Akt/mTOR pathway
Altered glucose metabolism in alzheimer’s disease: role of mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress
The mechanism and efficacy of GLP-1 receptor agonists in the treatment of alzheimer’s disease
Evaluation of liraglutide in the treatment of alzheimer’s disease
Finan B et al (2013) Unimolecular dual incretins maximize metabolic benefits in rodents, monkeys, and humans. Sci Transl Med 5(209):209ra151-209ra151
Obesity as a risk factor for dementia and alzheimer’s disease: the role of leptin
Tirzepatide prevents neurodegeneration through multiple molecular pathways
The GLP-1 medicines semaglutide and Tirzepatide do not alter disease-related pathology, behaviour or cognitive function in 5XFAD and APP/PS1 mice
Tirzepatide: A systematic update
Association between H2 haplotype of microtubule associated protein Tau gene (deletion/insertion) with alzheimer disease in Tunisian patients
Altered insulin signaling in alzheimer’s disease brain–special emphasis on PI3K-Akt pathway
Evidence for altered insulin receptor signaling in alzheimer’s disease
Tirzepatide ameliorates Spatial learning and memory impairment through modulation of aberrant insulin resistance and inflammation response in diabetic rats
SiRNA mediated GSK3β knockdown targets insulin signaling pathway and rescues alzheimer’s disease pathology: evidence from in vitro and in vivo studies
Adiponectin inhibits leptin signalling via multiple mechanisms to exert protective effects against hepatic fibrosis
The potential role of Tirzepatide as adjuvant therapy in countering colistin-induced nephro and neurotoxicity in rats via modulation of PI3K/p-Akt/GSK3-β/NF-kB p65 hub, shielding against oxidative and Endoplasmic reticulum stress, and activation of p-CREB/BDNF/TrkB cascade
A shift from a pivotal to supporting role for the growth-associated protein (GAP-43) in the coordination of axonal structural and functional plasticity
Altered O-GlcNAcylation and mitochondrial dysfunction, a molecular link between brain glucose dysregulation and sporadic alzheimer’s disease
Evidence for beneficial effects of compromised gastric inhibitory polypeptide action in obesity-related diabetes and possible therapeutic implications
Tirzepatide once weekly for the treatment of obesity
Jensen TL et al (2024) The body weight reducing effects of Tirzepatide in people with and without type 2 diabetes: a review on efficacy and adverse effects. Patient preference and adherence 373–382
Neuroprotective effects of glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide in alzheimer’s disease
Low plasma leptin in cognitively impaired ADNI subjects: gender differences and diagnostic and therapeutic potential
Comparative studies for amyloid beta degradation:neprilysin vs insulysin,monomeric vs aggregate, and whole Aβ40 vs its peptide fragments
Microtubule-associated protein 2 mediates induction of long‐term potentiation in hippocampal neurons
Donepezil regulates LPS and Aβ-stimulated neuroinflammation through MAPK/NLRP3 inflammasome/STAT3 signaling
Tirzepatide: clinical review of the twincretin injectable
Implications of phosphoinositide 3-kinase-Akt (PI3K-Akt) pathway in the pathogenesis of alzheimer’s disease
The citrus flavonoid Hesperetin encounters diabetes-mediated Alzheimer-type neuropathologic changes through relieving advanced glycation end-products inducing Endoplasmic reticulum stress
The γ-secretase modulator CHF5074 reduces the accumulation of native hyperphosphorylated Tau in a Transgenic mouse model of alzheimer’s disease
Inflammasome NLRP3 potentially links obesity-associated low-grade systemic inflammation and insulin resistance with alzheimer’s disease
SOCS3 promotes inflammation and apoptosis via inhibiting JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway in 3T3-L1 adipocyte
PI3K/AKT signal pathway: a target of natural products in the prevention and treatment of alzheimer’s disease and parkinson’s disease
Tirzepatide administration improves cognitive impairment in HFD mice by regulating the SIRT3-NLRP3 axis
Alterations in brain leptin signalling in spite of unchanged CSF leptin levels in alzheimer’s disease
How neurons die in alzheimer’s disease: implications for neuroinflammation
The dual GLP-1/GIP receptor agonist DA4-JC shows superior protective properties compared to the GLP-1 analogue liraglutide in the APP/PS1 mouse model of alzheimer’s disease
GLP-1 and GIP receptor signaling in beta cells–a review of receptor interactions and co-stimulation
Food for thought: leptin regulation of hippocampal function and its role in alzheimer’s disease
Leptin dysfunction and alzheimer’s disease: evidence from cellular, animal, and human studies
The role of tirzepatide, dual GIP and GLP-1 receptor agonist, in the management of type 2 diabetes: the SURPASS clinical trials
Type 3 diabetes and its role implications in alzheimer’s disease
miR-212-3p attenuates neuroinflammation of rats with alzheimer’s disease via regulating the SP1/BACE1/NLRP3/Caspase-1 signaling pathway
Incretin and insulin signaling as novel therapeutic targets for alzheimer’s and parkinson’s disease
Leptin treatment: facts and expectations
Perovic M et al (2024) The presymptomatic treatment with 3HFWC nanosubstance decreased plaque load in 5XFAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. CNS Neuroscie Ther 30(3):e14188
Use of dulaglutide, semaglutide, and Tirzepatide in diabetes and weight management
Pharmacophore-based models for therapeutic drugs against phosphorylated Tau in alzheimer’s disease
Pugazhenthi S, Qin L, Reddy PH (2017) Common neurodegenerative pathways in obesity, diabetes, and Alzheimer’s disease. Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA)-Mol Basis Dis. 1863(5):1037–1045
8447 A Short-Term Tirzepatide treatment improves insulin sensitivity and reduces Leptin-Ghrelin ratio in Diet-Induced obese mice
Insulin resistance in peripheral tissues and the brain: a Tale of two sites
Brain uptake pharmacokinetics of albiglutide, dulaglutide, tirzepatide, and DA5-CH in the search for new treatments of alzheimer’s and parkinson’s diseases
Semaglutide vs Tirzepatide for weight loss in adults with overweight or obesity
Hormonal gut–brain signaling for the treatment of obesity
Samms RJ et al (2021) GIPR agonism mediates weight-independent insulin sensitization by tirzepatide in obese mice. J Clin Invest 131(12)
Brain insulin signaling and alzheimer’s disease: current evidence and future directions
Insulin as a Bridge between type 2 diabetes and alzheimer disease–how anti-diabetics could be a solution for dementia
CREB: a multifaceted target for alzheimer’s disease
Telomerase reverse transcriptase preserves neuron survival and cognition in alzheimer’s disease models
Role of GSK-3β inhibitors: new promises and opportunities for alzheimer’s disease
Simental-Mendía LE et al (2024) Effect of Tirzepatide on leptin and adiponectin levels. Eur J Intern Med
Evidence that Tirzepatide protects against diabetes-related cardiac damages
Brain insulin resistance in alzheimer’s disease and its potential treatment with GLP-1 analogs
Demonstrated brain insulin resistance in alzheimer’s disease patients is associated with IGF-1 resistance, IRS-1 dysregulation, and cognitive decline
Efficacy and safety of Tirzepatide for treatment of overweight or obesity. A systematic review and meta-analysis
Recent advances in therapeutics for the treatment of alzheimer’s disease
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide promotes lipid deposition in subcutaneous adipocytes in obese type 2 diabetes patients: a maladaptive response
APP Osaka mutation in Familial alzheimer’s disease—Its discovery, phenotypes, and mechanism of recessive inheritance
The relation of Circulating levels of leptin with cognition in patients with alzheimer’s disease
Willard FS et al (2020) Tirzepatide is an imbalanced and biased dual GIP and GLP-1 receptor agonist. JCI Insight 5(17)
Wilson M et al (2014) Autophagy dysfunction and its link to Alzheimer’s disease and type II diabetes mellitus. CNS Neurol Disord-Drug Targets (Formerly Current Drug Targets-CNS & Neurological Disorders). 13(2):226–246
Alzheimer’s disease risk SNPs show no strong effect on MiRNA expression in human lymphoblastoid cell lines
Tirzepatide’s role in targeting adipose tissue macrophages to reduce obesity-related inflammation and improve insulin resistance
Tirzepatide shows neuroprotective effects via regulating brain glucose metabolism in APP/PS1 mice
Tirzepatide’s innovative applications in the management of type 2 diabetes and its future prospects in cardiovascular health
High-resolution structural and functional MRI of hippocampal CA3 and dentate gyrus in patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment
The pleiotropic of GLP-1/GLP-1R axis in central nervous system diseases
Role of insulin receptor substance-1 modulating PI3K/Akt insulin signaling pathway in alzheimer’s disease
The neuroprotection of liraglutide against ischaemia-induced apoptosis through the activation of the PI3K/AKT and MAPK pathways
Stimulating Myelin restoration with BDNF: a promising therapeutic approach for alzheimer’s disease