Acute Generalized Exanthematous Pustulosis: Clinical Features, Differential Diagnosis, and Management
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is a rare, acute, severe cutaneous adverse reaction mainly attributed to drugs, although other triggers, including infections, vaccinations, ingestion of various substances, and spider bites, have also been described. AGEP is characterized by the development of edema and erythema followed by the eruption of multiple punctate, non-follicular, sterile pustules and subsequent desquamation. AGEP typically has a rapid onset and prompt resolution within a few weeks. The differential diagnoses for AGEP are broad and include infectious, inflammatory, and drug-induced etiologies. Diagnosis of AGEP depends on both clinical and histologic criteria, as cases of overlap with other disease processes have been reported. Management includes removal of the offending drug or treatment of the underlying cause, if necessary, and supportive care, as AGEP is a self-limited disease. This review aims to provide an overview and update on the epidemiology, pathogenesis, reported precipitating factors, differentials, diagnosis, and management of AGEP.

Key Points
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is a rare, acute, severe cutaneous adverse reaction mainly attributed to drugs, although other triggers have been described.	 	While the differential diagnosis list is broad, AGEP typically has a rapid onset and resolution within a few weeks, and management includes removal of the offending drug or treatment of underlying cause and supportive care

Introduction
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is a rare, acute, severe cutaneous adverse reaction attributed mainly to drugs. However, other triggers have also been described. Originally considered a variant of pustular psoriasis, AGEP was first described as its own separate condition by Baker and Ryan in 1968. The name ‘acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis’ was then proposed by Beylot et al. in 1980. It is characterized by the development of edematous erythema, usually in large skin folds, followed by the eruption of multiple punctate, non-follicular, sterile pustules and subsequent typical desquamation. The reaction usually resolves within 15 days, and the overall prognosis is good. These lesions often occur in the intertriginous areas, which may help to differentiate AGEP from other diagnoses. Mucosal involvement is mild and occurs in approximately 20% of cases. The cutaneous manifestations are often accompanied by systemic symptoms, mainly fever and leukocytosis, and may be associated with hepatic, renal, or pulmonary involvement. The clinical course of AGEP is characterized by sudden onset followed by rapid resolution within days of discontinuation of the offending drug. There is a validated score from the EuroSCAR group for the diagnosis of AGEP. Treatment includes withdrawal of the offending drug and supportive care, including topical steroids, antipyretics, and antihistamines. In more severe cases, systemic steroids may be used. The purpose of this review was to provide an overview of the epidemiology, pathogenesis, precipitating factors, diagnosis, and management of AGEP.

Literature Search Methods
A literature review of AGEP was performed by searching PubMed/MEDLINE between January 1960 and October 2022. International articles were included if available in English. Emphasis was placed on recent publications, with at least 50% of cited studies published within the last 5 years. Search terms were ‘AGEP’, ‘acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis’, and ‘generalized pustulosis’. Articles were selected by two reviewers according to their relevance to the topic.

Epidemiology
Implicated triggers of AGEP and time to onset of symptoms from suspected exposure
Cause	Time to onset from suspected exposure	References	 	Drugs	 	 Antibiotics	 	  β-lactams	Amoxicillin, ampicillin, oxacillin, piperacillin-tazobactam, dicloxacillin, faropenem	2–15 days		 	  β-lactamase inhibitors	Clavulanic acid, tazobactam	2–5 days		 	  Cephalosporins	Cefixime, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, cefepime	0 days–1 month		 	  Cyclic lipopeptides	Daptomycin	3–24 days		 	  Fluoroquinolones	Ciprofloxacin, tosufloxacin	1–4 days		 	  Glycopeptides	Telavancin, vancomycin	1.5–5 days		 	  Lincosamides	Clindamycin	2–8 days		 	  Macrolides	Azithromycin	7 days		 	  Sulfonamides	Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole	8 days		 	  Tetracyclines	Tigecycline	2 days		 	  Other	Metronidazole, pristinamycin	2 days		 	 Antiviral	 		  Ritonavir	4–10 days		 		  Acyclovir	1 day		 		  Remdesivir	1 month		 		  Favipiravir	7 days		 	 Antifungal	 		  Terbinafine	2 days–2 weeks		 		  Fluconazole	1 day		 		  Miconazole oral gel	2 days		 		  Nystatin	7 days		 	 Antiparasitic	 		  Praziquantel	1 day		 		  Benznidazole	6 weeks		 	 Antimalarial	 		  Hydroxychloroquine	4–122 days		 		  Atovaquone-proguanil	3 weeks		 	 Anticancer	 	  Chemotherapy	Bendamustine, docetaxel, gemcitabine, mycophenolate mofetil, paclitaxel	1 day–9 weeks, second cycle of chemotherapy		 	  Targeted therapy	Cetuximab, erlotinib, rituximab, sorafenib, vismodegib	8 days–8 weeks		 	  Immunotherapy	Pembrolizumab, ipilimumab, nivolumab, atezolizumab, interleukin-2	2 days–20 weeks		 	 Anticoagulants	 	  DOACs	Apixaban	10 hours		 	  NOACs	Enoxaparin	2 days		 	  Antiplatelet	Clopidogrel, ticagrelor	2–5 days		 	 Other drugs from various classes	 	  Anti-arrhythmics	Amiodarone, propafenone	2–10 days		 	  Anticonvulsants	Levetiracetam, valproic acid	5 days–8 weeks		 	  Antihypertensives	Diltiazem, hydroxyzine, ranolazine	2–12 days		 	  Antipsychotics	Cariprazine, haloperidol, olanzapine, quetiapine	1–7 days		 	  Diabetes therapy	Gliclazide, linagliptin	3–6 days		 	  NSAIDs	Celecoxib, ibuprofen, lornoxicam, piroxicam	0–4 days		 	  Hormonal therapy	Letrozole, mifepristone	Hours–15 days		 	  Opioids	Codeine, dextromethorphan	1 day–2 weeks		 	  Topical agents	Mephenesin balm, topical diphenhydramine, transdermal ketoprofen, topical morphine	1–10 days		 	  Other drugs	Alendronate	15 days		 	Benzocaine	1 day		 	Cannabidiol	2 days		 	Dupilumab	2 days		 	Finasteride	3 months		 	Isotretinoin	5 days		 	Methimazole	7 days		 	Mianserin	7 days		 	Midodrine	22 days		 	Pantoprazole	4 days		 	Paracetamol	4 days		 	Prednisolone	1 day		 	Pseudoephedrine/fexofenadine	4 days		 	Varenicline	10–11 days		 	Infections	 	 Bacterial	Chlamydia pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae	Unknowna		 	 Fungal	Coccidiomycosis	3 days		 	 Viral	COVID-19, Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19	COVID: 3 days after diagnosis–4 days after resolutionOther unknowna		 	Vaccinations	 	 COVID-19 (Moderna; first or second dose)	0 days–3 weeks		 	 Influenza	1 day		 	Other causes	 	 Iatrogenic	Icodextrin, iodinated contrast, iron carboxymaltose infusions	1 day–2 weeks		 	 Dietary	Curcumin, oral blue dye, shiitake mushroom	1 day–1 month		 	 Other	Spider bite	Immediately
AGEP acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, COVID-19 coronavirus disease 2019, DOACs direct oral anticoagulants, NOACs non-oral anticoagulants, NSAIDs non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
aSkin findings were visible prior to serology confirming infection
AGEP is estimated to occur in one to five people per million per year. AGEP has been reported more frequently in women, with a mean age of 56 years. AGEP has been associated with increased body mass index; the mechanism may be related to upregulated proinflammatory cytokines secondary to obesity. Latency to drug-induced AGEP is a bimodal distribution as evidenced by Table 1. Of note, certain drugs have a higher epidemiological risk than others, these include pristinamycin, ampicillin, amoxicillin, quinolones, hydroxychloroquine, sulfonamides, terbinafine, and diltiazem.

Pathogenesis
Several pathways have been implicated in the pathogenesis of AGEP, all leading to increased interleukin (IL)-8 secretion and subsequent neutrophil migration and survival. Patch testing and in vitro assays have suggested that AGEP is a T-cell-mediated delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction to a specific drug or other trigger. Specifically, after exposure to the offending agent, antigen-presenting cells (APCs) present the antigen using major histocompatibility complex molecules, leading to the activation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells that become drug-specific. These activated T cells then proliferate and migrate into the dermis and epidermis. Using the perforin/granzyme B and Fas ligand pathways, these drug-specific CD8+ T cells induce apoptosis of keratinocytes within the epidermis, tissue destruction and epidermal vesicle formation. In addition, activated T cells secrete IL-8, which is a chemoattractant for neutrophils and contributes to the neutrophil-rich nature of the pustules and peripheral neutrophilia seen in AGEP.
T-helper (Th) 1 cells also predominate in AGEP. Th1 cells are thought to increase secretion of interferon (IFN)-γ and granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor, both of which promote neutrophil survival. Th2 cells producing IL-5 may also play a role, particularly in patients with eosinophilia, as IL-5 is a potent eosinophil stimulator. In addition, Th17 cells are also thought to play a role, as IL-17 and IL-22 produced by these cells synergistically promote downstream IL-8 secretion.
Mutations in the IL-36RN gene, which encodes the IL-36 receptor antagonist, have been reported to be more common in some patients diagnosed with both AGEP and pustular psoriasis than in unaffected individuals. IL-36 is a proinflammatory cytokine secreted by macrophages and keratinocytes, and IL-36 receptors have been identified at high levels on the surface of APCs in the skin. The IL-36 receptor antagonist typically blocks inflammatory cytokine signaling, namely IL-36α, IL-36β, and IL-36γ. The IL36RN gene is a small gene with six exons located on chromosome 2 at position q14. Dysregulation of this pathway results in increased IL-36 signaling, leading to increased production of IL-6, IL-8, IL-1α, and IL-1β. This increase in signaling is thought to predispose individuals to pustular eruptions. A 2019 study showed that amoxicillin and letrozole specifically trigger IL-36γ cytokine production by sorted CD14+ peripheral blood macrophages via toll-like receptor 4 and by keratinocytes in patients who are positive for AGEP by patch test or lymphocyte transformation test (LTT). These IL-36 cytokines then induce IL-8 secretion in an IL-36-dependent manner. This is in contrast to the hypothesis that T cells alone drive AGEP and suggests that AGEP may be driven, at least in part, by an innate response to drugs, possibly via pattern recognition receptors.

Drugs
A number of drugs have been reported in the literature to be associated with AGEP; these drugs are summarized below and their lag times are summarized in Table 1. Antibiotics are the most commonly implicated drug class in AGEP, including β-lactams, β-lactamase inhibitors, cephalosporins, macrolides, fluoroquinolones, sulfonamides, and clindamycin, among others.
The β-lactams and β-lactamase inhibitors that have been reported in the literature include oxacillin, dicloxacillin, amoxicillin ± clavulanic acid, piperacillin-tazobactam, and faropenem. Cephalosporins implicated in AGEP include cefixime, ceftriaxone, cefepime, and cefotaxime. Azithromycin has been reported of the macrolide class. Fluoroquinolones, including ciprofloxacin and tosufloxacin, have also been reported as associated with AGEP. Other antibiotics from various classes include clindamycin, tigecycline, telavancin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, vancomycin, daptomycin, metronidazole, and pristinamycin.
Hydroxychloroquine is the next most frequently implicated drug reported after antibiotics as a whole, with 44 cases reported in a recent review. Particularly in the era of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic from 2020 to present, there have been increased reports of hydroxychloroquine-induced AGEP, which may be secondary to increased use of the drug. Of note, hydroxychloroquine-induced AGEP typically has a delayed onset compared with other drugs due to its long half-life of 40–50 days.
Other antimicrobials implicated in the pathogenesis of AGEP include antifungals, namely fluconazole, miconazole oral gel, nystatin, and terbinafine; antivirals, including acyclovir, favipiravir, remdesivir, and ritonavir; antiparasitic drugs, namely benznidazole and praziquantel; and other antimalarials, including atovaquone/proguanil.
Anticancer therapies have also been associated with AGEP, including chemotherapy, such as bendamustine, docetaxel, gemcitabine, mycophenolate mofetil, and paclitaxel; targeted therapy, including cetuximab, erlotinib, rituximab, sorafenib, and vismodegib; and immunotherapy, such as pembrolizumab, ipilimumab, nivolumab, atezolizumab, and IL-2.
Direct oral anticoagulants, including apixaban and dabigatran, as well as non-oral anticoagulants, namely enoxaparin, have been reported a few times in the literature. Diabetes medications, including DPP-4 inhibitors (linagliptin) and sulfonylureas (gliclazide), have been reported as implicated in AGEP.
A number of other drugs have also been reported in the literature, including analgesics and anti-inflammatories, such as paracetamol, celecoxib, ibuprofen, piroxicam, prednisolone, topical mephenesin balm, transdermal ketoprofen, and topical morphine.
Antiarrhythmics, such as amiodarone and propafenone, and antihypertensives, including diltiazem, hydralazine, and ranolazine have also been reported. Anticonvulsants, including valproic acid and levetiracetam, and antipsychotics, including cariprazine, haloperidol, olanzapine, and quetiapine, have been implicated in AGEP, as have opioids, including codeine and dextromethorphan. Hormonal therapies, including letrozole and mifepristone have been implicated in AGEP. Other drugs such as alendronate, benzocaine, cannabidiol, dupilumab, finasteride, isotretinoin, methimazole, mianserin, midodrine, pantoprazole, pseudoephedrine/fexofenadine, and varenicline have also been reported.

Infections
Multiple infections have been reported in relation to AGEP onset. Reports of AGEP after Chlamydia pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, coccidiomycosis, COVID-19, cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), and parvovirus B19 have been identified. As these causative agents cannot be removed, treatment of underlying infection and supportive care until resolution are the mainstay of management. Given that AGEP occurs in patients with underlying infectious disease and may also occur in patients who take certain antibiotics, the correlation must be noted. It is possible that patients with underlying infectious disease may be more susceptible to developing AGEP. It may also be possible that patients with underlying infectious disease develop AGEP as a sequelae of the pharmacologic treatment used to treat the infection. This could also explain why prompt resolution occurs within a few weeks in AGEP.

Vaccinations
There have been reports of AGEP occurring after influenza vaccination and spikevax COVID-19 vaccination (Moderna). The pathogenesis may be due to the cytokine storm-like global immune activation that can occur after COVID-19 infection or vaccination. While this is not a reason to avoid vaccination, it is important to be aware of this potential adverse event in order to improve prompt diagnosis, initiate treatment, and minimize morbidity and mortality. Of note, given the high frequency of influenza vaccination and mRNA COVID-19 vaccination (Moderna) internationally, it must be stated that the epidemiological risk of developing AGEP remains very low. There is also no proven causation between vaccination and AGEP, only clinical correlates, and thus it also may be true that there are overlapping phenotypes and/or misclassifications of neutrophilic pustulosis as AGEP. Vaccinations cannot be discontinued like offending drugs; in these cases, supportive care is most important.

Other
Non-drug or non-infectious causes of AGEP include a variety of etiologies. Iatrogenic triggers include icodextrin, iodinated contrast, and iron carboxymaltose infusions. Dietary triggers include curcumin, oral blue dye, and shiitake mushrooms. Spider bites have also been reported to trigger AGEP. Specifically, envenomation by the brown recluse spider Loxosceles reclusa has been reported in the literature as a trigger for AGEP.

Clinical Presentation
Clinical presentation and progression of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis in a patient 3 days after oral clindamycin initiation: (a) 3 days of intertriginous erythema followed by (b) pustules overlying the erythema for 2–3 days, followed by (c) subsequent desquamation of the affected skin approximately 1 week after appearance of the rash
AGEP typically presents within 24–48 h of ingestion of the offending drug, with a median time of 24 h for antibiotics in particular. However, some drugs have been shown to have a lag time of up to 10–22 days; therefore, this is not a defining feature. Prodromal signs include fever (>38°C) and generalized malaise with leukocytosis, particularly neutrophilia, with eosinophilia in up to 30% of patients. This is accompanied by an edematous erythema and a pruritic pustular eruption that favors the trunk and intertriginous areas, often sparing the mucous membranes, followed by desquamation of the affected areas. The pustules are sterile, non-follicular, and numerous (Fig. 1). Mucosal involvement occurs in approximately 20% of cases. When mucosal involvement occurs, the rash is usually limited to a single site such as the lips or buccal mucosa. Atypical presentations of AGEP include eruption of atypical targetoid lesions or bullae in response to an inciting agent.
Systemic involvement is considered to be any organ dysfunction that occurs with cutaneous features that cannot be attributed to any other cause or disease. Studies have shown that 17–20% of AGEP cases have internal organ involvement, most often hepatic, renal, or pulmonary disease.
Hepatic findings involve enzyme elevation in either a hepatocellular pattern (elevated aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase to twice greater than normal) or a cholestatic pattern (elevated alkaline phosphatase and γ-glutamyl transferase). Abdominal ultrasound findings may show steatosis or hepatomegaly, both of which are nonspecific. Renal findings may include creatinine >1.5 times baseline, suggestive of severe acute kidney injury. Pulmonary findings may include pleural effusions, hypoxemia, and increased oxygen requirements. Other nonspecific signs of systemic involvement include elevated absolute neutrophil count and C-reactive protein. Systemic symptoms typically resolve with discontinuation of the causative drug, treatment of the underlying condition, and supportive care. AGEP cases accompanied by systemic symptoms tend to cause greater morbidity and mortality compared with AGEP cases with only cutaneous features.
Acute localized exanthematous pustulosis (ALEP) is a subtype of AGEP in which lesions are localized to one or few areas of the skin. The face is the most frequently affected area followed by the trunk and upper extremities. The clinical features and pattern of lesion evolution from erythema to pustules to desquamation is the same in ALEP as it is in AGEP. The inciting triggers for ALEP have also been the same as those reported in AGEP, with drugs, specifically antibiotics, being the most common trigger. Compared with AGEP, ALEP is less likely to have systemic involvement; ALEP is typically accompanied by normal laboratory tests without changes to renal or liver function. However, a few ALEP cases do report concurrent leukocytosis. Pathogenesis of ALEP has not been investigated; the majority of available research is case reports and case series.

Diagnosis
Diagnostic scoring system for AGEP, adapted from the EuroSCAR study group
Characteristic	Score	 	Morphology	 	Pustules	 	 Typical	+2	 	 Compatible with disease	+1	 	 Insufficient	+0	 	Erythema	 	 Typical	+2	 	 Compatible with disease	+1	 	 Insufficient	+0	 	Distribution/pattern	 	 Typical	+2	 	 Compatible with disease	+1	 	 Insufficient	+0	 	Post-pustular desquamation	 	 Yes	+1	 	 No/insufficient	+0	 	Course	 	Mucosal involvement	 	 Yes	− 2	 	 No	+0	 	Acute onset within 10 days of exposure	 	 Yes	+0	 	 No	− 2	 	Resolution within 15 days	 	 Yes	+0	 	 No	− 4	 	Fever (temperature ≥ 38°C)	 	 Yes	+1	 	 No	+0	 	PMNs > 7000/mm3	 	 Yes	+1	 	 No	+0	 	Histology	 	Consistent with other disease	− 10	 	Not representative/no histology	+0	 	Exocytosis of PMNs	+1	 	Subcorneal and/or intraepidermal non-spongiform or NOS pustule(s) with papillary edema OR subcorneal and/or intraepidermal spongiform or NOS pustule(s) without papillary edema	+2	 	Spongiform subcorneal and/or intraepidermal pustule(s) with papillary edema	+3
Score interpretation: ≤0 = not AGEP; 1–4 = possible AGEP; 5–7 = probable AGEP; 8–12 = definitive AGEP
AGEP acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, NOS not otherwise specified, PMNs polymorphonuclear leukocytes
Diagnosis of AGEP depends on clinical and histologic criteria. An AGEP score was proposed by the EuroSCAR group based on morphology, clinical course, and histology. This scoring tool classifies patients with suspected AGEP as having definite, probable, possible, or no AGEP (Table 2). A drug patch test can be used to identify the cause of AGEP. It is recommended that these tests are generally performed no sooner than 4 weeks after the resolution of AGEP but within 1 year after the adverse reaction. The sensitivity of patch testing for AGEP is estimated to be 50–58%. As such, when patch tests are negative but clinical suspicion remains high, intradermal tests or prick tests may be utilized next. The recommendations vary between the United States and Europe, with European guidelines considering prick tests to be safer than intradermal tests. However, in more recent studies, prick tests have been suggested to have limited value for AGEP, with intradermal tests considered ‘potentially useful’ but must be performed in a hospital setting and are contraindicated when involving ‘drugs that are highly suspected’. An LTT may also be used to assist in AGEP diagnosis. LTT may demonstrate significant lymphocyte stimulation toward medications that induced AGEP, despite negative skin testing.

Histopathologic Findings
Representative HE histology of AGEP depicting (a) a subcorneal neutrophilic pustule, (b) vacuolization of basal keratinocytes in the adjacent epidermis, accompanied by (c) a mixed infiltrate in the upper dermis consisting of lymphocytes, histiocytes, neutrophils and admixed eosinophils. Magnification: 40×, inset 100×. AGEP acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, HE hematoxylin and eosin
Histologic features of AGEP are characterized by intracorneal, subcorneal, and/or intraepidermal pustules with papillary dermal edema and both neutrophilic and eosinophilic perivascular and interstitial infiltrate. The intraepidermal pustules tend to be primarily in the upper epidermis and may be contiguous with subcorneal pustules. Spongiosis may also be seen, particularly in the intracorneal and subcorneal pustules, and necrotic keratinocytes are often also present. Histologic findings of a patient who developed AGEP are shown in Fig. 2.

Differential Diagnosis
Common differential diagnoses of AGEP
Clinical and cutaneous features	Histology	DIF	Systemic symptoms	Laboratory tests	Typical patient population	Overlap with AGEP	 	Bacterial folliculitis 	Follicular pattern, often in hair-bearing and intertriginous areas	Neutrophilic invasion of hair follicle and perifollicular tissue, primarily where the sebaceous glands and ducts meet follicle	Not indicated	None	Direct smear with gram stain and bacterial culture	Patients with a history of diabetes, obesity, prolonged antibiotic use, or immune-compromise, or those who shave frequently	No cases reported	 	Cutaneous candidiasis 	Red papules, plaques, and pustules mostly in intertriginous areas often with skin maceration; characteristically with pustules on the edge of the plaques and satellite pustules may develop	Micropustules beneath the stratum corneum coalesce into large pustules; neutrophils permeate through the underlying spongiotic stratum corneum; dermis is edematous with perivascular and interstitial infiltrate composed mostly of neutrophils. PAS may reveal the organism	Not indicated	None	Fungal culture and KOH prep for pseudohyphae and budding yeast	Immunocompromised, overweight/obese, patients with nutritional deficiencies such as iron deficiency, and endocrine diseases such as diabetes mellitus, patients with poor hygiene	No reported cases	 	Herpes simplex virus 	Vesicles and pustules clustered on erythematous base often near the mouth, genitals, or buttocks	Ballooning degeneration of keratinocytes and multinucleated giant cells	Not indicated	Localized pain, tenderness, burning, or tingling prior to onset, and may be accompanied by a viral prodrome (malaise, fevers, tender LAD)	PCR, Tzanck smear, serology	Varied, increased risk in immune-compromised patients	No cases reported	 	Pustular psoriasis (including pustular psoriasis of pregnancy/impetigo herpetiformis) 	Sterile, nonfollicular pustules overlaying scaly plaques	Intraepidermal pustules with neutrophilic infiltrates, spongiosis, papillomatosis, acanthosis, and micro-abscesses	Negative	History of psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis, constitutional symptoms (malaise, fatigue, fever), oral, ocular, bone, and/or joint involvement	Histology	Patients with a history of psoriasis vulgaris or psoriatic arthritis	AGEP and pustular psoriasis overlap after ceftriaxone therapy	 	IgA pemphigus 	Pruritic subacute eruption of flaccid pustules on an erythematous base in flexural areas	Subcorneal blisters with neutrophils and loss of cohesion between keratinocytes	DIF of perilesional skin: IgA autoantibodies on keratinocyte cell surfaces	Rarely mucous membrane involvement	Histology, DIF, IIF, ELISA, immunoblotting	Middle age or elderly individuals	No cases reported	 	Subcorneal pustular dermatosis (Snedden–Wilkinson disease) 	Flaccid sterile pustules on normal or mildly erythematous skin, often on the trunk, flexural surfaces, and intertriginous areas	Subcorneal blisters with neutrophils and eosinophils that classically sit above an undisturbed epidermis with minimal spongiosis	Typically negative; few reports of positive DIF with epidermal intercellular deposits of IgA	None	Histology, DIF, IIF	Middle age or elderly women	No cases reported	 	Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis (Ofuji disease) 	Pruritic follicular papules and pustules in areas above the trunk	Spongiosis and perifollicular lymphohistiocytic infiltrate, ± micro-abscesses of eosinophils	Not indicated	None	HIV serology	Patients with HIV, patients receiving chemotherapy, third decade of life, Japanese women	No cases reported	 	DReSS 	Polymorphic rash that may include pustules and vesicles, commonly facial edema, and possible mucosal involvement, classically long lag period (4–8 weeks)	Varied, may include basal squamatization, dermal red blood cell extravasation, or interface inflammation	Not indicated	Systemic involvement is prominent, including constitutional symptoms (fever, malaise) and various organs (liver, kidney, lung, brain, muscle/heart, pancreas, etc.)	CBC with diff and direct smear (atypical lymphocytes, eosinophilia), ESR, CRP, CMP (LFTs, creatinine), lipase, amylase, CK, troponin, urinary protein and cells, PCR for HHV6, HHV7, CMV, EBV	Patients with genetic predisposition and possible concurrent viral disease	Many cases, for example AGEP and DReSS, overlap in a patient after COVID-19 vaccine and in patients receiving vemurafenib	 	SJS/TEN 	Flu-like prodrome followed by cutaneous involvement with erythematous dusky purpuric macules (atypical target lesions), +Nikolsky sign, and mucosal involvement with ocular, oral, and genital lesions	Full-thickness keratinocyte necrosis	Negative	Constitutional symptoms (weakness, pain, high fever, malaise, headache); internal organ involvement mainly of the respiratory and GI tracts but any other systems can be involved	CBC with diff (look for leukocytosis), ESR, CRP, CMP (hyponatremia, creatinine, LFTs), ECG	Varied; genetic predisposition, more common in patients with HIV	Many cases, for example AGEP and SJS, overlap in a patient treated with ceftriaxone, metronidazole, and vancomycin simultaneously
AGEP acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis, DReSS drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, SJS/TEN Stevens–Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis, DIF direct immunofluorescence, IIF indirect immunofluorescence, PAS periodic acid-Schiff, KOH potassium hydroxide, LAD lymphadenopathy, IgA immunoglobulin A, CBC with diff complete blood count with differential, ESR erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CRP C-reactive protein, CMP comprehensive metabolic panel, LFT liver function tests, CK creatinine kinase, PCR polymerase chain reaction, CMV cytomegalovirus, EBV Epstein–Barr virus, GI gastrointestinal, ECG electrocardiogram, HIV human immunodeficiency virus, ELISA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
The differential diagnosis of AGEP is quite broad and includes mainly infectious diseases, inflammatory papulosquamous diseases, and adverse drug reactions (summarized in Table 3). Infectious diseases include bacterial folliculitis, cutaneous candidiasis, and herpes simplex virus (HSV). Non-infectious inflammatory papulosquamous differentials mainly include pustular psoriasis, immunoglobulin (Ig) A pemphigus, and subcorneal pustular dermatosis. Adverse drug reactions include drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DReSS), Stevens–Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN), and drug-induced eosinophilic pustular folliculitis (Ofuji disease). It is important to biopsy cutaneous lesions for standard histology and to consider perilesional biopsy for direct immunofluorescence (DIF). Due to the important differential diagnosis of infectious etiologies, it is always advisable to obtain the following from a pustule: direct smear, culture for gram stain, and consider culture for candida and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for viral disease such as herpes based on clinical manifestations.
There are some clinical clues to differentiate AGEP from other conditions. Bacterial folliculitis is distinguished by the follicular pattern of bacterially infected pustules compared with the nonfollicular distribution of sterile pustules in AGEP. Direct Gram stain and bacterial culture from pustules are an important part of the differentiation. Histopathology may also be helpful. Cutaneous candidiasis typically presents with erythematous papules, plaques, and pustules, usually in intertriginous areas and often with skin maceration. Pustules typically develop at the margins of plaques, and satellite pustules may also develop. Histopathology often shows micropustules beneath the stratum corneum coalescing into large pustules. Neutrophils may penetrate the underlying spongiotic stratum corneum and the dermis is often edematous with a perivascular and interstitial infiltrate composed mainly of neutrophils. Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining may reveal the organism. Fungal culture and potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparation to assess for pseudohyphae and budding yeast may aid in diagnosis. Patients who are immunocompromised, overweight/obese, and have poor hygiene, nutritional deficiencies such as iron deficiency, and/or endocrine disorders such as diabetes mellitus are more likely to develop cutaneous candidiasis. Herpetic viral infections may mimic AGEP due to the clinical presentation of vesicles and pustules on an erythematous base. However, herpes virus is more likely to be localized and herpes zoster is classically distributed in a dermatomal pattern. Histology of HSV lesions shows ballooning degeneration of keratinocytes and multinucleated giant cells. In addition, Tzanck smear and PCR can aid in differentiation. No cases of AGEP and bacterial folliculitis, cutaneous candidiasis, or HSV overlap have been reported.
Differentiating between AGEP and pustular psoriasis, including the subtypes of acute, annular, and pustular psoriasis of pregnancy (impetigo herpetiformis), is challenging. However, it is important to differentiate the diagnoses in order to determine the most effective treatment. Clinically, the difference is usually very subtle and both conditions present with sterile, nonfollicular pustules. Pustular psoriasis may be associated with constitutional symptoms (malaise, fatigue, fever) and oral, ocular, bone, and/or joint involvement. Genetically, both diseases were found to have mutations in IL-36RN. The following may assist in differentiation: (1) pustular psoriasis lesions usually overlay scaly plaques; (2) patients with pustular psoriasis often have a characteristic history of plaque psoriasis; and (3) have differences in comorbidities, such as psoriatic arthritis. In addition, Shalom et al. found that hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia were associated with pustular psoriasis and drug-induced psoriasis at significantly higher rates than with AGEP. Other differences include (4) the histopathology of AGEP is more likely to demonstrate neutrophilic and eosinophilic infiltrates and necrotic keratinocytes, as opposed to exclusively neutrophilic infiltrates in pustular psoriasis. In addition, in pustular psoriasis, spongiosis is more prominent, with macro-pustules at a higher epidermal level than in AGEP. Lastly, pustular psoriasis often has papillomatosis and acanthosis, as well as micro-abscesses, which are absent in AGEP. However, even with these reported differences, the histological differentiation is challenging. Vyas et al. found that the presence of CD123, a marker for plasmacytoid dendritic cells, and MxA proteins in dermal inflammatory infiltrate are helpful in distinguishing pustular psoriasis from AGEP. CD161 positivity also supports a diagnosis of pustular psoriasis.
There are reports of overlap between AGEP and pustular psoriasis in which a distinction cannot be made. For example, a case of overlap between AGEP and pustular psoriasis in response to ceftriaxone has been reported, in which a patient with psoriasis vulgaris developed an isolated pustular eruption after use of the antibiotic. However, it was not clear whether this was a case of AGEP in a patient with a history of psoriasis or an acute exacerbation of pustular psoriasis.
IgA pemphigus typically presents with a subacute eruption of flaccid pustules on an erythematous base. The pustules often rupture to form a painful and pruritic crust over the plaque. Similar to AGEP, the cutaneous eruptions are often located in flexural areas. However, unlike AGEP, IgA pemphigus is very rarely associated with systemic symptoms such as fever or mucosal involvement. IgA pemphigus is differentiated by histology and most commonly by DIF of the perilesional skin. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, indirect immunofluorescence (IIF), or immunoblotting may also be used. IgA pemphigus histology usually shows subcorneal vesicles with neutrophilic infiltration and occasional loss of adhesions between keratinocytes. DIF is characterized by the presence of IgA autoantibodies in the epidermis, particularly on the surfaces of keratinocytes.. IgA pemphigus has been associated with monoclonal IgA gammopathy, human immunodeficiency virus infection, Sjogren disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and Crohn’s disease. IgA pemphigus presents more often in middle age or elderly individuals. There is no particular patient population in terms of race or sex with which IgA pemphigus is closely associated. There have been no reported cases of concurrent or overlapping IgA pemphigus and AGEP.
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis (SPD), also known as Sneddon–Wilkinson disease, is a rare, benign, relapsing neutrophilic dermatosis that presents with flaccid sterile pustules on normal or mildly erythematous skin, often on the trunk, flexural surfaces, and intertriginous areas. These may develop into characteristic ‘half and half’ vesicles, with pus accumulation in the lower half and clear fluid overlying it. These pustules may be isolated or grouped; when grouped they tend to coalesce into annular, circumferential, or serpiginous patterns. Pruritus is not a prominent feature, although it may be present. The course of the disease is often cyclic. There is typically no fever or other systemic symptoms. SPD presents histologically, similarly to SPD-type IgA pemphigus and annular pustular psoriasis with subcorneal neutrophilic and eosinophilic pustules. However, the pustules in SPD are exclusively subcorneal and classically sit above an undisturbed epidermis with minimal spongiosis, contrary to pustular psoriasis, IgA pemphigus, and AGEP. DIF is classically negative, although there are reports of epidermal intercellular deposition of IgA. Approximately half of cases with positive DIF also have positive IIF for circulating autoantibodies. SPD often occurs in association with various neoplastic, immunological, and inflammatory conditions, including IgA or IgG monoclonal gammopathies, lymphoproliferative disorders, especially multiple myeloma, B-cell lymphoma, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, hyperthyroidism, Crohn’s disease, and pyoderma gangrenosum. SPD is more common in middle-aged and older women. No particular ethnic or racial predominance has been reported. There have been no reported cases of SPD and AGEP overlap.
Adverse drug reactions, such as DReSS, SJS/TEN, and Ofuji disease need to be differentiated from AGEP. DReSS and AGEP both may display clinical features of fever and edematous erythema. DReSS is more likely to have mucosal involvement (50%) compared with AGEP (20%). DReSS is also more likely to have systemic involvement (91%) compared with AGEP (17%). Systemic features of DReSS may include constitutional symptoms (fever, malaise) and systemic organ involvement in the liver, kidney, lung, brain, muscle/heart, or pancreas. Therefore, it is advised to consider ordering various laboratory tests that may include the following: complete blood count with differential including search for atypical lymphocytes and eosinophilia, inflammatory markers, PCR for HHV6, HHV7, CMV, EBV, liver function tests, pancreatic enzymes, serum creatinine, urinary protein and cells, creatine kinase, and troponin.
Although DReSS may manifest with pustules and vesicles, similar to AGEP, the cutaneous features are more commonly morbilliform and polymorphic with accompanying facial edema and possible mucosal involvement. DReSS has a classically long lag period of 4–8 weeks. Significant eosinophilia is also more common in DReSS (over 50% of cases) compared with the mild eosinophilia that has been reported in about one-third of AGEP cases. DReSS is a spectrum; mild cases demonstrate fewer systemic features and symptoms than major cases. The distinction between DReSS minor and DReSS major was recently conducted. DReSS minor, compared with DReSS major, had lower rates of facial edema, lesser degrees of elevated liver enzymes, and required shorter courses of immunosuppression. Minor forms of DReSS may be more challenging to differentiate from AGEP. It is important to note that there have been cases of DReSS and AGEP overlap reported, for example in a patient receiving vemurafenib.
SJS/TEN and AGEP are both immune-mediated reactions, most often triggered by drugs; it is important to differentiate the two to rule out SJS/TEN, a disorder that is classically more severe than AGEP. SJS/TEN typically presents with a flu-like prodrome followed by cutaneous involvement with erythematous dusky purpuric macules (atypical target lesions), a positive Nikolsky sign, and mucosal involvement with ocular, oral, and genital lesions. Mucosal involvement is much less common in AGEP. If there is skin sloughing in AGEP, the etiology is due to pustule coalescence, unlike SJS/TEN where sloughing is due to epidermal necrosis and detachment. The definitive way to differentiate AGEP from SJS/TEN is by skin biopsy. Histopathology of AGEP will show subcorneal or intraepidermal neutrophilic pustules, whereas SJS/TEN will show full thickness keratinocyte necrosis. Both SJS/TEN and AGEP are immediately treated with discontinuation of the inciting drug or trigger. A few cases of ‘TEN-AGEP’ overlap have been reported with bullae, mucosal involvement, and diffuse exfoliation mimicking SJS/TEN but with AGEP features on histology. Of note, drugs that induce AGEP are more likely to produce a positive patch test result compared with those involved in SJS/TEN.
Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis (Ofuji disease) can be differentiated from AGEP on the basis of clinical features and histological findings. Three subtypes of Ofuji disease have been described, including classical, immunosuppression-associated (most commonly HIV-associated), and infantile. In addition, cases of drug-induced Ofuji disease have been reported. Most cases of drug-induced Ofuji disease have been triggered by chemotherapies such as cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil. The clinical presentation typically begins with pruritic follicular papules and pustules in areas over the trunk, such as the face, scalp, and arms. Histologically, Ofuji disease is often characterized by spongiosis and a perifollicular lymphohistiocytic infiltrate. There may be micro-abscesses of eosinophils within the follicular epithelium. Ofuji disease is classically not accompanied by any systemic symptoms; however, peripheral eosinophilia is a common finding. Ofuji disease often recurs or is chronic, most commonly in patients with HIV or individuals aged in their 30s and is most well-characterized in Japanese women. There have been no reported cases of concurrent or overlapping Ofuji disease and AGEP.

Treatment
The mainstay of treatment for AGEP is withdrawal of the offending drug. In cases caused by infection or other triggers rather than a drug, treatment of the underlying cause is an important part of management. Otherwise, treatment is primarily symptomatic/supportive, as AGEP is usually self-limited. Supportive treatment may include topical steroids, antipyretics, and antihistamines. In severe cases, oral corticosteroids may be used and have been reported to be associated with reduction in length of hospital stay and morbidity. In rare cases, AGEP was reported to be induced by oral corticosteroids. For example, a case of AGEP induced by prednisolone confirmed by patch testing was reported. In such cases, all systemic steroid therapy is not necessarily contraindicated, as, in this report, the patient was able to tolerate methylprednisolone without recurrence of rash. Cyclosporine is another option for severe AGEP with similar efficacy to oral corticosteroids that may be used in steroid-refractory cases or in patients with contraindications to steroid therapy. Secukinumab and infliximab have also been successfully used to treat refractory cases that are not responsive to drug discontinuation, supportive care, or steroids. Due to the immunologic nature of AGEP, it is likely that other biologic medications targeting the aforementioned IL pathways can be utilized; however, further study is needed to determine the necessity, safety, dosing, and outcomes. The healing process is characterized by cutaneous desquamation, for which topical emollients are recommended.

Clinical Prognosis and Long-Term Outcomes
Upon discontinuation of the causative agent, rapid resolution of symptoms, including the cutaneous features, typically occurs within a few days to 2 weeks. Based on the diagnostic criteria for AGEP (Table 2), lack of resolution within 15 days reduces 4 points from the score, which decreases the likelihood of AGEP diagnosis and reflects the importance of this feature. As AGEP resolves, there are typically collarettes of desquamation over the affected areas. Mortality in AGEP is less than 5%, and in cases where death occurs, it is usually due to multiple organ dysfunction, disseminated intravascular coagulation, or nosocomial infection rather than the cutaneous findings. Those at highest risk of death are individuals with multiple comorbidities and more severe, diffuse cutaneous and mucous membrane involvement. More recent publications have suggested that death events in patients with AGEP may be unrelated to AGEP. In order to accurately assess AGEP-associated mortality, more research is needed to relate death events to follow-up periods, severity, treatment, and comorbidities. AGEP may, rarely, be followed by long-term complications in the event of multiorgan involvement, such as kidney damage, but this is rare and atypical and may resolve with the use of systemic corticosteroids. It is important to note that AGEP can recur after reintroduction of the causative drug or trigger.

Limitations
The main limitation of this review is that the AGEP literature consists mainly of case reports and research letters with retrospective data. In addition, in the absence of double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized control trials, available treatment recommendations are largely based on clinical opinion. Limited data are available on the safety and sensitivity of patch, prick, and intradermal tests for diagnosis. In addition, different presentations of the eruption in skin of color may affect the clinical manifestations, making it difficult to characterize on a global level. Finally, this summary is not a systematic review, which limits the degree of objectivity. However, care has been taken to present a variety of different perspectives on the topics that are hotly debated in AGEP.

Conclusions
AGEP, first described in 1968 and later defined in 1980, continues to be studied. The aim of this review was to present the most recent information on the triggers, pathogenesis, clinical features, diagnosis, prognosis, and management of AGEP. Although significant progress has been made, more studies are needed to further characterize AGEP. In addition, literature is needed to educate clinicians in all settings to promote awareness of AGEP, as this would be beneficial to improve diagnostic accuracy and prompt management, particularly due to the rarity of the disease and the overlap between the clinical features of AGEP and other severe cutaneous eruptions.
Rose Parisi and Hemali Shah were co-first authors on this work.

Declarations

Funding
No sources of funding were used to assist in the preparation of this article.

Competing interests
Roni P. Dodiuk-Gad consults for Janssen, Sanofi, AbbVie, Novartis, Pfizer, La Roche-Posay, Dexcel, and Eli Lilly. Alexander A. Navarini declares being a consultant and advisor and/or receiving speaking fees and/or grants, and/or served as an investigator in clinical trials for AbbVie, Almirall, Amgen, Biomed, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, Eli Lilly, Galderma, GSK, LEO Pharma, Janssen-Cilag, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre Pharma, Regeneron, Sandoz, Sanofi, and UCB. Rose Parisi, Hemali Shah, Beda Muehleisen, Neil H. Shear, and Michael Ziv have no relevant conflicts of interest to disclose.

Ethics approval
Not applicable.

Patient consent to participate/publish
Not applicable.

Data availability statement
Data were derived from public resources.

Code availability
Not applicable.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization: All authors. Literature search and data analysis: RP, HS, RPDG. Writing-original draft preparation: RP, HS, RPDG. Writing-review and editing: All authors. Supervision: All authors. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

References
Generalized pustular psoriasis A clinical and epidemiological study of 104 cases
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP): a review and update
Acute generalized exanthematic pustuloses (four cases) (author's transl)
Clindamycin-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: a case report
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP)–a clinical reaction pattern
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: Epidemiology, clinical course, and treatment outcomes of patients treated in an Asian academic medical center
The necessity of patch testing in determining the causative drug of AGEP
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: pathogenesis, genetic background, clinical variants and therapy
Gallardo MA, Mallela T, Gilkey T, Himed S, Walker TD, Nusbaum KB, et al. Demographic and laboratory differences seen between acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis and drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms: a cross-sectional analysis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2022.
Patient care outcomes in hospitalized patients with acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: a cross-sectional database study
Risk factors for acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP)-results of a multinational case-control study (EuroSCAR)
Culprit drugs induce specific IL-36 overexpression in acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Rare variations in IL36RN in severe adverse drug reactions manifesting as acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Immunohistochemical comparison of IL-36 and the IL-23/Th17 axis of generalized pustular psoriasis and acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
The genetic background of generalized pustular psoriasis: IL36RN mutations and CARD14 gain-of-function variants
Gene [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine (US), National Center for Biotechnology Information; 2022 09/22/2022.
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis to amoxicillin
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis in a child with fasciitis
Acute localized exanthematous pustulosis (ALEP): review of literature with report of case caused by amoxicillin-clavulanic acid
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, manifesting as severe laryngeal edema
Syrigou E, Grapsa D, Charpidou A, Syrigos K. Acute Generalized Exanthematous Pustulosis Induced by Amoxicillin/Clavulanic Acid: Report of a Case Presenting With Generalized Lymphadenopathy. J Cutan Med Surg. 2015 Nov-Dec;19(6):592-4.
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis to amoxicillin associated with parvovirus B19 reactivation
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by oxacillin confirmed by patch testing
Recurrent acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis to two different drugs: oxacillin and dextromethorphan confirmed by patch test
A case report of a piperacillin/tazobactam-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Piperacillin/tazobactam as cause of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Accidental re-exposure causing repeated severe acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Photoinduced acute exanthematous pustulosis caused by dicloxacillin and exposure to sunlight
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to clavulanic acid
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) induced by cefotaxime
Delayed presentation of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis following treatment with cefepime in a patient with COVID-19 without the use of hydroxychloroquine
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis after ceftriaxone use resembling sepsis
Cefixime-associated acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: Rare cases in India
Clinical features, diagnosis and management of cephalosporin-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by ceftriaxone use
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to ceftriaxone: Report of a pediatric case with recurrence after positive patch test
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis reported due to loxosceles envenomation may be secondary to azithromycin therapy
Ciprofloxacin induced acute generallised exanthematous pustulosis
Tosufloxacin-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis confirmed by a drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation test
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: a rare side effect of clindamycin
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis in an African American male caused by trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Clindamycin-associated acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Daptomycin-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by daptomycin in a critically ill burn victim
Acute localized exanthematous pustulosis due to metronidazole
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by daptomycin
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with tigecycline
A case of vancomycin-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis confirmed by patch testing
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) caused by telavancin
Catho G, Ader F, Chidiac C, Ferry T. Acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis due to pristinamycin. BMJ Case Rep. 2013;2013:bcr2013008594. 10.1136/bcr-2013-008594
Drug triggers and clinic of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP): a literature case series of 297 patients
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis after COVID-19 treatment with hydroxychloroquine
Hydroxychloroquine-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: an adverse reaction to keep in mind during COVID-19 pandemic
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to hydroxichloroquine
Hydroxychloroquine-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: a series of seven patients and review of the literature
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by hydroxychloroquine
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) in 12 patients treated for SARS-CoV-2 positive pneumonia
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis with a focus on hydroxychloroquine: a 10-year experience in a skin hospital
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: a complication of COVID-19 infection or therapy?
Prolonged acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis and atypical target-like lesions induced by hydroxychloroquine
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by hydroxychloroquine successfully treated with etretinate
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by empiric hydroxychloroquine for presumed COVID-19
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by hydroxychloroquine: first case report in Canada and review of the literature
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by hydroxychloroquine: a case with atypical clinical presentation
Hydroxychloroquine-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis in an orofacial granulomatosis patient with homozygous IL36RN mutation
Ixekizumab for treatment of refractory acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by hydroxychloroquine
The first pediatric case of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by hydroxychloroquine
A case of prolonged generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by hydroxychloroquine-Literature review
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis secondary to acyclovir confirmed by positive patch testing
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis following SARS-CoV-2 virus: remdesivir as a suspected culprit
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis following treatment with favipiravir in a patient with COVID-19 without hydroxychloroquine use: Report of the first case
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis in a child probably induced by terbinafine
Concurrent terbinafine-induced acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis and hepatitis
Terbinafine-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to terbinafine
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with terbinafine: a case report
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by terbinafine in a child confirmed by patch testing
Fluconazole-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Severe acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) induced by miconazole oral gel with overlapping features of drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS)
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis secondary to oral nystatin
Case report: acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by praziquantel
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to benznidazole
A case of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by exposure to Atovaquone/proguanil
Bendamustine-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis confirmed by patch testing
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by Mycophenolate Mofetil: a case complicated with pemphigus foliaceus
A mild case of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by gemcitabine
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by gemcitabine after nivolumab in metastatic lung adenocarcinoma followed by a dramatic tumor response: a case report
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by gemcitabine
Acute localized exanthematous pustulosis induced by paclitaxel
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by docetaxel
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by docetaxel and recurrent with letrozole: a case report
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by cetuximab
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by erlotinib in a patient with lung cancer
Pustular eruption after biosimilar rituximab infusion: report of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis in two patients with pemphigus
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by sorafenib
Sorafenib-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: an increasing association?
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis simulating Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis associated with the use of vismodegib
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by atezolizumab in a patient with lung adenocarcinoma
High grade dermatologic adverse events associated with immune checkpoint blockade for cancer
Ipilimumab-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis in a patient with metastatic melanoma
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with ipilimumab and nivolumab
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by the combination of pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy in a patient with squamous-cell carcinoma
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis in a patient receiving high-dose recombinant interleukin-2
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis to a novel oral anticoagulant (apixaban)
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by enoxaparin: 2 cases
Acute localized exanthematous pustulosis caused by enoxaparin
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by clopidogrel
Ticagrelor-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by gliclazide: a case report
Linagliptin-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis following paracetamol ingestion in a child
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis following paracetamol ingestion in a 5-year-old child: a case report
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by celecoxib
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by ibuprofen-Diagnosis confirmed by patch testing
Lornoxicam-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by piroxicam: a case report
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by oral prednisolone
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis with mephenesin balm
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by topical diphenhydramine
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to a transdermal ketoprofen patch
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by topical morphine and confirmed by patch testing
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis with features mimicking toxic epidermal necrolysis secondary to amiodarone
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by propafenone: an emerging skin adverse reaction
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to diltiazem: Investigation of cross-reactivity with other calcium channel blockers
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with 2 common medications: hydroxyzine and benzocaine
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with ranolazine
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis secondary to levetiracetam and valproic acid use
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by levetiracetam
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by the second-generation antipsychotic cariprazine
Roy C, Jaiswal S, B PJ, Paliwal S, Dey P, Mehta V. Haloperidol-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: a rare side effect. Prim Care Companion CNS Disord. 2022;24(3).
Olanzapine-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: a case report
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis as a side effect of quetiapine
Codeine-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis without IL36RN mutations
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to codeine confirmed by patch testing, without cross-reactivity to other opioids
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to dextromethorphan
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to dextromethorphan
First case report of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) caused by mifepristone
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by mifepristone
Acute localized exanthematous pustulosis due to alendronate
Cannabidiol-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Dupilumab-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis in a 17-year-old female chinese patient with atopic dermatitis
T cell-mediated acute localized exanthematous pustulosis caused by finasteride
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by isotretinoin
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by methimazole
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by mianserin
Midodrine-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by pantoprazole
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by pseudoephedrine in a combination tablet with fexofenadine
Varenicline-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis confirmed by patch testing
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: first case associated with a Chlamydia pneumoniae infection
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with coccidiomycosis infection
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with a COVID-19 infection
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis after COVID-19 infection: a case report from Saudi Arabia
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection reactivation
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to Epstein-Barr virus infection in a neonate
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with primary Epstein-Barr virus infection
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis with cytomegalovirus infection
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with human parvovirus B19 infection in an adolescent
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by Moderna COVID-19 messenger RNA vaccine
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis in close temporal association with mRNA-1273 vaccine
COVID-19 vaccine-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Overlapping acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms induced by a second dose of the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine
Influenza vaccine-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis during pregnancy
Association of facial pustular neutrophilic eruption with messenger RNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with icodextrin
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by iomeprol with cross-reactivity to other iodinated contrast agents and mild reactions after rechallenge with iopromide and oral corticosteroid premedication
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by iopamidol with recurrence on rechallenge with iopromide
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by an iodinated contrast radiocontrast medium for computed tomography arthrography of the knee
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis caused by an intravenous radiocontrast medium
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis induced by iron carboxymaltose infusion: a case report
Curcumin-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to oral use of blue dyes
Flagellate shiitake mushroom reaction with histologic features of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to insect bites?
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis and Coombs-positive hemolytic anemia in a child following Loxosceles reclusa envenomation
Acute localized exanthematous pustulosis induced by a spider bite
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: atypical presentations and outcomes
Systemic involvement of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: a retrospective study on 58 patients
Acute localized exanthematous pustulosis (ALEP)
Acute localized exanthematous pustulosis: Clinical features, pathophysiology, and therapy
Acute localized exanthematous pustulosis secondary to levofloxacin
Acute localized exanthematous pustulosis following heparin calcium injections
Skin tests in the work-up of cutaneous adverse drug reactions: a review and update
Results of patch testing in acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP): A literature review
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis due to sulfamethoxazol with positive lymphocyte transformation test (LTT)
The histopathological spectrum of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) and its differentiation from generalized pustular psoriasis
R AN, Rafiq NB. Candidiasis. Treasure Island: StatPearls; 2022.
Obesity and dermatology
Grouped pustules on an erythematous base
Generalized pustular psoriasis (von Zumbusch)
Clinical course and characteristics of generalized pustular psoriasis
Pustular psoriasis and acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis and psoriasis: what can be learned from comorbidities
Clinical and histopathologic features differentiating acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis and pustular psoriasis: a retrospective series
Distinguishing pustular psoriasis and acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis on the basis of plasmacytoid dendritic cells and MxA protein
A case of ceftriaxone-induced acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis/generalized pustular psoriasis overlap
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis: a review of 30 years of progress
Koebnerization of Hailey-Hailey disease into a cutaneous drug eruption of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with systemic symptoms
Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DReSS)/Drug-Induced Hypersensitivity Syndrome (DiHS)-Readdressing the DReSS
Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS)
Discriminating minor and major forms of drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms: facial edema aligns to the severe phenotype
Severe cutaneous adverse reaction associated with vemurafenib: DRESS, AGEP or overlap reaction?
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: an update
Clinical presentation and management of atypical and recalcitrant acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Rare and complicated overlap of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis
Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis (Ofuji's disease)
Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis: a 40 year retrospect
Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis: a proposal of diagnostic and therapeutic algorithms
Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis induced by chemotherapy
Histopathological patterns indicative of distinct adverse drug reactions
Ofuji's disease in an immunocompetent patient successfully treated with dapsone
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis associated with spider bite
Cyclosporine for treatment of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis: A retrospective analysis
Case report: successful treatment of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis with secukinumab
Overlap of acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis and toxic epidermal necrolysis: response to antitumour necrosis factor-alpha antibody infliximab: report of three cases
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis with multiple organ failure
Clinical Characteristics, Disease Course, and Outcomes of Patients With Acute Generalized Exanthematous Pustulosis in the US
Multisystem organ failure secondary to acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) with atypical presentation resembling septic shock
Acute Generalised Exanthematous Pustulosis: An Update