Evaluation of the efficacy and safety of Chinese medicine Cang-Er-Zi-San in the treatment of allergic rhinitis in children: A meta-analysis and systematic review
Background:
More and more studies have shown that Chinese medicine can effectively and safely treat allergic rhinitis (AR) in children. This meta-analysis aims to compare the efficacy and safety differences between conventional therapy and the Chinese herbal medicine Cang-Er-Zi-San (CEZS) from an evidence-based perspective, and guide the clinical treatment of pediatric AR.
Methods:
This study aims to compare the effects of intervention with traditional Chinese medicine formula CEZS on the clinical symptoms of pediatric AR, determine the effectiveness and safety of CEZS in treating pediatric AR, and obtain high-quality clinical evidence. Research method: based on the preferred reporting item (PRISMA) statement of systematic review and meta-analysis, inclusion and exclusion criteria were established. Retrieve 7 mainstream medical databases to obtain randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of traditional Chinese medicine CEZS for the treatment of pediatric AR. Include RCTs that meet research requirements. Then extract the data information and evaluate the quality using the Cochrane bias risk assessment tool. Meta-analysis was conducted using RevMan software on the effective rate, clinical symptom relief time, recurrence rate, and adverse event indicators. Calculate relative risk (RR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI), test heterogeneity identify its source, evaluate publication bias through funnel plots.
Results:
15 RCTs and 1361 patients were included. The results of meta-analysis showed that the efficacy of Chinese herbal compound CEZS in the treatment of children with AR was significantly superior to other therapies. Effective rate (RR = 1.21; 95% CI = 1.15, 1.26) The difference was statistically significant, and the symptom relief time, Recurrence rate, adverse event, the time of symptom relief in the treatment group were all better than those in the control group. It is suggested that CEZS therapy is more suitable for the clinical treatment of children with AR.
Conclusion:
CEZS has a definite therapeutic effect on children with AR and is an effective method for treating it. However, due to biased results and limited research, a large number of high-quality studies are needed to validate the effectiveness of CEZS and provide new treatments for clinical reference.

1. Introduction
Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a disease trait by sneezing, runny nose, nasal congestion and nasal itching. Some patients may experience eye symptoms such as itching, conjunctival congestion, and tearing. Some patients may experience persistent and leading diseases such as sinusitis, pharyngitis, conjunctivitis, secretory otitis media, and allergic asthma. Studies have shown that patients with a family history of allergic disease have a greater probability of developing AR, which can be caused by factors such as weather changes and exposure to allergens. According to 2 studies in 2023, the prevalence of AR in children diagnosed by doctors is 10.48%, the prevalence is about 17% of AR in people under 18 years old in China. The discomfort and trouble caused by symptoms such as nasal congestion and runny nose can cause great difficulties for children’s daily life and learning, and can also reduce their sleep quality. Repeated attacks of AR, which persist for a long time, there is a higher risk of asthma and seriously endanger the physical health of the affected child. Parents often pay a significant economic and time cost for this. At present, although commonly used drugs for the clinical treatment of pediatric AR take effect quickly, they can only alleviate symptoms, but cannot effectively control the recurrence rate. Children often need to take medication for long duration. These drugs can cause adverse reactions such as dry nose, dry mouth, drowsiness, fatigue, stomach discomfort, rash, etc, and their safety is not high. Traditional Chinese medicine has been widely spread in clinical practice to treat pediatric AR in recent years and achieving good therapeutic effects. Clinical research on Cang-Er-Zi-San (CEZS) treatment for pediatric AR has also gradually increased. Cang’er Zi-San is a traditional Chinese herbal formula composed of Cang’er Zi, Xinyi, Bai Zhi, and peppermint. It is suitable for patients with symptoms such as nasal congestion, itching, frequent sneezing, decreased smell, pale nasal mucosa, and watery discharge in the nasal tract.
However, due to differences in sample size, experimental design, intervention methods and processes, and combination therapy among different studies, as well as uneven literature quality, the CEZS treatment plan for pediatric AR has not yet reached standardization; evidence-based medicine research in this field is still lacking. This study conducted a meta-analysis on the efficacy and safety of CEZS in the pediatric AR, furnishing an evidence-based references for clinical application.

2. Methods

2.1. Study registration
The systematic review and Meta-Analysis Program (PRISMA-P) Priority reporting program will rigorously guide the reporting of this systematic review. The system review program has been registered on the PROSPERO website (the registration number is CRD42023481752). If there are any adjustments throughout the study period, we will promptly revise and update the details in the final report.

2.2. Inclusion criteria

2.2.1. Types of studies
We will only include randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of CEZS treatment for pediatric AR published between self-built databases and October 1, 2023, with no restrictions on disease subtypes or traditional Chinese medicine syndromes. The language is English and Chinese only.

2.2.2. Types of participants
Participants diagnosed with childhood AR (according to validated diagnostic criteria) will be included without restrictions by sex, ethnicity, nationality, and educational background, aged between 0 to 18 years old.

2.2.3. Types of interventions
The participants in the control group can receive a placebo or other intervention methods. The observation group should receive any dose and method of CEZS treatment, including CEZS Chinese herbal medicine decoction, patent medicines, or simple preparations administered orally, via nasal fumigation, etc. The treatment may or may not be be combined with other intervention methods. If the treatment group uses other medications, the control group must use them in the same way.

2.2.4. Types of outcomes
Included the effective rate (cure rate, response rate, and apparent efficiency), adverse event, the Recurrence rate, and Symptom relief time (the disappearance of corresponding clinical symptoms is considered as relief).

2.3. Exclusion criteria
Non-pediatric patients. Non-RCT reviews, animal experiments, case reports, expert experience, and conference articles. Incomplete data or information repeatedly checked or published in the literature.

2.4. Search strategy
From the date of database establishment until October 1, 2023, search the following electronic databases: PubMed, Cochrane Library, Chinese biomedical database, Embase, Wanfang Database, VIP Database, and China National Knowledge Infrastructure Database. The retrieval mode used will be a combination of free vocabulary and medical topic title terms, including Rhinitis, Allergic, Rhinitis, Allergic, Seasonal, Children, Rhinallergosis, Baby, Infant, Minors, CEZS, Cang-Er-Zi-Wan, Randomized controlled trial, Controlled clinical trial, Randomly, Randomized, Random allocation, Placebo, Double-blind method, Single-blind method, Trials. Taking PubMed as an example, the search strategy is shown in Table 1.
Search strategy for the PubMed database.
Number	Search items	 	1	Rhinitis, allergic [title/abstract]	 	2	Rhinitis, allergic, seasonal [title/abstract]	 	3	Rhinallergosis [title/abstract]	 	4	#1 OR # 2 to 3	 	5	Children [title/abstract]	 	6	Baby [title/abstract]	 	7	Infant [title/abstract]	 	8	Minors [Title/Abstract]	 	9	#5 OR #6 to 8	 	10	Cang-Er-Zi-San (all field)	 	11	Cang-Er-Zi-Wan (all field)	 	12	#10 OR #11	 	13	Randomized controlled trial (all field)	 	14	Controlled clinical trial (all field)	 	15	Randomly (all field)	 	16	Randomized (all field)	 	17	Randomised (all field)	 	18	Random allocation (all field)	 	19	Placebo (all field)	 	20	Double-blind method (all field)	 	21	Single-blind method (all field)	 	22	Trials (all field)	 	23	#13 OR #14 to 22	 	24	#4 and # 9 and #12 and # 23

2.5. Study selection and management
The first step is to confirm the title and abstract of the study. The literature management and record search will be done with Endnote X9 and NoteExpress3.6 software. To place the selected studies together, We will read the full text of the initially screened articles and select the appropriate studies based on the inclusion criteria. If there are differences of opinion on inclusion and exclusion, a group discussion will take place.

2.6. Data extraction and management
We will use the WPS Office to create a extraction form for the selected study that contains all necessary data. In a spreadsheet, we will record the information about the first author, publication date, sample size, interventions in treatment groups, interventions in control groups, and outcomes.

2.7. Dealing with missing data
When confronted with incomplete data or ambiguous research findings, we reached out to the authors to gather any missing details before deciding on exclusion. Should the accurate data remain unattainable, we will proceed with excluding it from the analysis.

2.8. Risk of bias assessment
Reviewers will independently assess the risk of bias using the Cochrane Manual for Systematic Review of Interventions. Biases such as random sequence generation, assignment hiding, participant and person blindness, result evaluation blindness, result data incomplete, and result reporting selectivity will be evaluated as low, high, or fuzzy risk. The results will be reviewed repeatedly and further discussed among all researchers.

2.9. Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using Review Manager 5.4.1 software (Cochrane Handbook). Results were reported with a standard mean difference of 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) for consecutive outcomes and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) for relative risk (RR) for dichotomous outcomes. I2 test and Chi-square test were used to analyze the statistical heterogeneity among the studies. As long as there is no heterogeneity in the data (Chi-square test P > .05, I2 test > 50%), we use a fixed-effect model. Subgroup and sensitivity analyses were performed to explore potential heterogeneity in the study and to assess potential confounders. Publication bias was detected by funnel plot.

3. Results

3.1. Literature selection
Through a comprehensive search, we identified a total of 185 studies based on our retrieval strategies from 7 electronic databases. Following the removal of duplicates, 75 trials were identified, of which 13 studies were removed by screening the titles and abstracts because they did not meet the predefined inclusion criteria. Through the reviewing of full texts, a further 47 studies were excluded by following the exclusion criteria. Consequently, 15 studies of 1361 patients were included in the meta-analysis as shown in Figure 1.
Flow diagram of the included and excluded studies.

3.2. Characteristics of included trials
A total of 15 RCT literature were included, including 1361 patients with chronic fatigue syndrome, 692 in the treatment group, and 669 in the control group. The characteristics are shown in Table 2.
Characteristics of included trials.
Author	Time	Region	Participants	Age (T/C) (yr)	Treatment group interventions	Control group interventions	Trial duration	Outcomes	 	Luo Liqin	2015	Hunan, China	91	9 ± 1.2/9 ± 1.2	BuzhongYiqi Decoction + CEZS, 2 times/d, 4 wk	BuzhongYiqi Decoction, 2 times/d, 4 wk	4 wk	①	 	Jiang Hua	2018	Chongqing, China	140	6.08 ± 2.39/6.69 ± 2.77	Montelukast, 4 mg/d, 12 wk + CEZS preparation, 3 times/d, 12 wk	Montelukast, 4 mg/d, 12 wk	12 wk	①③⑧	 	Tu Jing	2019	Sichuan, China	60	4 to 13/4 to 13	Montelukast, 4 mg/d, 6 wk + CEZS preparation, 3.6 mg/d, 6 wk	Montelukast, 4 mg/d, 6 wk	6 wk	①③⑤⑦⑧⑨	 	Hu Wencai	2021	Shandong, China	40	10/14	CEZS, 3 times/d, 2 wk	Loratadine, 10 mg/d (weight >  30 kg), 5 mg/d (weight ≤ 30 kg), 2 wk	2 wk	①	 	Li Ning	2014	Henan, China	60	9.2 ± 1.7	CEZS, 2 times/d, 3 mo	Biyankang tablet, 6 tablet/d, 3 mo	3 mo	①	 	Sun Lixiao	2016	Henan, China	184	7.59 ± 3.64/7.75 ± 4.21	CEZS, 2 times/d, 2 mo	Biyankang tablet, 6 tablet/d, 2 mo	2 mo	①⑥	 	Wang Yinjia	2022	Henan, China	80	5.4 ± 1.2/5.6 ± 1.7	CEZS + Tuo-Min-Tang decoction, 2 times/d, 4 wk	Tuo-Min decoction, 2 times/d, 4 wk	4 wk	①②⑥⑦	 	Yuan Haizhou	2016	Jiangsu, China	70	5.9 ± 0.32/5.5 ± 0.45	Cefixime, 6 mg/kg/d + Fuma Nasal Drops, 3 times/d, 6 d +  CEZS, 2 times/d, 10 d	Cefixime, 6 mg/kg/d + Fuma Nasal Drops, 3 times/d, 6 d	1	①②	 	Yang Yiyu	2021	Jiangsu, China	60	5.24 ± 0.78/5.19 ± 0.73	Cefprozil, 7.5 mg/kg, 2 times/d, 7 d + Mometasone furoate nasal spray, 1 times/d, 7 d + CEZS, 2 times/d, 7 d	Cefprozil, 7.5 mg/kg, 2 times/d, 7 d + Mometasone furoate nasal spray, 1 times/d, 7 d	7 d	①②⑥⑦	 	Qiu Hong	2014	Sichuan, China	100	3.02 ± 0.53/3.01 ± 0.55	CEZS, 4 times/d, 1 mo	Cephalosporin, +  Fuma Nasal Drops, + Dexamethasone, 5 times/d, 1 mo + Fluticasone Propionate Nasal Spray, 2 times/d, 1 mo	1 mo	①⑦	 	Huang Xiaolin	2016	Chongqing, China	84	5.44 ± 0.56/5.86 ± 0.63	Cefuroxime Axetil, 0.25 mg, 2 times/d, 2 wk + Triamcinolone acetonide nasal spray, 1 time/d, 2 wk + Vitamin C, 0.1 g, 3 times/d, 2 wk CEZS, 2 times/d, 2 wk	Cefuroxime Axetil, 0.25 mg, 2 times/d, 2 wk + Triamcinolone acetonide nasal spray, 1 time/d, 2 wk + Vitamin C, 0.1 g, 3 times/d, 2 wk	2 wk	①②	 	Li Yanshan	2016	Guangdong, China	60	5.12 ± 1.34/6.78 ± 1.61	Loratadine, Loratadine, 10 mg/d (weight >  30 kg), 5 mg/d (weight ≤ 30 kg), 7 d + CEZS, 2 times/d, 7 d	Loratadine, Loratadine, 10 mg/d (weight>30 kg), 5 mg/d (weight ≤ 30 kg), 7 d	7 d	①②⑥	 	Wang Wengong	2011	Gansu, China	60	7.5/7.2	CEZS, 3 times/d, 14 d	Terfenadine, 30 mg/time, 2 times/d + Prednisone acetate, 5 mg/time, 2 times/d + Ephedrine, 2 times/d, 14 d	14 d	①	 	Wang Changwu	2019	Henan, China	200	4.6 ± 0.9/4.8 ± 0.8	CEZS, 2 times/d, 10 d	Cefixime, 3 mg/kg, 2 times/d, 10 d + Fuma Nasal Drops, 3 times/d, 6 d	10 d	①②	 	Pan Shanwei	2019	Jiangsu, China	72	—/—	CEZS, 2 times/d, 3 wk	Desloratadine, 1.25 mg/time, (<5 yr), 2.5 mg/time, (5–11 yr), 5 mg/time (>12 yr), 3 wk + Mometasone Furoate, 1 time/d, 3 wk	3 wk	①⑩
① Total effective rate; ② recurrence rate; ③ symptom score; ④ physical sign score; ⑤ nasal condition; ⑥ comparison of clinical symptom relief time; ⑦ score of life quality; ⑧ immune factor levels; ⑨ adverse reactions; ⑩ long-term effect.

3.3. Methodological quality of included trials
According to the bias risk assessment criteria in the Cochrane Handbook version 5.1 manual, the quality of the included literature was evaluated. Random sequence generation: 5 studies were using a random number table for random allocation; 1 studyused visit order for random allocation, and other studies only mentioned the term “randomization.” Allocation concealment: No study used allocation concealment. Researcher/subject blinding: No study used a double-blind method, 4 studies informed participants of allocation information. Selective reporting of research results: No studies reported follow-up. Integrity of outcome data: No criteria for termination, rejection, or withdrawal were established in any included studies, and no dropouts were reported. The overall risk of bias in the literature is shown in Figure 2A and B.
Risk of bias graph. (A) Results of risk of bias assessment for individual level studies, (B) an overall summary for the included studies.

3.4. Outcomes

3.4.1. Effective rate
Effective rates were reported in 15 studies, involving 1361 patients. The results are shown in Figure 3. The heterogeneity of the included studies is acceptable (P = .02, I2 = 49%), and the statistics are merged using a fixed effects model. The effective rate of CEZS in treating AR in children is prominentiy higher than other drug treatments(RR = 1.21, 95% CI = 1.15,1.26), We conducted subgroup analysis and found that the control group had higher heterogeneity compared to subgroups of other therapies, which may be attribute to the significant differences in intervention methods used in the study within this subgroup.
Forest plot of efficiency.

3.4.2. Time for relief of nasal congestion symptoms
There are 4 literature reports on the time to relieve nasal congestion, involving 384 patients. Figure 4 shows the results of this outcome. The included studies had high heterogeneity (P = .0001, I2 = 71%), and the statistical measures were merged using a random group effects model. The nasal congestion relief time of the CEZS group was prominentiy better than other drug treatments (MD = −1.67, 95% CI = −1.77, −1.57) (d), and the difference was statistically significant (P < .00001). We conducted sensitivity analysis because of the high heterogeneity and excluded each included study one by one, while summarizing and analyzing the remaining studies. Indicate that none of the studies had an excessive impact on the results, indicating that the results are stable and reliable.
Forest plot of nasal congestion symptoms relief time.

3.4.3. Time for relief of runny nose symptoms
There are a total of 4 literature reports on the relief time of runny nose, involving 384 patients. The analysis results are shown in Figure 5. The included studies have high heterogeneity (P < .0001, I2 = 81%), and the statistical measures were merged using a random group effects model. The relief time of runny nose in the CEZS group was significantly better than other drug treatments (MD = −1.89, 95% CI = −2.02, −1.75) (d), and the difference was statistically significant (P < .00001). We conducted sensitivity analysis because of the high heterogeneity and excluded each included study one by one, while summarizing and analyzing the remaining studies. We found that heterogeneity was significantly reduced (I2 = 0%) when Li Yanshan’s 2016 literature was excluded, and we speculate that heterogeneity may originate from this.
Forest plot of runny nose symptoms relief time.

3.4.4. Recurrence rate
Recurrence rate: A total of 6 studies have reported recurrence rate as an outcome measure. The heterogeneity of the included studies is acceptable (P = .88, I2 = 0%), Merge statistics using a fixed effects model. The merged results showed a statistically obvious advantage between 2 groups [RR = 0.22, 95% CI (0.12, 0.42), P < .00001]. The results of the meta-analysis showed that the reduced recurrence rate after CEZS treatment was noteworthy as shown in Figure 6.
Forest plot of recurrence rate.

3.4.5. Adverse reactions
Three studies counted adverse reactions, including a dry nasal cavity, dry mouth, drowsiness, overall fatigue, stomach discomfort, rash, and other symptoms in the treatment group or control group. There were 2 studies in which participants did not experience any adverse reactions, with only 1 study reporting 12 cases of adverse reactions in the control group and 5 cases in the treatment group. These adverse reactions are mild and temporary, do not require medical treatment. The remaining 12 studies did not mention adverse reaction events. The statistical results showed that the adverse events between the 2 groups was (OR = 0.38, 95% CI = 0.13, 1.14), and no statistical significance, as shown in Figure 7.
Forest plot of adverse reactions.

3.5. Publication bias
Figure 8 shows that most of the 15 studies reporting the efficiency analysis were near the top midline and visually symmetrical, indicating no significant publication bias.
Funnel plot of publication bias.

4. Discussion
The etiology of AR depends on the spread and release of inflammatory factors. AR is an allergic disease in which the nasal mucosal Th2 immune response is dominant. After atopic individuals inhale allergens, antigen-presenting cells transmit the allergen to initial CD4 + T cells (Naive CD4, Th0). Under the induction of interleukin-4 (IL-4), Th0 differentiation shifts towards Th2, Th1 differentiation is inhibited, and Th2 releases Th2-type cytokines, including IL-4 Interleukin-5 (IL-5), interleukin-13 (IL-13), and other IL-4 and IL-13 induce B cells to produce specific IgE antibodies (sIgE, sIgE). sIgE binds to IgE receptors on the surface of mast cells (MC) to form sensitized MCs, putting the body in a sensitized state. When atopic individuals inhale the same allergen, the allergen activates sIgE anchored on the surface of MCs, causing them to release a large amount of inflammatory mediators, Causing type I allergic reactions in the nasal mucosa. During this period, the sustained release of IL-5 by Th2 can also promote the infiltration of inflammatory cells such as eosinophils (EOS) into the nasal mucosa, causing pathological changes in the nasal mucosa tissue. In recent years, with in-depth research on Th17 and Treg, more and more studies have shown that the Th17/Treg balance is also involved in the occurrence of AR. Th17 levels increase and Treg cells decrease in AR patients, while Treg cells secrete related cytokines such as IL-10 and TGF-β1 is also showing a downward trend.And weaker CD40 stimulation induces the production of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10.IL-11 increased the number of IL-17CD4 cells infiltrating the peripheral and central nervous system, as well as IL-17A serum levels. Meanwhile, IL-11 participates in the process of inflammatory cell transport by inducing NLRP3 inflammasome-related genes in monocytes. In addition, studies have shown that the activation and overexpression of programmed death 1 (PD-1) receptors is 1 of the pathways that inhibit T cell responses, manipulating and inhibiting changes in the PD-1 signaling pathway on Tregs and restoring Treg cell inhibitory activity. So currently, the commonly used drugs in Western medicine for treating AR often cut off a certain link in the pathway as the treatment approach. The Xanthium sibiricum in CEZS can stabilize the mast cell membrane, and reduce the production of allergenic MCs and the release of intracellular substances, thereby achieving an anti-allergic effect, at the same time, it can reduce the expression of Th2 cytokines such as IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13. There is experimental evidence that the nose drop therapy of Xanthium sibiricum can effectively reduce AR behaviors such as scratching the nose and sneezing in mice, and restore the body weight of the AR model group mice. The main active ingredient of peppermint is a volatile oil, which has biological activities such as anti-inflammatory, analgesic, antibacterial, and antitumor, regulating the digestive system and smooth muscles. After many clinical studies, it has been proven that peppermint naphtha can effectively alleviate AR symptoms. Experimental studies have shown that Bai Zhi intervention in AR mice can effectively alleviate symptoms and alleviate nasal mucosal tissue damage. The mechanism may be related to downregulating the Th17 ratio, upregulating the Treg ratio, and restoring the Th17/Treg balance. Xinyi essential oil can effectively reduce the Th1/Th2 ratio in the peripheral blood of guinea pigs, thereby regulating the Th cell immunity in AR and effectively alleviating the symptoms of AR.
We analyzed the 15 studies included from the perspective of effectiveness and found that although the criteria for judging effectiveness were not the same, the CEZS treatment group showed significant advantages. We conducted subgroup analysis and found that regardless of the intervention method used in the control group, the efficacy of the CEZS therapy group was better than that of the control group, indicating that the efficacy of CEZS in treating pediatric AR is commendable.
From our experience, we know that traditional Chinese medicine may not have an advantage in symptom relief time. However, by analyzing the relief time of nasal congestion and runny nose, we were surprised to find that the CEZS treatment group had a shorter symptom relief time than the control group. This may be related to the drugs used by CEZS. Modern pharmacological research has shown that CEZS can inhibit the growth of nasal bacteria, contract nasal mucosal blood vessels, reduce edema and exudation, and have anti-inflammatory and antibacterial effects. In CEZS, Xanthium sibiricum, Angelica dahurica, and peppermint have significant effects on inhibiting mast cell degranulation, antagonizing histamine, and reducing abnormal immune responses. The compounds of CEZS can affect multiple targets of rhinitis. The main components of traditional Chinese medicine, such as Xanthium sibiricum and Angelica dahurica, have anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects, improve lymphocyte activity, and promote the discharge of nasal secretions. Xinyi can contract nasal mucosal blood vessels. This confirms that CEZS therapy can effectively shorten the duration of nasal congestion and runny nose symptoms. However, in our statistical analysis, the heterogeneity of the merged results was high, so we conducted a sensitivity analysis and found that heterogeneity significantly decreased when Li Yanshan’s 2016 study was excluded. We analyzed Li Yanshan’s 2016 study and found that the quality of the study was low, and participants were not randomized or blinded. Meanwhile, the dosage of the control group in this study was not uniform but was calculated based on the weight of the subjects. The above factors may affect the heterogeneity of the merger results.
Recurrent episodes that cannot be cured for a long time can cause great pain to AR patients. Long-term recurrence of the disease can increase the risk of concurrent asthma. So AR patients often urgently need a therapy that can effectively reduce the recurrence rate. We analyzed 6 studies that tracked and reported recurrence rates, which were generally followed up 1 or 3 months after the end of the intervention. Regardless of the follow-up time, the CEZS treatment group showed lower recurrence rates without exception. This may be the advantage brought by traditional Chinese medicine’s principle of seeking the root cause in treating diseases. Compared to simply handling clinical symptoms, TCM diagnosis and treatment methods often focus on eliminating the cause; based on the symptoms and signs, the cause of the disease can be comprehensively determined, and targeted treatment can be carried out to achieve the effect of removing the cause and preventing further recurrence. Therefore, it can effectively reduce the recurrence rate.
For pediatric diseases, safety has always been a key concern for parents and clinical doctors. Pediatrics often pursue therapies with minimal adverse reactions and minimal damage to the liver and kidneys due to the growth and development of children. In a large number of studies on conventional therapy for pediatric AR, common adverse events using steroid drug therapy include upper respiratory tract infections, coughing, sinusitis, nosebleeds, etc. Due to the higher blood-brain permeability and inhibition of neurotransmitters caused by montelukast, AR patients using montelukast may experience neurological and psychiatric symptoms. Antihistamines can cause adverse reactions such as drowsiness and cardiac toxicity. For sublingual immunotherapy, common adverse reactions include oral itching, swelling, and throat irritation. The main toxic component in Xanthium sibiricum is carboxyl-based Atractyloside, and the liver and kidneys are the main organs of action of carboxyl-based Atractyloside. However, animal experiments have shown that the frying method can greatly reduce the toxicity of Xanthium sibiricum. Animal experiments have shown that when different components of Magnolia officinalis nasal drops are dropped into the nasal cavity of guinea pigs, which is equivalent to 60 times the clinical daily dose of 60 kg, no guinea pigs die, no acute toxic reactions are caused to guinea pigs, and no significant nasal mucosal irritation is observed. This indicates that different components of Xinyi nasal drops have high safety. There have been no relevant studies reporting the toxicity and safety of Bai Zhi and peppermint, nor been clinical studies reporting adverse reactions caused by Bai Zhi and peppermint. From these studies, it can be concluded that the CEZS therapy is much safety than that of the control group therapy. Among the studies, only 3 studies reported the adverse events. After the combined analysis, the results showed no statistically significant difference between the 2 groups. We believe the insufficient evidence are due to the small sample size. In the future, clinical research in this field should pay more attention to the incidence and clinical manifestations of adverse reactions, to obtain more scientific and reliable evidence-based medicine evidence and provide guidance for future clinical applications.
Research has shown that the total area of the nasal mucosa is about 150 cm2, which is rich in capillaries, and drugs can be directly absorbed into the systemic circulation through this. The hemodynamic characteristics of nasal administration are similar to those of intravenous injection, which is more stable than oral blood drug concentration, and has higher bioavailability. It can also avoid the first-pass effect of oral drugs on the liver, reducing the damage of drugs to the liver, Used for treating rhinitis, it can also allow drugs to reach the affected area directly, achieving faster control of the condition and relief of clinical symptoms. Based on this, the research on CEZS as a nasal spray, fumigation therapy, and other new uses should be widely concerned. Perhaps CEZS topical therapy will become a popular research and development direction for AR.
The analysis results show that the therapeutic effect of CEZS therapy on pediatric AR is commendable, and CEZS therapy can achieve good performance in terms of effective rate, symptom relief time, and recurrence rate. This provides a safe and efficient treatment plan for the clinical application of pediatric AR, which is worth promoting and applying. However AR is a disease caused by the combined action of inflammatory cells and factors, especially IgE is an important indicator for the diagnosis and efficacy evaluation of AR. The expression levels of other inflammatory factors can also accurately reflect the disease of AR. Focusing on the symptoms themselves, more exploration of the mechanism of AR is still needed from a molecular biology perspective. Among the studies included in this study, only 2 reported inflammatory factors such as specific sIgE, interleukin-2 (IL-2), interleukin-4 (IL-4), and interleukin-10 (IL-10) γ- Interferon (IFN)- γ) Due to the limited availability of data, we did not analyze these indicators. However, it can be seen that there is a significant gap in the mechanism research field of pediatric AR. Future clinical research should pay more attention to this direction to provide more scientific and objective indicators for clinical diagnosis and treatment. Due to the susceptibility of AR to concurrent asthma, close attention should be paid to the progression of AR patients toward asthma. Asthma-related indicators can be screened during the intervention process or the follow-up recurrence rate. Asthma patients can be identified early and controlled and intervened, and the corresponding asthma incidence rate should be calculated to provide a reference for the improvement of AR treatment plans in the future.
From the 15 studies we included, it can be seen that the experimental design of these studies is not perfect, and many outcome indicators closely related to childhood AR not tested in clinical trials. At the same time, the reported outcome indicators are mostly subjective scales or symptom changes, with fewer objective indicators and a lack of scientific and standardized approaches. Most of the studies were of low quality, and their rigor needs to be improved. The lack of uniformity in baseline comparability, data recording, and statistical methods has resulted in significant errors and heterogeneity. Moreover, these studies were all conducted in China and lacked multi-center and large sample studies. This has posed significant obstacles to the development of evidence-based medicine research and the subsequent standardization of clinical applications. This preliminary evidence-based medicine research not only provides some reference evidence for CEZS treating pediatric AR but also identified some pressing issues in this area that need to be addressed. We hope that the clinical studies carried out in this area will improve the rigor and science of the experimental design and pay more attention to other symptoms and signs, and at the same time, relevant clinical studies are being promoted globally to provide more comprehensive and credible evidence for future clinical promotion.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank all the researchers in our working group.

Author contributions
Conceptualization: Qiaoqiao Zeng, Jingnan Li, Huixin Yan, Yunpeng Bi.
Formal analysis: Qiaoqiao Zeng, Jingnan Li.
Funding acquisition: Yue Zhuo.
Investigation: Yunpeng Bi.
Methodology: Qiaoqiao Zeng, Jingnan Li, Qin Wu, Xiaojie Li, Huixin Yan, Yunpeng Bi, Yixin Gao.
Resources: Yue Zhuo.
Software: Qin Wu, Xiaojie Li.
Supervision: Huixin Yan.
Writing – original draft: Qiaoqiao Zeng, Jingnan Li.
Writing – review & editing: Yue Zhuo.
Abbreviation:
AR
allergic rhinitis
CEZS
Cang-Er-Zi-San
EOS
eosinophils
IgE
immunoglobulin E
IL
interleukin
MC
mast cells
PD-1
programmed death 1
RCT
randomized controlled trial
TGF- β
transforming growth factor-β
Treg
regulatory T cells
Funding for this project was supported by the Jilin Province Science and Technology Development Plan Project (No. 20230204019YY).
This work has received support from the Fund in China. Their support is gratefully acknowledged.
It is not required for ethical approval because this study is a retrospective study and does not involve any new studies of human or animal subjects performed by any of the authors.
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.
How to cite this article: Zeng Q, Li J, Wu Q, Li X, Yan H, Bi Y, Gao Y, Zhuo Y. Evaluation of the efficacy and safety of Chinese medicine Cang-Er-Zi-San in the treatment of allergic rhinitis in children: A meta-analysis and systematic review. Medicine 2024;103:51(e40491).

References
International consensus statement on allergy and rhinology: allergic rhinitis.
The burden of allergic rhinitis and allergic rhinoconjunctivitis on adolescents: a literature review.
Allergic rhinitis (AR) is now estimated to affect some 1.4 billion people globally and continues to be on the rise. Editorial.
Environmental exposures may hold the key; impact of air pollution, greenness, and rural/farm lifestyle on allergic outcomes.
Epidemiology of allergic rhinitis in children: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Meta analysis of the incidence of allergic rhinitis in individuals under 18 years old.
Learning impairment and allergic rhinitis.
Diagnosis and treatment of allergic rhinitis in children: results of the PETRA study.
Allergic rhinitis.
Guideline summary: clinical practice guideline: allergic rhinitis.
Intranasal corticosteroids for allergic rhinitis.
Intranasal steroid sprays in the treatment of rhinitis is one better than another.
Guidelines for traditional Chinese medicine diagnosis and treatment of Children’s rhinitis (revised).
Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015 statement.
The Cochrane collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials.
Observation on the therapeutic effect of Bu Zhong Yi Qi Tang combined with Cang Er Zi San in the treatment of pediatric allergic rhinitis.
A study on the therapeutic effect of Cang’erzi Biyan dropping pills combined with Montelukast in the treatment of allergic rhinitis in children.
The effect of Cangerzi Biyan Pill combined with Montelukast on cytokines and clinical symptoms in the treatment of allergic rhinitis in children.
Observation on the therapeutic effect of modified oral administration and external fumigation of Canger Zi San on allergic rhinitis in children.
Observation on the therapeutic effect of modified Canger Zi San on chronic simple rhinitis in children.
Observation on the therapeutic effect of modified Canger Zi San on chronic simple rhinitis in children.
The application value of Canger Zi San combined with desensitization tang in the treatment of pediatric nasal allergy.
Clinical observation on the efficacy of nasal nebulization inhalation of Cang’er Zi tang in the treatment of 70 cases of chronic rhinitis in children.
Analysis of the effect of nasal nebulization inhalation of Cangerzi decoction in the treatment of chronic rhinitis in children [J/OL].
Observation on the therapeutic effect of modified Canger Zi San on pediatric rhinitis.
The clinical value of modified Canger Zi San in the treatment of chronic rhinitis in children.
Clinical observation on the combination of loratadine and Cangerzi powder in the treatment of allergic rhinitis in children.
Observation on the therapeutic effect of Wumei Canger Zi San on 40 cases of pediatric allergic rhinitis.
The effect and recurrence of nasal nebulization inhalation of Western medicine combined with Canger Zi Tang in the treatment of chronic rhinitis in children.
Clinical observation on the treatment of allergic rhinitis in children with lung qi deficiency cold type with Yiqi desensitization Canger Zi San.
Research progress on traditional Chinese medicine regulating Th1/Th2 immune imbalance in the treatment of allergic rhinitis.
Research progress on the role of Th17/Treg cell imbalance in allergic rhinitis.
SHP-1 plays a crucial role in CD40 signaling reciprocity.
IL-11 induces encephalitogenic Th17 cells in multiple sclerosis and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
IL-11 induces NLRP3 inflammasome activation in monocytes and inflammatory cell migration to the central nervous system.
Differential expression of programmed death 1 (PD-1) on various immune cells and its role in human leprosy.
The inhibitory effect of Xanthium sibiricum on immediate allergic reactions.
Experimental study on the regulatory effect of Cang Er Zi medicated serum on IgE sensitized mast cell degranulation.
The effect of Cang Er Zi oil drops on behavioral symptoms and serum IL-5 levels in mice with allergic rhinitis.
Effects of Bai Zhi emulsion on serum cytokines and Th17/Treg balance in nasal mucosa of mice with allergic rhinitis.
Study on the effect of volatile oil of Xinyi on Th cells in guinea pigs with allergic rhinitis.
Overview of the respiratory pharmacological effects of naringin and its glycoside naringin
Stigmasterol protects rats from collagen induced arthritis by inhibiting proinflammatory cytokines.
Chemical composition study of Xanthium sibiricum.
Exploring the mechanism of action of Canger Zi San, a core formula for rhinitis data mining based on network pharmacology and molecular docking.
Recent advances in allergic rhinitis.
Allergic rhinitis and its impact on Asthma (ARIA) guidelines-2016 revision.
Intranasal fluticasone furoate in pediatric allergic rhinitis: randomized controlled study.
Adverse drug reactions of montelukast in children and adults.
Pharmacogenomics for the efficacy and side effects of antihistamines.
Efficacy and safety of sublingual immunotherapy for allergic rhinitis: a network meta-analysis.
Study on the “dose-time toxicity” relationship of different processed products of Xanthium sibiricum on mouse liver and kidney toxicity.
Safety trial of different components of Xinyi nasal drops preparation.
Clara cell protein 16 release from the nasal mucosa in allergic rhinitis, chronic rhinosinusitis, and exposure to air pollutants.
Clinical efficacy analysis of nasal irrigation in the treatment of allergic rhinitis.
Research progress on nasal administration for the treatment of nasal diseases.
Comparative study of skin prick test and serum specific IgE detection in middle-aged and young patients with allergic rhinitis.
Serum IL-34 levels and their correlation with serum inflammatory factors in patients with allergic rhinitis.