Salivary gland tissues and derived primary and metastatic neoplasms: unusual pitfalls in the work-up of sellar lesions. A systematic review
Purpose
Salivary gland (SG) tissue and derived neoplasms may occur in the sellar region. As the current literature is mostly limited to case reports, the puzzling case of an inflammatory SG removed by transsphenoidal surgery (TS) and mimicking a prolactinoma prompted us to perform the first systematic review of these unusual conditions.
Methods
A systematic literature search was conducted according to the PRISMA guidelines. Forty-four individual cases—non-neoplastic enlarged salivary glands (NNESG, n = 15), primary benign (n = 7) and malignant (n = 8) ectopic salivary tumours (ST) and sellar metastasis from eutopic primary ST (n = 14)—were suitable for the analysis of clinical, radiological and pathological characteristics. Therapeutic outcome was reviewed as a secondary endpoint.
Results
All cases were diagnosed after surgery. NNESG commonly affected young and/or female patients, typically leading to headaches and hyperprolactinemia and originating close to the neurohypophysis. Submucosal SG should be excluded before concluding to an intrasellar NNESG after TS. No gender or age predominance was found for primary ectopic ST, which present as large tumors, with histological phenotypes similar to common ST. Hypopituitarism and diabetes insipidus were more frequent in ST than in NNESG. NNESG and benign ectopic ST rarely recur. Malignant ectopic ST should be distinguished from secondary localizations of eutopic ST reaching the sella by contiguity or metastatic spread; both share a frequent unfavorable outcome.
Conclusion
Sellar neoplasms derived from SG are rare but misleading conditions and pituitary dysfunction is likely to be more common than currently reported. Appropriate pathological evaluation and multidisciplinary approach are required.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s40618-021-01577-6.

Introduction
Ectopic salivary gland (SG) tissue may occur in different sites of the body: extra-cranially (larynx, gastrointestinal tract, middle ear, chest wall) and intra-cranially, with sellar and extra-sellar localizations (e.g.: optic nerve sheath, cerebellopontine angle). Intrasellar ectopic SG rests are typically localized close to the neurohypophysis or in the pars intermedia, often communicating with the Rathke’s cleft, and maybe incidentally found at autopsy. Only a small minority come to clinical attention because of mass effects and/or endocrine dysfunction, in particular hyperprolactinemia. Symptomatic enlargement of ectopic SG rests may be non-neoplastic (NNESG) or due to benign or malignant salivary tumours (ST) that mimic other non-functioning lesions, and the diagnosis relies on pathology where surgery is indicated. In addition, because malignant ST derived from major or minor eutopic SG may reach the sella through local invasion or blood spread, an extra-sellar origin should be excluded before concluding to a primary ectopic SG malignancy. Sellar salivary neoplasms represent an unusual challenge for specialists involved in the management of pituitary neuroendocrine tumours (Pit-NETs) and other sellar/parasellar lesions.
A puzzling case of sellar salivary gland (SG). A 19-year-old woman was referred in February 2019 because of a prolactinoma showing increasing pharmacological resistance. The diagnosis was made 3 years earlier in the setting of primary amenorrhea–galactorrhea and intermittent headache, plasma PRL 1763 ng/ml (N < 26.7) and a macroadenoma with a fluid hemorrhagic component at Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) (A1, A2 coronal and sagittal T2-weighted). Menarche occurred within 5 months of treatment, with regular menses but an increasing and poorly tolerated drug requirement to obtain a sub-optimal control of hyperprolactinemia (CAB up to 3.5 mg/week). As MRI showed clear evidence of residual disease (B1, B2 pre-and post-Gadolinium coronal views), endoscopic TS was proposed. A small nodular lesion, consistent with a microadenoma, was removed. Unexpectedly, pathological examination revealed numerous groups of glandular berries composed of typical serous and mucinous cells, compatible with SG tissue, separated by a chronic inflammatory lymphoplasmacellular infiltrate (C1 hematoxylin–eosin). Immunostaining for lysozyme was positive in mucinous cells (C2). Bony spicules and flaps of respiratory mucosae were also present, with no evidence of pituitary cells. Immunostaining for PRL was negative (not shown). The first pathological diagnosis was NNESG. However, post-operative CAB withdrawal was followed by a progressive recurrence of symptomatic hyperprolactinemia (up to 245 ng/ml 4 months after surgery), with MRI evidence of residual/recurring disease. Careful revision of serial pre-operative imaging revealed in a single MRI study (2017) a small intrasphenoidal nodular lesion localized just beneath the adenomatous lesion, with spontaneous hypointensity in T2 (D1 coronal view) and hyperintensity in T1 before and after gadolinium (D2 sagittal view). This finding was consistent with a cystic SG, undergoing subsequent inflammation and shrinkage. The final diagnosis was a sub-mucosal SG, mimicking and masking the residual microprolactinoma during TS. As CAB was re-started up to the maximal well-tolerated dose (2.0 mg weekly) with an incomplete response (PRL 45 ng/ml), TS will be potentially re-considered if necessary.
A recent puzzling observation (illustrated in Fig. 1) prompted us to perform the first systematic review of the literature about sellar NNESG and ST, pointing out an additional diagnostic pitfall, i.e. an inflammatory submucosal SG mimicking a prolactinoma during transsphenoidal surgery (TS). Individual cases were classified into four groups: ectopic NNESG, benign and malignant ectopic ST (eST) and secondary localizations of eutopic ST. Clinical, neuroradiological, pathological characteristics, and therapeutic outcome were analysed. This review points out the importance of a multidisciplinary work-up to reach a correct diagnosis and optimize clinical management.

Methods
A systematic review of case reports and case series was performed according to the Cochrane Collaboration and PRISMA statements. A literature search without limits was conducted on Medline and Scopus up to September 2020, including international and non-English literature, using the following keywords: ectopic salivary gland/ salivary gland/salivary gland tumour AND pituitary/sella/sphenoidal/sphenoid sinus. Cross-references were used to identify additional papers, allowing to retrieve six additional cases. Titles and abstracts of all papers were screened to assess their relevance. Duplicates, reviews, animal studies, in vitro studies and congress reports were excluded. Based on available abstracts and full texts, all the papers describing NNESG and benign or malignant sellar ST were analyzed. The following data were extracted for each paper: (1) first author, year of publication; (2) case demographics (gender, age), (3) symptoms, (4) endocrine abnormalities, in particular, PRL values, (5) neuro-radiological findings at MRI and/or computed tomography (CT): localization, size, invasion, signal intensity/density, contrast enhancement, (6) pre-operative and final pathological diagnosis, (7) treatment and, (8) where available, status at last follow-up (recurrence, progression, hormone replacement therapy, death).

Results
Flowchart of the literature eligibility assessment process
Overall, 1024 potentially relevant studies were found, 978 were excluded at first screening and 46 were selected for full-text assessment (Fig. 2). Thirty-five papers were finally retained (1963–2020): 32 in English language, 1 in French, and 2 papers in Japanese or Korean with detailed English abstracts and figures footnotes. Overall, 44 individual cases of symptomatic sellar NNESG and ST were described, including 14 secondary sellar localizations of primary eutopic ST. Because PitNETs were originally reported as pituitary adenomas (PA) in all papers, we elected to maintain this terminology to report the pre-operative diagnosis.

NNESG
Non-neoplastic enlarged ectopic sellar salivary glands (NNESG) reported in the literature
Publication	Sex, age (years)	Symptoms	Endocrine dysfunction	Plasma PRL	Imaging (MRI/CT)	Size (cm)	First diagnosis	Treatment	Histopathological findings	Follow-up (duration)	 	Kato et al. 	M, 11	Growth retardation	GHD	NA	Sellar/suprasellarPosterior pituitary lobeCysticMildly hyperintense on T1 and T2 (MRI)	NA	NA	Surgery (TS)	Cyst in the posterior pituitary lobeAcid to neutral mucopolysaccharides contentAcinar tissue with a simple epithelium formed of cuboidal or columnar cells	NA	 	Tatter et al. 	F, 22	HeadacheGalactorrheaIrregular menses	None	(23.9 ng/ml)	SellarPosterior pituitary lobeIsointense on T1, iso-hypointense on T2, no CE (MRI)	1.2 × 0.9 × 0.9	PA	DA (2 months) thenSurgery (TS)	Well-formed salivary acini with a low columnar epithelium in a fibrovascular stromaEosinophilic contentNo anterior pituitary cells in the cyst lining	No recurrence, no HRT and normal PRL a (12 months)	 	Chen et al. 	F, 28	HeadacheGalactorrheaIrregular menses	None	(93 ng/ml)	SellarPosterior pituitaryIsointense on T1 and T2, no CE (MRI)	0.6 × 0.5	Cystic PA or RCC	DA (2 years)Surgery (TS)	Mixed nests of acidophilic, basophilic and chromophobic cells in a delicate fibrovascular networkColloid-like contentMild chronic inflammation	No recurrence, no HRT and normal PRL (12 months)	 	Kim et al. 	F, 19	HeadacheBlurred visionNauseaDizziness	None	Normal	Sellar/suprasellar hyperintense on T1, with CE (MRI)	1.8	PA	Surgery (TS)	Cyst in the posterior pituitarySeromucinous acini with a low-columnar to cuboidal epithelium in a fibrovascular stromaNo evidence of pituitary adenoma	Post operative DI	 	Ranucci et al. 	M, 17	HeadacheNausea	NA	(83.5 ng/ml)	Sellar/suprasellar, contacting the medial CS walls bilaterally	1.9	NA	Surgery (TS)	Lobules of seromucous glands, embedded in a fibrovascular network, within the wall of a RCCAnterior pituitary tissue	Post-operative PRL 33.1 ng/ml	 	Stefanits et al. 	F, 23	HeadacheGalactorrheaIrregular menses	None	NA	SellarPosterior cystHyperintense on T1, no CE	1.5a	PA, RCC	Surgery (TS)	Tubular glands with intraluminar mucous embedded in fibrous connective tissue and cystic cavities lined by non ciliated epithelium compatible with RCCClose to the anterior pituitary, no adenomaAnti-SMA immunoreactive epithelial cell and anti-PGP immunoreactive nerve fibers surrounding the lesion	HRT (L-T4, hydrocortisone, desmopressin)	 	Hwang et al. 	F, 26	HeadacheNausea	None	NA	SellarPosterior pituitary lobeHyperintense in T1, hypointense in T2, no CE (MRI)	1.9 × 0.5 × 0.9	PA with apoplexy	Surgery (TS)	Cyst in the posterior pituitarySalivary acini with a low-columnar epithelium in a fibrovascular networkEosinophilic contentNo evidence of neoplasm	NA	 	Hintz et al. 	F, 28	HeadacheDecreased visionBitemporal hemianopsiaInsatiable appetite and weight gainPolyuria	NA	NA	Sellar/suprasellarHypointense on T1, hyperintense on T2, no CE (MRI)	NA	NA	Surgery (TC)	Branching tubules and small glands or acini lined by attenuated to columnar epitheliumPale blue mucinous material contentNo secretory granules, atypia, or mitotic activityNo respiratory or ciliated epithelium, no goblet cells	No recurrence (2 years)	 	Tanaka et al. 	M, 24	HeadacheBitemporal Hemianopsia	Central HT		SellarCystic, hyperintense on T1, hypointense on T2, no CE	1.6	NA	Surgery (TS)	Mucopolysaccharide contentCyst wall surrounded by myoepithelial cells positive for P63 staining, no atypical cellsLymphocytic infiltration (acute inflammation), proliferation of macrophages, fibrosis, and foam cells (chronic sialadenitis)	No recurrence (12 months)	 	Liu et al. Case 1	F, 57	Headache	None	Normal	Sellar/suprasellar surrounded bilateral internal carotid arteriesIsointense on T1, iso-hyperintense on T2, heterogeneous CEHyperdensity (CT)	4.6	Chordoma	Surgery (TS)	Lobules of seromucous glandsFragments of normal pituitary tissueNo evidence of neoplasia	No progression (12 months)	 	Liu et al. Case 2	F, 36	Headache	GHD (primary hypothyroid-dism)	Normal	SellarPosterior pituitary lobeHyperintense on T1, hypointense on T2, no CE (MRI)Hyperdensity (CT)	0.8 × 1.7 × 1.3	PA, RCC	Surgery (TS)	Scattered islands of seromucous glands mixed with fragments of simple columnar epithelium, constituting the lining of the RCC	No recurrence (4 years)	 	Liu et al. Case 3	F, 48	NauseaBlurred visive	None	NA	Sellar/suprasellarIsointense on T1, hyperintense on T2, Rim CE (MRI)Hyperdensity (CT)	1.7	PA	Surgery (TS)	Scattered islands of seromucous glands mixed with fragments of squamous and ciliated columnar epithelium, constituting the lining of the RCC	No recurrence (12 months)	 	Kleinschmidt-DeMasters et al. Case 1	F, 22	Hydrocephalus	PanhypopitDI	NA	Sellar/suprasellarHeterogeneous signal on T2, peripheral CE on T1Third ventriculomegaly	2.4 × 2.2 × 2.4	CP, RCC	Surgery (TS)	Cystic sellar salivary gland90% Acellular amorphous eosinophilc cyst contents typical of RCC with low cuboidal ciliated epithelium10% acinar glands lined by low cuboidal epithelium without stroma or inflammation, focally showed globet cells as the source of mucinNo cytological atypia, mitosis or necrosis	HRT, Cyst recurrence after 2 years (without salivary gland like tissue)	 	Kleinschmidt-DeMasters et al. Case 2	F, 29	Headache	NA	NA	SellarCystic and solid components	NA	NA	Surgery (excisional biopsies)	Cystic salivary gland in the posterior pituitary lobeSalivary glands producing mucin without cytological atypia or mitosis, focally showing eosinophilic cytoplasma reflecting oncocytic changeAmorphous eosinophilc colloid material lined by low cuboidal cells identical to RCC	< 12 months	 	Kleinschmidt-DeMasters et al. Case 3	F, 68	HeadacheFatigue	PanhypopitDI	NA	Sellar/suprasellarHyperintese on T1	1.3 × 1.4 × 1.9	PA with apoplexy, CP, RCC	Surgery excisional biopsies	Salivary-type glands adjacent to a thin fibrotic cyst wallAmorphous eosinophilc mucinCiliated columnar epithelium identical to RCC	< 12 months
CE contrast enhancement, CT computed tomography, CP craniopharyngioma, DA dopamine-agonist, DI diabetes insipidus, GHD growth hormone deficiency, HRT hormone replacement therapy, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, NA not available, Panhypopit. panhypopituitarism, PA pituitary adenoma, PGP protein gene product, PRL prolactin, RCC Rathke’s Cleft Cyst, SMA smooth muscle actin, T1 T1-weighted imaging, T2 T2-weighted imaging, TC transcranial, TS transsphenoidal
aSlowly progressive growth
Fifteen cases of NNESG were found (Table 1). Most patients were younger than 30 years (11/15, 73.3%), including a pediatric case. Most were females (12/15, 80%). The most frequent complaints were headache (12/15, 80%), visual symptoms—bitemporal hemianopsia, blurred vision, decreased visual acuity—(4/15, 26.6%), nausea (4/15, 26.6%), galactorrhea and menstrual irregularities (3/15, 20%). Endocrine dysfunction was frequent (8/15, 53.3%), including mild hyperprolactinemia (23.9–93.0 ng/ml, median 83.5) (3/15, 20%), growth hormone deficiency (2/15, 13.3%), panhypopituitarism (2/15, 13.3%) and/or central hypothyroidism (1/15, 6.7%). Pre-operative diabetes insipidus (DI) was present in 3/15 cases (20%). NNESG were variable in size (maximal dimension 0.6–4.6 cm, median 1.7). Intrasellar lesions were typically localized in the posterior pituitary (6/15, 40%), suprasellar extension was frequent (8/15, 53.3%), but hydrocephalus was rare (1/15, 6.7%). Lateral extension was uncommon (2/15, 13.3%), with cavernous sinus infiltration in the largest case. Based on the neuroradiological description and/or pre-operative diagnosis, they presented as pseudo-tumorous solid lesions, with frequent cystic component(s) (7/15, 46.7%). At MRI, most lesions appeared as hyper- or iso-intense on T1 weighted imaging (T1) (7/15, 46.7% and 4/15 26.6%, respectively) but either hyper- or hypo-intense on T2 weighted imaging (T2) (4/15, 26.6% and 4/15, 26.6%, respectively), with inconstant contrast enhancement (4/15, 26.6%). Spontaneous hyperdensity was found at CT where available (n = 4). Pre-operative diagnosis was: PA (8/15, 53.3%), Rathke’s cleft cyst (RCC) (5/15, 30%), craniopharyngioma (2/15, 13.3%), exceptionally chordoma (the largest one). Two patients received bromocriptine but the lesion was unchanged despite PRL normalization. All patients were operated on, 80% through a TS route (12/15). Follow-up was limited (1–4 years, median 1 year, n = 10), but no recurrence or progression was reported, except a cystic relapse after 2 years, without pathological evidence of SG tissue. At pathological examination, SG rests or cysts were found within or close to the posterior pituitary lobe, in 7 cases within the wall of a RCC (46.7%). NNESG were composed of acini with a low columnar or cuboidal epithelium, embedded in a fibrovascular stroma, without cellular atypia, with occasional inflammation (2/15, 13.3%). Anti-PGP immunoreactive nerve fibers were reported in one case, suggesting parasympathetic innervation. Adjacent anterior pituitary cells were observed in a minority of cases (20%).

Sellar ST
Sellar/parasellar salivary tumours (ST) reported in literature
Publication	Sex, age (years)	Symptoms	Endocrine dysfunction	Plasma PRL	Imaging (MRI/CT)	Size (cm)	First diagnosis	Treatment	Histopathological findings	Follow-up (duration)	 	(I) Primary benign ectopic ST			 	Hampton et al. Case 1	F, 61	Nausea, vomitingOccasional hypothermiaDecreased visual acuityBitemporal hemianopsia	NA	NA	Sellar/suprasellar (optic chiasm)	3.0 × 3.5	PA	Surgery (TS)RT (66 Gy)	Pleomorphic adenoma (Ki67 12.9%)	No recurrence (24 months)	 	Hampton et al. Case 2	F, 81	DehydrationAnorexiaMental status changesBitemporal hemianopsia	ACTH, TSH deficit		Sellar/suprasellar3° ventricle and hypothalamus compression	NA	PA	Surgery (TS)RT (65 Gy)	Monomorphic adenoma (Ki-67 2.36%)	NA	 	Hampton et al. Case 4	F, 17	HeadacheConfusionHomonymous hemianopsia	Panhypopit., DI	NA	Sellar/suprasellarCE (MRI)Hemorrhagic mass (CT)	NA	PA	Surgery (TC and TS)	Salivary gland oncocytoma (Ki67 0.6%)	No recurrence (3 months)HRT	 	Chimelli et al. 	M, 44	HeadachesWeaknessImpotence, decreased libidoDecreased visionBitemporal hemianopsia	Panhypopit	Normal	Sellar/suprasellar (optic chiasm)	2.5 × 2.5 × 0.5	PA	Surgery (TS)	Pleomorphic adenoma within the wall of a RCC	No recurrence (15 months)HRT	 	Rychly et al. 	M, 38	Muscle weaknessAxillary hair lossReduction of perspirationWeight lossProgressive visual and mobility loss	NA	NA	Sellar/suprasellar (optic chiasm)Heterogeneous CE (MRI)	3.0 × 3.5 × 4.0	CP	1° surgery (TC)RT (60 Gy)2° surgery (TS)	Adenomyoepithelioma (Ki67% 5%—recurrence vs. 0%—original tumor)	Recurrence after 1° surgery (14 years)No recurrence since 2°surgery (6 months)HRT, DI	 	Takahashi et al. 	M, 56	ThirstFatigueDecreased visual acuity	DI	NA	Sellar/suprasellarHypothalamus and midbrain compressionWell-defined borders and heterogeneous CE (MRI)Calcifications (CT)	NA	Chordoma	1° surgeryRT2° surgery (TC)	Pleomorphic adenoma	No recurrence (3 years)	 	Yao et al. 	M, 23	Polyuria, polydipsiaAsymmetrical breast developmentFeverVisual loss	ACTH, LH, FSH deficit and DI		Sellar/suprasellar (optic chiasm)	NA	PA, benign teratoma	1° surgery (TC) (subtotal)2° surgery (TC) (radical)	Pleomorphic adenoma (Ki67 1.2%)	Recurrence after first surgery (4 years)No recurrence since 2nd surgery (30 months)	 	(II) Primary malignant ectopic ST			 	Hampton et al. Case 3	F, 66	Bilateral VI nerve palsy	NA	NA	Sellar/suprasellarInferior invasion and bilateral CS extension encasing the carotids	NA	PA	Surgery (TC)RT (50 Gy)Surgery for meningeal metastasis	Adenocarcinoma, low grade (Ki67 13% primary, 15% met.)	Secondary intracranial dissemination (4 years)	 	Gilcrease et al. Case 1	F, 44	GalactorrheaAmenorrheaHemianopsia	NA		Sellar/suprasellar (optic chiasm)	3.8	ACC (biopsy)	Surgery	ACC adjacent to RC epithelium	Post-operative death (8th day, severe hypotension)	 	Gilcrease et al. Case 2	M, 55	Diplopia	NA	NA	Sellar/suprasellar	2	NA	Surgery (TS)	Papillary mucinous adenocarcinoma adjacent to RC epithelium	No recurrenceAlive (5 years)	 	Tsuyuguchi et al. 	F, 34	GalactorrheaAmenorrheaVisual loss	Panhypopit	(65.2 ng/ml)	Sellar/suprasellarCystic area on T2, with CE (MRI)No bone erosion (CT)	NA	CP	Surgery (TC)RT (20 Gy)10 radiosurgeries and 4 operations	ACC (Ki67: 11%)	Recurrences at 3 and 7 monthsDeath (3 years)	 	Nieder et al. 	F, 34	Bitemporal hemianopsiaVisual impairment	Panhypopit., partial DI	NA	Sellar/suprasellar (hypothalamic compression)	NA	CP	Surgery (subtotal resection, cerebral met.)RT (54 Gy)CHT (isofosfamide and BCNU)	Malignant myoepitelioma (Ki67 30–40%)	Tumour progressionDeath (20 months)	 	Van Furth et al. 	M, 60	AnorexiaFatigueHeadacheAddisonian crisisPartial III nerve palsy	ACTH deficit, DI	NA	Sellar/suprasellar (floor of the 3° ventricle)Homogenous CE (MRI)	2.5 × 1.8 × 2	PA	Surgery (TS)	Acinic cell carcinoma, low grade (Ki67 3%)	Post-operative death (8th day, rupture of thoracic aortic aneurysm)	 	Hong et al. 	F, 48	Left III and VI nerve palsySensory symptoms on the left forehead skin	None	NA	Left CS massExtension into the ipsilateral middle fossaIsointense on T1, hypointense on T2, intense and heterogenous CE (MRI)	NA	PA, granulomatosis, metastatic brain tumor, primary of CS	Surgery (TC)	Malignant myoepitelioma (CS) (Ki67 60%)	Residual tumour regrowthDeath (2 weeks after second surgery)	 	Lavin et al. 	M, 68	Weight lossReduced muscle bulkConfusion and drowsiness for obstructive hydrocephalusPartial III nerve palsy	Panhypopit	(451 mU/l)	Sellar/suprasellar (floor of the 3° ventricle)Left CSSolid massCystic component, heterogeneous CE (MRI)	NA	NA	Surgery (TC)RT (54 Gy)Temozolomide	EMC (Ki67 40%)	Tumour progressionDeath (22 months, pulmonary infection)	 	(III) Secondary malignant ST in the sellar region			 	Taillens et al. 	M, 52	DiplopiaVI nerve palsyMultiple cranial nerve palsiesVisual lossHeadacheWeight loss	NA	NA	Sellar/suprasellar (optic chiasm compression)CS invasionSkull base erosion (X-ray)	NA	PA	RTSurgery (TS)	Mixed salivary tumorNasopharynxPituitary and intracranial invasion	HRTPost-operative death 15 days, meningitis)	 	Vincentelli et al. Case 1	F, 35	DiplopiaBlindnessVI nerve palsyOrbital painHearing loss	NA	NA	Sellar/suprasellarEnlargement of optic canalBone erosion (sellar) (X-ray)	NA	Neurinoma, meningioma	SurgeryRT (60 Gy)	ACCLocal invasion (SS)	Recurrence (4 years)Death	 	Vincentelli et al. Case 4	F, 29	HeadacheAmenorrheaGalactorrhea	NA	NA	Round mass filling the SSBone erosion (sellar floor and clivus)	NA	NA	Surgery (TS)RT (70 Gy)Re-operations	ACCLocal invasion (SS)Recurrent (delay: 5 years)	Recurrence (2 years)Two re-operationsDeath	 	Dickhoff et al. 	F, 41	VI nerve palsy	None		NA	NA	NA	NA	ACCLocal invasion (SS)	NA	 	Hampton Case 5	F, 85	NA	NA	NA	Skull base destruction (CT)	NA	PA	Surgery (TS)	Monomorphic adenomaParotidMulti-recurrentDirect extension	Death (11 years)	 	Kaur et al. 	M, 33	NA	NA	NA	SellarCS invasionAnterior right temporal lobe (CT)	NA	NA	Surgery (TC)	ACCRight palateRecurrence (delay:12 years)Dural invasion	NA	 	McCutcheon et al. 	M, 47	PolyuriaPolydipsiaWeight lossCold and heat intoleranceDecreased energy and libidoMild diplopiaBitemporal hemianopsia	Panhypopit., DI		Sellar/suprasellar (optic chiasm)Posterior extensionIsointense on T2, heterogeneous CE (MRI)Posterior peri-tumorous edema	NA	NA	Surgery (TC)RT (30 Gy)	Ductal adenocarcinomaParotidMetastasis	Death (7 months)	 	Kawamata et al. 	F, 78	General malaiseDisturbed consciousnessHyponatremia	SIADH	(26.2 ng/ml)	Sellar/suprasellar (optic chiasm)Suspect intra-tumorous hemorrhagePartial CE (MRI)	NA	Met. with intratumoral hemorrhage, CP, PA with apoplexy	Surgery (TS)RT	ACCParotidMetastasis (delay: 4 years) (Ki67 12.5%)	NA	 	Abdul-Hussei 	F, 49	HeadachePhotophobiaDizzinessNauseaDiplopiaVI nerve palsyNumbness in the right V area (complete)	None	(39.1 ng/ml)	Large mass in the clivus with posterior destruction, destruction of the pterygoid palate and anterior extension (SS and nasopharynx)Right CS invasionBone invasion (CT)	3.8 × 3 × 2	NA	Surgery (TC)RT	ACCLocal invasion (SS)	NA	 	Tripathy et al. 	M, 28	Bloody nasal dischargeNasal blockageBlurred visionHemianopsia	NA	NA	Mass in the left ethmoid and SS extending to the sella, nasal cavity and nasopharynxHypointense in T1, hyperintense in T2, heterogeneous CE (MRI)	NA	NA	Surgery (TS)RT	ACCParanasal sinusLocal invasion	No recurrence or metastasis (6 months)Small residual lesion (CS)	 	Giridhar et al. 	M, 38	HeadacheSensory loss—maxillary division of V nerveDiplopia	NA	NA	Mass in the left SSBone erosion (skull base, SS, sphenoid and left petrous apex), bilateral CS and left orbital apex (CT)	NA	NA	RT (66 Gy)	ACCLocal invasion (SS)	No progression (6 months)Symptoms resolution	 	Kenan et al. 	F, 43	HeadacheVision loss in the right eye	NA	NA	Mass in the left paraclinoid area, adjacent to the optical nerve	1.6 × 1.2	NA	Surgery (TC)	ACCNasopharynxMetastasis (perivascular route) (delay: 3 months)	No complications	 	Hughes et al. 	F, 72	Fall and facial traumaPolyuriaIncontinenceBitemporal hemianopsia	TSH, ACTH deficit	NA	Sellar/suprasellar (optic chiasm, involvement of anterior cerebral arteries)CE (MRI)Sellar bone destruction (CT)	3.8 × 2.3 × 2.1	PA	Surgery (TS)RT (37 Gy)	ACCParotidMetastasis (delay: 26 years)	HRT	 	Jahandideh et al. 	M, 69	HeadacheDiplopiaSensory loss in the V nerve area	NA	NA	Mass in the right SS extending to the sella and clivusHypointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2, CE (MRI)	4 × 2 × 2	ACC, chordoma	Surgery (endoscopic)CHT-RT	ACCLocal invasion (SS)	Delayed post-operative death (3 months, respiratory distress)
Italic text inside refers to multiple treatments received for tumour regrowth
ACC adenoid cystic carcinoma, CE contrast enhancement, CHT chemotherapy, CP craniopharyngioma, CS cavernous sinus, CT computed tomography, DI diabetes insipidus, GHD growth hormone deficiency, HRT hormone replacement therapy, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, NA not available, Panhypopit. Panhypopituitarism, PA pituitary adenoma, PRL prolactin, RC Rathke’s cleft remnants, RCC Rathke’s cleft cyst, RT radiotherapy, SS sphenoid sinus, T1 T1-weighted imaging, T2 T2-weighted imaging, TC transcranial, TS transsphenoidal
aNo full text available
The individual characteristics of sellar ST according to their pathological classification are shown in Table 2.

Primary benign ectopic ST
Seven cases of benign sellar eST have been reported, with a majority of pleomorphic adenomas (4/7, 57.1%) and single reports of monomorphic adenoma, oncocytoma and adenomyoepithelioma. They manifested at any age in both genders (4M, 3F, 17–81 years-old, median 44), with visual symptoms in all cases and inconstant headache (2/7, 28.6%). General symptoms—such as muscle weakness, fatigue, weight loss, anorexia, nausea and/or vomiting—were also present in all patients, and endocrine dysfunction reported as hypopituitarism (4/7, 57.1%), hyperprolactinemia (2/7, 28.6%) and/or DI (3/7, 42.8%). Accordingly, benign eST were large (2.5–4.0 cm, median 3.0), with a suprasellar extension in all cases—up to the optic chiasm (5/7, 71.4%) or the hypothalamus (2/7, 28.6%). MRI signal was not reported, but contrast enhancement was frequent (3/7, 42.8%) and calcifications or pseudo-hemorrhage could be found at CT. The most frequent pre-operative diagnosis was PA (n = 5), but craniopharyngioma, chordoma and benign teratoma were also considered. All patients were operated on—TS (4/7, 57.1%) or transcranially (TC) (3/7, 42.8%). Based on a variable follow-up duration (0.4–14 years, median 2.5, n = 6) recurrences were rarely reported after complete surgical removal, but occurred 4 and 14 years after partial removal. Four patients received radiotherapy. Noteworthy, the first pathological diagnosis was inaccurate in 3 cases (benign teratoma, chordoma, craniopharyngioma).

Primary malignant ectopic ST
Primary malignant eST were reported in 8 cases and consisted of adenoid cystic carcinoma (2/8, 25%), myoepithelioma (2/8, 25%), epithelial–myoepithelial carcinoma (1/8, 12.5%), papillary mucinous adenocarcinoma (1/8, 12.5%), low-grade acinic cell carcinoma (1/8, 12.5%) and adenocarcinoma (1/8, 12.5%). All patients were adult (3M, 5F, 34–68 years, median 51.5) and had visual symptoms, with frequent oculomotor nerve palsy/diplopia (5/8, 62.5%). Endocrine dysfunction was reported as hypopituitarism (4/8, 50%)—including one case of acute adrenal insufficiency, hyperprolactinemia (3/8, 37.5%) and DI (2/8, 25%). Accordingly, tumours were large (2.0–3.8 cm, median 2.5), growing up to the optic chiasm (4/8, 50%) or the floor of the 3° ventricle (3/8, 37.5%). An invasive growth was reported in some cases, eroding inferiorly into the sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses (1/8, 12.5%) or extending in the cavernous sinus (2/8, 25%)—in one case reaching the middle fossa. Contrast enhancement was inconstantly reported (4/8, 50%) and, according to limited detailed MRI (n = 2), the tumour was isointense on T1 and slightly hyper- or hypointense on T2. Pre-operative diagnosis was PA (n = 3), craniopharyngioma (n = 2), but also inflammatory granulomatosis/hypophysitis, metastatic brain tumour and primary tumour of the cavernous sinus. All patients were operated on—half of them through a TC approach—and subsequently irradiated (20–54 Gy). Two patients also received chemotherapy (isofosfamide/BCNU or temozolomide) for an epithelial–myoepithelial carcinoma and an aggressive myoepithelioma, respectively, with a poor response. Except for one case of papillary mucinous carcinoma, all patients showed disease progression within 4 years (4/8, 50%) or died (6/8, 75%, 3 post-operative deaths). In one case, neuropathological misdiagnosis of PA was reported.

Secondary malignant sellar ST
Secondary ST were reported in 14 patients, deriving in most cases from minor salivary glands situated in the sphenoid sinus (n = 6), nasopharynx (n = 2), palate (n = 1) and paranasal sinus (n = 1)—but also from the parotid gland (4/14, 28.6%). A majority were adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) (11/14, 78.6%), with single reports of ductal adenocarcinoma, mixed salivary tumour, and a monomorphic multi-recurrent parotid adenoma extending to the sella. Most primary ST reached the sella through the sphenoid sinus (9/14, 64.3%) or dural infiltration (1/14, 7.1%), but metastatic blood spread could occur (4/14, 28.6%). In 4 cases sellar involvement was delayed (5–26 years after the primary tumour). Adults were affected at any age (6M, 8F, 28–85 years, median 45). Most patients had visual defects (10/14, 71.4%), cranial nerve palsy (7/14, 50%) with frequent diplopia (6/14, 42.8%) and/or trigeminal sensory symptoms (3/14, 21.4%). Endocrine dysfunction (hypopituitarism, hyperprolactinemia, DI, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion—SIADH) was documented in a minority of cases (5/14, 35%) despite suggestive symptoms in additional cases. Tumours were large, frequently invasive with skull base erosion (6/14, 42.8%) or cavernous sinus infiltration (5/14, 35.7%)., and inconstant suprasellar invasion (5/14, 35.7%). Pre-operative diagnosis was PA (n = 3) —with an apoplectic presentation in one case —but also craniopharyngioma, meningioma, neurinoma and metastasis. Surgery was proposed in all but one patient, who received first-line radiotherapy for tumour inoperability. One patient who initially declined surgery was operated on 5 years after radiotherapy but the tumour had reached a considerable volume with extensive bone destruction and multiple cranial nerve palsy. Patients underwent TS/endoscopic (n = 7), TC (n = 4) or undetermined (n = 2) surgery, and frequent post-operative radiotherapy (n = 8). Follow-up was available in 8 cases, 6 patients died within 4 years, in one case from early post-operative meningitis.

Discussion
This is the first systematic review on salivary diseases and neoplasia localized to the sellar region. The puzzling case of an apparently intrasellar NNESG removed during TS surgery prompted us to further analyse these conditions, which are not mentioned in exhaustive reviews on sellar/parasellar lesions or single-center experiences reporting rare sellar-suprasellar masses. Indeed, nearly half of the reports were published in the last decade (17/35 papers), in particular those concerning NNESG (7/11 papers, 11/15 cases) and benign primary eST (4/5 papers, 4/7 cases). Strikingly, pre-operative neuroimaging was inconclusive or misleading in all cases. The heterogeneity of radiological descriptions, in part reflecting a variety of pathological histotypes, confirms the lack of strongly suggestive features, although cystic components of variable protein content were frequent in NNESG. Where present, DI or rapidly evolving symptoms may help to distinguish such conditions from non-secreting Pit-NETs, but usually suggest alternative diagnosis (craniopharyngiomas, hypophysitis or metastasis). Thus, similar to other rare lesions coming up as pathological surprises, they are extremely difficult to consider at the time of pre-operative evaluation. Of note, the pathological diagnosis may also be inaccurate at first observation.
Salivary rests in the pituitary are relatively common incidental findings at autopsy (3.4–8.8%). This may be explained by pre-existing seromucous glands from the primitive oral cavity remaining in the Rathke’s pouch during migration and persisting during postnatal life, similar to ectopic pituitary tissue reported at various locations along its migratory path, including the roof of the nasopharynx. Experimental studies also suggest that Rathke’s pouch components may occasionally differentiate into salivary and adenohypophyseal tissues during organogenesis and that parotid gland tissue may trans-differentiate into pituitary hormone-producing cells under the influence of hypothalamic factors. Embryological development would thus explain why NNESG are found close to the posterior pituitary lobe and sometimes within RCC’s wall. In this latter case, the role of salivary remnants in the development of clinical symptoms is not always clear-cut, and some may be incidental findings in the setting of a symptomatic RCC rather than true NNESG. Similarly, we recently observed incidental salivary rests adjacent to an apoplectic gonadotroph PitNET (Suppl Fig. 1), although in our experience this is extremely rare. Alternatively, active secretion from ectopic salivary rests within the cyst was proposed to contribute to RCC enlargement, possibly triggered by parasympathic innervation.
The mechanisms leading to NNESG are not fully elucidated but the development of mucinous cysts and/or chronic inflammation are frequently observed. In normal conditions, the lack of neuro-vegetative innervation of the posterior pituitary may prevent the secretion of mucinous material, or local lymphatic/venous reabsorption may remove secretions. Symptomatic NNESG may grow up into the opto-chiasmatic cistern, but exceptionally reach considerable dimensions or appear invasive. Because they more frequently affect young (73.3%) and/or female patients (80%), who present with headache and symptomatic hyperprolactinemia, NNESG may represent a rare differential diagnosis of cystic sellar lesions in such patients. Hyperprolactinemia likely results from functional disruption of the physiological dopaminergic inhibition, although direct stimulation by EGF, which is abundantly produced by SG, may be hypothesized. This explains why hyperprolactinemia is moderate and promptly normalized by dopamine-agonists in the absence of tumour shrinkage. Less frequently, pre-operative DI or hypopituitarism are present—including growth retardation —and require appropriate hormone replacement therapy. In our patient, the lateral localization of the lesion associated with post-operative recurrence of hyperprolactinemia lead us to reconsider our first diagnosis of intrasellar NNESG with surgical aspiration of prolactinoma cells escaping pathological examination. Furthermore, we found no previous observation of NNESG coexisting with a PitNET. Based on careful revision of serial pre-operative MRI, transient evidence of an intrasphenoidal cyst was noticed, placed on the TS route to the prolactinoma. As only pathological minor salivary glands are seen by radiological imaging, we finally concluded for residual inflammation in a submucosal SG following spontaneous reabsorption of the cyst. This pitfall should therefore be considered in the presence of SG acini contaminating surgical fragments obtained by TS, as it may open the possibility of a second TS approach. Once made a definitive diagnosis of NNESG, recurrences have been exceptionally reported. In such cases, a neoplastic origin may not be totally ruled out.
ST involving the sellar region have been reported more frequently than NNESG. Patients were adults of any age, mass effects were almost invariably present and amenorrhea–galactorrhea or hyperprolactinemia were occasionally reported. Malignant forms were characterized by a mild female predominance and a major frequency of ocular palsy and symptoms suggestive of hypopituitarism or DI. Similar to primary eutopic ST, they include a variety of histotypes, and a minority of eST were found in association with or close to a RCC.
Primary benign sellar eST were mostly represented by pleomorphic adenomas. Where specified, they presented as medium/large-sized heterogeneous sellar/suprasellar masses, sometimes with intratumoural hemorrhage or calcifications, potentially mimicking PA, craniopharyngioma, teratoma or chordoma. Hypopituitarism and DI were frequently documented in this group. Post-operative radiotherapy was often proposed due to the risk of recurrence after incomplete surgical removal, although but delayed regrowth could occur. Long-term follow-up is therefore recommended.
Malignant ST usually presented as large, heterogeneous, typically invasive sellar/parasellar masses, and rapid progression could suggest pituitary metastasis or other malignancies. They included a variety of histotypes. Adenoid cystic carcinomas (ACC) accounted for nearly 80% of secondary forms versus 25% of primary malignant eST. With a few exceptions, both were diagnosed earlier (4th–5th decade) than common eutopic ACC (5th–7th decade), which are usually slowly growing. This suggests that sellar ACC may have a different natural history. However, further information is needed to compare the prognosis of sellar ST with similar eutopic histotypes. Radical surgical resection followed by radiotherapy was the treatment of choice in most cases, although first-line (chemo-)radiotherapy was also proposed. Incomplete surgical removal favored tumour progression and/or metastatic spread, with a poor response to radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Of note, one patient died 8 days after surgery for unexplained hypotension. As pituitary function was poorly evaluated in these patients, hypopituitarism could be left untreated.

Conclusion
Sellar/parasellar lesions derived from SG tissues are rare but challenging conditions. An appropriate pathological characterization is essential for a correct multidisciplinary approach, which should consider and treat their frequent endocrine complications. Where required, hormone replacement therapy is essential to improve patient’s quality of life and prevent the risk of acute adrenal insufficiency. In addition to surveillance for the early recognition of ST recurrences or metastasis, life-long endocrinological follow-up is necessary for the presence of permanent dysfunction or after radiotherapy, which may induce delayed hypopituitarism. Multicenter collection and long-term follow-up would be useful to better define disease evolution and optimal clinical management of these unusual conditions.

Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Authors’ contributions
The review was designed and written by TF and MLJR, who take full responsibility for the paper. TF and FGianno performed the systematic review with the contribution of MDA. The manuscript was critically revised and approved by CC, VE and FGiangaspero.

Funding
Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi dell’Aquila within the CRUI-CARE Agreement. No funding was received for this study.

Declarations

Conflict of interest
On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.

Consent to publication
Consent for publication has been obtained from the patient, including permission for the details/images to be available on the Internet and viewable by the general public.

Ethical statement
Institutional review board approval was not required.

Informed consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the scientific report of the illustrating case.

References
Salivary gland choristoma (heterotopic salivary gland tissue) on the anterior chest wall of a newborn
Salivary gland choristoma of the middle ear
Heterotopic salivary gland tissue at the hepatic flexure of the large intestine: a case report
Ectopic salivary gland found on rectal biopsy—a rare pathological diagnosis
A case of ectopic salivary gland of the larynx
Salivary gland choriostoma in the esophagus
Intra-sellar salivary gland-like pleomorphic adenoma arising within the wall of a Rathke’s cleft cyst
Intracranial salivary gland choristoma within optic nerve dural sheath: case report and review of the literature
Solitary fibrous tumor of the cerebellopontine angle with salivary gland heterotopia: a unique presentation
Pre-morbid morphological conditions of the human pituitary
Salivary gland rests in the human pituitary. Light and electron microscopical study
Intrasellar symptomatic salivary gland rest
Pituitary symptomatic salivary gland rest cyst: case report
Ectopic salivary gland within the pituitary gland. Case report
A case report of symptomatic salivary gland rest within the pituitary gland
Intrasellar symptomatic salivary gland: case series and literature review
Ectopic salivary gland tissue in a Rathke’s cleft cyst
Innervated ectopic salivary gland associated with Rathke’s cleft cyst clinically mimicking pituitary adenoma
Intrasellar symptomatic salivary gland rest with inflammations
Symptomatic salivary-rest cyst of the sella turcica
Adenoid cystic carcinoma sphenoid sinus with intracranial extension treated by radical radiotherapy: a rare case
Adenoid cystic carcinoma metastatic to the pituitary: a case report and discussion of potential diagnostic value of magnetic resonance elastography in pituitary tumors
Adenoid cystic carcinoma metastatic to the dura: report of two cases
Primary epithelial–myoepithelial carcinoma of the pituitary gland
From pituitary adenoma to pituitary neuroendocrine tumor (PitNET): an International Pituitary Pathology Club proposal
The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elaboration
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement
Cystic sellar salivary gland-like lesions
Salivary gland-like tumors of the sellar region
Primary adenomyoepithelioma of the sellar region: a case report
Intrasellar salivary gland-like pleomorphic adenoma: case report
Suprasellar salivary gland-like pleomorphic adenoma
Intrasellar adenoid cystic carcinoma and papillary mucinous adenocarcinoma: two previously undescribed primary neoplasms at this site
Rapid-developed primary malignant myoepithelioma in the cavernous sinus: a case report
Radiotherapy and chemotherapy for myoepithelioma of the sellar region
Intracranial adenoid cystic carcinoma of suprasellar region
Salivary gland-like tumor of the sella
Adenoid cystic carcinoma: an unusual sellar mass
An unusual presentation of adenoid cystic carcinoma of the minor salivary glands with cranial nerve palsy: a case study
Intrasellar remote metastasis from adenoid cystic carcinoma of parotid gland: case report
Adenoid cystic carcinoma metastatic to the sellar area: report of two cases
Adenocarcinoma of the salivary gland metastatic to the pituitary gland: case report
Nasopharyngeal mixed salivary tumor with pituitary and intracranial invasion. (Differential diagnosis from a chromophobe adenoma of the pituitary)
Endoscopic-assisted microscopic decompression of adenoid cystic carcinoma of paranasal sinus extending to the sella: a case report and review of literature
Cylindromas of the base of the skull. Report of four cases
Adenoid cystic carcinoma arising in the sphenoid sinus presenting with headache and diplopia: a case report
Very unusual sellar/suprasellar region masses: a review
Diagnosis and treatment of parasellar lesions
Sellar surprises: a single-centre experience of unusual sellar masses
The sellar and suprasellar region: a “hideaway” of rare lesions. Clinical aspects, imaging findings, surgical outcome and comparative analysis
Review of the major and minor salivary glands, Part 2: neoplasms and tumor-like lesions
Clinical management of teratoma, a rare hypothalamic-pituitary neoplasia
Considering the ectopic pituitary gland in evaluation of the nasopharyngeal mass
A pituitary-salivary mixed gland induced by tissue recombination of embryonic pituitary epithelium and embryonic submandibular gland mesenchyme in mice
Parotid gland tissue is able partially to assume pituitary functions under the influence of hypothalamic factors: in vivo and in vitro studies
Paracrine control of lactotrope proliferation and differentiation
Metabolism and effects of epidermal growth factor and related growth factors in mammals
Review of the major and minor salivary glands, Part 1: anatomy, infectious, and inflammatory processes
Minor salivary gland basal cell adenocarcinoma