The Role of Cardiac Imaging for the Evaluation of Primary and Secondary Mitral Regurgitation: From Milestones to Novelties
Mitral regurgitation (MR) is the second most prevalent valvular heart disease, classified as primary (degenerative) or secondary (functional) based on its underlying etiology. Accurate assessment of MR severity, mechanism, and prognosis is crucial for guiding therapeutic decision-making, including surgical and transcatheter interventions. Cardiac imaging plays a pivotal role in this evaluation, wherein transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography is considered the first-line modality. Advancements in three-dimensional echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging allowed to refine the quantification and characterization of MR, enhancing diagnostic accuracy and risk stratification. This review aims to provide an overview of multimodal cardiac imaging and the most relevant parameters to assess MR, highlighting key milestones, novel techniques, and their implications in clinical practice.

INTRODUCTION
Mitral regurgitation (MR) is the second most common valvular heart disease (VHD) after aortic stenosis and the most common cause of valve surgery in Europe.
The high occurrence of this VHD is due to the complexity of the mitral structure, which is composed of multiple components: valve leaflets, mitral annulus, chordae tendineae, and papillary muscles, which function closely depends on the anatomy and physiology of the left heart chambers. Any alteration in these components can lead to valvular dysfunction.
The most common form of MR in the western world is related to degenerative mechanisms such as prolapse, Barlow’s disease, or forms associated with calcification of the annulus. In developing countries, conversely, the rheumatic form remains more common. Other frequent causes of MR include infective endocarditis, cardiomyopathies, ischemic heart disease, and atrial dilation. These causes can lead to a common outcome of impaired valve leaflet function. According to the mechanism of leaflet dysfunction, MR is classified using Carpentier’s classification into:
Type I – characterized by normal leaflet movement but with perforation or lack of coaptation due to mitral annulus dilation
Type II – characterized by excessive leaflet motion, as in the case of mitral valve prolapse (MVP) or papillary muscle rupture
Type III – characterized by reduced leaflet motion, further divided into IIIA (reduced opening) and IIIB (reduced closure).
From an etiopathogenetic perspective, three main forms of MR can be distinguished:
Primary, if the alteration directly affects the anatomical components of the mitral valve apparatus
Secondary, if MR is the result of diseases affecting the left heart chambers, such as left ventricular diseases of ischemic or nonischemic etiology
Atrial functional MR, mainly due to left atrial dilation.
This classification is clinically relevant, as both clinical outcomes and therapy depend on the etiology and mechanism of MR, to guide the choice between a conservative or surgical therapeutic approach. The correct identification of the etiology and mechanisms underlying the valvular defect requires an accurate evaluation using cardiovascular imaging techniques such as transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), three-dimensional (3D) 16 echocardiographic techniques, and sometimes, cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR). This approach is essential for identifying patients suitable for surgical intervention and for precise procedural planning, thereby increasing the chances of success.

PRIMARY MITRAL REGURGITATION
Primary mitral regurgitation is characterized by alterations that directly involve one or more elements of the valve apparatus. The most effective therapeutic approach in the case of primary MR is surgery in eligible patients, with a preference for valve repair over substitution, when applicable.
Surgical treatment is recommended as Class I for patients with severe symptomatic MR deemed operable. In asymptomatic patients, surgical treatment is recommended as Class I when left ventricular dilation and/or dysfunction is present (left ventricular end-systolic diameter ≥40 mm and/or ejection fraction (EF) ≤60%).
Surgical treatment should be considered (Class IIa) in asymptomatic patients with severe MR and preserved left ventricular function developing structural or functional complications secondary to MR, such as atrial fibrillation, pulmonary hypertension with resting pulmonary artery systolic pressure >50 mmHg, or significant left atrial dilation (left atrial indexed volume ≥60 ml/m2 or diameter ≥55 mm in sinus rhythm).
In patients eligible for surgery, but with a high surgical risk, endovascular valve repair techniques may be considered (Class IIb).
For the definition of severity and more accurate surgical planning, the use of cardiac imaging is essential, especially nowadays when technology is continuously growing, allowing for increasing definition and details of mitral valve apparatus.

Bidimensional transthoracic echocardiography in primary mitral regurgitation
Bidimensional TTE is the first-line method to assess MR due to its high availability. For this reason, it is the method of choice for the first evaluation of MR severity and the suitability of surgery. It is also the gold standard for assessing left ventricular volumes and function. In cases of optimal acoustic windows, TTE alone can provide all the necessary information, avoiding more invasive or demanding methods.
Initially, qualitative, semiquantitative, and quantitative parameters are required to define the severity of the condition. Qualitative criteria include the assessment of the morphology of individual valve components, leaflet movement, and the regurgitant flow with color Doppler. Semiquantitative parameters, such as a vena contracta diameter ≥7 mm (≥8 mm with the biplane method), and quantitative parameters, such as effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA) ≥40 mm2 and regurgitant fraction ≥50%, provide objective cutoffs for standardized grading.
After having defined MR severity, it is crucial to evaluate the left heart chambers, as their alterations are fundamental to guide the indication to surgical treatment according to the latest guidelines. In addition, a thorough evaluation of the right heart sections should be performed for two main reasons:
Identification of significant tricuspid regurgitation and pulmonary pressure estimation, which may require concomitant annuloplasty during mitral valve repair surgery
Identification of right ventricular dysfunction (right ventricular dilation, right ventricular fractional area change <35%, M-mode tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion <17 mm, and tricuspid annular systolic tissue Doppler velocity <11 cm/s), which are associated with a worse postoperative prognosis and may guide clinical decision-making in doubtful indications to surgery.
If a surgical approach is indicated, the transthoracic echocardiogram can provide extremely useful measurements for surgical planning. During the preoperative study, it is essential to provide additional information that is required for the programming of cardiac surgery, such as annular diameters and area, leaflet and chordae tendineae lengths, coaptation point-to-septum distance, tenting area, interventricular septum thickness (indicating any subaortic spur), mitral–aortic angle [Figure 1], left ventricular outflow tract diameter, as well as any calcifications.
Images from a transthoracic echocardiographic examination aimed at acquiring anatomical mitral valve parameters for surgery planning. (a) Measurement of the mitral annulus diameter in apical four-chamber view, (b) Measurement of the anteroposterior diameter of the mitral annulus in apical two-chamber view, (c) Length of the anterior mitral leaflet in apical three-chamber view, (d) Coaptation point-to-septum distance in apical three-chamber view, (e) Evaluation of the mitral–aortic angle in the apical three-chamber view

Speckle tracking echocardiography in primary mitral regurgitation
The hemodynamic changes caused by valvular disease induce gradual adaptations in the heart, thus leading to worsening structural modifications in the heart chambers. However, the onset of symptoms is variable and not always correlated with the presence of classic echocardiographic criteria of severity. To detect early cardiac structural changes before symptoms arise, thereby optimizing timing and improving the prognosis of surgical or minimally invasive procedures to correct the valvular defect, the use of advanced echocardiographic techniques such as 2D speckle tracking echocardiography (STE) acquires an important role.
Left ventricular global longitudinal strain (LV GLS) is an early indicator of subclinical left ventricular dysfunction in patients with preserved EF. A recent meta-analysis involving 2358 patients with severe MR and preserved EF demonstrated that reduced LV GLS (absolute <18% to 21%) during preoperative evaluation is a negative prognostic factor for both systolic ventricular function and postoperative survival.
An earlier prognostic predictor in patients with MR is left atrial strain, as the left atrium (LA) is the first heart chamber affected by volume overload in MR. Specifically, peak atrial longitudinal strain (PALS), an indicator of atrial reservoir function, is the most used parameter for this purpose, with more evidence from the literature compared to LA conduit and contractile strain. In fact, it has been shown that PALS is a predictor of postoperative left atrial remodeling in patients with severe and moderate MR, and it correlates with functional capacity and postprocedural survival. In addition, a reduced PALS may indicate the onset of LA fibrosis, which increases the risk of atrial fibrillation, thus suggesting a preference for surgical treatment of MR.
STE can also be used in patients with severe MR to evaluate the right heart sections. As mentioned earlier, chronic volume overload affecting the pulmonary circulation can lead to pulmonary hypertension and subsequent right heart compromise. Free-wall right ventricular longitudinal strain allows for the early detection of right ventricular dysfunction, which indicates an advanced MR stage and represents a negative prognostic factor after surgical intervention.

Transesophageal echocardiography in primary mitral regurgitation
Preoperative TEE is indicated in most patients with severe MR in the absence of contraindications. Although TTE can potentially provide all the necessary information, TEE has greater sensitivity, especially in cases of suboptimal acoustic windows, making all the measures, e.g., EROA, MR regurgitant volume, and fraction, more reliable [Figure 2]. TEE is particularly useful for a better definition of the mechanism underlying valvular dysfunction, which is crucial for determining the most appropriate surgical approach. Intraoperative TEE is extremely useful for real-time verification of the procedure’s effect on the valvular defect.
Images from a transesophageal echocardiogram to determine the severity of the mitral valve regurgitation. (a) Measurement of the proximal isovelocity surface area (PISA) radius resulting in ≥1 cm with mitral regurgitation aliasing velocity of 30–40 cm/s, strongly indicative of severe valve defect, (b) Automatic calculation of the effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA) after acquisition of the PISA radius and Doppler continuous spectrum of the mitral regurgitation: the image shows an EROA ≥40 cm2 and a regurgitant volume ≥60 ml, also indicative of severe MR, (c) Measurement of the vena contracta at the narrowest point of the maximum visible regurgitant jet: a value ≥7 mm is another indicator of severity

Three-dimensional echocardiography in primary mitral regurgitation
When available, 3D transthoracic or TEE allows for an even more accurate and detailed description of valvular anatomy [Figure 3]. This level of resolution enables a superior discrimination regarding the feasibility of valve repair: identifying annular calcification, the presence of leaflet clefts or indentations, or alterations from Barlow’s disease may complicate and sometimes make valve repair impossible. 3D echocardiography is also very useful in doubtful cases for grading MR by measuring the 3D vena contracta area: a value >0.4 cm2 indicates severe MR. Finally, the accuracy of the measurements of various valvular components allowed by multiplanar reconstruction techniques is helpful in selecting the size of devices used in annuloplasty procedures (e.g., rings and bands).
Three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiogram in a case of severe primary mitral regurgitation: in the first image (a), the mitral annulus is seen to be dilated, with measurements of its diameters; in the second image (b), the leaflets are markedly redundant, exhibiting extreme billowing during systole

Cardiac magnetic resonance in primary mitral regurgitation
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a second-level diagnostic test in the study of MR. Both the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology guidelines recommend this technique for the assessment of cardiac chamber volumes and ventricular function in patients with MR when TTE is inconclusive due to inadequate acoustic windows. Several studies demonstrated the reliability of evaluating MR volume using MRI. Specifically, a prospective study conducted by Penicka et al. on patients with moderate or severe primary MR on echocardiography demonstrated not only the validity of MRI in grading the valve defect but also its superiority in quantifying regurgitation volume compared to echocardiography in cases of complex regurgitation jet physiology (e.g., multiple jets or late systolic MR). The most used standard method for assessing regurgitation volume currently involves the combined use of cine sequences to study left ventricular stroke volume and 2D phase-contrast sequences to study the antegrade aortic flow. This approach is independent of the morphology of the regurgitation jet and is not influenced by the concomitant presence of other potential concomitant valvular defects. Finally, the use of MRI becomes crucial when the presence of areas of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE), indicative of fibrosis, is suspected, especially in cases of prolapse mechanism. This finding has significant prognostic value, as it is associated with a higher risk of arrhythmic events.

SECONDARY MITRAL REGURGITATION
Secondary MR is defined as mitral valve insufficiency caused by global or regional alterations of the left heart chambers. When these alterations involve the left ventricle, the etiology can be classified into ischemic and nonischemic forms (the latter often secondary to cardiomyopathies). These conditions are associated to a worse prognosis, when compared to primary MR, regardless of the degree of ventricular dysfunction. Surgical repair is a viable option in selected cases, and when feasible, reducing MR severity improves survival, as demonstrated by the COAPT trial.
To identify the patients likely to benefit from surgical repair, a classification of “proportionate” and “disproportionate” forms of MR has been proposed, based on the relationship between EROA and left ventricular end-diastolic volume. Proportionate forms, where the degree MR aligns with left ventricular dilation grade, are more frequently responsive to optimized medical therapy for heart failure. Disproportionate forms, mostly of ischemic etiology, may significantly benefit from surgical repair.
Given the complexity of remodeling mechanisms and the poor prognosis, surgical indications for secondary MR remain limited. According to ESC guidelines, valve repair is a Class I recommendation only for patients with severe secondary MR who remain symptomatic despite optimized medical therapy, following discussion by a heart team. In cases of concomitant coronary artery disease, valve surgery is also recommended for patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting or other cardiac surgical procedures. In the absence of coronary artery disease, Class IIa recommendation for transcatheter edge-to-edge repair applies to patients with select characteristics indicating a high likelihood of success, as demonstrated in the COAPT trial.
An accurate evaluation of these forms using the available imaging techniques is essential to gather information on etiology and cardiac chamber remodeling underlying the pathogenesis, and to select the patients most likely to benefit from mitral valve repair [Figure 4]. In some ischemic forms, specific structural abnormalities may guide alternative surgical procedures, as discussed below.
Transthoracic echocardiogram in a setting of atrial functional mitral regurgitation. (a) Initial assessment with basic echo technique and color Doppler evidence of significant mitral regurgitation, (b) Advanced echocardiographic evaluation with left atrial strain: in this case, a reduction in PALS can be observed, suggestive of atrial fibrosis

Bidimensional echocardiography in secondary mitral regurgitation
In secondary mitral regurgitation, TTE remains the first-line diagnostic tool, providing diverse useful information. In the ischemic forms, this modality allows for the assessment of remodeling and geometric alterations underlying the severity of regurgitation. The primary cause is generally leaflet tethering, which can be symmetric or asymmetric.
Asymmetric tethering is more commonly associated with inferolateral myocardial infarction, leading to regional wall motion abnormalities, displacement of the posterior papillary muscle and chordae tendineae, and reduced systolic motion of the posterior mitral leaflet (Carpentier IIIB). Symmetric tethering, on the other hand, is more frequent in extensive anterior or multiple myocardial infarctions associated with diffuse global left ventricular remodeling and significant systolic dysfunction.
Another mechanism of MR involves annular remodeling, which occurs early due to flattening of the annular 3D structure, resulting in increased intercommissural distance. Specific parameters assessed through TTE include mitral annular diameters, end-systolic mitral planimetric area, coaptation depth (distance between the leaflet coaptation point and the annular plane), coaptation length, tenting area (area between the leaflets and annulus), and anterior and posterior leaflet angles. Nevertheless, the application of TEE, as in primary MR, allows to enhance the accuracy for these measures. Prognostically adverse values include annular diameter >37 mm, systolic tenting area >2.5 cm2, and coaptation distance >10 mm. In addition, posterior leaflet angles >45% may indicate alternative repair procedures such as posterior papillary muscle repositioning.
In nonischemic forms, the primary mechanism involves symmetric annular deformation secondary to left ventricular dilation and sphericity. This alteration leads to tethering of both leaflets. In such cases, key parameters include tenting area, coaptation depth, and measurements of ventricular volumes and systolic function using the biplane Simpson method.

Three-dimensional echocardiography in secondary mitral regurgitation
The mitral annulus has a complex 3D saddle shape. For this reason, the optimal technique to achieve higher resolution of the geometric alterations occurring in secondary mitral regurgitation is 3D TTE or, even better, TEE, which allows for a more accurate 3D reconstruction [Figure 5].
Representative case of an 88-year-old patient presented to the emergency department with acute pulmonary edema. Echocardiography revealed chordal rupture at the level of P2 with flail of the posterior leaflet, resulting in severe mitral valve regurgitation (a-d). The patient underwent transcatheter edge-to-edge mitral valve repair with the implantation of two MitraClip G4 XTW and XT devices. The devices were deployed after confirmation of stability and a significant reduction in regurgitation (e-g). The final assessment showed correctly positioned clips, minimal residual regurgitation, and a mean transvalvular gradient of 4 mmHg (h). TEER: Transcatheter edge-to-edge repair
This technique also provides a more precise assessment of papillary muscle displacement and a detailed analysis of the tethering mechanism through the calculation of the tenting volume [Figure 6].
Evaluation with transesophageal echocardiography of severe mitral regurgitation with multiple central jets due to a combined degenerative and central tethering mechanism in the context of ischemic cardiomyopathy with left ventricular dilation and systolic dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction 40%) (a and b), (c) Measurement of the posterior mitral leaflet: a length >10 mm is a favorable indicator for MitraClip procedure according to COAPT criteria

Cardiac magnetic resonance in secondary mitral regurgitation
Secondary MR, as previously mentioned, is a consequence of ventricular pathology. MRI is considered the gold standard for studying the left ventricle due to its ability to define volumes and systolic function, as well as its capability for tissue characterization. In secondary MR, LGE sequences allow for the etiological differentiation between ischemic and nonischemic forms. In addition, the presence of extensive fibrosis in ischemic forms has a negative prognostic value. In a retrospective observational cohort study conducted by Cavalcante et al., it was observed that patients with significant mitral regurgitation (MR fraction ≥35%) and substantial ischemic scar burden had worse outcomes and lower survival rates following mitral valve surgery compared to those with limited scar burden (<15%). The finding of marked fibrosis in the posterior papillary muscle could represent a contraindication for annuloplasty procedures.

ATRIAL FUNCTIONAL MITRAL REGURGITATION
In the context of secondary MR, a specific condition has recently been recognized wherein the underlying mechanism of mitral insufficiency resides in left atrial dilation: termed “atrial functional MR,” this entity is of growing interest due to its considerable incidence, particularly in older patients. As demonstrated by numerous studies, this form of MR is generally associated with atrial fibrillation and/or heart failure with preserved EF (HFpEF) and presents a higher mortality rate, although it is unclear whether this increase is due to the advanced age and comorbidities of these patients. Studies have shown that isolated dilation of the mitral annulus is the main mechanism involved in this valvular defect both in the presence of atrial fibrillation and/or in HFpEF. These two conditions share pathophysiological aspects such as diastolic dysfunction and increased left atrial pressure, which lead to progressive stretching and remodeling of the LA. Atrial remodeling, consequently, leads to dilation of the mitral annulus, which, however, is not enough to fully explain the pathogenesis of MR. It seems that an insufficient adaptation of the valve leaflets to the dilation of the annulus discussed above is required: following dilation, the valve leaflets appear to compensate by increasing their surface area until reaching a plateau, beyond which mitral insufficiency appears. The mitral annulus is a dynamic structure that passively changes its 3D shape during the contraction and relaxation of the left heart chambers in the cardiac cycle. In the presence of atrial fibrillation or increased right atrial pressure, these dynamic changes are less pronounced, probably due to alterations in atrial kinetics. Another implicated alteration is the tethering of the atrial-origin leaflets: because of atrial enlargement, the posterior mitral annulus and, in turn, the posterior mitral leaflet are stretched toward the upper edge of the free wall of the left ventricle, while the papillary muscles, during contraction, pull the leaflet downward, limiting its closing motion in systole.
These pathophysiological mechanisms explain why treatments that may seem more effective in this form of MR are annuloplasty with a ring and atrial fibrillation ablation, though specific recommendations on this topic are still lacking.

Echocardiography in atrial functional mitral regurgitation
Echocardiography is the first-line examination that allows us to assess when MR may be secondary to alterations in atrial function. Farhan et al. suggest the following criteria for the definition of atrial functional-MR: the presence of MR with structurally normal leaflets in the absence of annular calcification, the finding of left atrial enlargement (left atrial volume index >34 mL/m2) secondary to atrial fibrillation and/or increased left atrial pressure in the context of diastolic dysfunction, normal left ventricular end-diastolic volume indexed for age and sex, and preserved left ventricular systolic function with EF ≥60% in the absence of segmental kinetic abnormalities.
The annular dimensions are not included in these diagnostic criteria, although the finding of annular dilation is clearly suggestive: for this reason, it is preferable to measure the annular area rather than the anteroposterior diameter, as the former has been shown to be a more accurate measure of annulus dilation.

Left atrial strain in atrial functional mitral regurgitation
In patients with atrial functional MR, the evaluation of diastolic dysfunction as a marker of disease severity can be challenging since its impairment is the main characteristic defining HFpEF; therefore, standard echocardiography should be integrated with advanced parameters.
For this reason, the application of left atrial strain by STE may be important, as this allows for more sensitive and, above all, earlier detection of increased pressures in the left heart chambers, with a cutoff value <18%. Moreover, PALS has proven to be a superior predictor of diastolic dysfunction and elevated pulmonary pressure compared to other traditional indices and has also shown a correlation with natriuretic peptides in heart failure.
Furthermore, reduced PALS has been associated with significant atrial fibrosis, with a higher likelihood of atrial fibrillation recurrence after ablation procedures when values are below 15%.
Importantly, patients with atrial functional MR will usually show reduced left atrial strain with normal or slightly reduced left ventricular strain, as the main damage is related to the LA. These may be important information for atrial functional MR recognition, with consequent implications on the selection of treatment strategies.

Cardiac magnetic resonance in secondary mitral regurgitation
Cardiac magnetic resonance using dedicated LGE sequences allows the assessment of the presence of fibrosis in the LA, which is closely associated with recurrences of atrial fibrillation even after ablation procedures. For this reason, performing a CMR examination could be considered in the context of atrial functional MR, as it is predictive of the success of rhythm control strategies aimed at reducing the valvular defect. However, the recommendations in this setting are still lacking [Figure 4].

CONCLUSIONS
MR is characterized by high incidence that is still growing due to population aging. Both outcomes and treatment are dependent on MR etiology and mechanisms; thus, great attention is given to the appropriate selection of the treatment options in these patients. Standard echocardiography remains the mainstay of MR assessment, as it can provide precious information for the evaluation of primary and secondary MR. However, the integration with advanced imaging techniques such as STE, 3D echocardiography, and MRI may prove useful for a thorough assessment of mitral valve anatomy and recognition of the underlying disease.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
Two and three-dimensional echocardiography in primary mitral regurgitation:Practical hints to optimize the surgical planning
Mitral regurgitation
Global, regional, and national burden of calcific aortic valve and degenerative mitral valve diseases, 1990-2017
Causes and mechanisms of isolated mitral regurgitation in the community:Clinical context and outcome
Contemporary presentation and management of valvular heart disease:The EURObservational research programme valvular heart disease II survey
The VALVAFRIC study:A registry of rheumatic heart disease in Western and Central Africa
Reconstructive surgery of mitral valve incompetence:Ten-year appraisal
Meta-analysis comparing mitral valve repair versus replacement for degenerative mitral regurgitation across all ages
Long-term results of mitral valve repair for regurgitation due to leaflet prolapse
Prognostic implications of magnetic resonance-derived quantification in asymptomatic patients with organic mitral regurgitation:Comparison with Doppler echocardiography-derived integrative approach
Survival implication of left ventricular end-systolic diameter in mitral regurgitation due to flail leaflets a long-term follow-up multicenter study
Association between early surgical intervention versus watchful waiting and outcomes for mitral regurgitation due to flail mitral valve leaflets
The MIDA mortality risk score:Development and external validation of a prognostic model for early and late death in degenerative mitral regurgitation
Prognostic and therapeutic implications of pulmonary hypertension complicating degenerative mitral regurgitation due to flail leaflet:A multicenter long-term international study
Left atrial size is a potent predictor of mortality in mitral regurgitation due to flail leaflets:Results from a large international multicenter study
Percutaneous repair or surgery for mitral regurgitation
Outcomes with transcatheter mitral valve repair in the United States:An STS/ACC TVT registry report
2021 ESC/EACTS guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease
Recommendations for the echocardiographic assessment of native valvular regurgitation:An executive summary from the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging
Recommendations for noninvasive evaluation of native valvular regurgitation:A report from the American Society of echocardiography developed in collaboration with the society for cardiovascular magnetic resonance
Right ventricle function:The role of the forgotten chamber in mitral valve surgery
More than 10 years of speckle tracking echocardiography:Still a novel technique or a definite tool for clinical practice?
Global longitudinal strain predicts survival and left ventricular function after mitral valve surgery:A meta-analysis
Speckle tracking echocardiography in primary mitral regurgitation:Should we reconsider the time for intervention?
Myocardial work and left heart deformation parameters across primary mitral regurgitation severity
How to do LA strain
Relationship between mitral annulus function and mitral regurgitation severity and left atrial remodelling in patients with primary mitral regurgitation
Prognostic value of left atrial strain in patients with moderate asymptomatic mitral regurgitation
Cardiac fibrosis in patients with atrial fibrillation:Mechanisms and clinical implications
Left atrial strain to predict postoperative atrial fibrillation in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting
Basic and advanced echocardiography in advanced heart failure:An overview
Echocardiography and correction of mitral regurgitation:An unbreakable link
Imaging for mitral interventions:Methods and efficacy
A complexity scoring system for degenerative mitral valve repair
Causes of repair failure for degenerative mitral valve disease and reoperation outcomes
Diagnostic value of vena contracta area in the quantification of mitral regurgitation severity by color Doppler 3D echocardiography
Quantitative modeling of the mitral valve by three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography in patients undergoing mitral valve repair:Correlation with intraoperative surgical technique
ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2017 Appropriate Use Criteria for Multimodality Imaging in Valvular Heart Disease:A Report of the American College of Cardiology Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons
2017 ESC/EACTS guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease
Assessment of mitral valve regurgitation by cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance characterization of mitral valve prolapse
Late gadolinium enhancement CMR in primary mitral regurgitation
Myocardial fibrosis in patients with primary mitral regurgitation with and without prolapse
Survival and cardiovascular outcomes of patients with secondary mitral regurgitation:A systematic review and meta-analysis
Refining the prognostic impact of functional mitral regurgitation in chronic heart failure
Transcatheter mitral-valve repair in patients with heart failure
Proportionate and disproportionate functional mitral regurgitation:A new conceptual framework that reconciles the results of the MITRA-FR and COAPT trials
2021 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure
Percutaneous repair or medical treatment for secondary mitral regurgitation
Influence of mitral regurgitation repair on survival in the surgical treatment for ischemic heart failure trial
Mitral-valve repair versus replacement for severe ischemic mitral regurgitation
3-year outcomes of transcatheter mitral valve repair in patients with heart failure
COAPT-like profile predicts long-term outcomes in patients with secondary mitral regurgitation undergoing mitraclip implantation
Characteristics and outcome of COAPT-eligible patients in the MITRA-FR trial
Universal definition and classification of heart failure:A report of the Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology, Japanese Heart Failure Society and writing committee of the universal definition of heart failure
Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 354 diseases and injuries for 195 countries and territories, 1990-2017: A systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2017
Mitral valve surgery in patients with ischemic and nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Determinants of the degree of functional mitral regurgitation in patients with systolic left ventricular dysfunction: A quantitative clinical study
Secondary mitral regurgitation: Pathophysiology, proportionality and prognosis
Parameters of the mitral apparatus in patients with ischemic and nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Functional anatomy and echocardiographic assessment in secondary mitral regurgitation
Papillary muscle relocation in conjunction with valve annuloplasty improve repair results in severe ischemic mitral regurgitation
Geometric differences of the mitral apparatus between ischemic and dilated cardiomyopathy with significant mitral regurgitation: Real-time three-dimensional echocardiography study
Multimodality imaging in secondary mitral regurgitation
Prognostic impact of ischemic mitral regurgitation severity and myocardial infarct quantification by cardiovascular magnetic resonance
Regional wall motion abnormalities and scarring in severe functional ischemic mitral regurgitation: A pilot cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging study
Functional mitral regurgitation and left atrial myopathy in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
Evidence of atrial functional mitral regurgitation due to atrial fibrillation: Reversal with arrhythmia control
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction and atrial fibrillation: Vicious twins
Mitral valve adaptation to isolated annular dilation: Insights into the mechanism of atrial functional mitral regurgitation
Three-dimensional echocardiographic analysis of mitral annular dynamics: Implication for annuloplasty selection
Does left atrial enlargement contribute to mitral leaflet tethering in patients with functional mitral regurgitation?Proposed role of atriogenic leaflet tethering
Atrial functional mitral regurgitation
Pathophysiology, echocardiographic diagnosis, and treatment of atrial functional mitral regurgitation: JACC state-of-the-art review
Utility of three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography for mitral annular sizing in transcatheter mitral valve replacement procedures: A cardiac computed tomographic comparative study
Recommendations for the evaluation of left ventricular diastolic function by echocardiography: An update from the American Society of Echocardiography and the European Association of cardiovascular imaging
Left atrial strain: A key element for the evaluation of patients with HFpEF
Prediction of congestive state in acute and chronic heart failure: The association between NT-proBNP and left atrial strain and its prognostic value
Left atrial strain and strain rate in patients with paroxysmal and persistent atrial fibrillation: Relationship to left atrial structural remodeling detected by delayed-enhancement MRI
Association of atrial tissue fibrosis identified by delayed enhancement MRI and atrial fibrillation catheter ablation: The DECAAF study
Atrial fibrosis by late gadolinium enhancement magnetic resonance imaging and catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation: 5-year follow-up data