Assessment and evaluation of prescribing competences: A systematic review and recommendations
Aims
Since assessment of prescribing competence is a key promoter of student learning and achievement, we aim to summarize existing national‐level approaches, provide a systematic review of current literature, indicate the frequency of various methodologies, and make recommendations to promote and extend existing practice.
Methods
Regulatory body websites were accessed for details of national examinations. PubMed, Embase, the Allied and Complementary Medicine, and CINAHL databases were systematically searched in August 2023 for studies in English from Europe, North America, Australia and New Zealand reporting assessment of prescribing competencies among students/practitioners. Additional articles were identified through citation tracking.
Results
National approaches are described for several jurisdictions. A total of 20 514 articles were retrieved, of which 54 met the inclusion criteria. Most articles came from the UK, with medical students and qualified doctors most frequently featured. Multiple choice formats were most common, with short answer questions, calculations and scenario‐based skills tests also featured. Direct observations of skills through Objective Structured Clinical Examinations and similar methods were less commonly described. Test reliability generally employed Classical Test Theory. Costs of developing and delivering assessments, differential attainment by demographics, and predictive validity were not indicated.
Conclusion
We recommend measurement of the predictive validity of prescribing competence assessments, the routine inclusion of performance by demographic characteristics, extension of competence assessments to professions other than medicine, and structured reporting of methods and findings, including costs and cost‐effectiveness. Situational judgement tests would be a valuable addition to assessment practices.

INTRODUCTION
While it is simplistic to say that assessment drives learning, it certainly plays an important part, not only in engaging students but also in helping to determine if candidates have reached required standards. This is particularly important in healthcare education tasks, such as prescribing competence, where future patient safety is at stake. Yet a large study of junior doctors' preparedness for practice found that prescribing was the weakest area of practice across all the data sources. Several studies have shown that prescribing errors are worryingly common among junior doctors. This lack of confidence extends to other prescribing roles, such as those carried out by pharmacists. A systematic literature review concluded that final‐year medical students lacked adequate competence.
Nor is there great confidence that current assessment methods meet the requirements of the public and the profession. Mucklow et al. indicated that “No validated, reliable and widely accepted measure of prescribing performance currently exists”.
The aims of this review are to describe existing national‐level approaches to the problem, since these are rarely published in full in research papers, to provide a systematic review of current literature on assessment processes in use internationally, indicating the frequency with which various approaches are taken, and to make recommendations to promote existing best practice and to suggest additional steps for both institutional and national practice.
Cognitive knowledge is generally assessed through written tests, frequently in the form of selected response formats such multiple choice questions (MCQs) or extended matching items (EMIs). Short answer questions (SAQs) may also be employed, and scenario‐based calculations are an important part of prescribing skills. The psychomotor domain is frequently assessed through observation of skills and behaviours in either simulated or real settings, through such tests as Objective Structured Clinical Examinations (OSCEs), usually featuring simulated patients and assessment of a single attribute, or, in the workplace, by Mini‐Clinical Examinations, with real patients and feedback to candidates. The affective domain may be tested using Situational Judgement Tests (SJTs): structured multiple‐choice style tests in which candidates are presented with realistic scenarios, and must deduce the most appropriate course of action, not in terms of clinical knowledge, but by understanding the best course of action in that scenario.
The utility or usefulness of an assessment methodology is generally considered to depend on its validity, reliability, educational impact, acceptability and cost. Validity is complex, but in this article we will consider face validity (the appropriateness of individual items within a test), content validity (the coverage of the learning domain as a whole), predictive validity (the relationship between test performance and subsequent workplace performance) and construct validity (when a measurement tool accurately measures the intended concept).
We will argue that the ultimate guarantor of validity of an assessment in healthcare is its predictive validity—how performance on a previous test corresponds to actual performance in the workplace. This may be assessed by potential and actual patient benefits and harms. Since we will argue that such tests of predictive validity are essential for genuine evaluation of tests of prescribing competence, the kinds of evidence that could be gathered for a predictive validity study comparing exam scores to actual clinical practice are considered further in Section 5.

National level testing
Some jurisdictions rely on institutional testing as a sufficient guarantee of prescribers' competence. Others refer such decisions to a unified national process. There may be conflicts of interest with the former, since it is not in the institution's financial or reputational interest to have a high fail rate. The latter may be an independent assessment of competence, but are expensive, and cannot be as extensive as institutional tests. We reviewed these through internet searching of official websites.
In the UK, medical students currently undertake the Prescribing Safety Assessment (PSA), developed by a joint council of medical schools and the British Pharmacological Society. The PSA is undertaken by medical students in their final year of study. Some medical schools make passing the PSA a requirement for graduation, while others do not, although all medical graduates must have passed the PSA by the end of the first year of practice after graduation (corresponding to Internship in the USA). The PSA is a 2‐h 60‐item written exam, based on the UK's General Medical Council's Outcomes for Graduates. These are 8 test domains: Prescribing, Prescription Review, Planning Management, Communicating Information, Calculation Skills, Adverse Drug Reactions, Drug Monitoring, and Data Interpretation. Each may be set in various medical contexts. These are Surgery, Elderly Care, Paediatrics, Psychiatry, Obstetrics and Gynaecology and General Practice. The score available for each item type varies, and the total possible score is 200. The cut score is set by the modified Angoff Method and is typically just above 60% (e.g. 63% in 1 recent year). Item formats include both constructed and selected response styles. Candidates have access to the online British National Formulary.
Two reviews of the PSA have recently been carried out. The first focussed on the exam itself and concluded that it was generally fit for purpose. The second explored the strategic place of the PSA, particularly in the light of the forthcoming national Medical Licencing Assessment for UK medical students. This review concurred with the previous 1 that the PSA should continue but perhaps be joined with the Medical Licencing Assessment in a combined Medical and Prescribing Assessment. It also recommended that the PSA should be extended to those international medical graduates who wish to practise in the UK.
For pharmacists in the UK, passing the General Pharmaceutical Council and Pharmaceutical Society of Northern Ireland (GPhC/PSNI) Registration Assessment is a pre‐requisite for applying to register as a pharmacist. Candidates undertake the GPhC/PSNI national Registration Assessment after they have graduated and have been in practice for at least 39 weeks, generally in either a community or a hospital environment, and have been signed off with a satisfactory Progress Report. Passing is a pre‐requisite for applying to register as a pharmacist in Great Britain or Northern Ireland.
There are 2 papers, each of which must be passed separately. Part 1 involves 40 calculation items undertaken over 2 h. A calculator is provided. Part 2 is currently composed of 90 1‐best‐of‐MCQs and 30 EMIs. Cut scores are generally around 70% in each part, and candidates are more likely to fail Part 1.
In applying to the UK National Health Service for a training post, there is also a 20‐min 10‐item numeracy test and a 52‐item SJT undertaken over 104 min, with 2 response formats: ranking options from first to fifth and selecting 3 best options from 8. Candidates are ranked on the basis of their SJT score, with the numeracy test used as a tiebreaker, although it is also possible to fail the numeracy test with a sufficiently low score.
In the USA, there is no separate prescribing test for medical graduates, but in the US Medical Licencing Assessment Step 3, there are items on health maintenance and disease prevention, pharmacotherapy, clinical interventions, and mixed management. Together, these represent 32–35% of the exam as a whole.
For US pharmacists, the national exam is the North American Pharmacist Licensure Examination, developed by the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy. The exam lasts 6 h and contains 225 items, in multiple choice (with both single and multiple options) and free text formats, with the latter being used for calculations. Candidates also sit a test of legal knowledge appropriate to their state, for instance, the multistate pharmacy jurisprudence examination.
In Canada, the Pharmacy Examination Board of Canada examination consists of a computer‐delivered 200‐item test (of which 50 are pilot items) undertaken over 4.25 h, and an OSCE with 13 stations (one of which is an unscored pilot station).
In the Netherlands, all 8 medical schools (and 3 Belgian medical schools) undertake the Dutch National Pharmacotherapy Assessment. This is a 1‐h test paper with 40 items, focussed on common prescribing errors, which students must pass in order to graduate. Consideration is being given to extending such a test elsewhere in Europe. In 2019, 9 European universities, the European Agency for Clinical Pharmaceutics and Therapies, and the World Health Organization Europe commenced a 3‐year project to develop, pilot and eventually implement an online examination on safe prescribing for joint use in European medical schools. The aim of this potential European Prescribing Exam was to ensure that medical students in Europe graduate with prescribing competencies for safe and effective clinical practice. This has been challenging, however, due to the cost involved as well as different legal requirements and medications available in different countries. The European Prescribing Exam project was completed in 2022. The 2‐h digital exam consists of 47 items, over 9 subjects. Question types include scenario‐based skills tests, which include dosage calculations. Importantly, the assessment is free, and is currently running in 50 EU medical schools.
Against this trend, Italian pharmacy graduates were previously required to pass a State Examination in order to join the professional register and to practise independently. However, this requirement was lifted in 2021.
An internationalized version of the UK Prescribing Safety Assessment, the Prescribing Skills Assessment, is available and is extensively used in Australia and New Zealand for medical students, but there is no formal national equivalent.
Pharmacists in Australia, on completion of their first degree, undertake a supervised practical internship, typically for 1 year. Subsequently, they undertake the Australian Pharmacy Council Examination. This is 2 h long, with 75 questions in total. This exam is also delivered in New Zealand and Fiji. There is also a 35‐min oral examination component, assessing the candidate's knowledge, skills, decision‐making, communication and patient care skills in practical contexts, through scenarios and cases.
In this Introduction, we have summarized some general assessment principles, and considered national approaches to testing, following from our review of internet and public sources. We now present the methods and findings of our systematic review of the assessment and evaluation of prescribing competencies among medical and nonmedical students/practitioners.

METHODS
National policies on prescribing assessment were accessed through the websites of national bodies, by hand‐searching internet sources and Google Scholar, and by materials brought to light during a recent review of the PSA.

Search strategy
This review was conducted and reported in accordance with the guidelines of Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐analyses. We systematically searched the PubMed, Embase (via Ovid), the Allied and Complementary Medicine, and CINAHL (via EBSCO) databases for original research articles published in the English language from the inception of these databases to August 2023. Our searches were aimed at retrieving articles that reported the assessment and evaluation of prescribing competencies among medical and nonmedical students/practitioners. Search terms including prescribing, assessments, competencies and skills were combined with others using Boolean operators. Additional articles were identified by checking reference lists of eligible studies and by Google Scholar citation tracking. Furthermore, geographical restrictions were applied to limit our searches to articles from Europe, USA, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, in which jurisdictions relatively similar types of healthcare systems are in place.
The screening and search criteria are described in Appendix A.

Eligibility criteria
Studies were included in this systematic review if they reported on the assessment and/or evaluation of prescribing competence among medical and nonmedical healthcare students and/or professionals and described the methods used to measure prescribing competencies. We considered prescribing competencies to include knowledge, skills and behaviours that are needed for safe and effective prescribing. In addition, we included educational intervention studies if they assessed prescribing competence and reported on how they were assessed. There was no restriction on the study type.

Exclusion criteria
We excluded reviews, editorials, opinion articles and conference abstracts. Also excluded were studies involving prescribing data analysis and those reporting on the opinion of healthcare professionals and/or students on their prescribing competence or confidence and on medicine reconciliation were excluded.

Data extraction
Two reviewers (A.A. and A.A.) extracted data from the studies and entered them into Microsoft Excel for Microsoft 365 MSO version 2208. Any discrepancy in data extraction was resolved by consensus. The data extracted included author, year of publication, study country, study type, sample size, context of the assessment, target group, assessment delivery methods, assessment format, standard setting methods reported and types of validity and reliability measures.

Study quality assessment
The quality of each study was assessed by 2 reviewers (A.A. and A.A.) using the Medical Education Research Quality Instrument (MERSQI). This tool has been designed to measure the methodological quality of observational, quasiexperimental and experimental studies in medical education. The MERSQI included 10 items across 6 domains: study design, sampling, type of data (subjective or objective), validity, data analysis and outcomes. Each domain has a maximum score of 3, producing a maximum possible MERSQI score of 18 and potential range of 5–18.

Data synthesis
Outcomes were categorized under the following headings:
Context: whether the papers relate to national or regional studies, or to single or multiple institutions.
Country/Region: the geographical location of the study, including those which were multinational.
Target population: the professions pursued by candidates and their status (e.g. students or practitioners).
Delivery method: how the assessments were delivered to candidates (online or in person).
Format: written tests such as MCQs or practical tests such as OSCEs.
Standard setting method(s) employed:
Reliability: evidence for the reliability of the assessments.
Validity: evidence for the validity of the assessments.
Educational impact: how the candidates responded to the testing process.
Differential attainment: how the candidates performed by protected characteristics such as age, sex, ethnicity or disability.
Hand searching of grey literature such as reports and minutes from professional bodies was also carried out and contributed particularly to the Introduction to this article.

RESULTS

Study selection
In total, 20 468 articles were identified through database searching and 46 records through citation tracking. Following the removal of duplicates and records that were clearly irrelevant, we assessed 188 full‐text articles, of which 54 met the inclusion criteria (see Figure 1).
Flow diagram of article selection process.

Study quality
Total MERSQI scores for the 54 articles included in this review ranged from 9.00 to 14.40, with a mean (standard deviation) of 11.53 (1.27). Mean domain scores were highest for type of data (3.00), data analysis (2.81), and sampling (2.00). The scores were lowest for validity evidence (0.63) and study design (1.44; Appendix B).
Nearly 2/3 of studies were of single‐group cross‐sectional or single‐group post‐test‐only designs (Appendix B). Two‐fifths of the studies reviewed included participants from 3 or more institutions. In addition, about half (46.3%) of the included studies had response rates of 75% or more. Not many studies reported on the validity of the evaluation instrument in relation to content (29.6%), internal structure (25.9%) and relationship to other variables (7.4%). However, almost all studies (96.3%) applied statistical analysis that were appropriate for their study designs and type of data.
The analysis of the papers is shown in Table 1.
Characteristics of included studies.
Article	Context	No. of candidates	Country/region	Candidate group	Delivery method	Format	Standard setting method	Reliability	Validity	Acceptability	PSA based	Differential performance	 	1	Brinkman et al. 2014	Single Institution	483	Netherlands	Medical students	In person	Therapeutic consultation							 	2	Brinkman et al. 2017	Multi‐institution	895	Europe	Medical students	Remote online	MCQSBST		Guttman λ2Item‐rest correlationKappa				By education style e.g. PBL vs. traditional	 	3	Brinkman et al. 2019	Multi‐institution	6330	Netherlands	DentistsDental students	Remote online	MCQSBST		Guttman λ2Item rest correlationKappa	FaceContent			By profession	 	4	Celebi et al. 2009	Single Institution	74	Germany	Medical students		SBST		Inter rater reliability	Face				 	5	Chin et al. 2022	National	6440	AustraliaNew Zealand	Medical students	Remote online	MCQSAQCalc(PSA)	Angoff	PSA	PSA	Yes	PSA	By institution	 	6	Coombes et al. 2007	Single Institution	233	Australia	Medical students	In Person	SAQ							 	7	Cubbin et al. 2009	Single Institution	36	UK	Practicing NMPsDoctors	In person	OSCE						By specialty	 	8	Cullinan et al. 2017	Multi‐institution	80	Republic of Ireland	Doctors	Remote online	MCQCase study		Kappa	Face				 	9	Davis et al. 2013	Single Institution	113	UK	Doctors	In person	SAQ			Face				 	10	Deskur‐Smielecka et al. 2020	Single Institution	183138	Poland	Medical studentsDoctors	In person	MCQ			Face				 	11	Dewey et al. 2016	Multi‐institution	174	USA	DoctorsNursesPhysician associatesDentists	In person	Not specified			FaceContentConstruct				 	12	Donker et al. 2022	Multi‐institution	326325	Europe	Doctors	Remote online	MCQSBST		Cronbach's αDiscriminantanalysis	FaceContent			By specialty and level	 	13	Ganeshan et al. 2006	Single Institution	5330	UK	NursesDoctors	In person	VSASBST							 	14	Garbutt et al. 2006	Single Institution	28	USA	Medical students	In person	VOTT							 	15	Gordon et al. 2011	Multi‐institution	7686	UK	Doctors	By post	VSASAQCalc							 	16	Grossman & Sheidler 1985	Multi‐institution	2068	USA	Medical studentsDoctors	In person	PMP						By level of training	 	17	Harding et al. 2010	Multi‐institution	128	UK	Doctors	In person	EMIWUSCE		Cronbach's αInter class correlation coefficientsKappa					 	18	Hardisty et al. 2019	Multi‐institution	397236	UK	Pharmacy students, pre‐reg trainees	Remote online	MCQSAQCalc(PSA)		PSA	PSA	Yes	PSA	UG vs. preregistration trainees	 	19	Hilmer et al. 2009	Regional	191	Australia	Doctors	In person	SBST						By institution	 	20	Holbrook et al. 2019	Multi‐institution	714	Canada	Medical students	Remote online	MCQSAQCalc(PSA)	Angoff	PSA	PSA	Yes	PSA	By institution	 	21	Ibia et al. 2005	Multi‐institution	989	USA	Medical students	In person	Clinical Vignettes			Face				 	22	Jansen et al. 2019	Single Institution	576	Netherlands	Medical students	Remote online	MCQ		Cronbach's αItem rest correlation discriminant analysis	FaceContentConcurrentConstruct				 	23	Kalfsvel et al. 2022	Single Institution	381	Netherlands	Medical students	In person	SBST			Face				 	24	Kalfsvel et al. 2022b	Single Institution	270	Netherlands	Medical students	In person	MCQSBST							 	25	Kidd et al. 2010	Single Institution	62	UK	Doctors	In person	SBST							 	26	Maxwell et al. 2017	National	7343	UK	Medical students	Remote online	MCQSAQCalc(PSA)	Angoff	PSA	PSA		PSA	By institution	 	27	Menon et al. 2006	Single Institution	32	UK	Doctors	In person	SBST						Paediatric experience	 	28	McGhan et al. 1982	Single Institution	30	USA	Pharmacists	In person	MCQ	Fixed cut score from experts	Cronbach's αInter rater reliabilityKR20	FaceContentConcurrent			By institution	 	29	Mokrzecki et al. 2021	Single Institution	24	Australia	Medical students	In person	SBST			Face				 	30	SummativeNeubauer et al. 2004	Regional	285	Canada	Pharmacists	In person	MCQT/FSAQ						By years of experience	 	31	Newby et al. 2019	Multi‐institution	16	Australia	Medical students	In person	SBST							 	32	Park et al. 2019	Multi‐institution	185	Australia	Dental students	RemoteOnline	MCQ			Face				 	33	Petit et al. 2020	Multi‐institution	65	SwitzerlandCanada	Doctors	Remote online			Item analysis					 	34	Phillips et al. 2017	Single Institution	85	Australia	Doctors	Remote online	MCQ			Content				 	35	Power et al. 2022	Multi‐institution	238167	UK	Pharmacy students, pre‐reg trainees	In person	MCQSAQCalcPSA		PSA	PSA	Yes	PSA	By level of training	 	36	Powell et al. 2013	Multi‐institution	177	UK	Doctors	In person	MCQ			Face			NHS regions	 	37	Reid et al. 2018	Multi‐institution	59	UK	Pharmacist prescribers	Online	MCQSAQCalc(PSA)	Angoff	PSA	PSA	Yes	PSA		 	38	Compares with summativeRogers et al. 2014	Single Institution	84	Australia	Medical students	In person	MCQSAQSBSTSCT							 	39	SummativeRothwell et al. 2012	Multi‐institution	284	UK	Doctors	In person	SBST							 	40	Sam et al. 2019	Multi‐institution	364	UK	Medical students	In person	SBAVSA		Cronbach's α					 	41	Sandilands et al. 2010	Single Institution	78	UK	Medical students	In person	SBST							 	42	Scobie et al. 2003	Multi‐institution	40	UK	Medical students	In person	OSCE							 	43	Summative Sikkens et al. 2018	Single Institution	356	Netherlands	Medical students	In person	OSCE			Face				 	44	Starmer et al. 2013	Single Institution	40	Australia	Doctors	In person	SAQ							 	45	Stewart et al. 2010	Multi‐institution	10	UK	Pharmacist prescribers		Video assessment		Inter‐rater reliability	Construct	Yes			 	46	Thomas et al. 2013	Single Institution	153	Australia	Doctors	In person	SBST							 	47	Tonkin et al. 2006	Single Institution	144	Australia	Medical students	In person	OSCE							 	48	van der Steen et al. 2020	Single Institution	129	Netherlands	Doctors	In personRemote online	MCQ	Wijnen	Cronbach's αGuttman λ2Item–rest correlation	FaceContent				 	49	van der Voort et al. 2019	Multi‐institution	856	Europe	Medical students	Remote online	SBST			Face			By education style	 	50	Walson et al. 1981	Single Institution	29	USA	Doctors	In person	SAQ							 	51	Ward & Wasson 2016	Single Institution	106	UK	Medical students	In person	Direct observation of procedural skills			FaceContent				 	52	Whitehair et al. 2014	Single Institution	192	Australia	Nursing students	In person	SAQ						Routinely administering medication vs. not	 	53	Woit et al. 2020	Single Institution	1631	Canada	Medical students, Pharmacy students	Remote online	SBST			FaceContent			By profession	 	54	Wu et al. 2015	Single Institution	58	Canada	Medical students	Remote online	MCQSAQCalc(PSA)		PSA	PSA		PSA	Science students
The following notes are provided for each of the analysis groups.
Number of candidates: Where 2 or more different groups are identifiable, the number in each group is recorded in the same order as the candidate group (e.g. dentists, dental students, 63, 30).
Candidate group: NMP: Nonmedical prescribers.
Delivery method: Where this is not stated, and cannot reasonably be inferred, the entry is left blank.
Format: CBD: case‐based discussion; MCQ: multiple choice questions. The exact format may not have been specified in the article; T/F: true/false questions; EMI: extended matching items; SAQ: short answer questions; SBA: single best answer; VSA: very short answer (e.g. single word answers); PMP: patient management problems; SBST: scenario‐based skills test. This may overlap with SAQs, since many of these will have introductory scenarios; Calc: calculations questions. Again, this may overlap with SAQs and SBSTs, depending on how much detail is provided; PSA: Prescribing Safety Assessment, indicating the assessment was based in whole or in large part on the UK version; OSCE: objective structured clinical examination; WUSCE: written unobserved structured clinical examination; VOTT: verbal order transcription test; SCT: script concordance test; PBL, problem‐based learning; UG, undergraduate.
The original articles may not provide all the required details, and in some cases reasonable inferences had to be made. For instance, face and content validity might not be explicitly mentioned, but could reasonably be deduced from the process of constructing items. If the PSA or a test based on the PSA are used, this is cited as evidence of validity and reliability.

SUMMARY
Since a number of the entries have very many references (e.g. >20), we have individually listed those with only 3 or fewer citations: for the others, they are more easily found by reference to Table 1.

Context
Two studies referred to national assessments, and 2 to regional assessments. Of the remainder, 22 studies were multi‐institutional, and 28 took place within a single institution, as indicated in Table 1.

Country/region
The largest source of articles was the UK with 19 (about 1/3 of all results), followed by Australia with 12, the Netherlands with 7, the USA with 6 and Canada with 5. Three studies covered multiple countries in Europe. Poland, Germany, New Zealand and Switzerland were represented by 1 article each.

Target population
Medical students represented the largest study population, with 26 article references (approximately half of all results), followed by qualified doctors with 21 (see Table 1). Pharmacy students were indicated by 3 articles, and pharmacists and pharmacist prescribers by 4 articles. One article referred to nursing students, and nurses were indicated by 2. Two articles referred to dental students and 2 to dentists. One article referred to physician associates and 1 to nonmedical prescribers. An article might refer to >1 of these groups, so the total exceeds 54.

Delivery method
Thirty‐five studies were characterized as in‐person (including both written and practical tests), and 15 as delivered remotely online. Computer adaptive testing was not employed in any of the studies, and the impact of possible cheating and/or the use of AI was not considered.

Format
For written assessments, 20 articles described the use of MCQ formats, mostly single best answer though 1 article mentioned true/false format. One article specified extended matching items. Two articles indicated the use of very short answers, and 15 SAQs. Eight articles were classed as employing calculations on the basis of specific information, but others may have included these as SAQs. We classified 17 articles as involving scenario‐based skills tests on the information provided, but again, there will have been overlap between these, SAQs and calculations. Patient management problems were mentioned in 1 article, therapeutic consultations in 1, clinical vignettes in 1, and in 1 the assessment methodology was not specified within the article.
Skills assessments in educational environments were more varied in format and were, therefore, more difficult to categorize. OSCEs were specifically named in 4, and written unobserved structured clinical examinations in 1. Direct observation of procedural skills was mentioned in 1 article and video assessments in 1.
We noted that 7 articles employed the UK PSA in whole or part, and this is indicated in Table 1.

Standard setting methods
Four articles described the use of Modified Angoff methods, and unique methods were described in a further 2: a fixed cut score set by experts, and the Wijnen method.

Reliability
Cronbach's α was employed in 6 studies, KR20 in 1 article, and standard error of measurement in 1 article. Kappa was employed in 4 articles and other inter‐rater reliability measures in 3. Gutmann λ2 was employed in 3 articles.

Validity
Face validity (either stated explicitly, or inferred when item relevance was confirmed by appropriate experts) was indicated in 18 articles, and content validity (items covered an appropriate range of topics) in 16 articles. Concurrent validity (where several different tests gave similar results) appeared twice. The term construct validity was mentioned in 5 publications.

Cost
Although cost of delivery of an assessment method would be important to describing cost effectiveness, it was not clearly indicated in any articles.

Acceptability
Seven articles explored the acceptability of the assessments to candidates, generally concluding that the assessment methods were positively viewed by the stakeholders.

Differential attainment
Surprisingly, none of the articles from the literature review considered differential attainment by protected characteristics such as age, sex, ethnicity and disability. Differential performance by institution, speciality and professional category, and by years of experience, was, however, described as shown in Table 1.

Formative or summative usage
The great majority of the articles referred to research purposes and formative uses, generally combined. Three articles referred to summative uses of the tests. The PSA in use in the UK is semi‐summative in that students may be required to pass it before graduation, or may fail it with a requirement to then pass before the end of Foundation Year 1.
One article was found that explored a possible crossover between the assessments for pharmacy students and medical students. The pharmacy students generally did well on the PSA, with mean scores above the likely pass mark for both undergraduate students and those in preregistration training.

DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This review provides a current snapshot of the ways in which prescribing competence is measured and, in addition, reviews national requirements in several jurisdictions, where the information is available. After summarizing the findings from the systematic part of the assessment, we consider the information that may be missing from some or all the published articles, and we propose recommendations both for the institutional and national levels, based on our findings.
The majority of studies were carried out on medical students and junior doctors, rather than on other prescribers, despite the increasing role of nonmedical prescribers in the delivery of health care. Methods of choice in the cognitive knowledge domain remain selected response items such as MCQs and extended matching items, with SAQs, other scenario‐based skills tests and calculations in various formats also featuring strongly. In terms of skills associated with prescribing (other than knowledge about prescribing) OSCEs and other observational methods were employed, but less frequently. Any debate about the relative value and cost effectiveness of written tests vs. OSCE style observations can only be resolved with the aid of: (i) predictive validity data on the relationship between test performance and later clinical performance; and (ii) at least some recording of relative costs of development and delivery of each approach. We return to these points below.
While we believe that this review of what is currently being done is a useful snapshot of previous practice, it additionally sheds light on what is not being done, and perhaps ought to be. Reported information did not include cost, or approaches to reliability other than Classical Test Theory. In the research papers, performance by demographic data such as age, sex, ethnicity and disability was not indicated.
By contrast, several national sources of data on candidate performance by demographic are available and show that there are significant differences by demographic data. These sources are the UK Prescribing Skills Assessment, the NHS National Pharmacist Recruitment Programme (NPRP) and the GPhC National Registration Assessment, for which an assessment report is published in annual minutes.
For the NPRP in 2022–2023, younger applicants scored slightly higher than older applicants both on the SJT and the numeracy tests. Female candidates scored slightly higher than male candidates on the SJT, and male candidates scored slightly higher than female candidates on the numeracy tests. These effect sizes were small. For ethnicity, self‐identifying White and Chinese candidates scored higher than Asian, Black, Mixed and Other candidates both on the numeracy test and the SJT, with a medium effect size. These effects were consistent with previous iterations of the NPRP. Analysis of Differential Item Functioning indicates that these discrepancies in scores are not the result of bias in individual items, and, as in the case of widespread patterns of differential attainment, the causes remain obscure.
For the GPhC Registration Assessment 2022, younger candidates scored higher than older candidates, and candidates self‐identifying as White or Chinese scored higher than other demographic groups. Males slightly outperformed females. Again, these results are generally comparable with earlier iterations of the assessments.
As far as we know, the UK PSA does not publish demographic analyses, and a review of the performance of the PSA in Australia and New Zealand also did not report on demographic data of the participants.
We consider this missing evidence below and make recommendations to address these issues.

National programmes for collecting evidence of predictive validity
The ultimate guarantor of assessment methodology, outcomes and standard setting, and arbiter for cost‐effectiveness, we propose, is predictive validity: how the assessment predict how candidates subsequently perform in the workplace, with particular regard to patient safety.
How might such clinical performance best be measured? A number of outcome measures have been used in clinical practice and compared to previous assessment scores.
While some of these involve clinical skills other than prescribing, many could be adapted for use in prescribing settings. These include peer ratings of skills, indices obtained from claims‐for‐fees data, including appropriate prescribing, incidence of contraindicated drug prescribing, use of structured review charts of performance, and supervisor ratings with the need for subsequent remedial support. All of these studies showed a positive relationship between earlier assessment scores and subsequent workplace performance.
In several studies, later successful disciplinary proceedings were used as the outcome variable. This is no doubt because the data are more readily available than data arduously obtained through physician and patient case reviews, or by colleague or supervisor reviews. A disadvantage is that successful disciplinary action only affects a small proportion of healthcare providers. Inverse relationships have been demonstrated between earlier assessment scores and the likelihood of subsequent disciplinary action, the number of nontrivial complaints, and having significantly lower clinical competence and professional behaviour ratings.
The unequivocal conclusion that can be drawn is that written tests of declarative knowledge, practical tests such as OSCEs, and Situational Judgement Tests all have predictive validity for later clinical practice.
There is, therefore, plainly a major need for tests of the predictive validity of tests of prescribing competence, particularly for national examinations. Such tests could, as described above, employ outcome measures such as normal progression in later professional assessments, Fitness to Practise issues and measures of patient benefits and harms. In the UK, it would be most valuable to be able to include referrals to the former National Clinical Assessment Service (now Practitioner Performance Advice, with National Clinical Assessment Service falling under the aegis of NHS Resolution). For the UK Prescribing Safety Assessment, data on the future performance of medical students, including any subsequent sanctions, is obtainable through the UK Medical Education Database. However, retrospective review of charts by trained pharmacists is potentially the most direct and quickest method of obtaining relevant data, as described in above. It is appreciated that this is expensive and time‐consuming, but no methods with the same validity but lower cost have been published. In view of the importance of national assessments as the gate‐keepers for clinical practice and patient safety, such research must be viewed as value for money.

Recommendation 1: predictive validity
National authorities and regulators, such as the GPhC, should commission the appropriate research, replicating studies more commonly carried out with medical students and doctors, to explore the predictive validity of their current tests, and from these, deduce the relative and incremental value of written tests, practical and observational tests such as OSCEs and SJTs. Similarly, regional and local institutions should consider if it is possible to measure the predictive validity of their educational assessments in later clinical practice.
The creation of national data sets analogous to the UK Medical Education Database (UKMED), containing all available performance data in training and subsequent clinical practice, would empower such analyses, and we recommend that this be considered by national and regional regulators.

Differential performance
There is a systemic issue of significant and unexplained group differences across ethnic subgroups and other protected characteristics for many assessment outcomes, including, as data here indicate, tests of prescribing competence. The causes of differential performance are likely to be complex and to include societal issues and are outside the scope of this review. However, it would be valuable to establish the presence and scale of the issue in tests of prescribing competence, particularly in fields where ethnic minority candidates may be present in relatively large numbers.

Recommendation 2: demographic data
In tests of prescribing competence, candidates should be routinely invited to include demographic data, including protected characteristics such as age, sex, disability and ethnicity on a voluntary basis to allow subgroup analysis to be performed.

Range of professions covered
Medical students and doctors were featured in the great majority of articles, possibly because of greater funding opportunities, or greater research expertise in the medical community. However, there are significant and expanding role in prescribing by pharmacists, nurses and physician associates. Extending studies of assessment in these professions would be a welcome addition to the literature.

Recommendation 3: professions other than medicine
Research on tests of prescribing competence in allied health professions would extend and benefit the knowledge pool on prescribing competence in general, with particular reference to future patient safety.

Good practice in reporting the assessment of prescribing
The results of this study indicate that there is considerable variability in reporting of information relating to assessment of prescribing skills, with key information frequently lacking. The following recommendation suggests some good practice steps that would ease the task of identifying best practice in this area in future.

Recommendation 4: reporting practice
When research on assessment of prescribing is published, clear descriptions of how tests were developed, their format, size and delivery time are essential. We recommend that data on reliability, sample size, cut score and standard‐setting methods be published consistently.
With increasing delivery of tests online, information about delivery format and security measures is essential.
Where Classical Test Theory is used to describe reliability, we recommend citing the standard error of measurement as well as Cronbach's α, but we also recommend considering the use of Generalisability Theory (particularly where OSCEs are employed) and Item Response Theory, increasingly widely used in medical education, where appropriate (e.g. in large regional and national tests).
Approaches to validity are extremely valuable, but not always described. A description of the chosen approaches to validity would be an invaluable addition to articles on assessments of prescribing competence, with particular reference to the face validity of items, and the content validity of tests.
Cost (e.g. in terms of staff time to develop, deliver, quality assure and score the assessments) is very rarely described. However, since cost effectiveness is a highly desirable property of assessments, such information would be invaluable, and we recommend at least an indication of the time costs involved in the assessment, even if this is not reduced to an exact financial sum.

Recommendation 5: situational judgement tests
Since SJTs have demonstrated predictive validity in the affective domain, they would provide a valuable complement to tests in the cognitive and psychomotor domains.

STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS
This study represents a snapshot, current at the time of analysis, of practice in assessment of prescribing competence. It identifies not only what is present in current practice, but also what is absent, but desirable. It makes recommendations for future research projects and their reporting, to address such lacunae.
This study has limitations. First, the findings of our review may not apply to countries in Africa, Asia and South America as studies from these regions were excluded in this systematic review. Also, it is possible that the standards of reporting prescribing assessment studies from these countries may be different to what we found. Second, our search strategy excluded articles that were not reported in English and could have missed other important assessment strategies that may exist in these studies. Third, medical students and qualified doctors represented the majority of the population groups studied in the papers we reviewed. Hence, our findings may be more reflective of the situation within medicine, as prescribing assessments in other disciplines are currently under researched/reported. Fourth, many of the included studies were conducted in a single institution (51.9%) or had small cohorts with <100 participants (40.7%).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All 3 authors designed the study. Drs Ajiboye and Auta carried out the systematic review, and resolved any discrepancies in scoring and analysis. Professor McLachlan provided the general educational background and wrote the first draft. All 3 authors extensively reviewed and commented on the article before submission and during the refereeing process.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors have no conflicts of interest with regard to this work.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data are available from the Principal Investigator on request.

REFERENCES
The relationship between assessment and learning
Junior doctors prescribing: enhancing their learning in practice
An in‐depth investigation into causes of prescribing errors by foundation trainees in relation to their medical education: EQUIP study
Competence and confidence with prescribing in pharmacy and medicine: a scoping review
Do final‐year medical students have sufficient prescribing competencies? A systematic literature review
Assessing prescribing competence
The assessment of professional competence: developments, research and practical implications
Validity: on the meaningful interpretation of assessment data
https://prescribingsafetyassessment.ac.uk/
https://www.gmc-uk.org/education/standards-guidance-and-curricula/standards-and-outcomes/outcomes-for-graduates
https://www.bnf.org/
https://www.bps.ac.uk/getmedia/8028ab78-0e36-4e11-a2d8-9da39f4833e8/PSA-Independent-Review-Report-(public).pdf.aspx
https://www.gmc-uk.org/education/medical-licensing-assessment
https://prescribingsafetyassessment.ac.uk/resources/Independent_Review_Into_The_PSA.pdf
https://www.pharmacyregulation.org/education/pharmacist-foundation-training-scheme/registration-assessment
https://www.pharmacyregulation.org/sites/default/files/document/registration-assessment-regulations-for-sittings-in-2023a.pdf
https://www.pharmacyregulation.org/the-registration-assessment
nhs_england_foundation_pharmact_recruitment_applicant_handbook_2023_final.pdf (hee.nhs.uk)
https://www.usmle.org/prepare-your-exam/step-3-materials/step-3-content-outline-and-specifications
https://nabp.pharmacy/programs/examinations/naplex/
https://nabp.pharmacy/programs/examinations/mpje/
https://pebc.ca/about-pebc/
A licence to prescribe
Towards a “prescribing license” for medical students: development and quality evaluation of an assessment for safe prescribing
https://www.prescribingeducation.eu/
The European prescribing exam: assessing whether European medical students can prescribe rationally and safely
https://apps.unimi.it/files/manifesti/eng_manifesto_E26of1_2024.pdf
https://www.bpsassessment.com/products-services/prescribing-skills-assessment/
https://www.pharmacycouncil.org.au/pharmacist/skills-assessment/intern-written-exam/
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
https://www.rpharms.com/resources/frameworks/prescribers-competency-framework#:~:text=It%20describes%20the%20demonstrable%20knowledge,both%20the%20prescriber%20and%20patient
Association between funding and quality of published medical education research
The prescribing performance and confidence of final‐year medical students
Essential competencies in prescribing: a first European cross‐sectional study among 895 final‐year medical students
Are Dutch dental students and dental‐care providers competent prescribers of drugs?
Problem‐based training for medical students reduces common prescription errors: a randomised controlled trial
Evaluation of the prescribing skills assessment implementation, performance and medical student experience in Australia and New Zealand
Safe medication practice tutorials: a practical approach to preparing prescribers
Training and assessing independent nurse prescribers: a model for old age psychiatry
Use of an e‐learning educational module to better equip doctors to prescribe for older patients: a randomised controlled trial
Categorising paediatric prescribing errors by junior doctors through prescribing competency assessment: does assessment reflect actual practice?
Medical students' and internal medicine trainees' knowledge of drug prescribing recommendations in older patients with impaired kidney function
Misprescribing controlled substances: an evaluation of a professional development program
Do we become better prescribers after graduation: a 1‐year international follow‐up study among junior doctors
Oxygen: can we prescribe it correctly?
Safe prescribing: an educational intervention for medical students
Improved junior paediatric prescribing skills after a short e‐learning intervention: a randomised controlled trial
Skills of medical students and house officers in prescribing narcotic medications
The performance of junior doctors in applying clinical pharmacology knowledge and prescribing skills to standardized clinical cases
Exploring the utility of the prescribing safety assessment in pharmacy education in England: experiences of pre‐registration trainees and undergraduate (MPharm) pharmacy students
Do medical courses adequately prepare interns for safe and effective prescribing in New South Wales public hospitals?
Prescribing competency assessment for Canadian medical students: a pilot evaluation
Knowledge of the principles of judicious antibiotic use for upper respiratory infections: a survey of senior medical students
How would final‐year medical students perform if their skill‐based prescription assessment was real life?
Better performance of medical students on pharmacotherapy knowledge and skills tests is associated with practising with e‐learning program P‐scribe
Prescribing competence of junior doctors: does it add up?
Prescribing safety assessment: ensuring that new graduates are competent to prescribe and supervise the use of medicines in modern healthcare
Can paediatric junior hospital doctors prescribe competently
Pharmacists as drug prescribers: validation of certification exams and evaluation instruments
Pharmacist‐led education for final year medical students: a pilot study
Competency assessment of pharmacists providing emergency contraception
A pilot study of a pharmacist‐led prescribing program for final‐year medical students
Medication knowledge among dental students in Australia—a cross‐sectional study
E‐learning training to improve pediatric parenteral nutrition practice: a pilot study in two university hospitals
Junior doctors' preparedness to prescribe, monitor, and treat patients with the antibiotic vancomycin in an Australian teaching hospital
Student and pre‐registration pharmacist performance in a UK prescribing assessment
Intravenous fluid prescribing knowledge and confidence in F1 doctors
Piloting the United Kingdom ‘prescribing safety assessment’ with pharmacist prescribers in Scotland
A randomised controlled trial of extended immersion in multi‐method continuing simulation to prepare senior medical students for practice as junior doctors
Using prescribing very short answer questions to identify sources of medication errors: a prospective study in two UK medical schools
Impact of a focussed teaching programme on practical prescribing skills among final year medical students
Meeting the challenge of prescribing and administering medicines safely: structured teaching and assessment for final year medical students
Improving antibiotic prescribing skills in medical students: the effect of e‐learning after 6 months
Blind prescribing: a study of junior doctors' prescribing preparedness in an Australian emergency department
Developing and validating a tool for assessment of pharmacist prescribers' consultations
Impact of a compulsory final year medical student curriculum on junior doctor prescribing
The effect of an interactive tutorial on the prescribing performance of senior medical students
A pharmacotherapy self‐assessment improves prescribing by prompting junior doctors to study further
Appropriate antibiotic prescribing among final‐year medical students in Europe
Prescription‐writing by pediatric house officers
Bridging the gap: improving safe prescribing from university to workplace
Identification of prescribing errors by pre‐registration student nurses: a cross‐sectional observational study utilising a prescription medication quiz
Pharmacy and medical students' competence and confidence with prescribing: a cross‐sectional study
Development and validation of the McMaster prescribing competency assessment for medical trainees (MacPCA)
national_recruitment_scheme_2022_outcome_report.pdf (hee.nhs.uk)
https://www.pharmacyregulation.org/sites/default/files/document/gphc-council-papers-8-september-2022_0.pdf
Predictive validity of certification by the American Board of Internal Medicine
Association between licensure examination scores and practice in primary care
Doctor scores on national qualifying examinations predict quality of care in future practice
Evaluating the complementary roles of an SJT and academic assessment for entry into clinical practice
Performance during internal medicine residency training and subsequent disciplinary action by state licensing boards
Situational judgement test performance and subsequent misconduct in medical students
Predicting fitness to practise events in international medical graduates who registered as UK doctors via the professional and linguistic assessments board (PLAB) system: a national cohort study
Is academic attainment or situational judgment test performance in medical school associated with the likelihood of disciplinary action? A national retrospective cohort study
Physician scores on a national clinical skills examination as predictors of complaints to medical regulatory authorities
Setting a fair performance standard for physicians' quality of patient care
https://www.ukmed.ac.uk/
Differential attainment in medical education and training

SCREENING AND SEARCH STRATEGY
The titles and abstracts of articles retrieved from our searches were initially screened by 2 reviewers (A.A. and A.A.) to identify potentially eligible studies. The full texts of all potentially relevant studies were obtained and independently assessed against the eligibility criteria by these 2 reviewers. Any discrepancy in screening of articles was resolved by consensus.
Keywords/mesh terms	 	1.	(“Prescriptions”[Mesh] OR “Prescription Drugs”[Mesh])	 	2.	(Medical students OR doctors OR nurses OR pharmacists OR physiotherapists OR nonmedical prescribers OR nurse prescribers OR allied health students OR healthcare students OR nursing students OR pharmacy students OR dental students OR nonmedical prescribing students OR nurse prescribing students OR physiotherapy students OR pharmacist prescribing students OR nonmedical prescribing course OR pharmacists prescribing course OR independent prescribing course OR supplementary prescribing course)	 	3.	(Assessment OR evaluation OR examination OR exam OR competenc* OR knowledge OR skill*)	 	4.	(United Kingdom OR Europe OR United States OR United States of America OR USA OR Canada OR Australia OR New Zealand)	 	5	1 AND 2 AND 3 AND 4
The search strategy is shown in the Table below.

MERSQI domain and items cores for included studies
Domain	MERSQI item	Study No. (%)a	Maximum score	MERSQI score Mean (SD)	 	Item	Domain	Item	Domain	 	Study design	Study design			3	1.44 (0.68)	1.44 (0.68)	 		Single‐group cross‐sectional or single‐group post‐test only	34 (62.9)	1				 		Single‐group pretest and post‐test	4 (7.4)	1.5				 		Nonrandomized, 2 group	10 (18.5)	2				 		Randomized controlled trial	6 (11.1)	3				 	Sampling	No of institutions studied			3	0.94 (0.48)	2.00 (0.60)	 		1 institution	28 (51.9)	0.5				 		2 institutions	4 (7.4)	1				 		3 or more institutions	22 (40.7)	1.5				 		Response rate				1.13 (0.44)		 		Not applicable	7 (13.0)					 		<50% or not reported	13 (24.1)	0.5				 		50–74%	9 (16.7)	1				 		≥75%	25 (46.3)	1.5				 	Type of data	Type of data			3	3.00 (0.00)	3.00 (0.00)	 		Subjective	0	1				 		Objective measurement	54 (100)	3				 	Validity	Content			3	0.30 (0.46)	0.63 (0.83)	 		Reported	16 (29.6)	1				 		Not reported	38 (70.4)	0				 		Internal structure				0.26 (0.44)		 		Reported	14 (25.9)	1				 		Not reported	40 (74.1)	0				 		Relationship to other variables				0.07 (0.26)		 		Reported	4 (7.4)	1				 		Not reported	50 (92.6)	0				 	Data analysis	Appropriateness of data analysis			3	0.96 (0.19)	2.81 (0.39)	 		Data analysis inappropriate for study design and type of data	2 (3.7)	0				 		Data analysis appropriate for study design and type of data	52 (96.3)	1				 		Complexity of analysis				1.85 (0.36)		 		Descriptive analysis only	8 (15.4)	1				 		Beyond descriptive analysis	46 (85.2)	2				 	Outcomes	Outcomes			3	1.50 (0.00)	1.50 (0.00)	 		Satisfaction, attitudes, perceptions, opinions, general facts	0	1				 		Knowledge, skills	54 (100)	1.5				 		Behaviours	0	2				 		Patient/health care outcomes	0	3
Percentages may not total 100 due to rounding.