Small sample sizes in clinical trials: a pragmatic approach to clinical research in veterinary medicine
As evidence synthesis and guideline development efforts advance in veterinary medicine, the quality and quantity of data can be limiting factors. Aspiration and pragmatism must be balanced to ensure optimal data development and availability. Systematic reviews and meta‐analyses are ideally based on multiple large randomised controlled trials from a broad range of relevant populations, but cost, time and caseload can be substantial barriers. Small randomised controlled trials can also provide useful and actionable information. Data from numerous small but robustly designed and executed, comparable randomised controlled trials can support stronger conclusions, complementing larger randomised controlled trials or providing critical important knowledge when larger randomised controlled trials are not available. The value from these small trials is in the data, not the analysis, as individual analyses within these randomised controlled trials are usually underpowered to detect reasonable and clinically relevant endpoints. A desire for perfection can inhibit progress if randomised controlled trials are not performed, or if small but potentially useful data sets remain unpublished. We encourage the veterinary scientific community, including researchers, reviewers and editors, to strive for optimal study designs and sample sizes but to be open to publishing data from small trials that may provide little insight in isolation but contribute useful data for meta‐analyses.
There are no underpowered studies, just underpowered analyses.
Evidence‐based medicine, evidence synthesis and evidence‐based guidelines are receiving more attention in veterinary medicine. This represents a positive step to improve patient care. Yet, efforts in these areas are often hampered by a poor evidence base, including lack of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) or low‐quality studies with methodological or analytical limitations.
Systematic reviews and meta‐analyses use structured approaches to allow for reproducible qualitative (evidence evaluation) and quantitative (meta‐analysis) assessment of available data. Ideally, these are based on multiple large RCTs from a broad range of relevant populations. Data from numerous small but comparable RCTs can support stronger conclusions, complementing larger RCTs or providing critical important knowledge when large RCTs are not available. The approach to systematic review and meta‐analysis helps reduce the risk of bias being introduced from including small trials. The certainty assessment during a systematic review ensures that the risk of bias of individual trials, the precision of the overall effect estimate, directness of the data and risk of publication bias are considered and openly communicated (Neumann & Schünemann, ). Additionally, the sizes of individual studies are weighted in the meta‐analysis, and larger studies influence the pooled estimate more than small trials.
Robustly powered RCTs should be our goal, but there is a need to be pragmatic and accept data from a properly designed and reported RCT (Sargeant et al., ), even if a specific trial cannot achieve a strong analytical endpoint. As reviewers, some of us have rejected small RCTs that had no realistic hope of achieving their a priori goals or having acceptable statistical analysis, despite the importance of the subject that was studied. With the benefit of hindsight and a recognition of the value of data sets (even small data sets) for systematic reviews and meta‐analyses, this approach can result in the loss of valuable data.
We do not argue to abandon sample size calculations. Rather, small RCTs must be absolutely transparent about their limitations, including lack of statistical power. Reviews of the veterinary literature have reported that sample size determination was only provided in 0% to 24% of trials (Bergen et al., ; Giuffrida, ; Munro et al., ; Wang et al., ; Wareham et al., ). Limited statistical power is most concerning when studies report “no significant effect” because of the potential for Type II error, something that was demonstrated in a study of 103 published veterinary RCTs that indicated only 14% of studies were adequately powered to detect a 25% difference, and only 39% could have detected a 50% difference (Giuffrida, ). Those effect sizes are likely beyond the realistic true effects for many, if not most, interventions.
In veterinary medicine, small RCTs are often presented as pilot studies. True pilot studies are introductory studies that are designed to be small and evaluate aspects such as feasibility, practicality, resource requirements, limitations and cost, as a lead‐in to a properly powered and more refined RCT. This is not analogous to “small” or “underpowered”. It is our assumption that in many pilot studies in veterinary medicine, the “pilot” nomenclature was assigned post hoc after failure to recruit the targeted sample size or after peer review was critical of the sample size. A review of veterinary studies positioned as pilot studies reported that only 20% lead to a subsequent larger study, but 75% were cited in review papers (Rishniw & White, ). Overall, issues with sample size, analysis and interpretation abound and methodological weaknesses are not always (or often) highlighted, potentially increasing the likelihood of misinterpretation or over‐interpretation of the results by readers.
Reasons for the rather limited number of veterinary RCTs and small sample sizes within many RCTs are not described but likely include logistical, time and financial barriers. A review of UK publicly funded non‐inferiority trials in humans reported a median trial duration of 5 years and a funding amount of £1,772,044 (Totton et al., ). While this may not represent a good estimate of the costs for large RCTs in veterinary medicine, these data highlight the economic and time limitations, with timeframes that do not fit with graduate or clinical resident research (which is often how trials are conducted in veterinary medicine) and where even a reasonable fraction of that level of funding is very unlikely to be obtained for companion animal RCTs.
Study of interventions is critically important to guide safe and effective patient care. In some ways, a strict focus on large RCTs could inhibit progress if people were deterred by the cost, logistics and practicality of large trials. This can be of particular concern for rare outcomes, where prohibitively large sample sizes could be needed to detect a significant impact of an intervention. In addition to leading to limited motivation to perform RCTs, these issues can lead to questionable study designs, particularly overestimating the effect size to justify a smaller sample size. It is preferable to have a trial with a properly performed sample size calculation that fails to reach the target sample size and is transparent about analytical limitations than a trial that makes biologically unlikely or implausible estimates of effect size to justify a small sample size, and which could therefore overlook the potential efficacy of an intervention.
We believe that there is value in small RCTs that are adequately designed and presented. The value is in the data, not the analysis, as individual analyses within these trials are usually underpowered to detect reasonable and clinically relevant endpoints. What they provide are data; data that can be used for meta‐analysis and evidence syntheses that are critically important in veterinary medicine. As a result, we recommend that authors, reviewers and editors recognise the value of the data contained in such reports. Rather than applying an incorrect post hoc “pilot” or “preliminary” term to the title or using overreaching analyses that are prone to Type 2 error, there should be an emphasis on the data. All RCTs, regardless of sample size, need to provide detailed information about study methods, populations and other factors that are core design and reporting elements for RCTs, as outlined in the PetSORT guidelines for reporting clinical trials in pets (Sargeant et al., ). Yet, in small RCTs, minimal statistical analysis may be the optimal approach, and the focus should be on clear reporting of outcomes (ideally using standardised definitions) that can be compared to other trials of any size. This may result in small RCTs being presented solely with descriptive analysis, without evaluation of the impact of the intervention and highlighting issues such as broad confidence intervals. While recommending that a clinical trial be presented without statistical analysis of the impact of the intervention may seem questionable (if not downright bizarre), it reflects the strengths and limitations of the dataset. It ensures that useful data become accessible while unsupported analyses do not lead to misleading or inaccurate interpretations. A trial RCT such as this would not answer many, if any, immediate questions but would provide data for more robust meta‐analyses to answer the same or similar questions in the future.
Recognition of the value of small RCTs can be a double‐edged sword. While it can drive better data collection and reporting, it should not be used as demotivation to seek funding for and conduct large, well‐powered RCTs. A well‐powered RCT will provide more value than a small, underpowered RCT, but a properly designed and executed small trial will provide better data than a trial that is not performed, is abandoned or is not published.
A desire for perfection should not be a barrier to progress, and a pragmatic approach to publishing is needed. Therefore, we wish to highlight the value of properly designed and executed RCTs, regardless of sample size. We encourage authors, reviewers and editors to appreciate small data sets as sources for future evidence synthesis by supporting the publication of small trials.

Author contributions
J. S. Weese, F. Allerton, K. Scahill, T. M. Sørensen, L. R. Jessen: Developed the concept. J. S. Weese: Created the intial draft. J. S. Weese, F. Allerton, K. Scahill, T. M. Sørensen, L. R. Jessen: Developed the final version.

Conflict of interest
None of the authors of this article has a financial or personal relationship with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence or bias the content of the paper.

Data availability statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no data sets were generated or analysed during the current study.

References
Quality of reporting of prospective in vivo and ex vivo studies published in the Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care over a 10‐year period (2009‐2019)
Type II error and statistical power in reports of small animal clinical trials
Randomization, blinding, data handling and sample size estimation in papers published in Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia in 2009 and 2019
The term ‘Pilot Study’ is misused in veterinary medicine: a critical assessment
The standards of reporting trials in pets (PetSORT): explanation and elaboration
A review of UK publicly funded non‐inferiority trials: is the design more inferior than it should be?
How many subjects are enough in a veterinary trial? – Literature review and insights from industrial statisticians
Sample size and number of outcome measures of veterinary randomised controlled trials of pharmaceutical interventions funded by different sources, a cross‐sectional study