Procedures to evaluate potential of plants as natural food preservatives: Phytochemical characterization, novel extraction technology, and safety evaluation—A comprehensive review
Abstract
There is increasing demand for natural food preservative in food manufacturing industry as it is the key to meet consumers' preferences toward healthier food choice. Plant is listed among the most important resources of bioactive components to be utilized as the green and natural food preservatives. There are more than 10,000 kinds of bioactive components in plants that possess antioxidant and antimicrobial properties. Artemisia with potential antimicrobial and antioxidant attributes, as well as functional and medicinal properties, is one of the most important plant species. The manuscript presents a comprehensive review of the potential of the Artemisia species as natural food preservatives. The current challenges and ways forward in using Artemisia EOs and extracts as food preservatives are also discussed. This topic is timely and important considering the natural preservatives used to replace chemical ingredients, sustaining quality, healthy properties, and shelf life of food products as well as efficient and novel extraction techniques.
The use of plant extracts and EOs as preservatives in food products is a growing trend. Artemisia revealed good antimicrobial and antioxidant effects. Artemisia can be a novel natural agent for food preservation. The recent developments in extraction of Artemisia are discussed.

INTRODUCTION
The dependence of people being on plant kingdom for different purposes such as fodder, food, medicine, fuel, etc., is as old as the presence of humans in this universe (Koul & Taak, ). Natural ingredients due to their few side effects, and as a result less toxic, are preferred mostly by consumers compared to chemically synthesized ingredients (Haile & Jiru, ). Therefore, medicinal herbs can potentially be utilized as a source of healthy products for the production and improvement of functional foods. Asteraceae family species, with high antioxidant and antimicrobial properties, are listed among the most practical and useful plants to produce a healthy diet (Kazeminia et al., ). Asteraceae includes many species with economic and medicinal significance, and is known as the largest eudicot angiosperm family with ~500 species. Artemisia is the leading genus of Asteraceae family (Bora & Sharma, ). The genus Artemisia, which comprises hardy herbs and shrubs mostly covered with hairs, belongs to the tribe Anthemideae of the family Asteraceae (Compositae). Due to the medicinal value as well as the commercial and economic significance of Artemisia, their proper chemical identification is of great importance. There are more than 600 secondary metabolites with valuable medical properties which have been identified from Artemisia species (Shahrivari et al., ). These essential metabolites may include saponins, EOs, cyanogenic glycosides, flavonoids, tannins, phenols, unsaturated lactones, glucosinolates, and phenolic glycosides (Al‐Zubairi et al., ). The Artemisia extracts have been reported to be rich in compounds like flavonoids and phenolic with medicinal properties such as antinociceptive, antimalarial, antimicrobial, antihepatotoxic, antihelmintic, antidiabetic, antifungal, antihysteric, antioxidants, diuretic, stimulant, and digestive (Mehani et al., ). Some species of Artemisia genus have been utilized not only to treat epilepsy, psychosis, depression, diabetes, insomnia, irritability, stress, and anxiety but also as flavoring in cake, pastries, tobacco, etc. (Babayan et al., ; Pavithra et al., ). Artemisia essential oil is not only a rich source of β‐thujone, camphor, 1,8‐cineole, and α‐thujone but also has high antioxidant and antibacterial attributes (Baldino et al., ). In this regard, techno‐functional attributes of Artemisia have been proved in foods, like Hy‐line Brown male chickens' breast (Wan et al., ), rainbow trout fillets (Raeisi et al., ), yogurt (Zedan et al., ), soybean oil (Ayoughi et al., ), and thigh muscles in broilers (Baldino et al., ). Some of the most notable Artemisia species include, but are not limited to A. annua, A. argyi, A. vulgaris, A. herba‐alba, A. absinthium L, A. pallens, A. afra, and A. japonica (Bora & Sharma, ).
The aim of the present work is to investigate the potential of the Artemisia species as a natural food preservative.

METHODOLOGY

Investigation of the most important Artemisia species

Artemisia annua
The common name of A. annua is sweet annie, sweet wormwood, or wormwood. A. annua is an erect, branched, annual herb with a sweet aromatic odor having very slender stem approximately 2 m high (Zeb et al., ). A. annua has naturalized worldwide and has expanded in various areas such as Switzerland, the USA, Burma, Brazil, Thailand, Malaysia, Australia, Central and South Europe, India, South China, Afghanistan, Iran, and Pakistan. The twig and leaf extract of A. annua is a rich source of artemisinin, 3‐O‐β‐d‐glucopyranoside of sitosterol, chrysosplenetin, scopoletin, and eupatin (Patel, ). A. annua is widely utilized to make flavored drinks, fragrant wreaths, and EOs distillation for industrial and perfumery usage. A. annua has also been reported to have antiviral, anticholesterolemic, antimicrobial, anti‐inflammatory, anticonvulsant, antiplasmodial, antitumor, antimalaria, and antihyperlipidemic properties (Mirghaed et al., ; Wang et al., ; Yan et al., ). Furthermore, A. annua leaf extract has been exhibited to increase the Oreochromis niloticus immunity (Soares et al., ), enhance the Cyprinus carpio antioxidant capacity (Mirghaed et al., ), and improve the growth performance of Oncorhynchus mykiss W (Koshinski, ). A. annua received increased importance when the sesquiterpene lactone artemisinin, as the active principle of A. annua against malaria, was isolated from this species (Feng et al., ). A. annua is listed among the top 10 industrial crops around the world.

Artemisia argyi
A. argyi, known as a perennial herbaceous plant of Compositae artemisia, is widely distributed in most areas of China. A. argyi, which is known as medical grass, with high resistance against drought and cold weather likes wet and warm conditions (Zhang et al., ). The dried leaf of A. argyi is widely utilized for the treatment of menstrual‐related symptoms, hemostasis, inflammation, diarrhea, and eczema in many countries (Liu et al., ; Shin et al., ). According to modern pharmacological studies, A. argyi due to the abundance of volatile terpenoids can be utilized as a broad‐spectrum antiviral and antibacterial treatment (Jiang et al., ). Furthermore, the extracted active substance from A. argyi leaves, due to their pleasant aroma, has wide uses as additives to cosmetics and functional foods (Anwar et al., ). Chemical studies indicated the presence of several secondary metabolic components such as organic acids, coumarins, sesquiterpene lactones, polysaccharides, flavonoids, and terpenoids in A. argyi (Han et al., ; Jiang et al., ).

Artemisia vulgaris
A. vulgaris, which spreads rapidly upon introduction by a well‐developed rhizome system, is a broadleaf perennial approximately 2.5 m tall and 75 cm width (Ekiert et al., ). A. vulgaris, which develops fruit called achenes, is well established to cool weather with gravelly, sandy, and well‐drained soils (Ekiert et al., ). Pandey et al.  also analyzed A. vulgaris EOs composition and listed the following major components: germacrene D (8.42%), borneol (4.44%), camphor (11.89%), chrysanthenone (4.48%), beta‐thujone (19.99%), and sabinene (11.29%) (Pandey et al., ). The EOs of A. vulgaris mainly include volatile components, such as 1,8‐cineole, β‐caryophyllene, α‐thujone, camphor, camphene, germacrene D, and α‐pinene (Judžentienė & Buzelytė, ). In traditional medicine, A. vulgaris is utilized as infusions to which stomachic, cytostatic, antibacterial, anthelmintic, antitumor, and antipyretic actions have been attributed (Blagojević et al., ).

Artemisia herba‐alba
A. herba‐alba, also known as desert wormwood, is a greenish‐silver perennial herb that grows approximately 20–40 cm in height (Moufid & Eddouks, ). This plant is a chamaephyte and is distributed in most of Europe, Saudi Arabia, and North Africa (Libya). A. herba‐alba is widely utilized to treat stomach problems such as abdominal pain and diarrhea and heal exterior wounds (Sapkota et al., ). Furthermore, A. herba‐alba has exerted potent vaso‐relaxant, antifungal, antispasmodic, and antibacterial activities (Mohamed et al., ; Skiker et al., ). Studies on A. herba‐alba indicated that this plant is among the most practical utilized aromatic herbs to counter the threat of COVID‐19 (Asdadi et al., ; Brahmi et al., ; Hasan et al., ). A. herba‐alba by apoptosis induction, DNA destruction, and reducing cell viability in cancer cells has shown a potential cytotoxic activity against different cancers such as myelogenous leukemia, bladder carcinoma, laryngeal carcinoma, and human colon cancer cell (Tilaoui et al., ). Identification of A. herba‐alba EOs indicated the presence of sesquiterpenes, monoterpenes, flavonoids, phenolic components (cirsilineol and hispidoline), and cis‐chrysanthenyl acetate, as well as oxygen‐containing monoterpenes (77.3%) such as chrysanthenone, a‐thujone, and camphor (Belhattab et al., ).

Artemisia absinthium L (wormwood)
A. absinthium, which is traditionally known as Ariti, is typically identified as a perennial and erect herb about 30–60 cm tall (Mohammed et al., ). This plant is distributed in North Africa, West Asia, and Europe (Szopa et al., ). A. absinthium in traditional medicine is used for treating stomach ache, worms, fevers, and sepsis, and acts as a diuretic (Koul & Taak, ). Mohammed et al.  indicated the presence of terpenoids, phenols, proteins, quinines, tannins, carbohydrates, flavonoids, and alkaloids by the phytochemical analysis of A. absinthium extract. The main constituents of A. absinthium EOs (isolated from the aerial parts) are linalyl 3‐methylbutanoate (7.5%), sabinene (8.1%), trans‐sabinyl acetate (8.8%), cis‐â‐epoxyocimene (10.7%), and â‐thujone (19.8%) (Blagojević et al., ). Identification of semisaturated azulenes obtained from A. absinthium EOs; for instance, guaiol (0.49%), chamazulene (3.38%), γ‐gorgeonene (0.86%), and α‐gorgeonene (7.15%), an indication of the plant's responsibility in the biosynthesis of azulenes as its main sesquiterpene components (Mohammed et al., ). This plant has been utilized in the preparation of antimicrobial, anti‐inflammatory, anthelmintic, and anticold drugs due to its stimulant, carminative, digestive, antidepressant, antiseptic, and choleretic impacts (Goud et al., ). It has been indicated that terpenoid, thiophene, flavonoid, and phenolic are listed among the main secondary metabolites of this genus (Yamari et al., ).

Artemisia pallens
A. pallens known as “Davana “is an aromatic, erect herb, approximately 60 cm tall, with small yellow flowers and much divided leaves which grows in the temperate Himalayas (Durgadevi et al., ). A. pallens is a high‐value annual fragrant herb cultivated commercially in South India (Dongare, ). This plant is a versatile medicinal herb utilized for treating a variety of ailments especially diabetes (Kumar & Kumud, ). A. pallens also has been utilized for the treatment of blood pressure, depression, cold, cough, and measles (Pavithra et al., ). This plant contains phenolics and ascorbic acid both of which are powerful antioxidants.

Artemisia afra
A. afra, approximately 2 m tall, is a perennial woody shrub with ridged, hairy, and leafy stem (Van Wyk, ). This plant is distributed in the high land areas (1500 and 3000 m) of Southern Africa and Eastern altitudes with loamy sands, volcanic ash, or calcareous clay loams of granitic or volcanic origin. A. afra is a popular medicinal herb which commonly called African wormwood (Van Wyk, ). A. afra is widely distributed in South Africa from the Mountains of Cederberg in the Cape to tropical East Africa, northwards and stretching as far north as Ethiopia (Van Wyk, ). Evaluation of the preliminary phytochemical screening of the petroleum ether, dichloromethane, and ethanol extract of A. afra leaves indicated the presence of steroids, cardiac glycosides, phenolic quinones, coumarins, terpenoids, anthraquinones, saponins, tannins, flavonoids, and alkaloids, while there were no anthocyanins in all crude extracts (Yimam & Desalew, ). A. afra has long been utilized to treat different sicknesses like dyspepsia, malaria, coughs, diabetes, cold, headaches, and disorders of bladder and kidney (Patil et al., ). du Toit and van der Kooy  indicated good to moderate activity of A. afra against Leishmania donovani, Trypanosoma species, parasitic gastrointestinal nematodes, and Plasmodium falciparum (du Toit & van der Kooy, ).

Artemisia japonica
A. japonica is native to Viet Nam, Korea, China, and Japan. A. japonica is widely utilized to treat tuberculosis, hypertension, malaria, headache, and fever (Vo, ). This plant is used as a tea and vegetable in Chongqing, Fujian, and other places. It has been declared beneficial for liver disorders such as jaundice and viral hepatitis (Lu et al., ).

Advanced extraction technologies
As a separation process, plant extraction allows to extract desired soluble metabolites from herb materials. Due to the presence of active components in the herb matrixes, suitable extraction techniques are necessary to extract the active components (Chuo et al., ). Conventional methods (like Soxhlet and hydrodistillation extraction as the most widely utilized techniques) due to their drawbacks like degradation of thermolabile components, hydrolysis of EOs, along with long processing time need to be substituted with advanced extraction technologies (Ahmad et al., ). There are various new extraction techniques (Figure 1) such as enzyme‐assisted extraction, microwave‐assisted extraction, high‐voltage electrical discharge extraction, ultrasound‐assisted extraction, accelerated solvent extraction, pulsed electric field extraction, supercritical fluid extraction, and negative pressure cavitation which will be evaluated. Among these emerging techniques are those shown below. Table 1 shows the advantages and disadvantages of the application of emerging technologies for the extraction of BACs.
Advanced extraction technologies used for the extraction of bioactive compounds from Artemisia.
Advantages and disadvantages of the application of emerging technologies for the extraction of bioactive compounds (BACs).
Extraction techniques	Advantages	Disadvantages	Extraction condition	References	 	UAE	Increase kinetics of extraction and the yield of extractive substance. Time efficient. Not producing toxic components. Reducing solvent and energy consumption	Poor extraction for volatile or nonpolar components.Degradation and oxidation reactions. Nonselective. To avoid excessive temperature, proper power selection is needed.Affects chemical structure of the BACs	0.5–1 h200–2450 W25 kHzOrganic solvent	Chuo et al. ; Zia et al. 	 	MAE	Time efficient. Increase yield of extraction. Low solvent consumption. Suitable for thermolabile ingredients	Poor extraction for volatile or nonpolar components.Degradation and oxidation reactions. Nonselective. To avoid excessive temperature, proper power selection is needed.Affects chemical structure of the BACs	300 MHz to‐ 300 GHz.Solvents: methanol, water and ethanol	Chuyen et al. 	 	EAE	Time efficient with low solvent and energy consumption. Higher yield of extraction. Enhancing the extraction of BACs. Improved the antioxidant properties and extraction of soluble phenolics. Eco‐friendly technique	Interactions of food ingredients with enzymes. The stability of enzymes. High price of enzymes.It is hard to scale up to industrial scale	Various enzymes can be utilized, mostly pectinases cellulases, and hemicellulase	Gligor et al. ; Wan et al. 	 	ASE	Increase extraction kinetics. Time efficient. High efficiency by faster penetration of solvent without light and oxygen.	Lower yields of oils extraction utilize of organic solvents. Caramelization and Maillard reactions	Up to 200°C with 3000 psi	Vilas‐Franquesa et al. 	 	HVDE	Higher extraction yields of high‐added value components. Improve the extraction of phenolic compounds. Lower diffusion time, diffusion temperature, and solvent content	HVED may produce undesirable contaminants, such as free reactive radicals. Metal migration. Producing small particles that are hard to be separated	40–60 kV/cm2–5 μs	Li et al. 	 	SFE	Enhance safety and selectivity. Nontoxic organic solvents. Prevent sample oxidization. Time efficient. Sustainable extraction. Higher yield of extraction. Free of inorganic salts and heavy metals. Extracts are very pure	Use high pressure. Need high power. Need very complex and expensive equipment. Polar substances cannot be extracted	45 min‐640–80°C25–40 MPaCosolvent: Ethanol	Roselló‐Soto et al. ; Zia et al. 	 	PEFE	Increase extraction yield of BACs. Enhance the antioxidant activity. Use low temperature and minimize the degradation of heat‐sensitive components	High cost of the equipment. Need to be thermally controlled to avoid further degradation of the thermos‐sensitive compounds. No inactivation spores. High conductivity values reduce the specificity and effectiveness of the electroporation	10–4 –10 − 2 s500–1000 V/cm	Martínez et al. ; Zia et al. 	 	NPC	Efficient. Eco‐friendly.Time efficient. Easy large‐scale operation.Avoiding decomposition of thermos‐sensitive components	In large‐scale application, there is concern regarding the efficiency of the technique and the degradation of extract	−0.04 (MPa) pressure; 35 (°C)35 minEthanol concentration (v/v): 65%	Kou et al. ; Panda and Manickam ; Tian et al.
Abbreviations: ASE, accelerated solvent extraction; EAE, enzyme‐assisted extraction; HVED, High‐voltage electrical discharge extraction; MAE, microwave‐assisted extraction; NPC, Negative pressure cavitation; PEFE, Pulsed electric field extraction; SFE, Supercritical fluid extraction; UAE, ultrasound‐assisted extraction.

Ultrasound‐assisted extraction (UAE)
Ultrasound technique (wave frequency >20 kHz) is a useful, simple, efficient, and economic technology, which does not require expensive instruments (Zia et al., ). Ultrasound waves lead to the production of small bubbles during the rarefaction cycles, which grow until the implosion. This implosion generates high temperature and pressure, resulting in cell wall damage and releasing cell contents (Al Khawli et al., ; Zia et al., ). The efficiency of ultrasound‐assisted extraction is mostly related to temperature, extraction time, plant materials, L/S, and solvent, along with intensity, amplitude, power, and frequency (Chuo et al., ). According to results obtained by Patil and Akamanchi  on camptothecin extraction from Nothapodytes nimmoniana, ultrasound‐assisted extraction technique showed higher efficacy (up to 78%) compared to conventional stirring extraction technique (46.5%) (Patil & Akamanchi, ). Karabegović et al.  studied the Soxhlet and ultrasonic extraction techniques. They indicated that ultrasound positively affected the kinetics of extraction and the yield of extractive substance, and in the case of both Artemisia species (Artemisia campestris and Artemisia vulgaris) the lowest amounts of flavonoids and total phenolic components are found in the Soxhlet extraction technique which might be related to the longer processing time as well as higher extraction temperature (Karabegović et al., ). Total flavonoid and phenolic contents of A. vulgaris extracted by SE and ultrasound were 123.4 and 135.0 (total phenolic content/mg·g−1), respectively.

Microwave‐assisted extraction (MAE)
Microwave (with frequency between 300 MHz and 300 GHz) is nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (Chuyen et al., ). The underlying principle of microwave extraction lies in the energy transfer by an electric field through two coinciding mechanisms. Firstly, to generate heat, energy interacts with the polar molecules in matrix (i.e., water) (Zia et al., ). Secondly, during microwave process, ionic conduction moves ions within the solution generating a resistance among ions, which leads to friction and thus heat is produced (Zia et al., ). Microwave by the internal pressure and also sudden temperature rise damage the plant cell walls, which help to release the bioactive constituents (Shams et al., ). Several factors might influence its efficiency, such as extraction time, dielectric constant, microwave power, solubility, and solvent attributes. According to results obtained by Cardoso‐Ugarte et al. , the yield of extraction through MAE technique was double compared to conventional method (temperature of 80°C) (Cardoso‐Ugarte et al., ).

Enzyme‐assisted extraction (EAE)
Unlike high electric field pulses, high hydrostatic pressure compressed, carbon dioxide, and EAE can readily be evaluated on the laboratory scale (Puri et al., ). Some compounds are retained by hydrogen or hydrophobic or in the herb matrix and, therefore, are not achievable with common extraction methods (Gligor et al., ). To disrupt the structural integrity of the plant cell wall and as a result increase the extraction of bioactives, various enzymes like hemicellulose, pectinases, and cellulases are often required. These enzymes increase cell wall permeability by hydrolyzing cell wall compounds, resulting in higher yields of bioactives (Puri et al., ). Elsayed et al.  indicated that the extract obtained by EAE technique (using protease, cellulase, and protease/cellulose (1:1)) had higher ABTS and DPPH free radical inhibition activity as well as higher total phenolic content compared to ethanol extract and BHT (Elsayed et al., ). According to Wang et al. , β‐glucosidase or cellulase‐assisted extraction improved the antioxidant activity by 126.5% and the extraction of soluble phenolics by 103.2% (Wang et al., ).

Accelerated solvent extraction (ASE)
ASE, with high efficacy in extracting target components from plants, is a relatively new method which uses solvent mixtures or low‐boiling solvents under high temperature and pressure (Hossain et al., ). In order to enhance the efficiency of extraction, it uses organic solvents at elevated pressure and temperature (Shams et al., ). The high pressure not only allows the extraction cells to be filled faster and helps to force liquid into the solid matrix but also helps to raise the extraction temperature and maintains the solvent in a liquid state (Sirichokworrakit et al., ). An increased temperature leads to increased extraction kinetics by augmenting the diffusivity of the solvent (Mandal et al., ). According to Sirichokworrakit et al. , the ASE technique is more efficient compared to the UAE and CSE techniques for extracting total phenolic content and total anthocyanin content. Vilas‐Franquesa et al.  compared the ASE technique with conventional method extraction and reported that ASE displayed lower yields of oils. Nevertheless, the oils from ASE revealed greater concentration of monounsaturated fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids, and α‐tocopherol, probably deriving from the greater extraction time in conventional method (Vilas‐Franquesa et al., ).

High‐voltage electrical discharge extraction (HVED)
HVED, which is known as corona discharge, is a cold plasma‐based emerging technology. During the HVED process, a gas flows through the needle (electrode), ionizes, and forms a cold plasma. During this process, the permeability of the cell membrane increases, which potentially leads to the formation of membrane pores and higher release of intracellular compounds (Sarkis et al., ). Generally, this technique is divided into three categories including; circulating, continuous, as well as batch system with exactly the same mechanisms (the destruction of the cell walls and mass transfer improvement caused by various secondary phenomena, resulting in higher extraction yields of high‐added value components) (Li et al., ). The authors indicated that HVED can significantly enhance the extract's antioxidant properties (TEAC and DPPH value) (Boussetta et al., ). According to Brianceau et al. , HVED made a remarkable improvement in the phenolic component extraction compared with conventional hydroalcoholic extraction. In the optimized operation conditions, HVED allowed the recovery of 23.6 ± 4.1 mg RES/100 g RM of stilbenes, 56.0 ± 4.5 mg QUE/100 g RM, 794.9 ± 74.1 mg/100 g RM, and 6.6 ± 0.2 mg GAE/100 g RM of stilbenes, flavonols, flavan‐3‐ols, and polyphenols, respectively (Brianceau et al., ).

Supercritical fluid extraction (SFE)
The SFE, which uses supercritical fluid as a solvent, is a new and efficient system for the extraction of targeted components from the plants (Zia et al., ). Supercritical fluids can easily diffuse through a solid matrix and enhance the extraction rates due to their high diffusivity, low viscosity, as well as enhanced transport properties (de Andrade Lima et al., ). In comparison with other extraction methods, SFE enhances selectivity and safety (due to nontoxic organic solvents), prevents sample oxidization, and has less extraction time, resulting in a sustainable extraction (Roselló‐Soto et al., ). The solvent utilized in SFE is mostly CO2, which is sometimes modified by combination with methanol, ethanol, etc. (Zia et al., ). Supercritical CO2 is the most commonly utilized solvent in this method, because it is cheap, easily obtainable, nonflammable, nontoxic, achievable critical points (7.39 MPa, 31.1°C), and easy to separate after processing (Chuo et al., ). Supercritical fluid can easily transfer active compounds to bulk solvent (due to easy permeation into plant materials) (Chuo et al., ). Santos‐Zea et al. , in optimal conditions (60°C, 30 MPa, 10% common solvent (70% ethanol)), investigated Agave salmiana and the result of their research led to the optimal extraction of saponin content: 10.95 mg protodioscin/g pl., and antioxidant activity: 17.61 mmol TE/g pl. protodioscin (Santos‐Zea et al., ). According to results obtained by Wenqiang et al.  on the extraction of A. argyi EOs, the yield of extraction in SFE technique was higher than hydrodistillation technique (0.26%, and 0.20%, respectively). The authors also reported that the presence of coextracted cuticular waxes is the main disadvantage of the oil obtained by SFE (Wenqiang et al., ).

Pulsed electric field extraction (PEFE)
During the last decades, PEFE has gained more attention in food waste/by‐products to extract beneficial compounds through drying, pressing, osmosis, and diffusion (Bansal et al., ). The main interest of this nonthermal technology, which uses a high‐voltage electric field for a very short time, is cell disruption. This cell disruption can potentially lead to higher membrane permeability, and higher mass transfer of inner liquid and cell compounds from the intracellular vacuoles (Zia et al., ). The effectiveness of this method is particularly related to some factors, like pulse intensity, especially energy input, process temperature, strength of field, and sample attributes (Gómez et al., ). PEF‐assisted extraction enhanced the antioxidant activity of treated samples as well as improved the release of anthocyanins as compared to untreated samples. Authors studied the PEF as a green technology for the extraction of bioactive components. They indicated that PEF technology in bioactive components extraction from by‐products could be an efficient substitute for conventional techniques which need long extraction times, large amounts of organic solvents, and dried products (Redondo et al., ).

Negative pressure cavitation (NPC)
NPC extraction is known as an efficient and eco‐friendly method. In this technology, negative pressure leads to cavitation (created by a vacuum pump) and is continuously introduced into the liquid–solid system. The turbulence, collision, and mass transfer between the extracting solvent and plant matrix are enhanced when air is continuously added into the system via the valet and facilitates the migration of target components out of the matrix. Consequently, secondary metabolites can be rapidly and adequately released into the extraction solvent (Tian et al., ). Compared with traditional extraction techniques, NPCE has shown many superiorities, such as higher efficiency, shorter time, easy large‐scale operation, and avoiding decomposition of thermosensitive compounds (Kou et al., ). Mu et al.  reported that the extraction yield of vinblastine, vincristine, catharanthine, and vindoline from roseus leaves was 0.126, 0.018, 0.2843, and 0.5783 mg/g DW, respectively, which were higher than the yields obtained by HR and maceration extraction techniques, and equivalent to those obtained from ultrasound extraction method (Mu et al., ).

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Plant extracts and EO properties

Antioxidant activity
Quality attributes (texture, flavor, color, organoleptic attributes, nutritional properties, etc.) and shelf life of foods are highly conditioned by the oxidation reactions, particularly those related to lipid oxidation. Furthermore, the use of plant extracts and EOs as preservatives in food products is a growing trend. Different synthetic and natural antioxidants are used to prolong the shelf life of food products, protecting them from lipid oxidation during distribution and sale (Table 2). Various natural and chemical antioxidants are utilized to preserve foods from oxidation reactions and increase their shelf life. Recently, the discussion and concern about whether it is appropriate to utilize synthetic preservatives (such as tertiary butyl hydroquinone, propyl gallate, butylated hydroxyl anisole, and butylated hydroxyl toluene) in foods has enhanced. In this way, actually, it tends to utilize components from natural resources, especially plants. Plants, due to the presence of phenolic constituents such as tannins, phenolic diterpenes, phenolic acids, flavonoids, and phenols, have high antioxidant attributes which act as radical scavengers.
Artemisia plants as natural preservatives used in food products.
Artemisia	Concentration	Product	Outcomes	References	 	A. drAcunculus EOs (ADEO)	0.25% ADEO	Beef burgers	Reduced the Staphylococcus aureus counts by a 2 log CFU/g after 24 h	Chaleshtori et al. 	 	A. absinthium EOs (AEO)	0.15% AEO	–	97% reduction in the optical density of E. coli O157:H7	Rafiq et al. 	 	A. fragrans EOs (AFEO)	1500 ppm AFEO	Chicken fillets	Results indicated 2.27 Log CFU/g for treated samples with AFEO compared to 4.48 Log CFU/g for negative control		 	A. dracunculus EOs (ADEO)	Chitosan and sodium alginate coating + ADEO	Rainbow trout fillets	On day 1, LAB count was 1.16 log10 CFU/g for CH + ADEO, 1.33 log10 CFU/g for CH coating;On day 12, LAB count was 5.00 log10 CFU/g in control compared to 4.53 log10 CFU/g in CH+ ADEO groups	Raeisi et al. 	 	A. dracunculus EOs (ADEO)	CH (6%) and ADEO (60%)	Yogurt	Primer bacteria and yeast count of yogurt containing CH (6%) and ADEO (60%) were 4.83 and 3.66; in yogurt containing CH (6%) was 5 and 4.16; and in control yogurt were 10.16 and 14 Log CFU/gr, respectively.	Zedan et al. 	 	A. dracunculus EOs (ADEO)	Alginate (AL) and chitosan (CH) coatings containing 0.2% ADEO	Rainbow trout fillets	TBARS values of treated samples with AL + ADEO and CH + ADEO (0.90 and 0.81 mg of malonaldehyde equivalents/kg of tissue, respectively) were significantly lower than treated samples with CH, and control (1.07 and 1.29 mg of malonaldehyde equivalents/kg of tissue)	Raeisi et al. 	 	A. fragrans EOs (AFEO)	2% Calcium Alginate +1500 ppm AFEOs	Chicken meat	CA + AFEOs coating reduced significantly the pH, TVB‐N, and TBARS values. This treatment also displayed a reduction of 3.3 Log CFU/g in molds and yeasts and 2.97 Log CFU/g in coliforms in comparison with control.		 	A. annua EOs (AAEO)	AAEO and nano zinc oxide	Pork meat	AAEO could effectively inhibit lipid oxidation and microorganism proliferation. AAEO could effectively improve the flexibility, and barrier properties of the films	Zheng et al.
Ayoughi et al.  assessed the antioxidant properties of A. dracunculus L. EOs in soybean oil compared to BHT and BHA. The authors indicated that the antioxidant activity of the BHT and BHA (in 0.2 and 0.01 mg/mL, respectively) with obtained EOs (0.8 mg/mL) had no significant difference (Ayoughi et al., ). According to results obtained by Chebbac et al. , A. negrei L. EOs displayed a potent DPPH free radical scavenging activity when compared to BHT (IC50 = 0.0164 ± 0.0011 mg/mL and 0.0082 ± 0.002 mg/ mL, respectively) (Chebbac et al., ). Chebbac et al.  reported that A. aragonensis L. EOs inhibited the DPPH free radicals with an IC50 value of 0.034 ± 0.004 mg/mL, whereas other chemical antioxidants like quercetin, ascorbic acid, and butylated hydroxyl toluene displayed IC50 values of 0.0342 ± 0.002, 0.0124 ± 0.001, and 0.0203 ± 0.005 mg/mL, respectively (Chebbac et al., ). Similarly, Devare et al.  reported the high antioxidant attributes of A. pallens root extract (DPPH IC50 = 3.013 μg/mL) (Devare et al., ). According to results obtained by Moalla et al. , who developed active food packaging films based on chitosan + A. campestris (essential oil, aqueous extract, and hydroalcoholic extract), the presence of A. campestris significantly enhanced the antioxidant and UV–Vis barrier attributes of the films (Moalla et al., ). Lu et al.  also evaluated the antioxidant properties of A. japonica Thumb (AJT) extract. The IC50 values of AJT for ABTS+ and DPPH and the OD50 values of AJT for FRAP were determined as 172.37 ± 25.72, 172.37 ± 25.72, and 95.88 ± 5.79 lg/mL, respectively (Lu et al., ). Zheng et al.  assessed the effects of chitosan–coix seed starch films containing A. annua EOs (AAEO) and nano zinc oxide in pork meat. They reported that AAEO could effectively inhibit lipid oxidation and microorganism proliferation. Results also showed that AAEO could effectively improve the flexibility, and barrier properties of the films (Zheng et al., ). Houicher et al.  also reported high antioxidant properties of A. campestris extract in vacuum‐packed sardine fillets (Houicher et al., ). Raeisi et al.  evaluated the antioxidant attributes of alginate (AL) and chitosan (CH) coatings containing 0.2% A. dracunculus EOs (ADEO) in rainbow trout fillets. The results revealed that at the end of storage, the TBARS values of treated samples with AL + ADEO and CH + ADEO (0.90 and 0.81 mg of malonaldehyde equivalents/kg of tissue, respectively) were significantly lower than those treated samples with CH, and control (1.07 and 1.29 mg of malonaldehyde equivalents/kg of tissue); this is because of the antioxidant properties of the extract. TBARS values on day 1 for CH + ADEO were 0.17, AL and AL + ADEO were 0.20, for CH and control was 0.19 mg of malonaldehyde equivalents/kg of tissue, respectively. Artemisia revealed good antimicrobial and antioxidant effects. The authors have indicated that A. sieberi possess a great antioxidant potential (Boroomand et al., ).

Antimicrobial properties
Most of the foods are susceptible to spoilage and need to be protected from microbiological growth throughout the process, keeping period and dispensation. There are many techniques that have been utilized to control the microorganisms in foods. The plants’ EOs and extracts are popular to possess antibacterial and fungicidal properties. Hence, they are an efficient and green substitute to synthetic additives, which could decline the risk of food‐borne disease. Nowadays, the EOs and extracts of various Artemisia species have become popular, which has encouraged many researchers to evaluate their bioactive components. Components such as para cymene, thymol, carvacrol, and 1, 8 cineole, as the most important compounds of the plants’ EOs (particularly different species of Artemisia), have high antimicrobial activities (Massiha et al., ). Sharafati Chaleshtori et al.  evaluated the antimicrobial properties of A. drAcunculus EOs (ADEO) in beef burgers. They reported that 0.25% ADEO in beef burgers after 24 h reduced the Staphylococcus aureus counts by a 2 log CFU/g at 4°C. They also reported that high concentrations of ADEO exhibited more antibacterial activity against S. aureus, but their practical consumption is limited due to a negative smell–taste effect in foods (Chaleshtori et al., ). Rafiq et al.  also evaluated the antimicrobial activities of A. absinthium EOs (AEO) against E. coli O157:H7 and S. typhimurium. The authors indicated that the presence of 0.15% AEO resulted in a 97% reduction in the optical density of E. coli O157:H7, whereas 0.1% AEO were needed to reach a similar reduction in S. typhimurium. The AEO at a concentration of 0.2% displayed a 66% reduction in E. coli O157:H7 (indicated by 3.04 ± 0.14 log CFU/mL). They reported that at concentrations higher than 0.2%, the bacterial population declined to under detectable levels (Rafiq et al., ). Extracts (Artemisia L. species) prepared with 90% and 70% ethanol inhibited the growth of G‐negative bacteria (Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Citrobacter freundii, Klebsiella ozaenae, and Escherichia coli) and gram‐positive bacteria (Propionibacterium acnes, Enterococcus faecalis, streptococci, and staphylococci). Growth inhibition zones ranged from 3.79 to 9.47 mm and 3.79 to 7.33 mm for G‐negative and G‐positive bacteria, respectively, depending on the type of extract and the test culture (Hrytsyk et al., ). Raeisi et al.  evaluated the antimicrobial attributes of chitosan (CH) and sodium alginate (SA) coating containing A. dracunculus EOs (ADEO) in rainbow trout fillets. The authors reported that on day 1, the lactic acid bacteria count was 1.16 log10 CFU/g for CH + ADEO compared with 1.33 log10 CFU/g for CH coating, indicating good antimicrobial attributes of ADEO. On day 12, LAB values ranged from 5.00 log10 CFU/g in control to 4.53 log10 CFU/g in CH + AD groups (Raeisi et al., ). A. campestris L. displayed high antimicrobial properties against histidine decarboxylating bacteria (HFB) in fish fillets. High antimicrobial properties of A. dracunculus EOs (ADEO) in yogurt were also reported by Zedan et al. . The results showed that primer bacteria and yeast count of yogurt containing CH (6%) and ADEO (60%) were 4.83 and 3.66; in yogurt containing CH (6%) was 5 and 4.16; and in control yogurt were 10.16 and 14 Log CFU/gr, respectively (Zedan et al., ). A. absinthium extracts showed high antimicrobial activities against E. coli O157:H7, S. typhimurium, and L. monocytogenes in raw beef (Cruz‐Galvez et al., ). Artemisia can be used as a novel natural agent for food preservation.

Health and functional properties
Over 260 Artemisia species have been evaluated for their secondary metabolites, and essential oils. Results indicated that a total of 23 species of Artemisia, with potential antiviral activity (which might be related to the presence of biologically active components), were reported for the treatment of viral diseases (Taleghani et al., ). The health benefits of different Artemisia species are presented in Table 3. Among the reported Artemisia species, A. annua extracts (aqueous, ethanol, and methanol extracts) due to presence of artemisinin, as an antiviral and antimalarial compound, have proven to be widely utilized against various viruses such as HBV, HIV‐1, SARS‐CoV‐2, BVDV, Influenza virus type A (IV‐A), and HHV (HSV‐1) (Hussain, ). Scopoletin and isoscopoletin, which are found widely in different species of Artemisia extracts, were proven to efficiently postpone cancer progression (Song et al., ). The results indicated that the oral administration of A. herba alba extract (300 mg/kg) led to significant reductions in tumor weight (similar to those reported in cisplatin and artesunate‐treated groups) (Mohamed et al., ). The authors indicated that borneol not only can accelerate brain distribution and intestinal absorption but also causes the effective ingredients of Sanqi and Danshen to play a quicker therapeutic role and enhance the therapeutic effect (Lv et al., ). Anti‐inflammation and immunomodulation activity of A. argyi have been reported to act as general immune system stimulators to increase the function of natural killer cells B and T lymphocytes as well as enhancing host defense responses through regulating the secretion of antibodies and cytokines (Song et al., ). A. argyi have a wide range of pharmacological effects such as immunomodulatory, antiosteoporotic, anticoagulant, anti‐inflammatory, antitumor, and antioxidant activities (Ge et al., ; Lv et al., ; Yun et al., ; Zhang et al., ). For example, according to results obtained by Zhang et al.  extracted polysaccharides from A. argyi increased the levels of cytokines (IL‐1β, IL‐6, and TNF‐α) and immunoglobulins (IgM and IgG), suggesting the immunomodulation activity of A. argyi polysaccharides. Artemisia species are pharmaceutically used by people for their anticancer (Gupta et al., ), anti‐inflammatory (Miranda et al., ), and antithrombotic (Subramani & Sathiyarajeswaran, ) properties. Artemisia species with strong anti‐inflammatory and antioxidant properties can enhance vascular health (Shen et al., ). Amyrins are triterpenes (found in Artemisia) that have hypoglycemic and anti‐inflammatory activity along with a gastro‐protective effect (Carvalho et al., ).
Health benefits of Artemisia species.
Artemisia species	Health benefits	Reference	 	A. annua	Utilized against various viruses such as HBV, HIV‐1, SARS‐CoV‐2, BVDV, Influenza virus type A (IV‐A), and HHV (HSV‐1). It has anticholesterolemic, antimicrobial, anti‐inflammatory, anticonvulsant, antiplasmodial, antitumor, and antihyperlipidemic properties	Hussain ; Wang et al. 	 	A. vulgaris	It is utilized as infusions to which stomachic, cytostatic, antibacterial, anthelmintic, antitumor, and antipyretic actions have been attributed and postpone cancer progression	Blagojević et al. 	 	A. herba alba	Reducing tumor weight; treat stomach problems such as abdominal pain and diarrhea and healing exterior wounds; has antifungal, antispasmodic, and antibacterial activities, counter the threat of COVID‐19; DNA destruction and reducing cell viability in cancer cells and has shown a potential cytotoxic activity against different cancer	Brahmi et al. ; Hasan et al. ; Kadri et al. 	 	A. pallens	Treatment of blood pressure, depression, cold, cough, and measles and diabetes, with high anti‐inflammatory activity	Pavithra et al. 	 	A. argyi	Anti‐inflammation and immunomodulation activity; increase the function of natural killer cells B and T lymphocytes; secretion of antibodies and cytokines, immunomodulatory, antiosteoporotic, anticoagulant, anti‐inflammatory, antitumor, and antioxidant activities, treatment of menstrual‐related symptoms, hemostasis, diarrhea, and eczema	Liu et al. ; Lv et al. ; Shin et al. ; Song et al. ; Zhang et al. 	 	A absinthium	Treating stomach ache, worms, fevers, and sepsis, and act as a diuretic, stimulant, carminative, digestive, antidepressant, antiseptic, and choleretic impacts	Koul and Taak 	 	A. afra	Treat different sicknesses such as dyspepsia, malaria, coughs, diabetes, cold, headaches, and disorders of bladder and kidney	Patil et al. 	 	A. japonica	Treat tuberculosis, hypertension, malaria, headache, and fever, beneficial for liver disorders such as jaundice and viral hepatitis	Lu et al.

PREVIOUS CONSIDERATIONS FOR USING ARTEMISIA SPECIES IN FOODS
When an extraction process comes to scaling and the extracted compounds are utilized in foods, the laws have great significance. For the implementation of these extracted compounds in food industry, the legal dose which can be utilized is listed among the most vital issues (Pateiro et al., ). In Europe, with regard to the process condition of foods (thermally treated or not) and their fat content, Regulation 1129/2011 sets the limits for each of these compounds as well as allowed components (Commission, ). Different countries have different legal considerations; however, their implementation of foods as safer ingredients implies its consideration as GRAS (Food and Drug Administration, ). FDA has a list of many GRAS EOs that can be utilized in foods. Furthermore, the application of Artemisia plant in foods should not alter the technological attributes of the foods (the most important properties that need to be taken into account are the organoleptic properties and consumer acceptance). There are many researches that suggest the possibility of utilizing natural EOs and extracts instead of chemical ingredients. However, to achieve the same results as chemical preservatives, higher concentrations of natural preservatives are needed, but it may alter the organoleptic properties of products. To overcome this issue, the combination of natural components could be an efficient technique to enhance their antimicrobial and/or antioxidant properties and increase the stability of food products because of their possible synergistic effects, decreasing the negative physiological and organoleptic side effects. On the other hand, an antagonistic effect might also happen (low activity when components are utilized in combination with together compared with individual impacts) (Tajik et al., ).

IMPLEMENTATION OF ARTEMISIA SPECIES EXTRACTION PRODUCTS IN FOOD INDUSTRY
Nowadays, production of functional and healthier food products that can help promote consumer's well‐being, due to their demands, needs to be taken into account (Putnik et al., ). The application of natural ingredients in the production of functional foods can be a useful technique. In this way, Artemisia species in a concentrated form (as EOs and/or extracts) can be used in food products. Due to the declared utilization of natural additives, which are able to decrease microbial growth and oxidation reactions (leading to clean‐label food products), these technological processes could be well accepted (Granato et al., ). The application forms of these ingredients in products (nanoparticles, directly, active packaging, etc.) is a key factor for the effectiveness and stability of the new formulation. Depending on the food products, the EOs can be utilized as nanoparticles, directly or in combination with packaging. Spray drying, which is listed among the most common techniques for encapsulation, not only can mask unacceptable odors and control the release of active compounds in the food products, but also can protect encapsulated compounds (EOs) against processing conditions (storage time, temperature, pH, exposure to light and oxygen, etc.) (Pateiro et al., ). As a result, compounds protected by layers of a coating agent, resulting in better quality attributes. Active food packaging, which provides a new system for food preservation in the food industry, is an innovative technology. Active packaging is prepared by incorporating active agents, particularly natural EOs and extracts, into packaging materials and works by releasing active agents (releasing these compounds in a controlled manner potentially enhances its efficacy, resulting in higher stability) into the surrounding environment. These compounds can be applied to the substrate of active food packaging either in encapsulated form (electro spun fibers, microbeads, spray‐dried microcapsules, etc.) or free form (in the form of w/w, w/o, or o/w emulsions) (Vilela et al., ).

FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
Increasing consumer demands for healthy food products led to a progressed interest in food industries to substitute chemical additives with natural antioxidants and antimicrobial compounds to maintain quality and freshness. The use of Artemisia EOs and extracts as active packaging and nanoparticles in foods can be an efficient method to decline the application of synthetic antioxidants and preservatives. The efficacy of herb derivatives has been proved in various research; however, there are few natural antioxidants and antimicrobials commercially available. This phenomenon is mainly related to the various extraction techniques throughout the production processes and storage as well as various phenolic components in plants’ EOs and extracts. Hence, to maintain volatile components among preparation and achieve complete bioactive components extraction, the optimizing and modeling of extraction could be an efficient method. The use of antioxidant and antimicrobial active packaging, which has been proposed as a good substitute to traditional food packaging, could increase the stability, shelf‐life, and of quality foods. Hence, the application of natural antioxidant and antimicrobials not only provides high protective activity on lipid oxidation and microbiological spoilage but also satisfies consumer demands for the substitution of synthetic additives. The application of novel extraction techniques would allow us to obtain high‐value bioactive components along with protecting both the consumers and environment. This would give value to the processed products by the industry from Artemisia plant materials to bioactive compound extraction, combination in foods aits sale. Prior to use in foods, more studies are needed to evaluate clinical trials to better evaluate Artemisia plants effects on health. These studies need to be completed with researches that assess their bioavailability and bioaccessibility in the consumer's body.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Negin Ahmadi: Writing – original draft (lead). Nazanin Mosleh: Funding acquisition (equal). Mahta Yeganeh: Resources (equal). Nadia Ahmadi: Writing – original draft (equal). Sara Malakouti: Resources (equal). Saleh Shahsavari: Resources (equal). Reza Shahraki: Funding acquisition (equal) Somaye Katebi: Funding acquisition (equal). Mina Agapoor: Funding acquisition (equal). Sonia Sadeghi: Writing – review and editing (equal). Karim Bagheri: Writing – review and editing (equal).

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare no conflict of interest relevant to this article.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data are available upon request from the authors.

REFERENCES
Essential oils: Extraction techniques, pharmaceutical and therapeutic potential‐a review
Innovative green technologies of intensification for valorization of seafood and their by‐products
Eleucine indica possesses antioxidant, antibacterial and cytotoxic properties
Chemical characterization of essential oil of Artemisia herba‐alba asso and his possible potential against covid‐19
Chemical compositions of essential oils of Artemisia dracunculus L. and endemic Matricaria chamomilla L. and an evaluation of their antioxidative effects
The chemical composition and antioxidant properties of some species of Artemisia genus, represented in Armenian flora
An optimized process for SC‐CO2 extraction of antimalarial compounds from Artemisia annua L
Influence of pulsed electric field and heat treatment on Emblica officinalis juice inoculated with Zygosaccharomyces bailii
Essential oil from Artemisia herba‐alba Asso grown wild in Algeria: Variability assessment and comparison with an updated literature survey
Chemical composition of the essential oils of Serbian wild‐growing Artemisia absinthium and Artemisia vulgaris
The genus Artemisia: A comprehensive review
Phytochemical components, total phenol and mineral contents and antioxidant activity of six major medicinal plants from Rayen, Iran
Valorisation of grape pomace by the extraction of phenolic antioxidants: Application of high voltage electrical discharges
Ethnobotanical survey of medicinal plants of Bejaia localities from Algeria to prevent and treat coronavirus (COVID‐19) infection shortened title: Phytomedicine to manage COVID‐19 pandemic
High voltage electric discharges assisted extraction of phenolic compounds from grape stems: Effect of processing parameters on flavan‐3‐ols, flavonols and stilbenes recovery
Microwave‐assisted extraction of betalains from red beet (Beta vulgaris)
Amyrins from Protium heptaphyllum reduce high‐fat diet‐induced obesity in mice via modulation of enzymatic, hormonal and inflammatory responses
Use of tarragon (Artemisia dracunculus) essential oil as a natural preservative in beef burger
Antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of chemically‐characterized essential oil from Artemisia aragonensis Lam. against drug‐resistant microbes
Chemical analysis and antioxidant and antimicrobial activity of essential oils from Artemisia negrei L. against drug‐resistant microbes
A glimpse into the extraction methods of active compounds from plants
Microwave‐assisted extraction and ultrasound‐assisted extraction for recovering carotenoids from Gac peel and their effects on antioxidant capacity of the extracts
Commission regulation (EU) No 1129/2011 of 11 November 2011 amending annex II to regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 of the European Parliament and of the council by establishing a union list of food additives
Antibacterial effect against foodborne bacteria of plants used in traditional medicine in central Mexico: Studies in vitro and in raw beef
Supercritical fluid extraction of carotenoids from vegetable waste matrices
Antioxidant potential of Artemisia pallens roots
Artemisia pallens: An Indian plant with multifarious pharmacological potentials
Artemisia afra, a controversial herbal remedy or a treasure trove of new drugs?
Davana a potential under exploited aromatic crop of south India: A review
Significance of Artemisia vulgaris L. (Common Mugwort) in the history of medicine and its possible contemporary applications substantiated by phytochemical and pharmacological studies
Phenolic profiling and in‐vitro bioactivities of corn (Zea mays L.) tassel extracts by combining enzyme‐assisted extraction
Traditional application and modern pharmacological research of Artemisia annua L
Anti‐inflammatory and blood stasis activities of essential oil extracted from Artemisia argyi leaf in animals
Enzyme‐assisted extractions of polyphenols–a comprehensive review
Application of pulsed electric fields in meat and fish processing industries: An overview
A review on history, controversy, traditional use, ethnobotany, phytochemistry and pharmacology of Artemisia absinthium Linn
An integrated strategy between food chemistry, biology, nutrition, pharmacology, and statistics in the development of functional foods: A proposal
Green approaches for cancers management: An effective tool for health care
Antibacterial effects of Artemisia afra leaf crude extract against some selected multi‐antibiotic resistant clinical pathogens
Comprehensive characterization and identification of antioxidants in folium Artemisiae argyi using high‐resolution tandem mass spectrometry
Can Artemisia herba‐alba be useful for managing COVID‐19 and comorbidities?
Optimisation of accelerated solvent extraction of antioxidant compounds from rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis L.), marjoram (Origanum majorana L.) and oregano (Origanum vulgare L.) using response surface methodology
Effect of Mentha spicata L. and Artemisia campestris extracts on the shelf life and quality of vacuum‐packed refrigerated sardine (Sardina pilchardus) fillets
The investigation of antimicrobial and antifungal activity of some Artemisia L. species
A phylogenetic perspective of antiviral species of the genus Artemisia (Asteraceae‐anthemideae): A proposal of anti SARS‐CoV‐2 (COVID‐19) candidate taxa
The essential oils and eucalyptol from Artemisia vulgaris L. prevent acetaminophen‐induced liver injury by activating Nrf2–Keap1 and enhancing APAP clearance through non‐toxic metabolic pathway
Chemical composition of essential oils of Artemisia vulgaris L. (mugwort) from North Lithuania
Chromatography analysis, in vitro antioxidant and antibacterial activities of essential oil of Artemisia herba‐alba Asso of Boussaâda, Algeria
Comparison of antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of methanolic extracts of the Artemisia sp. recovered by different extraction techniques
Chemical composition, biological activities, and nutritional application of Asteraceae family herbs: A systematic review
Effect of Artemisia annua L. extract on growth performance, biochemical blood parameters and meat quality of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss W.), cultivated in recirculating system
Preparative separation of specific triterpenoids from Inonotus obliquus based on negative‐pressure cavitation extraction and high‐speed counter‐current chromatography
The Artemisia genus: A review on traditional uses, phytochemical constituents, pharmacological properties and germplasm conservation
Pharmacognostic and phytochemical investigation of aerial parts of Artemisia pallens wall ex. Dc
Recent advances in high voltage electric discharge extraction of bioactive ingredients from plant materials
From longevity grass to contemporary soft gold: Explore the chemical constituents, pharmacology, and toxicology of Artemisia argyi H. Lév. & vaniot essential oil
Chemical constituents, antioxidant and hepatoprotective properties of ethanol extract from Artemisia japonica thumb. Leaves
Two new flavonoids from Artemisia argyi with their anticoagulation activities
Pulsed electric field‐assisted extraction of valuable compounds from microorganisms
Antibacterial activity of essential oils and plant extracts of Artemisia (Artemisia annua L.) in vitro
Antifungal activity of Artemisia herba‐alba on various fusarium
Antiinflammatory activity of natural triterpenes—An overview from 2006 to 2021
Hepatoprotective effects of dietary Artemisia (Artemisia annua) leaf extract on common carp (Cyprinus carpio) exposed to ambient ammonia
Development and characterization of chitosan films carrying Artemisia campestris antioxidants for potential use as active food packaging materials
Chemical constituents and biological activities of Artemisia herba‐alba
Growth retardation and apoptotic death of tumor cells by Artemisia herba‐alba oral administration in Ehrlich solid carcinoma bearing mice
Phytochemical analysis and anti‐microbial activities of Artemisia spp. and rapid isolation methods of artemisinin
Artemisia herba alba: A popular plant with potential medicinal properties
Negative‐pressure cavitation extraction of four main vinca alkaloids from Catharanthus roseus leaves
Cavitation technology—The future of greener extraction method: A review on the extraction of natural products and process intensification mechanism and perspectives
Chemical composition, antioxidant and antibacterial activities of essential oil and methanol extract of Artemisia vulgaris and Gaultheria fragrantissima collected from Nepal
Essential oils as natural additives to prevent oxidation reactions in meat and meat products: A review
Biological potential and therapeutic benefit of Chrysosplenetin: An applications of polymethoxylated flavonoid in medicine from natural sources
Microwave assisted process intensification and kinetic modelling: Extraction of camptothecin from Nothapodytes nimmoniana plant
Artemisia afra and modern diseases
Phytochemical, antioxidant and a study of bioactive compounds from Artemisia pallens
Optimisation of novel method for the extraction of steviosides from Stevia rebaudiana leaves
An integrated approach to mandarin processing: Food safety and nutritional quality, consumer preference, and nutrient bioaccessibility
Effects of sodium alginate and chitosan coating combined with three different essential oils on microbial and chemical attributes of rainbow trout fillets
Antibacterial and antioxidant activities of essential oils from Artemisia herba‐alba Asso., Pelargonium capitatum × radens and Laurus nobilis L
Pulsed electric fields as a green technology for the extraction of bioactive compounds from thinned peach by‐products
Evaluating the impact of supercritical‐CO2 pressure on the recovery and quality of oil from “horchata” by‐products: Fatty acid profile, α‐tocopherol, phenolic compounds, and lipid oxidation parameters
Effect of ultrasound intensification on the supercritical fluid extraction of phytochemicals from Agave salmiana bagasse
Antioxidant activity of essential oil of Artemisia vulgaris collected from sub‐tropical region of Bagmati province, Nepal
Application of pulsed electric fields and high voltage electrical discharges for oil extraction from sesame seeds
A comprehensive study on essential oil compositions, antioxidant, anticholinesterase and antityrosinase activities of three Iranian Artemisia species
Green technology: Economically and environmentally innovative methods for extraction of medicinal & aromatic plants (MAP) in Egypt
Plant flavonoids: Classification, distribution, biosynthesis, and antioxidant activity
Artemisia argyi attenuates airway inflammation in ovalbumin‐induced asthmatic animals
Comparative study on conventional, accelerated solvent extraction and ultrasonic‐assisted extraction of total phenolic and anthocyanin contents and antioxidant activities from Riceberry bran
Artemisia herba‐alba Asso relaxes the rat aorta through activation of NO/cGMP pathway and KATP channels
Effects of Artemisia annua alcohol extract on physiological and innate immunity of Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) to improve health status
Phytochemical components and biological activities of Artemisia argyi
Current update on herbal sources of antithrombotic activity—A comprehensive review
Artemisia absinthium L.—Importance in the history of medicine, the latest advances in phytochemistry and therapeutical, cosmetological and culinary uses
Effectiveness of clove essential oil and grape seed extract combination on microbial and lipid oxidation characteristics of raw buffalo patty during storage at abuse refrigeration temperature
Artemisia: A promising plant for the treatment of cancer
Negative‐pressure cavitation extraction of secoisolariciresinol diglycoside from flaxseed cakes
Comparative phytochemical analysis of essential oils from different biological parts of Artemisia herba alba and their cytotoxic effect on cancer cells
A broad review of commercially important southern African medicinal plants
The potential of south African plants in the development of new medicinal products
Sea buckthorn (Hippophae rhamnoides) oil extracted with hexane, ethanol, diethyl ether and 2‐MTHF at different temperatures–an individual assessment
A concise guide to active agents for active food packaging
Evaluation of enzymatically treated Artemisia annua L. on growth performance, meat quality, and oxidative stability of breast and thigh muscles in broilers
Biosynthesis and characterization of zinc oxide nanoparticles from Artemisia annua and investigate their effect on proliferation, osteogenic differentiation and mineralization in human osteoblast‐like MG‐63 cells
Complex enzyme‐assisted extraction releases antioxidative phenolic compositions from guava leaves
Comparison of composition and antifungal activity of Artemisia argyi Levl. et Vant inflorescence essential oil extracted by hydrodistillation and supercritical carbon dioxide
A new thiophen acetylene from Artemisia absinthium
Structural characterization and in vitro antitumor activity of A polysaccharide from Artemisia annua L. (Huang Huahao)
Phytochemical screening, antibacterial effect, and essential oil extract from the leaf of Artemisia afra against on selected pathogens
Anti‐inflammatory effects of Artemisia leaf extract in mice with contact dermatitis in vitro and in vivo
Pharmacology, taxonomy and phytochemistry of the genus Artemisia specifically from Pakistan: A comprehensive review
The effect of tarragon (Artemisia dracunculus) essential oil and high molecular weight chitosan on sensory properties and shelf life of yogurt
Immunomodulatory effect of Artemisia argyi polysaccharide on peripheral blood leucocyte of broiler chickens
Properties and biological activity of chitosan‐coix seed starch films incorporated with nano zinc oxide and Artemisia annua essential oil for pork preservation
An inclusive overview of advanced thermal and nonthermal extraction techniques for bioactive compounds in food and food‐related matrices
Combined effect of microwave and ultrasonication treatments on the quality and stability of sugarcane juice during cold storage