Evaluation of Minimal Residual Disease in Patients with Neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma (NB) is a pediatric extracranial solid tumor that accounts for approximately 15% of all pediatric cancer deaths. More than 50% of patients with newly diagnosed NB are classified into a high-risk group with an approximately 50% long-term survival rate. Although most high-risk patients with NB achieve remission, more than half may have minimal residual disease (MRD) that eventually causes relapse. Looking towards an optimal outcome, the accurate evaluation of MRD in patients with NB (NB-MRD) is essential to monitor the treatment response and disease burden. Over the past decades, the quantification of NB-associated messenger RNA (NB-mRNA) by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction has become widely used to detect NB-MRD, owing to the lack of recurrent genomic aberrations in NB cells. To achieve a more accurate and sensitive detection, the current NB-MRD assays quantify a set of NB-mRNAs to detect NB cells in bone marrow, peripheral blood, and peripheral blood stem cell samples. Among a growing number of NB-MRD assays, several assays quantitating different but overlapping sets of NB-mRNAs are reported to have a significant prognostic value. However, the clinical significance of NB-MRD remains to be established. In this review, we summarize the recent progress in NB-MRD and evaluate its clinical value.

Key Points
Minimal residual disease in patients with neuroblastoma (NB-MRD) is currently evaluated by the quantification of a set of neuroblastoma-associated messenger RNAs (NB-mRNAs).	 	Several NB-MRD assays quantitating different but overlapping sets of NB-mRNAs have recently suggested a significant prognostic value of NB-MRD.	 	The clinical significance of NB-MRD depends on the marker genes (NB-mRNAs), the sample types, and the evaluation timepoints.	 	Optimizing these variables will establish the clinical significance of NB-MRD.

Introduction
Neuroblastoma is one of the most common solid tumors in children. It accounts for approximately 10% of patients and 15% of deaths in all childhood cancer. The disease originates from neural crest cells and primarily manifests in the loci of the sympathetic nerve tissues. The primary tumor site varies among patients; ~50% of cases are found in the adrenal glands, ~25% in the abdominal region, ~15% in the thorax region, and ~5% in the pelvis and neck.
Patients with neuroblastoma are characterized by extreme heterogeneity with their clinical presentation and tumor biology. Clinical symptoms of patients with neuroblastoma vary widely by age and primary/metastatic tumor site. Patients with neuroblastoma exhibit very distinct outcomes that range from spontaneous regression to aggressive metastatic progression. The heterogeneity in clinical presentation is closely linked to the inter-tumoral and intra-tumoral heterogeneities of neuroblastoma. Inter-tumoral heterogeneity is formed from substantial differences in tumor histology among patients. Histology of neuroblastoma is defined by the relative proportion of neuroblastic/ganglionic cells and reactive stromal Schwann-like cells that also determine the tumor’s differentiation status. Intra-tumoral heterogeneity refers to distinct cell populations within the same tumor. Neuroblastoma is composed of at least two types of interconvertible tumor cells with divergent gene expression profiles. One is a committed adrenergic or sympathoadrenal cell (ADR) type and the other is an undifferentiated mesenchymal or neural crest-like cell (MES) type.
Patients with neuroblastoma are categorized into three risk groups (low risk, intermediate risk, and high risk) based on various prognostic factors, including age at diagnosis, stage of disease, histopathology, and genetic characteristics such as MYCN amplification and chromosomal aberrations. For patients with low-risk and intermediate-risk neuroblastoma, their treatment has been successful with over 90% long-term event-free survival (EFS) rates. However, the treatment for patients with high-risk neuroblastoma remains a significant challenge. Children with high-risk neuroblastoma account for half of newly diagnosed patients and are currently treated by the intensive multimodal regimens containing four components: induction chemotherapy, local therapy (surgery and radiation therapy), consolidation therapy, and maintenance therapy. Their overall survival (OS) has improved from 29 to 50% over the past 20 years, owing to the intensification of therapy through myeloablative therapy and the introduction of immunotherapy. Furthermore, more than 70% of long-term remission is suggested for patients who received all planned therapies including tandem myeloablative therapies and immunotherapy. Despite the progress in treatments, as many as 20% of high-risk patients have residual diseases that are refractory or progressive during induction chemotherapy. The rest of the high-risk patients usually can achieve remission, but a larger part of those patients has minimal residual disease (MRD) that causes relapses even after additional consolidation therapy. Patients with relapsed neuroblastoma can rarely be cured with a less than 10% long-term survival rate.
Minimal residual disease refers to the residual cancer cells that persist in the body of patients following cancer therapy, even when no visible tumor is detected. The accurate and sensitive detection of MRD is critical to monitor the treatment response and disease burden for an optimal outcome. Accordingly, a growing number of MRD assays for patients with neuroblastoma have been developed over the past three decades and several assays are reported to have a significant prognostic value. In this review, we summarize the recent progress in the detection of MRD in patients with neuroblastoma and evaluate its clinical value.

Minimal Residual Disease in Patients with Neuroblastoma
Minimal residual disease is defined as residual cancer cells that persistently reside in patients following cancer therapy. Activation of MRD causes tumor metastasis and relapses that ultimately lead to therapeutic failure and cancer-related death. In the bodies of patients with cancer, tumors are composed of multiple phenotypically distinct subpopulations of cancer cells, which causes the resistance to cancer therapy. Following local and systemic therapies, residual cancer cells persist not only in primary/metastatic tumors as cancer stem cells, but also in peripheral blood (PB) as circulating tumor cells and in bone marrow (BM), lymph node, and other tissues as disseminated tumor cells. In neuroblastoma, metastases are present at diagnosis in about 50% of all patients and relapses are experienced in more than 50% of high-risk patients. Because BM and bone are the most frequent sites of metastasis and relapses, MRD in patients with neuroblastoma (NB-MRD) usually detects disseminated tumor cells in BM samples. This is the unique characteristic of neuroblastoma, which is not a hematopoietic tumor but a non-hematopoietic solid tumor.

Detection Methods of NB-MRD
While histopathological examination of BM samples has been the gold standard for initial diagnosis and staging of patients with neuroblastoma, it is not always possible to detect neuroblastoma cells when they account for less than 1% of all cells in BM. Immunocytology, flow cytometry, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) have been applied for more sensitive detection of NB-MRD in BM, PB, and peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) samples. Immunocytology and flow cytometry can identify neuroblastoma cells with a sensitivity of 1 in 104–105 cells using antibodies against neuroblastoma-associated antigens. Polymerase chain reaction detects neuroblastoma-specific genetic and epigenetic aberrations with a sensitivity of 1 in 105–106 cells. In contrast to acute leukemia and oncogenic-fusion gene-positive tumors, neuroblastoma lacks these tumor-specific gene rearrangements and fusion genes. Accordingly, mRNA specific to the tissue of tumor origin (tumor-associated mRNA), instead of tumor-specific gene aberrations, is quantitated by reverse transcriptase-PCR to detect NB-MRD. The clinical value of tumor-associated mRNA detection depends on the sample type (BM, PB, or PBSC) and the evaluation timepoint (end of induction, consolidation, or maintenance therapy).

Neuroblastoma-Associated mRNAs (NB-mRNAs)
Neuroblastoma-messenger RNAs
Gene symbol	Gene name	Lineage	References	 	B4GALNT1	Beta-1,4-N-acetyl-galactosaminyl transferase 1GD2-synthase (GD2-s)	ADR/MES		 	CCND1	Cyclin D1	ADR		 	CHGA	Chromogranin A	ADR		 	CHGB	Chromogranin BSecretogranin 1 (SCG1)	ADR		 	CHRNA3	Cholinergic receptor nicotinic alpha 3 subunit	ADR		 	CRMP1	Collapsing response mediator protein 1	ADR		 	DBH	Dopamine beta-hydroxylase	ADR		 	DCX	Doublecortin	ADR		 	DDC	Dopa decarboxylase	ADR		 	ELAVL4	ELAV-like RNA binding protein 4	ADR		 	FMO3	Flavin containing dimethylaniline monoxygenase 3	MES		 	GABRB3	Gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor beta 3 subunit	ADR		 	GAGE	G antigen	NA		 	GAP43	Growth-associated protein 43	ADR		 	ISL1	ISL LIM homeobox 1	ADR		 	KIF1A	Kinesin family member 1A	ADR		 	MAGE	Melanoma-associated antigen	NA		 	PHOX2B	Paired-like homeobox 2b	ADR		 	POSTN	Periostin	MES		 	PRRX1	Paired related homeobox 1	MES		 	SLC6A2	Solute carrier family 6 member 2Adrenergic transporter (NET)Noradrenaline transporter (NAT)	ADR		 	SNAP91	Synaptosome-associated protein 91	ADR		 	ST8SIA2	ST8 alpha-N-acetyl-neuraminidealpha-2,8-sialyltransferase 2 sialyltransferases (STX)	ADR		 	STMN2	Stathmin 2	ADR		 	STMN4	Stathmin 4	ADR		 	TACC2	Transforming, acidic coiled-coil containing protein 2	ADR		 	TH	Tyrosine hydroxylase	ADR		 	UCHL1	Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1Neuron cytoplasmic protein 9.5 (PGP9.5)	ADR
ADR adrenergic or sympathoadrenal cell, MES mesenchymal or neural crest-like cell, NA not available
For the evaluation of NB-MRD, reverse transcriptase-PCR quantitating the expression of tumor-associated mRNAs is most widely used. Twenty-eight neuroblastoma-associated mRNAs (NB-mRNAs) have been identified over the past three decades as shown in Table 1. These NB-mRNAs are selected by their specific expression in the cell populations of neuroblastoma origin. TH encodes the rate-limiting enzyme in catecholamine biosynthesis and is the first NB-mRNA used to detect NB-MRD. B4GALNT1, CCND1, CHGA, DBH, DCX, DDC, ELAVL4, GAGE, MAGE, SLC6A2, ST8SIA2, and UCHL1 mRNAs are subsequently reported as NB-mRNAs for NB-MRD. PHOX2B encodes a transcription factor involved in the development of several noradrenergic neuron populations and is identified as the most specific and sensitive NB-mRNA for NB-MRD. Although the above 14 NB-mRNAs are reported as a single marker for NB-MRD, CHGB, CHRNA3, CRMP1, FMO3, GABRB3, GAP43, ISL1, KIF1A, POSTN, PRRX1, SNAP91, STMN2, STMN4, and TACC2 are subsequently selected as a member of a multiple marker set to improve the accuracy of NB-MRD detection.
Recent progress is the identification of MES NB-mRNAs (FMO3, POSTN, PRRX1). Although the previously used NB-mRNAs (CHRNA3, DBH, DDC, PHOX2B, or TH mRNA) did not reveal the significant correlation between NB-MRD and patient outcome, the newly identified MES NB-mRNAs (POSTN or PRRX1 mRNA) enabled NB-MRD to be significantly associated with patient outcome. As expected from the expression in neuroblastoma origin, NB-mRNAs are now classified into ADR type or MES type, except for GAGE and MAGE.

NB-MRD Assays
NB-minimal residual disease assays
NB-mRNA sets	Marker genes	Lineage	Reference genes	PCR methods	References	 	NB2	DCX, TH	ADR	GAPDH	qPCR		 	NB3-UK	DCX, PHOX2B, TH	ADR	B2M	qPCR		 	NB3-SWE	B4GALNT1, DDC, TH	ADR/MES	Callibrator	qPCR		 	NB3-MES	FMO3, POSTN, PRRX1	MES	GUSB	qPCR		 	NB4-MSKCC	B4GALNT1, CCND1, ISL1, PHOX2B	ADR/MES	B2M	qPCR		 	NB4-EUR	B4GALNT1, ELAVL4, PHOX2B, TH	ADR/MES	ABL	qPCR		 	NB5-COG	CHGA, DCX, DDC, PHOX2B, TH	ADR	B2M, GAPDH, HPRT1, SDHA	qPCR		 	NB5-BM-NLD	CHRNA3, DDC, GAP43, PHOX2B, TH	ADR	GUSB	qPCR		 	NB5-PB-NLD	CHRNA3, DBH, DDC, PHOX2B, TH	ADR	GUSB	qPCR		 	NB6	CCND1, DDC, GABRB3, ISL1, KIF1A, PHOX2B	ADR	B2M	qPCR		 	NB7	CRMP1, DBH, DDC, GAP43, ISL1, PHOX2B, TH	ADR	HPRT1	ddPCR		 	NB11	CHRNA3, CRMP1, DBH, DCX, DDC, GABRB3, GAP43, ISL1, KIF1A, PHOX2B, TH	ADR	B2M	qPCR
ADR adrenergic or sympathoadrenal cell, ddPCR droplet digital polymerase chain reaction, MES mesenchymal or neural crest-like cell, mRNA messenger RNA, NB neuroblastoma, PCR polymerase chain reaction, qPCR quantitative polymerase chain reaction
To overcome the extreme heterogeneity of neuroblastoma, a total of 12 reverse transcriptase-PCR assays have been reported for NB-MRD detection (NB-MRD assays) since 2008 as shown in Table 2. Quantitative PCR assays quantitating different but overlapping sets of NB-mRNAs with different references are initially reported. To improve the accuracy of barely expressed NB-mRNA detection, the droplet digital PCR assay has been recently developed.
Among 28 NB-mRNAs listed in Table 1, 18 NB-mRNAs (B4GALNT1, CCND1, CHGA, CHRNA3, CRMP1, DBH, DCX, DDC, ELAVL4, FMO3, GABRB3, GAP43, ISL1, KIF1A, PHOX2B, POSTN, PRRX1, TH) are used in 12 NB-mRNA sets (NB2, NB3-UK, NB3-SWE, NB3-MES, NB4-MSKCC, NB4-EUR, NB5-COG, NB5-BM-NLD, NB5-PB-NLD, NB6, NB7, and NB11). Among these sets, frequently used NB-mRNAs are PHOX2B (nine assays), TH (nine assays), DDC (seven assays), DCX (four assays), and ISL1 (four assays). Other NB-mRNAs are used in no more than four assays: B4GALNT1, CHRNA3, DBH, and GAP43 (three assays); CCND1, CRMP1, GABRB3, and KIF1A (two assays); CHGA, ELAVL4, FMO3, POSTN, and PRRX1 (one assay).

Evaluation of NB-MRD
Minimal residual disease (MRD) evaluation in patients with neuroblastoma. BM bone marrow, PB peripheral blood, PBSC peripheral blood stem cell, PBSCT peripheral blood stem cell transplantation
Clinical evidence of NB-MRD
Sample types	Evaluation timepoints	Marker genes	Clinical performance	Reference	 	Outocome	MRD-highgroup	MRD-lowgroup	Statisticalsignificance	 	BM	At diagnosis	DDC (NB3-SWE)	OS	32%	90%	P = 0.009		 	TH (NB3-SWE)	OS	32%	90%	P = 0.009		 	DCX (NB3-UK)	5y-EFS	20%	50%	P = 0.04		 	5y-OS	17%	43%	P = 0.03		 	PHOX2B (NB3-UK)	5y-OS	21%	43%	P = 0.02		 	TH (NB3-UK)	5y-OS	21%	43%	P = 0.01		 	End of induction	DCX (NB2)	EFS	NA	NA	P = 0.007		 	OS	NA	NA	P = 0.035		 	TH (NB2)	EFS	NA	NA	P = 0.026		 	NB3-UK	3y-EFS	20%	38%	P = 0.030		 	5y-OS	15%	40%	P = 0.030		 	NB4-EUR	3y-EFS	0%	51%	P = 0.013		 	5y-OS	0%	64%	P = 0.012		 	NB5-BM-NLD	5y-OS	8%	53%	P < 0.001		 	After 1 cycle of induction chemotherapy	TH	5y-OS	0%	90%	P = 0.008		 	After 2 cycles of anti-GD2 therapy	NB4-MSKCC	3y-EFS(first remission)	13%	70%	NA		 	3y-EFS(second remission)	8%	45%	NA		 	3y-EFS(primary refractory)	10%	52%	NA		 	5y-OS(first remission)	23%	75%	P < 0.001		 	5y-OS(second remission)	18%	56%	P < 0.001		 	5y-OS(primary refractory)	35%	57%	P = 0.003		 	End of treatment	NB5-COG	EFS	57%	73%	P = 0.005		 	3 months after diagnosis	NB5-BM-NLD	5y-OS	22%	63%	P = 0.009		 	4 months after diagnosis	TH	5y-OS	0%	100%	P < 0.01		 	After consolidation	NB7	Event	NA	NA	AUC = 0.723		 	AUC = 0.767		 	After refractory or relapse	NB5-COG	Event	NA	NA	AUC = 0.622		 	PB	At diagnosis	TH	5y-EFS	12%	25%	P = 0.031		 	5y-OS	12%	25%	P = 0.012		 	TH	3y-EFS	46%	96%	P < 0.001		 	PHOX2B	5y-EFS	29%	55%	P = 0.032		 	TH (NB2)	EFS	NA	NA	P = 0.015		 	OS	NA	NA	P = 0.010		 	NB3-UK	5y-EFS	0%	25%	P < 0.001		 	5y-OS	0%	38%	P < 0.001		 	End of induction	TH	3y-EFS	40%	86%	P = 0.018		 	TH (NB2)	EFS	NA	NA	P = 0.047		 	OS	NA	NA	P = 0.013		 	End of treatment	TH	3y-EFS	33%	87%	P = 0.003		 	TH (NB2)	OS	NA	NA	P = 0.026		 	After consolidation	NB7	Event	NA	NA	AUC = 0.800		 	PBSC	At harvest	TH	5y-OS	25%	75%	P = 0.003		 	NB3-MES	5y-EFS	13%	35%	P = 0.046		 	5y-OS	13%	45%	P = 0.047		 	NB5-COG	5y-EFS	29%	53%	P < 0.001		 	5y-OS	41%	62%	P = 0.002		 	NB7	3y-EFS	11%	56%	P = 0.015
AUC area under the curve, BM bone marrow, EFS event-free survival, MRD minimal residual disease, NA not available, NB neuroblastoma, PB peripheral blood, PBSC peripheral blood stem cell, OS overall survival, y year
Although several NB-MRD assays are reported to have a significant prognostic value, their clinical significances depend on sample types, evaluation timepoints, and marker genes as shown in Fig. 1. One issue for NB-MRD evaluation is the target population among patients with neuroblastoma. NB-MRD assays are used for low-, intermediate-, and high-risk patients, but their evaluation timepoints for low- and intermediate-risk patients are usually limited to the time at diagnosis (before treatment). The other issue is the exploratory nature of published data for NB-MRD assays: the non-significant data mostly lack the necessary information for a NB-MRD evaluation. We have set the target population as high-risk patients and focused on the statistically significant data in this review. In Table 3, we first categorized the available data according to sample types, evaluation timepoints, and marker genes, and then reviewed their clinical performances.

Sample Types
NB-MRD assays can measure three different types of samples: BM, PB, and PBSC samples. Because BM is the most common metastatic site in patients with neuroblastoma, BM samples are the primary subjects for NB-MRD assays. In addition, neuroblastoma cells have been detected in PB at diagnosis and during therapy and in PBSC at harvest.

Evaluation Timepoints
Although PBSC samples are available for NB-MRD assays only at harvest, BM and PB samples can be subjected to NB-MRD assays at any time during the entire course of treatment. Indeed, NB-MRD assays have used BM and PB samples collected at diagnosis, end of induction, after one cycle of induction chemotherapy, after two cycles of anti-GD2 therapy, end of treatment, 3 months after diagnosis, 4 months after diagnosis, after consolidation, and after progressive disease or relapse.
There are critical issues in evaluation timepoints. Fist issue is “after” or “before” treatment. As discussed in the target population among patients with neuroblastoma, NB-MRD assays using diagnostic samples (before treatment) do not assess the “residual” disease. For an NB-MRD evaluation, the evaluation timepoints should be limited “after” treatment. However, the detection of neuroblastoma cells in BM samples “before” treatment is one of the risk factors used to stratify patients with neuroblastoma into low-, intermediate-, and high-risk groups. Although the current practice of risk group classification for patients with neuroblastoma has been based on the presence or absence of BM infiltration by pathological findings, more sensitive NB-MRD assays may allow a more accurate risk group classification that leads to more effective treatment and an improved outcome.
The second issue in evaluation timepoints is a “single” timepoint or “multiple” timepoints. Because the quantity of “residual” disease in each patient depends on the treatment protocol and the timing of sample collection, a well-defined “single” timepoint is essential for an NB-MRD evaluation. In this sense, 3 months after diagnosis, 4 months after diagnosis, after consolidation, and after refractory disease or relapse are not a well-defined “single” timepoint. After consolidation and after refractory disease or relapse contain “multiple” timepoints, while 3 months after diagnosis and 4 months after diagnosis are varied in each patient.

Marker Genes
For NB-mRNAs (Table 1), four NB-mRNAs (DCX, DDC, PHOX2B, and TH) out of 28 NB-mRNAs are reported to have a statistical significance (Table 3). Although these four marker genes are all evaluated as a member of a multiple marker set (NB2, NB3-SWE, and NB3-UK) for NB-MRD, TH is also used as a single marker. For NB-mRNA sets (Table 2), nine NB-mRNA sets (NB2, NB3-UK, NB3-SWE, NB3-MES, NB4-MSKCC, NB4-EUR, NB5-COG, NB5-BM-NLD, and NB7) out of 12 NB-mRNA sets (Table 2) show a statistical significance (Table 3). Among nine NB-mRNA sets, five sets are used in one sample type (BM sample: NB3-SWE, NB4-MSKCC, NB4-EUR, NB5-BM-NLD; PBSC sample: NB3-MES), while four sets are used in two or three sample types (BM and PB samples: NB2, NB3-UK; BM and PBSC samples: NB5-COG; BM, PB, and PBSC samples: NB7).

Clinical Performance
As discussed in the evaluation timepoints, the evaluation of NB-MRD should be based on the well-defined “single” timepoint data “after” treatment. For BM samples collected at the end of induction, after one cycle of induction chemotherapy, after two cycles of anti-GD2 therapy, and the end of treatment, six NB-mRNA sets (NB2, NB3-UK, NB4-EUR, NB4-MSKCC, NB5-BM-NLD, NB5-COG), one NB-mRNA set (TH), one NB-mRNA set (NB4-MSKCC), and one NB-mRNA set (NB5-COG) have a significant predictive value of EFS or OS. For PB samples collected at the end of induction and the end of treatment, one NB-mRNA (TH) has a significant predictive value of EFS and OS. For PBSC samples, one NB-mRNA (TH) and three NB-mRNA sets (NB3-MES, NB5-COG, NB7) have a significant predictive value of EFS or OS.

Conclusions
Therapy-resistant MRD is primarily responsible for the therapeutic failures and dismal outcomes of patients with cancer. Intensive multimodal therapies can eliminate the bulk of cancer cells while sparing the small subpopulations of MRD in patients with cancer. Over recent decades, more accurate and sensitive MRD assays detecting clonotypic immunoglobulin/T-cell receptor rearrangements or fusion genes and genomic alterations by quantitative PCR were developed and enabled us to decrease the therapeutic failure rates and improve patient outcomes in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia. In neuroblastoma, more accurate and sensitive MRD assays detecting a set of NB-mRNAs by quantitative PCR or droplet digital PCR are developed but have not yet been implemented in clinical trials.
The clinical significance of NB-MRD assays depends on sample types, evaluation timepoints, and marker genes. As shown in Table 3, the multiple NB-MRD assays have demonstrated significant prognostic value for the BM/PB samples collected at different evaluation timepoints and PBSC samples. Bone marrow samples are more sensitive than PB samples for NB-MRD detection. Earlier evaluation timepoints can provide an option for the NB-MRD-based treatment stratification. Therefore, the most effective samples for an NB-MRD evaluation would be the BM samples collected at earlier timepoints (end of induction or after two cycles of anti-GD2 therapy). Although there is no consensus on marker genes for an NB-MRD evaluation, NB4-MSKCC, NB5-COG, and NB7 marker genes are either tested in a relatively larger cohort (>100 patients) or validated in multiple cohorts. Accordingly, the most promising NB-mRNA set would be the one of NB4-MSKCC, NB5-COG, and NB7.
To validate the clinical significance of these NB-MRD assays, clinical studies testing independent cohort samples will be required. Towards a better patient outcome, there is an urgent need for prospective clinical trials evaluating the impact of NB-MRD-based patient stratifications on EFS or OS.

Declarations

Funding
Open Access funding provided by Kobe University. The authors acknowledge support from Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (KAKENHI) from the Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science (No. 21K07750 and No. 23K14977).

Conflicts of Interest/Competing Interests
Noriyuki Nishimura received research funding from Sysmex Corporation. Nobuyuki Yamamoto, Kikyo Ishizawa, Mayuno Umemoto, Akihiro Nishimura, Tomoko Fujikawa, Shotaro Inoue, Naoko Nakatani, Akihiro Tamura, Nanako Nino, Suguru Uemura, Daiichiro Hasegawa, and Yoshiyuki Kosaka have no conflicts of interest that are directly relevant to the content of this article.

Ethics Approval
Not applicable.

Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

Consent for Publication
Not applicable.

Availability of Data and Material
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed.

Code Availability
Not applicable.

Authors’ Contributions
NY performed the literature review and drafted the manuscript. KI, MU, AN, TF, SI, NN (Naoko Nakatani), AT, NN (Nanako Nino), SU, DH, YK, and NN (Noriyuki Nishimura) reviewed and edited the manuscript.

References
Neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma
Clinical, biologic, and prognostic differences on the basis of primary tumor site in neuroblastoma: a report from the International Neuroblastoma Risk Group Project
Tumoral heterogeneity in neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma is composed of two super-enhancer-associated differentiation states
Heterogeneity of neuroblastoma cell identity defined by transcriptional circuitries
Neuroblastoma: paradigm for precision medicine
Advancing therapy for neuroblastoma
Advances in risk classification and treatment strategies for neuroblastoma
Effect of tandem autologous stem cell transplant vs single transplant on event-free survival in patients with high-risk neuroblastoma: a randomized clinical trial
Molecular detection of low-level disease in patients with cancer
Metastasis as an evolutionary process
Mechanisms and molecular characterization of relapsed/refractory neuroblastomas
Tumor heterogeneity
Tumor heterogeneity: a ‘contemporary concept’ founded on historical insights and predictions
Minimal residual disease in solid neoplasia: new frontier or red-herring?
Neuroblastoma: clinical and biological approach to risk stratification and treatment
Evaluation of bone marrow as a metastatic site of human neuroblastoma
Prognostic value of immunocytologic detection of bone marrow metastases in neuroblastoma
Detection of metastatic neuroblastoma in bone marrow: when is routine marrow histology insensitive?
Detection of melanoma cells in peripheral blood by means of reverse transcriptase and polymerase chain reaction
Detection of tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA and minimal neuroblastoma cells by the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
Neuroblastoma cell detection by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA
Pitfalls in detection of contaminating neuroblastoma cells by tyrosine hydroxylase RT-PCR due to catecholamine-producing hematopoietic cells
Quantitation of marrow disease in neuroblastoma by real-time reverse transcription-PCR
Cyclin D1, a novel molecular marker of minimal residual disease, in metastatic neuroblastoma
Detection procedures for neuroblastoma cells metastatic to blood and bone marrow: blinded comparison of chromogranin A heminested reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction to tyrosine hydroxylase nested reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and to anti-GD2 immunocytology
The doublecortin gene, a new molecular marker to detect minimal residual disease in neuroblastoma
Molecular detection of dopamine decarboxylase expression by means of reverse transcriptase and polymerase chain reaction in bone marrow and peripheral blood: utility as a tumor marker for neuroblastoma
Potential application of ELAVL4 real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR for detection of disseminated neuroblastoma cells
Molecular detection of GAGE expression in peripheral blood and bone marrow: utility as a tumor marker for neuroblastoma
Detection of microscopic neuroblastoma in marrow by histology, immunocytology, and reverse transcription-PCR of multiple molecular markers
Sialyltransferase STX (ST8SiaII): a novel molecular marker of metastatic neuroblastoma
Expression of protein gene product 9.5 and tyrosine hydroxylase in childhood small round cell tumors
Polyalanine expansion and frameshift mutations of the paired-like homeobox gene PHOX2B in congenital central hypoventilation syndrome
PHOX2B is a novel and specific marker for minimal residual disease testing in neuroblastoma
Detecting minimal residual disease in neuroblastoma: the superiority of a panel of real-time quantitative PCR markers
Exploiting gene expression profiling to identify novel minimal residual disease markers of neuroblastoma
Mesenchymal neuroblastoma cells are undetected by current mRNA marker panels: the development of a specific neuroblastoma mesenchymal minimal residual disease panel
Minimal residual disease detection in autologous stem cell grafts from patients with high risk neuroblastoma
Minimal disease detection in peripheral blood and bone marrow from patients with non-metastatic neuroblastoma
TH and DCX mRNAs in peripheral blood and bone marrow predict outcome in metastatic neuroblastoma patients
Minimal disease monitoring by QRT-PCR: guidelines for identification and systematic validation of molecular markers prior to evaluation in prospective clinical trials
Neuroblastoma mRNAs predict outcome in children with stage 4 neuroblastoma: a European HR-NBL1/SIOPEN study
mRNAs of tyrosine hydroxylase and dopa decarboxylase but not of GD2 synthase are specific for neuroblastoma minimal disease and predicts outcome for children with high-risk disease when measured at diagnosis
Murine anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody 3F8 combined with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and 13-cis-retinoic acid in high-risk patients with stage 4 neuroblastoma in first remission
Bone marrow minimal residual disease was an early response marker and a consistent independent predictor of survival after anti-GD2 immunotherapy
Prospective investigation of applicability and the prognostic significance of bone marrow involvement in patients with neuroblastoma detected by quantitative reverse transcription PCR
Purged versus non-purged peripheral blood stem-cell transplantation for high-risk neuroblastoma (COG A3973): a randomised phase 3 trial
Expression of five neuroblastoma genes in bone marrow or blood of patients with relapsed/refractory neuroblastoma provides a new biomarker for disease and prognosis
Minimal residual disease monitoring in neuroblastoma patients based on the expression of a set of real-time RT-PCR markers in tumor-initiating cells
Level of seven neuroblastoma-associated mRNAs detected by droplet digital PCR is associated with tumor relapse/regrowth of high-risk neuroblastoma patients
Minimal residual disease detected by droplet digital PCR in peripheral blood stem cell grafts has a prognostic impact on high-risk neuroblastoma patients
Minimal residual disease detected by the 7NB-mRNAs ddPCR assay is associated with disease progression in high-risk neuroblastoma patients: a prospective multicenter observational study in Japan
The prognostic value of fast molecular response of marrow disease in patients aged over 1 year with stage 4 neuroblastoma
Detection of neuroblastoma cells in blood
Minimal residual disease at the time of peripheral blood stem cell harvest in patients with advanced neuroblastoma
Significance of molecular quantification of minimal residual disease in metastatic neuroblastoma
Prognostic impact of the detection of microcirculating tumor cells by a real-time RT-PCR assay of tyrosine hydroxylase in patients with advanced neuroblastoma
Expression of neuroblastoma-related genes in bone marrow at end of high-risk neuroblastoma therapy
Circulating neuroblastoma cells detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA are an independent poor prognostic indicator in stage 4 neuroblastoma in children over 1 year
Molecular detection of tyrosine hydroxylase in the peripheral blood of patients with neuroblastoma: useful at diagnosis but not predictive of subsequent relapse during off-therapy follow-up
Event-free survival of infants and toddlers enrolled in the HR-NBL-1/SIOPEN trial is associated with the level of neuroblastoma mRNAs at diagnosis
Tailoring therapy for children with neuroblastoma on the basis of risk group classification: past, present, and future
Revised neuroblastoma risk classification system: a report from the Children's Oncology Group
Outcome prediction by molecular detection of minimal residual disease in bone marrow for advanced neuroblastoma
Advancing diagnostics and therapy to reach universal cure in childhood ALL
Minimal residual disease in high-risk neuroblastoma shows a dynamic and disease burden-dependent correlation between bone marrow and peripheral blood