Radiographic evaluation of the painful adolescent and young adult hip
Radiographic evaluation of hip pain in adolescents and young adults is an important component of the assessment to aid in the identification of the cause of pain, distinguish between etiologies of early hip degeneration such as acetabular dysplasia (instability) and femoroacetabular impingement, and guide further workup and management. Recent advances in radiographic assessment include the importance of obtaining a standing anterior-posterior radiograph to illustrate the functional position of the pelvis, the use of anterior and posterior wall indices to illustrate anterior and posterior wall coverage and the importance of interpreting radiographic measures in the context of a patient’s sagittal balance. Advances in magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, and ultrasound have also occurred and can provide further diagnostic clarity. The purpose of this work is to review the literature to provide a systematic approach to the radiographic evaluation of hip pain in skeletally mature adolescents and young adults.
Key Concepts
The standing AP pelvis, 45° Dunn, and false-profile views provide a preliminary comprehensive radiographic assessment of the symptomatic hip in the skeletally mature adolescent and young adult and help to distinguish between instability and impingement.
The Lateral Center Edge Angle (LCEA) should be augmented by the anterior center edge angle (ACEA), anterior wall index (AWI), and posterior wall index (PWI) to obtain a more complete understanding of 3-dimensional femoral head coverage from plain radiographs.
While the crossover and posterior wall signs on radiographs can be helpful in screening for acetabular retroversion and anteversion, CT should be used to confirm if considering reorientation or resection.
Cam morphology should be quantitatively assessed using the alpha angle and head-neck offset on the 45° Dunn view.
Dynamic ultrasound may be useful in illustrating the motion associated with impingement and instability in real-time but may be limited by the technician-dependent nature of this modality.

Introduction
Orthopedic evaluation of hip pain in the adolescent and young adult population has continued to evolve over the past few decades alongside an increased understanding of the pathophysiology and natural history of prearthritic hip conditions. It is thought that the 2 main causes of early hip degeneration are acetabular dysplasia and femoroacetabular impingement (FAI). Many of these patients become symptomatic in adolescence and young adulthood, long before the development of advanced osteoarthritis (OA). Thus, it is important to identify and distinguish between dysplasia and FAI, as proper diagnosis can guide clinical decisions and hip preservation efforts that address the underlying pathology in anticipation of relieving symptoms, improving function, and potentially delaying OA progression. Alongside the history and physical exam, diagnostic imaging plays an important role in helping providers make an accurate diagnosis and initiate appropriate next steps in management, and presumably optimize patient outcomes.
Radiographic assessment requires an understanding of the differences between acetabular dysplasia (instability) and FAI. Acetabular dysplasia refers to malformation of the acetabulum ± femoral head due to changes in their morphology or orientation, resulting in a loss of coverage of the femoral head; and, thus, inadequate bony constraint of the hip joint. This reduced contact area results in structural instability that leads to an excessive acetabular load, and associated increased stresses of the cartilage. Left untreated, this can lead to chondrolabral damage and eventual osteoarthritis. FAI involves mechanical impingement of the proximal femur and acetabulum as they come into contact during hip joint motion and is classified into 3 types: cam-type femoral morphology, pincer-type acetabular morphology, or a combined cam and pincer-type morphology. Cam morphology refers to an aspherical anterolateral femoral head-neck junction that impinges on the acetabulum during motion. Pincer morphology includes acetabular retroversion, global over coverage with increased anterior and lateral femoral head coverage, and isolated anterosuperior over coverage without retroversion. Continued impingement over time can lead to damage to the labrum, deterioration of the cartilage, and eventual osteoarthritis.
Prior work by the Academic Network for Conversational Hip Outcomes Research study group in 2008 provided a detailed approach to the radiographic evaluation of the painful hip. However, there have been significant advances in plain radiographic evaluation in the last 15 years, as well as in magnetic resonance imaging and arthrogram (MRI and MRA), computed tomography (CT), and ultrasound. The aim of this paper is to provide an update by synthesizing the prior literature with these recent advances in the evaluation of a skeletally mature adolescent and young adult presenting with hip pain.

Image acquisition and technical evaluation
Radiographic Views of the pelvis: Anterior-Posterior (left), 45° Dunn (middle), False Profile (right).
Figure 1
Proper technique in obtaining radiographs is essential for reproducibility and accurate characterization of hip morphology. The following views can be utilized to assess hip morphology in a suspected skeletally mature patient: a standing anteroposterior view of the pelvis (AP pelvis), a 45° Dunn view, and a false-profile view (Fig. 1). Each has distinct advantages in assessing various aspects of hip morphology and provides complementary information to identify structural abnormalities.

Anteroposterior pelvic view
A: Positioning for standing AP view, with limbs in 15° internal rotation and tube-to-film distance of 120 cm. Fig. 2B: Positioning for 45° Dunn view, with affected hip flexed to 45° and abducted to 20°. Fig. 2C: Positioning for false profile view, with pelvis rotated 65° from cassette and foot of affected side parallel to cassette.
Figure 2
The AP pelvis view should be obtained in the standing position, with the lower extremities internally rotated by 15° to maximize the length of the femoral neck. The x-ray tube-to-film distance should be 120 cm, with the beam crosshairs centered at a point midway between the top of the iliac crests and the pubic symphysis (Fig. 2A).
Traditionally, the AP view has been obtained in the supine position. Though this position is still commonly used and may be appropriate in assessing for hip morphology, we recommend the standing position, given that this more accurately represents the true functional position of the pelvis while standing. Acetabular coverage is most important in the weight-bearing position while the joint is under load, and a positional change from standing to supine may result in overestimating measures of acetabular coverage. Therefore, it is our preference to obtain this view in the weight-bearing position if possible.

45° Dunn view
Our preference is to obtain the 45° Dunn view as the single lateral view of the proximal femurs, given the substantially decreased effective radiation dose compared to the cross-table lateral view and the increased ability to detect cam morphology compared to the frog-leg view. To obtain this view, the patient should be instructed to lay supine on the X-ray table with the symptomatic hip flexed to 45° and abducted 20°, while maintained in neutral rotation. The crosshairs of the beam should be directed to the midpoint between the anterior superior iliac spine and pubic symphysis. The x-ray tube-to-film distance should be approximately 40 in (∼100 cm) along a line perpendicular to the table (Fig. 2B). It may be preferable to obtain this view bilaterally by including both hips, similar to the protocol for obtaining a frog-leg lateral, as this would reduce radiation to the midline structures while still providing the same information. In a suspected skeletally immature patient, a proper screening would also include a frog lateral as many features of femoral head-neck morphology and the osseous acetabular rim are not completely ossified.

False profile view
To acquire the false profile view, the patient should be standing with their symptomatic hip against the radiographic cassette, the foot of their symptomatic side parallel to the cassette, and their pelvis rotated to make an angle of 65° with a line parallel to the cassette (Fig. 2C).

Radiographic assessment

Osteoarthritis assessment
One of the important first steps in radiographically evaluating the painful hip is to assess for the presence of degenerative changes. This affects treatment decisions, given the limited role for hip preservation in advanced osteoarthritis. The Tönnis classification is commonly used to grade progressive degrees of degenerative changes as visualized on the AP pelvis radiograph. Grade 0 involves no signs of osteoarthritis. Grade 1 includes slight joint space narrowing, lipping at the joint margin, and increased sclerosis at the femoral head and acetabulum. Grade 2 includes increased joint space narrowing, small cysts in the femoral head or acetabulum, and moderate loss of femoral head sphericity. Grade 3 includes severe joint space narrowing or joint space obliteration, large cysts in the femoral head or acetabulum, severe femoral head deformity, and evidence of avascular necrosis. Although there is a lack of consensus on its reliability (particularly at early stages of arthritis when distinguishing between grades 0 and 1), it nevertheless provides an efficient way to assess for the presence of degenerative changes and to rule out severe osteoarthritis.

Defining the acetabulum
Landmarks on AP radiograph that help to define the acetabulum: anterior wall, posterior wall, iliopectineal line, ilioischial line, teardrop, and sourcil.
Figure 3
Radiographic assessment to diagnose and distinguish between acetabular dysplasia and FAI should include an evaluation of the acetabulum, periacetabular region, femoral head/neck morphology, and sagittal parameters. The clinician can begin by identifying key landmarks on the AP radiograph that define the acetabulum, including the anterior acetabular wall, the posterior acetabular wall, the teardrop, sourcil, ilioischial line, and iliopectineal line (Fig. 3). The posterior wall is typically located lateral to the anterior wall. The teardrop is a U-shaped radiographic figure composed of 2 nearly parallel radiographic lines—the medial line is formed by a portion of the quadrilateral plate and obturator groove, and the lateral line is formed by the cotyloid fossa. The sourcil represents the sclerotic weight-bearing roof of the acetabulum and forms an arc that should be congruent with that of the femoral head. The ilioischial line, formed by the X-ray beam occurring in a tangent across the surface of the quadrilateral plate, defines the posterior column of the acetabulum. The iliopectineal line, composed of cortical bone extending between the sacroiliac joint and pubic symphysis, represents the anterior column.

Acetabular morphology

Coverage of the femoral head
Lateral Center Edge Angle (LCEA) using the Wiberg method utilizing the lateral acetabular rim, resulting in a “normal” LCEA value (left). Ogata method utilizing lateral margin of sourcil, on the same image, resulting in an LCEA value associated with borderline dysplasia (right).
Figure 4
Acetabular coverage of the femoral head is commonly represented by the lateral center edge angle (LCEA), a measure on the AP pelvis radiograph that assesses superolateral coverage. The LCEA is the angle between 2 lines that both originate at the femoral head center, identified using Mose circles or Picture archiving and communication system (PACS) software which provides a best fit circle within the femoral head. One line extends superiorly and perpendicular to the axis connecting the inferior edge of the acetabular teardrops (the transverse axis of the pelvis), while the other line extends laterally through either the lateral acetabular rim (when using the Wiberg method) or through the lateral margin of the sourcil (when using the Ogata method) (Fig. 4). Although the Wiberg method has traditionally been used, Ogata proposed an alternative by using the lateral margin of the sourcil, after noting that in dysplastic hips; the presence of acetabular retroversion yields an overestimate of the true functional lateral coverage when using the Wiberg method. A more recent study illustrated that the Wiberg method overestimates true coverage by an average of 4° because it includes a bony area of the acetabulum that functions as the labral base but does not come into contact with the femoral head and thus does not contribute directly to coverage. Therefore, we recommend the Ogata method to obtain a more accurate assessment of superolateral coverage. LCEA values <20° indicate frank acetabular dysplasia. LCEA values between 20 and 25° typically indicate borderline dysplasia, although some surgeons may use a range of 18 to 25°. Values above 40° indicate over coverage, generally associated with global over coverage type of pincer deformity in FAI.
Femoral Head Extrusion Index is another measure of femoral head coverage on the AP view that quantifies the percentage of the femoral head that is not covered by the acetabulum. This value is calculated as the percentage of the total femoral head width that lies lateral to the lateralmost portion of the acetabulum (rather than the lateral edge of the acetabular sourcil which may lay further medial). A normal hip is defined as having an extrusion index of <25%, and higher values are thought to be associated with acetabular dysplasia. This measure is closely geometrically related to the LCEA value and correlates highly.
Despite the utility of the LCEA, one limitation is that it only measures femoral head coverage in 2 dimensions. Acetabular dysplasia has been demonstrated to be a variable 3-D deformity with some hips demonstrating global deficiency, while others demonstrate anterosuperior or posterosuperior deficiency. The radiographic projection of the sourcil used to measure LCEA corresponds to a small region of the true acetabular weight-bearing surface. The femoral head coverage anterior or posterior to the radiographic projection of the sourcil would not be captured using LCEA alone. Therefore, the LCEA may over- or underestimate the true 3-D femoral head coverage in the weight-bearing zone of the acetabulum in cases of anterior or posterior wall deficiency (or over-coverage) or acetabular version abnormalities.
Anterior center edge angle, measured as the angle between the vertical and a line connecting the center of the femoral head to the anterior sourcil.
Figure 5
To obtain a more accurate representation of 3-D femoral head coverage, the LCEA should be augmented by other measures such as the anterior center edge angle (ACEA), anterior wall index (AWI), and posterior wall index (PWI). The ACEA is a measure of anterior coverage on the false-profile view, defined as the angle between a vertical line through the center of the femoral head and a line that connects the center of the femoral head to the anterior-most portion of the sourcil (Fig. 5). ACEA values <20° may indicate anterior under coverage. However, some radiologic and 3-D CT studies have indicated that although the ACEA tends to accurately represent anterior coverage in normal hips, it may not reliably represent anterior coverage in dysplastic hips. Similarly, AWI and PWI are sensitive to changes and pelvic tilt and rotation which should be recognized. A recent study in borderline dysplasia found the PWI to correlate well with posterior coverage on CT, but the AWI to not be a precise estimate of anterior coverage. Therefore, these measures should be used carefully and in conjunction with 3-D assessments in most cases.
Measurements for calculating anterior wall index (AWI) and posterior wall index (PWI). a = distance along neck axis from edge of femoral head to anterior wall. p = distance along neck axis from the edge of femoral head to posterior wall. r = radius of femoral head. AWI = a/r. PWI = p/r.
Figure 6
The AWI and PWI were developed to quantify anterior coverage and posterior coverage, respectively, using the AP radiograph. To determine these indices, a circle is drawn that best fits the femoral head shape and center of rotation, and the radius of the circle (r) is determined. A line is drawn down the femoral neck axis that intersects the circle at its center. The distances along this line from where it intersects the circle and where it intersects the anterior wall (a) and the posterior wall (p) are measured. The AWI is calculated as the quotient of an over r, and the PWI is calculated as the quotient of p over r (Fig. 6). The AWI is thought to be more reliable than ACEA in predicting anterior coverage and the AWI and PWI may be helpful in distinguishing between acetabular dysplasia, retroversion, and overcoverage. However, further work needs to be done to define the true normal cutoff values for these indices, relative to gold standard 3-D assessments. Regardless, the AWI and PWI can be used in conjunction with the ACEA and LCEA to obtain a more complete assessment of 3-D femoral head coverage.

Acetabular inclination
Tönnis angle for measuring acetabular inclination. Angle formed between horizontal line parallel to pelvis and line connecting medial and lateral edges of sourcil.
Figure 7
Acetabular inclination should be determined on the AP view using the Tönnis angle. This is the angle between a horizontal line parallel to the transverse pelvic axis drawn through the most medial edge of the sourcil, and a line that connects the medial edge and lateral edge of the sourcil (Fig. 7). An angle of 0 to 10° is considered normal, an angle of >10° is considered to be increased inclination and associated with structural instability and acetabular dysplasia, and an angle of <0° is considered to be decreased inclination and may be associated with pincer-type FAI.
Evaluation of sourcil morphology provides additional information about acetabular inclination. An Upsloping Lateral Sourcil is defined on an AP radiograph as a caudal to the cranial inclination of the middle to the far lateral portion of the sourcil with loss of normal lateral concavity. This finding is thought to be associated with acetabular dysplasia, with one study showing almost 90% of the patients with frank acetabular dysplasia having this finding and 3 times as many patients with borderline dysplasia having this finding compared to normal controls.

Acetabular version
Ischial spine sign shown by prominent extension of ischial spine into pelvis (left), compared to normal AP pelvis (right). The presence of ischial spine sign indicates acetabular retroversion.
Figure 8
Positive crossover sign (left). Positive posterior wall sign (right), with the center of femoral head (X) lying lateral to posterior wall. The presence of crossover sign and posterior wall sign together indicate true acetabular retroversion.
Figure 9
Determination of the acetabular version is key in evaluating hip pathology, as excessive acetabular anteversion may be associated with dysplasia/instability and acetabular retroversion with pincer-type FAI. Plain radiographic signs useful in determining version include the ischial spine sign, the crossover sign, and the posterior wall sign. The ischial spine sign refers to a prominent extension of the ischial spine into the pelvis on the AP view and is an indicator of acetabular retroversion (Fig. 8). The crossover sign refers to a “figure of eight” appearance of the acetabular walls as the anterior rim of the acetabulum crosses over/lateral to the posterior rim on the AP view (Fig. 9). The absence of the crossover sign indicates acetabular anteversion. A positive crossover sign is typically associated with either acetabular retroversion or global overcoverage, depending on the presence or absence of the posterior wall sign, respectively. The posterior wall sign refers to the center of the femoral head being located lateral to the outline of the posterior acetabular wall (Fig. 9). In the case of true acetabular retroversion, a positive crossover sign will be accompanied by the posterior wall sign. If the crossover sign is present but the posterior wall sign is absent, this suggests focal anterosuperior over coverage. However, the literature has shown that in normally covered asymptomatic hips, up to 15% may have a positive crossover sign and up to 30% may have a positive posterior wall sign, on plain radiographs. Therefore, while x-rays are useful in screening for excessive acetabular anteversion or retroversion, CT should be used to confirm if considering reorientation or resection.

Acetabular depth
The most reliable marker traditionally associated with increased depth on the AP view is protrusio acetabuli. Protrusio acetabuli is an imaging finding that refers to the medial aspect of the femoral head lying medial to the ilioischial line. Protrusio acetabuli is thought to be associated with increased depth and pincer-type FAI. Prior studies that evaluate coxa profunda lack reliability and should not be used to evaluate acetabular depth.

Femoroepiphyseal acetabular roof (FEAR) index
Femoroacetabular Roof (FEAR) Index, measured as the angle between a line through the central third femoral physeal scar and a line connecting the medial and lateral sourcil.
Figure 10
The femoroepiphyseal acetabular roof (FEAR) index was developed as a measure on the AP pelvis view to distinguish between hip instability and FAI in patients with borderline hip dysplasia. The FEAR index is measured by drawing one line through the central portion of the femoral head physeal scar, and another that connects the medial and lateral sourcil. The angle between these lines forms the FEAR index; an angle that opens laterally represents a positive index, while an angle that opens medially represents a negative index (Fig. 10). In cases of borderline hip dysplasia, it can be difficult to distinguish from the LCEA alone whether the deformity driving symptoms is instability or impingement. This distinction between instability and FAI is important because the preferred surgical treatment for instability is periacetabular osteotomy while the preferred surgical treatment for FAI is arthroscopic impingement surgery. Therefore, the addition of the FEAR index to distinguish between instability and FAI may provide a complementary tool for guiding management. A few studies have reported it may be reliable and reproducible in differentiating between stable and unstable hips, may have high inter-rater and intra-rater reliability, and may potentially be associated with postoperative patient-reported outcome scores. However, there is concern that the FEAR index has poor sensitivity in evaluating for instability. There is also a lack of consensus on the cutoff values that should be used to define instability. Therefore, although the FEAR index may be a useful adjunct in evaluating patients with borderline dysplasia, more work is needed to validate its clinical utility and association with patient outcomes.

Periacetabular evaluation

Shenton’s line
Shenton’s line, formed as an arc from the superior border of the obturator foramen to the inferomedial aspect of the femoral neck.
Figure 11
The Shenton’s line is a continuous arc on the AP view that is formed along the superior border of the obturator foramen extending down the inferomedial border of the femoral neck (Fig. 11). This line should be continuous; a break in the line defines superolateral hip subluxation and has been shown to have high reliability and specificity in diagnosing frank acetabular dysplasia. However, a continuous line does not exclude hip dysplasia/instability.

Anterior inferior iliac spine
Prominent low-lying anterior inferior iliac spine (AIIS). Mistaking the AIIS for the anterior rim can lead to a false positive crossover sign (left). Using the appropriate landmarks for the anterior wall in this radiograph illustrates that the crossover sign is absent (right).
Figure 12
The anterior inferior ilration of conflicts of iprominence seen on the AP or false profile views that has a variable size, location, and or/morphology. In some cases, it may impinge on the soft tissue in the region of the anterior femoral neck and/or anterosuperior greater trochanter, termed subspine impingement, which results in extra-articular FAI. It is also important to pay careful attention to the anterior inferior iliac spine because in some cases with abnormal morphology, it may be mistaken for the anterior rim of the acetabulum, leading to a falsely positive crossover sign and potential for misdiagnosis as a result (Fig. 12).

Femoral evaluation

Femoral neck-shaft angle
The femoral neck-shaft angle is the angle on the AP view between the longitudinal femoral neck shaft axis and the femoral head-neck axis. A normal neck-shaft angle is between 120° and 140°, while an angle <120° is termed coxa vara and an angle >140° is termed coxa valga. Coxa vara is more commonly associated with FAI, while coxa valga is more commonly associated with acetabular dysplasia. Standardization of internal rotation of the femurs while obtaining the AP view, as described previously, is important because the apparent neck-shaft angle radiographically will change based on the degree of femoral rotation. As little as 7° of external rotation of the femur can cause a change of >10° in the apparent femoral neck-shaft angle. This is important to recognize given the standard internal rotation of 15 degrees of the legs for the AP pelvis radiograph represents the typical femoral version, but may not reflect the actual femoral version present in each patient and thus affect the true representation of femoral neck-shaft angle.

Evaluation for cam morphology
Evaluation for the presence of cam morphology involves both a qualitative and quantitative assessment of the femoral head. Qualitatively, this is best visualized on a 45° Dunn lateral radiograph as a loss of sphericity along the anterosuperior aspect of the femoral head-neck junction. An extension of this morphology, commonly referred to as “pistol grip”, is best visualized on an AP radiograph as a loss of sphericity at the superolateral aspect of the femoral head-neck junction.
An adolescent male with cam deformity. Alpha angle is measured as the angle between the femoral neck axis and a line connecting the center of the femoral head to where the femoral head-neck junction exits a best fit circle around the femoral head (left). Head-neck offset is determined by drawing a line along the femoral neck axis (dashed line). The head-neck offset is then measured as the distance between a parallel line at the concavity of the femoral neck and a parallel line at the convexity of the femoral head (right). Alpha angle >50 to 55° and head-neck offset ratio <0.18 are indicative of cam impingement.
Figure 13
Quantitatively, the magnitude of the cam morphology can be assessed using the alpha angle of Notzli (α angle) and head-neck offset ratio. The α angle is best measured on the Dunn view and is calculated as the angle between a line from the center of the femoral head down the center of the femoral neck, and a line from the center of the femoral head to a point on the anterolateral head-neck junction where the distance from the bone to the center of the head is greater than the radius of the femoral head located more proximally in the acetabulum (Fig. 13). An α angle >50° to 55° is indicative of cam morphology.
The head-neck offset ratio can be measured on an AP or Dunn lateral view and is determined by drawing 3 lines: (1) a line along the center of the long axis of the femoral neck, (2) a parallel line at the concavity of the lateral femoral neck, and (3) a parallel line at the convexity of the lateral femoral head (Fig. 13). The head-neck offset distance is calculated as the distance between lines 2 and 3, and the head-neck offset ratio is calculated as this distance divided by the femoral head diameter. An offset distance of <9 mm or ratio <0.18 is abnormal and indicative of cam morphology.

Sagittal parameters
Sagittal parameters of pelvic incidence, pelvic tilt, and sacral slope. Pelvic incidence = pelvic tilt + sacral slope.
Figure 14
A quantitative assessment of sagittal balance includes the pelvic incidence, pelvic tilt, and sacral slope. Each of these parameters can be obtained from a standing lateral and lumbar pelvis view, and pelvic incidence may be obtained from a false profile view. Pelvic incidence is the sum of pelvic tilt and sacral slope and is measured as the angle between a line perpendicular to the midpoint of the S1 sacral endplate and a line connecting to this point to the center of the bicoxofemoral axis. Pelvic tilt is the angle between the vertical axis and a line connecting the midpoint of the S1 sacral endplate to the center of the bicoxofemoral axis. The sacral slope is the angle between a line tangent to the S1 sacral endplate and the horizontal axis (Fig. 14).
Although these parameters have traditionally been used in the evaluation of spinal deformity, their importance in hip pathology has been increasingly recognized. Variations in pelvic tilt, a position-dependent parameter that is a natural component of a patient’s posture, can influence radiographic parameters of the acetabular version, inclination, and coverage. Increases in anterior pelvic tilt away from the patient’s baseline functional tilt are associated with increases in ACEA on the false-profile view, as well as increases in Tönnis angle and the presence of the crossover/ischial spine sign on the AP view, which may lead to a potential misdiagnosis of FAI. Therefore, proper patient positioning in the standing position while obtaining these radiographs to capture the patient’s true native pelvic tilt is important. If a supine AP pelvis is obtained, then obtaining a lateral lumbar pelvis or a false profile can be helpful in assessing the patient’s sagittal balance. Normal values for pelvic tilt have been reported to be on average 13° ± 6°, corresponding on the AP view to a pubic symphysis to sacrococcygeal junctional distance of 32.3 mm in men and 47.3 mm in women.

MRI parameters
Magnetic resonance imaging allows for evaluation of the labrum, cartilage, and subchondral bone of the hip joint, and can provide insights into the presence of acetabular dysplasia and FAI. Although acetabular cartilage and labral pathology have traditionally been assessed using MRA, 3T MRI has been shown to be equally effective in diagnosing cartilage defects and labral tears and can thus be used in the evaluation of the painful hip.

Chondrolabral hypertrophy
T2 MRI sagittal (left) and axial (right) views of hip demonstrating labral hypertrophy in adolescent with dysplasia. The labrum (white arrow) is hypertrophied as indicated by the dashed line showing increased labral length.
Figure 15
Labral length and cartilage thickness measured on MRI/MRA are commonly increased in patients with borderline or dysplastic hips (Fig. 15). One study found that the average labral length on MRI was 7.68 mm in normally covered hips (LCEA 25.0–39.9°), 9.44 mm in borderline hips, and 10.12 mm in dysplastic hips. Another study found that the average cartilage thickness was 3.20 mm in normally covered hips, 3.68 mm in borderline hips, and 4.33 mm in dysplastic hips. It is thought that chondrolabral hypertrophy in the borderline and dysplastic hip may be an adaptation to increased shear forces within the unstable joint, or maybe the result of incomplete ossification of the cartilaginous acetabulum during development. However, it is important to recognize that labral hypertrophy is not a universal finding in patients with dysplasia, as some patients, particularly those with more mild disease, may have a normal labral length. Therefore, the absence of labral hypertrophy does not reliably guarantee hip stability.

Labral tearing
T2 MRI radial (left) and coronal (right) views of hip demonstrating labral tear in adolescent with cam deformity and dysplasia. The labrum (arrow) should be triangular with low signal intensity, but in this case demonstrates irregularity with increased signal intensity, indicating a tear. Image obtained with 3T magnet rather than arthrogram.
Figure 16
FAI is associated with labral tearing, due to abnormal contact between the acetabular rim and the femoral head-neck junction. The normal labrum is best visualized on MRI/MRA as a triangular shape in cross section, with a diffusely low signal intensity on all imaging sequences due to its fibrocartilaginous composition. In assessing for labral tears, the morphology and signal intensity of the labrum should be evaluated. An irregular or distorted shape, with increased signal intensity on a T2 sequence, is consistent with a tear (Fig. 16).

Osteoarthritis evaluation
Conventional MRI is useful in detecting structural subchondral bone changes consistent with osteoarthritis, including bone marrow edema, joint effusion, synovitis, and sclerosis-like signal changes. Osteophytes and subcortical cysts are often more noticeable on MRI than on plain radiographs, given their multiplanar capacity. While there are several quantitative scoring systems for using the MRI to evaluate hip osteoarthritis, further work is needed to evaluate the clinical utility of these classifications.

CT parameters
CT provides the most detailed representation of the bony 3-dimensional anatomy of the hip, allowing for objective measurements of the acetabular version and femoral torsion to be made accurately. Low-dose CT can be used with a kVp of 100 and a mAs of 100, along with a limited field of volume by scanning from the inferior sacroiliac joint to the lesser trochanter of the femur. We recommend using low-dose CT instead of traditional CT, given that low-dose CT has been associated with a 90% reduction in radiation exposure while maintaining sufficient image quality for clinical evaluation and surgical planning.

Acetabular version
Acetabular version measurement on axial CT, measured as an angle between the line connecting anterior and posterior acetabulum, and a line tangent to the horizontal axis of posterior acetabulum. Normal acetabular version = 15 to 20°. Anteversion >25°. Retroversion <15°.
Figure 17
The acetabular version on axial CT is typically measured at the level of the midfemoral heads, as the angle between a line perpendicular to the horizontal axis of the posterior acetabulum, and a line connecting the anterior and posterior rims (Fig. 17). Normal acetabular version at this level is considered as 15 to 20°. Anteversion >25° is indicative of anterior undercoverage and may result in anterior instability. Relative retroversion <15° may be associated with impingement. The acetabular version may also be assessed at the superior aspect of the femoral heads to evaluate more cranial acetabular version and coverage.

Femoral torsion
Femoral torsion, measured using the Jarrett technique on oblique axial CT view, as the sum of the femoral neck angle (left) and the femoral condylar angle (right). Femoral anteversion is 15 degrees in this example.
Figure 18
Femoral torsion, or version, refers to the orientation of the femoral neck relative to the femoral condyles in the axial plane. This is commonly measured as the angle between the tangent line at the posterior aspect of the condyles and a line passing through the center of the femoral head and neck. Various methods have been described to measure torsion, such as the Jarrett technique (Fig. 18), but all utilize slices of both the proximal and distal femur on CT. Though there are age- and sex-dependent differences, these methods all have high intra-observer and inter-observer reliability, and standard normal values of torsion range from 7° to 24°. Regardless of the technique used to measure torsion, increased femoral antetorsion is thought to be associated with hip instability.

Dynamic ultrasound
Hip instability and impingement are dynamic phenomena, and radiographs, CT, and MRI are static imaging modalities that do not demonstrate the associated abnormal motion itself. Dynamic ultrasound may be used to illustrate the motion associated with these pathologies, in real-time, to provide further diagnostic certainty. However, an important limitation is that this is a highly technician-dependent modality with inherent subjectivity in obtaining measurements and may have limited generalizability depending on the resources available at a given institution.

Microinstability
Dynamic ultrasound of left hip demonstrating anterior translation of femoral head relative to the anterior acetabular rim of ∼4 mm from rest position in neutral (top) to stressed position in extension, abduction, and external rotation (bottom).
Figure 19
Microinstability is characterized by painful pathologic hip laxity/motion with abnormal translation of the femoral head. Ultrasound can be used to assess for anterior femoral head translation, measured as the distance between the femoral head and the acetabulum on the ultrasound image (Fig. 19). This can be measured with the patient supine in both a relaxed neutral position with the hip fully extended, and in a stressed position with the hip abducted, externally rotated, and extended off the bed. A difference in head translation between the stressed and rest position of <2 mm is thought to represent physiologic hip motion. Ultrasound can thus distinguish between physiologic hip motion under stress (asymptomatic translation <2 mm), hip laxity (asymptomatic translation >2 mm), and microinstability (painful translation >2 mm).

Femoroacetabular impingement
FAI is evaluated with the patient supine, beginning with the hip extended in a neutral position and then flexing towards 90 degrees. In the neutral position, a cam lesion can be observed on the ultrasound image as an aspherical contour and diminished offset at the femoral head-neck junction As the hip is flexed to 90 degrees, the lesion may be observed to impinge upon the acetabular labrum and reproduce pain.

Conclusion
Systematic approach to the painful adolescent and young adult hip.
Figure 20
Radiographic approach to the painful adolescent and young adult hip.
Table 1
Diagnosis	Key radiographic markers	Other radiographic markers to consider	Advanced imaging	Findings on advanced imaging	Surgical treatment options	 	Acetabular dysplasia/structural instability	LCEA < 20°*20-25° for borderline dysplasia-Tönnis angle >10°-Break in Shenton’s line-Femoral HeadExtrusion Index >25%	ACEA < 20°AWI/PWIacetabular anteversion-coxa valga*FEAR index for borderline: instability vs FAI	CT: for surgical candidatesMRI: chondrolabral assessmentUltrasound: dynamic evaluation of the femoral head and acetabulum	CT:acetabular anteversionfemoral antetorsion3D reconstruction for perioperative assessmentMRI:chondrolabral hypertrophyDynamic Ultrasound:anterior femoral head translation on extension and external rotation	Pelvic osteotomy (periacetabular or rotational acetabular)Arthroscopic vs open repair of chondrolabral pathology with capsular plication*Pelvic osteotomy vs impingement surgery for borderline, based on underlying deformity	 		 	Cam impingement	Head-neck asphericityα-angle >50-55°Head-neck offset ratio <0.18		CT: for surgical candidatesMRI: chondrolabral assessmentUltrasound: dynamic evaluation of the femoral head and acetabulum	CT:3D reconstruction for perioperative assessment of deformity/versionMRI:labral tearDynamic ultrasound:visible impingement of cam lesion as hip is flexed to 90°	Arthroscopic vs open resection of camChondrolabral repair	 		 	Pincer impingement secondary to retroversion	Positive crossover sign with posterior wall sign	Evaluation of AIIS morphology to rule out false positive crossover sign	CT: for surgical candidatesMRI: chondrolabral assessment	CT:acetabular retroversion3D reconstruction for perioperative assessmentMRI:labral tear	Anteverting periacetabular osteotomyArthroscopic vs open acetabular rim recessionChondrolabral repair	 		 	Pincer impingement secondary to focal anterosuperior coverage without retroversion	Positive crossover sign, without posterior wall sign	Evaluation of AIIS morphology to rule out false positive crossover sign	CT: for surgical candidatesMRI: chondrolabral assessment	CT:3D reconstruction for perioperative assessmentMRI:labral tear	Arthroscopic vs open acetabular rim recessionChondrolabral repair	 		 	Pincer impingement secondary to global anterolateral over coverage without retroversion	LCEA > 40°ACEA > 40°Protrusio acetabuli		CT: for surgical candidatesMRI: chondrolabral assessment	CT:3D reconstruction for perioperative assessmentMRI:labral tear	Reverse periacetabular osteotomyValgus proximal femoral osteotomyChondrolabral repair	 		 	Osteoarthritis	Tönnis Classification:Joint space narrowingJoint margin lippingSclerosisCystsLoss of femoral head sphericitySevere femoral head deformity		MRI: chondral assessment	MRI:cartilage lossbone marrow edemajoint effusionsynovitissclerosis-like signal changes	Limited role for hip preservation
AIIS, anterior inferior iliac spine; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; CT, computed tomography.
The systematic approach outlined above for radiographic and 3-dimensional imaging of hip pain in skeletally mature adolescents and young adults can facilitate a reliable path from the initial presentation to the correct diagnosis and optimal management (Fig. 20 and Table 1). This evaluation should be used only as a supplement to a focused history and physical examination. Nevertheless, a comprehensive radiographic assessment is an important component of the initial evaluation to identify the cause of the pain, thereby expediting clinical decision-making and potentially improving patient outcomes.
Our recommendation is to primarily utilize the standing AP pelvis radiograph, supplemented by the 45° Dunn and false-profile views, to obtain a comprehensive radiographic assessment of the symptomatic hip in the skeletally mature adolescent and young adult. This evaluation can potentially be augmented by advanced imaging modalities including MRI/MRA to identify chondrolabral and subchondral osseous changes, CT to visualize 3-dimensional (3-D) osseous morphology, and ultrasound to capture motion abnormalities associated with hip pathology.

Additional links
POSNAcademy: Pediatric and Adolescent Hip Exam. University of Maryland Resident Webinar Series 2020.
POSNA Study Guide: Femoroacetabular Impingement.

Funding
There was no funding received for this study.

Author contributions
Daniel J. Sucato: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Jeffrey J. Nepple: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. John C. Clohisy: Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Rishi Sinha: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Visualization. William Z. Morris: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Henry B. Ellis: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. James McGinley: Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. David A. Podeszwa: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Declarations of competing interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
The evolution and concepts of joint-preserving surgery of the hip
Management of hip pain in young adults
A contemporary definition of hip dysplasia and structural instability: toward a comprehensive classification for acetabular dysplasia
Trends in utilization and outcomes of hip arthroscopy in the United States between 2005 and 2013
Normal hip joint contact pressure distribution in single-leg standing--effect of gender and anatomic parameters
Patient-specific analysis of cartilage and labrum mechanics in human hips with acetabular dysplasia
The acetabular rim syndrome. A clinical presentation of dysplasia of the hip
Significant differences in femoral torsion values depending on the CT measurement technique
Cumulative hip contact stress predicts osteoarthritis in DDH
What is the evidence to support acetabular dysplasia as a cause of osteoarthritis?
The etiology of osteoarthritis of the hip: an integrated mechanical concept
Femoroacetabular impingement
A systematic approach to the plain radiographic evaluation of the young adult hip
Retroversion of the acetabulum. A cause of hip pain
Anteroposterior pelvic radiographs to assess acetabular retroversion: high validity of the "cross-over-sign"
Anteversion of the neck of the femur
Comparison of six radiographic projections to assess femoral head/neck asphericity
False profile of the pelvis. A new radiographic incidence for the study of the hip. Its use in dysplasias and different coxopathies
Functional acetabular orientation varies between supine and standing radiographs: implications for treatment of femoroacetabular impingement
Variability of acetabular coverage between supine and weightbearing pelvic radiographs
The effect of pelvic tilt on radiographic markers of acetabular coverage
Supine and standing AP pelvis radiographs in the evaluation of pincer femoroacetabular impingement
The cross-table lateral radiograph results in a significantly increased effective radiation dose compared with the Dunn and single frog lateral radiographs
Detecting cam-type deformities on plain radiographs: what is the optimal lateral view?
A new method for roentgenologic evaluation of the hip joint—the hip factor
Reliability of Tönnis classification in early hip arthritis: a useless reference for hip-preserving surgery
Interobserver and intraobserver reliability of the radiographic analysis of femoroacetabular impingement and dysplasia using computer-assisted measurements
Classifications in brief: Tönnis classification of hip osteoarthritis
The anteroposterior pelvic radiograph: acetabular and femoral measurements and relation to hip pathologies
Studies on dysplastic acetabula and congenital subluxation of the hip joint with special reference to the complication of osteo-arthritis
Acetabular cover in congenital dislocation of the hip
Discrepancies in measuring acetabular coverage: revisiting the anterior and lateral center edge angles
Prevalence of high-grade cartilage defects in patients with borderline dysplasia with femoroacetabular impingement: a comparative cohort study
Hip arthroscopy in the presence of dysplasia
Lateral acetabular coverage predicts the size of the hip labrum
Predictors of poor clinical outcome after arthroscopic labral preservation, capsular plication, and cam osteoplasty in the setting of borderline hip dysplasia
A contemporary look at the evaluation and treatment of adult borderline and frank hip dysplasia
Clinical and radiographic predictors of failed hip arthroscopy in the management of dysplasia: a systematic review and proposal for classification
Is hip arthroscopy effective in patients with combined excessive femoral anteversion and borderline dysplasia? A match-controlled study
Arthroscopic capsular plication in patients with labral tears and borderline dysplasia of the hip: analysis of risk factors for failure
Periacetabular osteotomy improves pain and function in patients with lateral center-edge angle between 18° and 25°, but are these hips really borderline dysplastic?
Outcomes after arthroscopic treatment of femoroacetabular impingement for patients with borderline hip dysplasia
Legg-Perthes disease; a method for the measurement of the roentgenographic result
What are the radiographic reference values for acetabular under- and overcoverage?
Femoroacetabular impingement: radiographic diagnosis-what the radiologist should know
Three patterns of acetabular deficiency are common in young adult patients with acetabular dysplasia
Pincer deformity does not lead to osteoarthritis of the hip whereas acetabular dysplasia does: acetabular coverage and development of osteoarthritis in a nationwide prospective cohort study (CHECK)
Anatomical and radiological correlation of Lequesne's "false profile"
Is vertical-center-anterior angle equivalent to anterior coverage of the hip?
Defining the borderline dysplastic hip: high variability in acetabular coverage and femoral morphology on low-dose computed tomography
The acetabular wall index for assessing anteroposterior femoral head coverage in symptomatic patients
Anterior center-edge angle is less reliable than anterior wall index to predict anterior coverage of the femoral head
Acetabular wall indices help to distinguish acetabular coverage in asymptomatic adults with varying morphologies
Upsloping lateral sourcil: a radiographic finding of hip instability
Ischial spine projection into the pelvis: a new sign for acetabular retroversion
Are normal hips being labeled as pathologic? A CT-based method for defining normal acetabular coverage
Coxa profunda is not a useful radiographic parameter for diagnosing pincer-type femoroacetabular impingement
Coxa profunda in the diagnosis of pincer-type femoroacetabular impingement and its prevalence in asymptomatic subjects
Coxa profunda: is the deep acetabulum overcovered?
Does radiographic coxa profunda indicate increased acetabular coverage or depth in hip dysplasia?
The femoro-epiphyseal acetabular roof (FEAR) index: a new measurement associated with instability in borderline hip dysplasia?
The radiographic femoroepiphyseal acetabular roof index is a reliable and reproducible diagnostic tool in patients undergoing hip-preservation surgery: a systematic review
Association of radiographic markers of hip instability and worse outcomes 2 to 4 years after hip arthroscopy for femoroacetabular impingement in female patients
Is the femoral-epiphyseal acetabular roof (FEAR) index associated with hip pain in patients with hip dysplasia?
Patients with a high femoroepiphyseal roof with concomitant borderline hip dysplasia and femoroacetabular impingement syndrome do not demonstrate inferior outcomes following arthroscopic hip surgery
External validation of the FEAR index in borderline acetabular dysplasia
FEAR index in predicting treatment among patients with femoroacetabular impingement and hip dysplasia and the relationship of femoral version
Is the femoro-epiphyseal acetabular roof (FEAR) index on MRI a relevant predictive factor of instability in a borderline dysplastic hip?
The Shenton line in the diagnosis of acetabular dysplasia in the skeletally mature patient
Degeneration in dysplastic hips
Anterior inferior iliac spine morphology correlates with hip range of motion: a classification system and dynamic model
Making a case for anterior inferior iliac spine/subspine hip impingement: three representative case reports and proposed concept
Operative treatment of hip impingement caused by hypertrophy of the anterior inferior iliac spine
Three-dimensional shape of the dysplastic femur: implications for THR
Incidence and characteristics of femoral deformities in the dysplastic hip
Imaging findings of femoroacetabular impingement syndrome
Anterior femoroacetabular impingement after femoral neck fractures
The modified femoral neck-shaft angle: age- and sex-dependent reference values and reliability analysis
The effect of femoral rotation on the projected femoral neck-shaft angle
Evaluation of the magnitude and location of Cam deformity using three dimensional CT analysis
Impingement of the native hip joint
Validity of the alpha angle measurement on plain radiographs in the evaluation of cam-type femoroacetabular impingement
Standing lateral lumbar spine and pelvis (SLLP) radiograph: a screening, reduced radiation method, for sagittal imbalance
Assessing precision and accuracy of false-profile hip radiographs
Pelvic incidence: a fundamental pelvic parameter for three-dimensional regulation of spinal sagittal curves
Effect of pelvic tilt on acetabular retroversion: a study of pelves from cadavers
Do changes in pelvic rotation and tilt affect measurement of the anterior center edge angle on false profile radiographs? A cadaveric study
Radiographic analysis of the sagittal alignment and balance of the spine in asymptomatic subjects
Regional articular cartilage abnormalities of the hip
MRI of labral and chondral lesions of the hip
The diagnostic accuracy of acetabular labral tears using magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance arthrography: a meta-analysis
Hip MR arthrography and femoroacetabular impingement
Triad of MR arthrographic findings in patients with cam-type femoroacetabular impingement
Comparative reliability and diagnostic performance of conventional 3T magnetic resonance imaging and 1.5T magnetic resonance arthrography for the evaluation of internal derangement of the hip
Comparison of 3.0-T MR vs 3.0-T MR arthrography of the hip for detection of acetabular labral tears and chondral defects in the same patient population
Lateral acetabular coverage as a predictor of femoroacetabular cartilage thickness
Combined lateral osseolabral coverage is normal in hips with acetabular dysplasia
Labral morphologic characteristics in patients with symptomatic acetabular dysplasia
The imaging evaluation of acetabular labral lesions
Lesions of the acetabular labrum: accuracy of MR imaging and MR arthrography in detection and staging
Osteoarthritis of the hip: is radiography still needed?
Methodologies for semiquantitative evaluation of hip osteoarthritis by magnetic resonance imaging: approaches based on the whole organ and focused on active lesions
Preliminary validation of 2 magnetic resonance image scoring systems for osteoarthritis of the hip according to the OMERACT filter
Hip Osteoarthritis MRI Scoring System (HOAMS): reliability and associations with radiographic and clinical findings
Longitudinal assessment of MRI in hip osteoarthritis using SHOMRI and correlation with clinical progression
Low-dose computed tomography reduces radiation exposure by 90% compared with traditional computed tomography among patients undergoing hip-preservation surgery
Acetabular and femoral anteversion: relationship with osteoarthritis of the hip
CT determination of femoral torsion
Axial oblique CT to assess femoral anteversion
Normative data on femoral version
Anteversion versus torsion of the femoral neck
Femoral derotation osteotomy in adults for version abnormalities
Two or more impingement and/or instability deformities are often present in patients with hip pain
Dynamic ultrasound assessment of hip instability and anterior and posterior hip impingement
Can dynamic ultrasonography of the hip reliably assess anterior femoral head translation?