Pediatric and Congenital Cardiac Services: An Innovative and Empowering Approach to Global Training and Equitable Care
Congenital heart disease is a leading cause of preventable death in children, with a disproportionate impact on low‐ and middle‐income countries. Despite progress in treating congenital heart disease globally, significant challenges remain in accessing specialized cardiovascular care, particularly cardiac surgery, in low‐ and middle‐income countries. This review examines current models of assistance and proposes a novel global training program to address these inequities. Key challenges identified include building program infrastructure, training health care providers, ensuring financial sustainability, and promoting local engagement. The proposed program, structured under a new international organization, will leverage emerging technologies to deliver accessible and rigorously assessed training in pediatric and congenital cardiac care. By collaborating with local experts and global partners, the program will promote access to education for various health care personnel involved in congenital heart disease care, establish credentialing standards, and foster global collaboration. This unified, scalable approach aims to bridge the health equity gap and accelerate progress toward comprehensive and sustainable cardiac care programs worldwide.

Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms
LMIC
low‐ and middle‐income countries
NGO
nongovernmental organization
SSC
South–South cooperation
Congenital heart disease (CHD) poses a significant global health challenge, affecting an estimated 1.8% of live births based on recent studies. Of these, one third (0.6% of live births) require early surgical or interventional catheterization due to moderate to severe CHD, whereas others may require intervention later during childhood or adult life. CHD is the leading cause of preventable death among children under age 5 with birth defects, accounting for >260 000 global deaths in 2017, with a disproportionate impact on children under 1 year of age in low‐ and middle‐income countries (LMIC). The disparity in mortality rates between LMIC and high‐income countries has continued to widen between 1990 and 2019.
Despite the need for early intervention, access to essential cardiac care remains limited in LMIC. This disparity is particularly concerning given the growing burden of both CHD and acquired heart diseases in these regions as a result of rapidly growing populations. Unattended risk factors in childhood can also have lasting consequences, including the development of adult‐onset cardiovascular diseases such as coronary artery disease. Additionally, LMIC face a significant burden of acquired heart disease with origins in childhood, notably rheumatic heart disease, which accounts for over 300 000 annual deaths and typically begins with acute rheumatic fever in childhood.
Historically, investments in specialized pediatric care, such as congenital cardiac care, have been deprioritized in LMIC due to the greater burden of “high prevalence” conditions such as malnutrition and infectious diseases. However, the global epidemiological shift toward an increased burden of chronic diseases, including congenital malformations, justifies a reevaluation of this approach in many regions. Investing in specialized pediatric care not only addresses immediate needs but also strengthens overall health care systems and contributes to long‐term health outcomes in these populations.
The lack of access to care is stark, with a minority of children in LMIC being able to reach pediatric and congenital cardiac care and 90% of children in LMIC lacking access to essential cardiac surgery (Figure 1). This paper aims to address this inequity by examining current models of assistance and cooperation in pediatric and congenital cardiac care, identifying key challenges and potential solutions. We present an innovative program focused on training and credentialing health care personnel in LMIC by leveraging emerging technologies. With the involvement of local and global partners, we propose the establishment of an international organization to develop and implement a global training strategy for pediatric and congenital cardiac care that meets global benchmarks, prioritizes accessibility, and includes a rigorous assessment process.
Pediatric cardiac surgeons per million population (registered with CTSNet in August 2017, n=3858).
Map created at www.mapchart.net. CTSNet indicates Cardiothoracic Surgery Network. Reprinted from Vervoort et al.8 with permission. Copyright ©2020, Elsevier.

EXISTING MODELS OF ASSISTANCE AND COOPERATION
There are 3 well‐established models of assistance and cooperation in caring for children with congenital or acquired heart disease in LMIC: (1) financial assistance, (2) visiting teams, and (3) commitment to capacity building. Each model has distinct strengths and weaknesses, with variations and combinations of the models often employed (TableTable).
Examples of Models to Establish and Strengthen Pediatric Cardiac Services in Low‐ and Middle‐Income Countries
Existing model	Brief description	Strengths	Limitations	 	Financial assistance and care abroad	Transport a child (or family) for medical care abroad	Comprehensive care at a center of excellenceMinimal additional effort for clinical team	High costAdministrative barriers (e. visa permits)Few children treatedSeparation (or displacement) of a familyTypically focused on pediatric age groupNo educational opportunitiesMay undermine the development of local programs	 	Visiting teams	Fly‐in, fly‐out a medical team to perform cardiac procedures, including open heart surgery, in LMIC	High standard of careBedside and short‐term teaching availableTeam relationships and exposure to standardized practices	High costHighly dependent on volunteersSmall number of children treatedTypically focused on pediatric age groupLimited complexity and duration of treatmentLack of family home care teachingLack of patient follow‐upLimited educational opportunitiesMay disrupt the work or undermine the development of local programs	 	Commitment to capacity building	Long term collaboration to develop a center of excellence for pediatric and congenital cardiac care in LMIC	Focus on training and quality improvementResults in a sustainable center that can provide on‐going pediatric and congenital cardiac servicesResults in a center that can train additional health care personnel	Significant resources required to develop a single centerRequires a long‐term commitment (up to 10 y)More effective in countries with established infrastructureMay lead to a hierarchal and unbalanced relationship between teamsBest when integrated into national policies and health systems with diverse stakeholders including government
LMIC indicates low‐ and middle‐income countries.

South–South Cooperation Model
In addition to the traditional models of assistance that involve high‐income countries, a growing number of programs operate under a “South–South Cooperation” (SSC) model. SSC involves the transfer of knowledge, skills, or technology between developing countries, also known as countries of the Global South. Examples of successful SSC models include the established centers for pediatric and congenital cardiac care in Guatemala, Egypt, Namibia, and other sub‐Saharan African countries. With the SSC model, care centers not only serve as regional hubs for excellence but also provide specialized training to health care providers and personnel from neighboring countries. Despite their growing numbers, the sustainability and reproducibility of these centers remain challenging. There are multiple reasons for poor health care access in LMIC, including lack of political commitment, maldistribution of resources (especially financial support), inadequate human resources, and lack of persistence. In addition to addressing these issues of access, the SSC model has also fostered valuable research training and mentoring relationships.

CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES IN EXISTING AND FUTURE MODELS

Building Program Infrastructure
Despite considerable progress in the field of global pediatric and congenital cardiac care over the past half‐century, substantial challenges remain across all models of assistance. In 2023, recognizing the potential of collaborative efforts, thought leaders in global pediatric cardiac care published a set of recommendations to guide program development in LMIC. This tiered framework, emphasizing coordinated education, screening, care delivery, and quality improvement within a cohesive health care system, aims to enhance and accelerate program development. However, a scalable model that expedites the training and credentialing of specialized health care personnel remains a pressing need.
The persistent lack of access to cardiac surgery continues to contribute significantly to the global burden of pediatric and congenital heart disease. With approximately 4 cardiac centers per 10 million population in LMIC and >100 countries lacking a single center or surgeon, even for adults with heart disease, the need for robust infrastructure is evident.
A report of documented activity since 2015 showed that 81 nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) had performed pediatric cardiac surgery in LMIC, with efforts focused only on children in 56 instances (trips) and on both adults and children in 25. However, their impact is often limited to short‐term benefits for host institutions, with minimal capacity building and inconsistent follow‐up care for patients. As a result, the focus of global assistance has shifted toward establishing sustainable centers for comprehensive care in LMIC, with an increasing emphasis on capacity building through training and tiered program development.

Accessibility and Scalability of Training Programs
Adequately addressing the needs of children with cardiac disease necessitates training a substantial number of physicians, nurses, and allied health personnel. Better coordination and resource‐sharing among international organizations could accelerate this process. Pooling resources to develop and rigorously evaluate CHD teaching materials tailored for LMIC learners could significantly enhance capacity development. Although open‐access educational platforms like Heart University and SURGhub offer a valuable starting point, their impact can be limited by internet access barriers and the lack of validation for some materials, as well as not being intended to serve as complete subspecialty curricula.
Emerging technologies such as simulation, virtual and augmented reality, and artificial intelligence also present an opportunity to revolutionize the global education of physicians, nurses, and other health care personnel. The development of a scalable educational process incorporating these technologies could accelerate training at all levels while addressing local and regional needs. A new, innovative approach to global training aimed at maximizing the impact of investments in pediatric and congenital cardiac care will be explored in subsequent sections.

Financial Sustainability and Local Engagement
One of the most significant challenges in global pediatric and congenital cardiac care is funding. Most NGOs rely heavily on medical volunteers and general volunteers for fundraising efforts. Limited funding and competition for philanthropic support necessitate the exploration of diverse and sustainable financial models, incorporating tuition fees, government subsidies, philanthropy, and public–private partnerships.
Public–private partnerships have been proposed as a comprehensive, “whole‐of‐system” approach to address public health concerns in LMIC. Successful examples include a hybrid model in Mexico City that integrated a novel funding model through a local NGO and a “twinning program” with a well‐established center from a high‐income country. Another noteworthy example is the population‐based program in Kerala, India, which significantly reduced infant mortality through early identification, referral, and treatment of infants with CHD, by leveraging a combination of NGO facilitation and local public funding.
Although funding is essential, educational efforts must be integrated with a commitment to capacity building at local and regional levels. Successful capacity building requires alignment between the goals and resources of regional and international partners, with clearly defined roles and responsibilities for each stakeholder. Addressing inequities in global health funding is paramount to achieving equitable and sustainable outcomes.

Local and Global Advocacy
Advocacy plays a pivotal role in developing sustainable programs for global pediatric and congenital cardiac care. Both local and global advocacy efforts are essential for improving the quality and availability of graduate medical education programs and other health care personnel training. Local advocacy can effectively highlight programs within specific communities or regions, partnering with individuals and institutions to address unique needs and challenges. Local advocates play a crucial role in ensuring the creation and adoption of appropriate objectives and outcome measures.
In a complementary manner, global advocacy focuses on ensuring that medical and health care personnel education programs meet the needs of patients and their families worldwide. This includes collaborating with existing NGOs to enhance their graduate medical and nursing education programs, providing support to families and health care providers and personnel in LMIC, and maintaining international quality improvement collaboratives. In line with the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals, the UNICEF Progress on Children's Well‐Being report recommends a “One Plan, One Budget” approach to ensure healthy lives and reduce inequities within and among countries.
The coordination of local and global advocacy efforts to improve access to medical and nursing education is essential to closing the health equity gap in pediatric and congenital cardiac care. The global community must prioritize building program infrastructure, increasing access to training, and creating financially sustainable models to support the development of centers of excellence in LMIC. By embracing cooperation and collaboration, we can accelerate progress toward health equity for children with congenital and acquired heart disease worldwide.

A New International Organization
A newly formed international organization is proposed to focus on ensuring equitable access to high‐quality pediatric and congenital cardiac care by training and empowering local health care professionals. Establishing a new working group or organization is a complex decision, as existing programs in LMIC require ongoing support and funding. Significant resources will be needed to establish an organization dedicated to global training. Success hinges on both regional and global support for the sustainability of any international training program, where the benefits of standardization and scalability must outweigh the costs. This envisioned international organization will take a “bottom‐up” as well as “top‐down” approach to addressing the personnel shortage problem (Figure 2).
A standardized global approach to pediatric cardiology training with an emphasis on engagement and empowerment.
NGO indicates nongovernmental organization.
Conduct a comprehensive survey to identify gaps in LMIC pediatric and congenital cardiac care training programs
Establish a resource‐efficient, accessible graduate medical education program with rigorous assessment
Develop comprehensive training programs for health care providers in LMIC, collaborating with government agencies and NGOs to enhance their capabilities and implement a data‐driven quality improvement program
Advocate for increased resources and policy changes that support training, innovation, and access to care in LMIC
Develop regional models of pediatric and congenital cardiac care integrated into existing LMIC health care systems
Foster collaboration and knowledge exchange between LMIC professionals and international organizations
The new organization will recruit educators, technology innovators, individuals familiar with challenges due to resource limitations, and individuals skilled in finance and advocacy. Experts in providing care and building programs in LMIC—gathered from around the world and, importantly, having considerable representation from LMIC health care professionals—will meet regularly to share ideas, amplify the efforts of their respective groups, and work collaboratively to address the growing inequities of care. Partnering with local experts, regional institutions, and government agencies, the new international organization could have the following goals:

INNOVATIVE APPROACH TO GLOBAL TRAINING

Principles of Frugal Education
Frugal innovation, often described as “essential in environments of necessity,” aims to achieve more with less. In the context of goods and their production, this typically involves reducing complexity and cost; this is usually achieved through the limited use of resources, reuse of existing components, adoption of cost‐effective technology, and simplification of design. Inherent to the complexity of cardiovascular care, frugal innovation has been broadly applied to surgical and nonsurgical care for cardiovascular disease in LMIC. By applying these principles to medical education, we can address the challenges of delivering high‐quality training in resource‐challenged settings.
Frugal education, an extension of frugal innovation, is defined as “resource efficient” in the medical and health care personnel education context. This does not imply low cost or low quality. The principles of frugal education encompass designing with an open mind through a creative and collaborative approach that involves the target audience; leveraging existing resources; and starting small, building quickly, and keeping it lean. This approach emphasizes an iterative process of prototyping and refinement. Frugal innovation can enhance the accessibility of medical and health care personnel education by promoting creative and resource‐efficient solutions. Resource efficiency, combined with a focus on quality, can also reduce the time required for health care training. A crucial aspect of global educational initiatives is identifying and engaging thought leaders and experts from LMIC. This approach facilitates acceptance, lowers costs, and enhances sustainability.

Characteristics of a Scalable Global Training Program
Developed with local experts and global partners
A standardized curriculum with a modular design to allow for the option of self‐paced, or asynchronous, learning
Flexible scheduling, with full‐time and part‐time choices to improve accessibility
Contextualized, interactive case‐based lessons
Empowering local health care providers and personnel, in partnership with local hospitals and community organizations, to participate in training
Use of distance learning technologies and incorporation of emerging technologies to allow for the sharing of trainers and mentors
Task‐shifting and “train‐the‐trainer” approaches to address the health care provider and personnel shortage
Standardized assessment tools for timely feedback and documentation of competency and educational attainment
Approved pathways for credentialing and international recognition
A resource‐efficient global pediatric and congenital cardiology health care training program should be designed for scalability. We propose the following characteristics for such a program:
Promoting graduate medical and nursing education is the first step in a global pediatric and congenital heart training strategy that aims for comprehensive and sustainable cardiac care programs integrated with regional and national health care systems in LMIC. The proposed frugal training model will provide a standardized curriculum for graduate medical education, improve accessibility, address personnel shortages in LMIC, and include a credentialing process for recognizing educational attainment.

Global Curriculum Development
A comprehensive global training curriculum for pediatric and congenital cardiac care must be developed, covering CHD, pediatric acquired heart disease, preventive heart care, and home care needs. A detailed description is beyond the scope of this article but will be addressed elsewhere. A functional graduate education program in this field of medicine requires specialized training in pediatric cardiology, congenital heart surgery, pediatric cardiac anesthesia (and perfusion), pediatric cardiac intensive care, pediatric cardiac nursing, and health care administration. Respected thought leaders with expertise in medical and health care personnel education should assemble local experts and global partners to define training needs and expectations, develop procedures for regional curriculum development, plan funding and implementation, and establish criteria for trainee certification and training institution accreditation.
A standardized curriculum with a modular design will enable self‐paced learning. Trainees can have the option of working part time while receiving additional medical training. Similar “executive degree” programs exist in business and law schools, and comparable structures exist for graduate medical education, albeit with varying levels of support. A standardized curriculum could expand existing programs and expedite the creation of new ones. However, the curriculum must be customizable to meet the needs of local programs.
Flexible scheduling, including part‐time options, broadens student participation, though it may extend training duration. Recorded didactic presentations and regular sessions dedicated to contextualized, interactive case‐based discussions can create a hybrid approach that promotes education on relevant patient scenarios using local laboratory and imaging studies to address regional problems.

Personnel Shortage
A global educational approach, partnering with hospitals and community organizations to empower local health care providers and personnel, is essential to address all personnel shortages, especially nursing, due to high training costs and retention challenges. Local providers and graduate educated nurses will conduct hands‐on training, a costly component of medical and health care personnel education. Distance learning technologies offer exceptional access to electronic education, especially in remote areas. Emerging technologies like simulation, virtual reality, and augmented or extended reality, enhanced by artificial intelligence, will soon enable the sharing of trainers and mentors. Artificial intelligence, through machine learning and generative language models, has the potential to transform medical education by providing more varied educational content, aiding in curriculum development, and tracking student progress. Experienced health care educators will be able to simultaneously train and mentor students in multiple locations, sharing expertise and facilitating real‐time, “hands‐on” teaching without travel. Although still developing, artificial intelligence in training should reduce costs and improve quality in LMIC and other resource‐challenged settings.
A task‐shifting or team‐building approach, training nurses and allied health care personnel, can help alleviate personnel shortages. International collaborations can promote task‐sharing with nurses and community health workers, particularly in cardiac diagnosis. This may enable the training of independent sonographers for CHD screening and diagnosis without direct physician supervision. Similar programs for community health workers can focus on rheumatic heart disease recognition and CHD screening. A hybrid model combining online modules with in‐person teaching has shown promise in teaching basic echocardiography and electrocardiography in Malawi. The Parent Education Discharge Instruction program shifted home care education to an independent nursing practice, reduced complications, and allowed medical providers to focus on higher function tasks. Finally, there is a model of community health workers trained in postoperative CHD home care. The community health care workers support families with parent education, providing at‐home care sessions to reduce postoperative complications (unpublished data, Children's HeartLink).
A train‐the‐trainer strategy is likely the most sustainable way to increase pediatric and congenital cardiac care providers and personnel in LMIC. Common in high‐income and select upper‐middle‐income countries, this approach has proven effective in implementing regional newborn screening for CHD in Abu Dhabi and building pediatric critical care expertise in Georgia. Organizations like Children's HeartLink have adopted this philosophy to develop centers of excellence as training centers in various LMIC.
A long‐term commitment to support local and regional trainers is crucial for attracting and retaining providers and personnel in these centers. Although brain drain remains a concern, this may be mitigated by addressing the root causes thereof. For example, the College of Surgeons of Eastern, Central, and Southern Africa has established a regional training program for surgeons in its 14 countries, among which 6 provide cardiac surgical training. Through formal standardized training, continued medical education, research opportunities, and the specialty‐specific social network, high retention rates have been observed over the past few decades. Among cardiothoracic surgeons trained by the College of Surgeons of Eastern, Central, and Southern Africa, 88% of surgeons remained within their country and 96% remained within Africa.
To counter the lure of better pay and conditions abroad, addressing salary and working conditions for specialists in pediatric and congenital cardiac care is essential. Additionally, lifelong training for all providers and personnel and research mentoring are vital for developing and sustaining pediatric centers in LMIC. A combined academic and clinical model allows these centers to foster excellence through best practices, quality improvement processes, and professional development through regular contact with international partners.

Assessment and Accreditation
Globally, formal training modules should be standardized to meet the needs of diverse communities while remaining adaptable to local requirements. There is a gap between knowledge transfer and documenting competency and mastery of clinical skills. Regional and local flexibility in training is best paired with standardized assessment tools for competency, credentialing, and voluntary recognition of educational achievement for physicians, nurses, and other allied health care personnel.
For medical accreditation, standards for training organizations (eg, regional teaching hospitals) are needed for each cardiac care specialty, along with assessment tools for individuals in training. Uniform examinations could be part of the credentialing process, offered at the end of training to document that graduates meet an international standard. Efforts should also assess the clinical impact and outcomes of educational programs in different regions, taking a quality improvement approach toward initial and lifelong education. Several LMIC programs already have this approach, with exit written and oral examinations and logbooks detailing competencies. Importantly, accreditation should be accepted across programs for reciprocal training, as seen in the South Africa‐based African Paediatric Fellowship Program and College of Surgeons of Eastern, Central and Southern Africa training. Coordination and collaboration among existing NGOs should facilitate these activities.
Tell me and I will forget, show me and I may remember; involve me and I will understand. Confucius
Education is the most powerful weapon we can use to change the world. Nelson Mandela, 2003
Nursing and other allied health care personnel require specialized on‐the‐job education and training to obtain the requisite knowledge and skills required to competently care for children and young adults with congenital or acquired heart disease. Content in those important areas is not standardly taught during basic or undergraduate training for nurses. In addition, there should be a system in place for competency‐based nursing practice and subsequent appropriate competency‐based patient care assignments to optimize child outcomes. Specifics of required training are beyond the scope of this article. There is considerable need in LMIC for graduate‐level trained nurse educators, nurse mentors, or clinical nurse specialists to foster requisite on‐the‐job education and training for all nursing personnel. Furthermore, consideration for the use of advanced practice pediatric nurse practitioners trained to manage children with heart disease in both outpatient and inpatient settings may aid in local nurse retention, foster continuity of patient care, and add capacity to a taxed medical workforce in many regions of the world. Accreditation for all graduate trained nurse roles will obviously vary by region or country. Also, specialized education and training for physiotherapists and occupational therapists will need to be considered for a well‐functioning interprofessional team to optimize patient outcomes.

ANSWERING THE CALL
The long‐standing history of international assistance and volunteerism in pediatric and congenital cardiac services calls for a unified plan for global access to care in this field. A new international working group or organization can support and accelerate the efforts of current universities, hospitals, NGOs, professional medical societies, and local and national governments by broadening access to training—for physicians, nurses, and other health care personnel—and professional credentialing (Figure 3). This plan should encompass an innovative, scalable medical education and training program that emphasizes resource efficiency, leverages emerging technologies, prioritizes accessibility for trainees, and incorporates a rigorous assessment process to document educational attainment. Ultimately, the ideas generated from this effort should benefit graduate medical educational programs in high‐income countries as well as in LMIC.
Role of an international organization in improving graduate medical education and credentialing.
AI indicates artificial intelligence; Gov. governmental agency; Grad., graduate; Hosp, hospital; Int'l, international; MedEd, medical education; NGO, nongovernmental organization; Org., organization; PC, pediatric cardiology; PCCC, Pediatric and Congenital Cardiac Services; Prof., professional; Soc., society; and Uni, university.
Although the roadmap for affecting change presented here may not be unique, the combination of a maturing workforce of skilled clinicians and educators plus the emergence of artificial intelligence provides a rare opportunity for amplification of efforts. To effectively reduce global inequity in access to pediatric and congenital cardiac care, a newly formed international organization must practice good governance principles, prioritize local solutions, and collaborate with other organizations to develop and execute a sustainable global strategy.

Principles of Good Governance
A program addressing global educational needs must adhere to fundamental principles of good governance: a clear vision and mission, transparency and fairness, consensus‐oriented decision‐making, leadership accountability, and a culture of assessment and learning from failure. Operating globally, it must also build long‐term relationships, demonstrate cultural sensitivity, adopt a lifelong learning approach, and manage costs and risks effectively. Both trainers and trainees require mentorship and support, such as just‐in‐time training and consultations, from established programs.

Prioritizing Local Solutions
Developing a new frugal education model for global pediatric and congenital cardiac services necessitates partnerships with regional institutions and governments. Involving these agencies, along with other stakeholders like professional societies and NGOs, allows for the development and adaptation of training programs tailored to the needs and resources of local learners. Combining local trainers with emerging technology can enable learner‐directed and multilingual education. Sustainability and acceptance depend on the involvement of all stakeholders.
Clinical training will often involve centers with overlapping missions of clinical care, education, and research. Local leaders, supported by governmental agencies and NGOs, will play a crucial role in selecting and supporting institutions that could become regional centers of excellence. In LMIC, these centers should also actively work to reduce health disparities. Individuals from these organizations will lead in navigating local regulations for clinical care and participate in health care training (eg, for patient contact and hands‐on procedures), health care financing, and educational certification. Creating and implementing an innovative educational model requires discussion and consensus, with the understanding that refinements will be necessary over time.

Need for a Global Strategy
Despite the significant contributions of talented individuals to the care of children with CHD worldwide, the health equity gap in pediatric and congenital cardiac care in LMIC persists due to a fragmented approach. Adopting a “One Plan, One Budget” approach will require all stakeholders to develop and agree upon a global strategy for training in resource‐challenged environments. This unified approach entails complex negotiations between various governmental, nongovernmental, local, and global agencies involved in this field. A new international working group or organization could serve as a platform for these stakeholders to convene, either in person or virtually, to create viable programs that effectively use the provided education and training.
A global medical educational program for pediatric and congenital cardiac care will necessitate a high level of cooperation, significant startup financing, and a sustainable funding model. It will be best to start the program on a smaller scale, with the final training model requiring multiple iterations and local modifications. Collaboration is key to this global initiative. By working together, stakeholders can achieve far more than they could alone. As Sir Magdi Yacoub, a renowned heart surgeon and global health leader, aptly put it, “the envisioned results fully justify the effort.” His words serve as a powerful reminder of the immense potential of this global initiative.

CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, although existing models of assistance and cooperation have made strides in enhancing global access to pediatric and congenital cardiac services, a significant health equity gap persists. By leveraging emerging technologies to accelerate a shift in focus toward capacity building, a rare opportunity exists to adopt an innovative, scalable global approach to graduate medical education and training. This approach will emphasize resource efficiency, prioritize accessibility for trainees, and incorporate a rigorous assessment process.
We propose the establishment of a dedicated, globally representative, international organization to spearhead the development and implementation of a comprehensive global strategy for training and credentialing health care professionals in pediatric and congenital cardiac care. The design and execution of such an innovative educational model must be a collaborative effort, incorporating input from all stakeholders. It is crucial to recognize that programs should be adaptable to local needs and that ongoing refinement will be essential for sustained success.

Sources of Funding
Dominique Vervoort is supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarship for work outside this article. The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from Save the Heartbeat for covering the publication costs associated with this article.

Disclosures
Dr Lai reports service as Board of Director for National Board of Echocardiography; service on the Board of Directors for CHAMPS Children Foundation; service as Medical Director for MD1World; service as Board of Directors for sSCAPE; and employment by CHOC Children's. Dr Vervoort reports service as Medical Advisory Council member for Global Alliance for Rheumatic and Congenital Hearts. Dr Cabrera reports employment by Nationwide Children's Hospital. Dr Floh reports compensation from Office of the Chief Coroner, Ontario for consultant services. Dr Jacobs reports compensation from American Academy of Dermatology for consultant services and compensation from SpecialtyCare for consultant services. Dr Zuhlke reports employment by South African Medical Research Council. The remaining authors have no disclosures to report.

REFERENCES
The burden of selected congenital anomalies amenable to surgery in low and middle‐income regions: cleft lip and palate, congenital heart anomalies and neural tube defects
Incidence and mortality trend of congenital heart disease at the global, regional, and national level, 1990–2017
Global, regional, and national burden of congenital heart disease, 1990–2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Lancet Child Adolesc
Global, regional, and national progress towards Sustainable Development Goal 3.2 for neonatal and child health: all‐cause and cause‐specific mortality findings from the Global Burden of Disease study 2019
The incidence of congenital heart disease
Global, regional, and national time trends in mortality for congenital heart disease, 1990–2019: an age‐period‐cohort analysis for the Global Burden of Disease 2019 study
The invisible child: childhood heart disease in global health
Global cardiac surgery: access to cardiac surgical care around the world
Primary prevention of ischaemic heart disease: populations, individuals, and health professionals
Rheumatic heart disease is a neglected disease relative to its burden worldwide: findings from Global Burden of Disease 2019
The rise in chronic conditions among infants, children, and youth can Be met with continued health system innovations
The Emerging Global Health Crisis: Noncommunicable Diseases in Low‐ and Middle‐Income Countries
Editorial: pediatric cardiology and cardiac surgery in developing countries: current needs and future perspectives
Pediatric cardiac NGOs: collaboration and coordination
What Is ‘South‐South Cooperation’ and Why Does it Matter?
Pediatric cardiac surgery: a challenge and outcome analysis of the Guatemala effort
Taking cardiac surgery to the people
Innovative financing to fund surgical systems and expand surgical care in low‐income and middle‐income countries
Financing and provision of healthcare for two billion people in low‐income nations: is the cooperative healthcare model a solution?
Open heart surgery in sub‐Saharan Africa: challenges and promise
Making a difference: 5 years of Cardiac Surgery Intersociety Alliance (CSIA)
Improvement in congenital heart surgery in a developing country
Establishing pediatric cardiovascular services in the developing world: a wake‐up call
Pediatric cardiac service development programs for low‐ and middle‐income countries in need of improving or initiating local services
Pediatric cardiac surgery in low‐and middle‐income countries: present status and need for a paradigm shift
Feasibility of south‐south collaboration in Africa: the Uganda‐Mozambique perspective
Recommendations for developing effective and safe paediatric and congenital heart disease services in low‐income and middle‐income countries: a public health framework
Global access to comprehensive care for paediatric and congenital heart disease
The global initiative for children's surgery: optimal resources for improving care
Postgraduate medical education in sub‐Saharan Africa: a scoping review spanning 26 years and lessons learned
Evaluation of e‐learning for medical education in low‐ and middle‐income countries: a systematic review
Heart university: a new online educational forum in paediatric and adult congenital cardiac care. The future of virtual learning in a post‐pandemic world?
UN Global Surgery Learning Hub Website
Efficiency and Inefficiency in Humanitarian Financing
A novel private‐public hybrid model for treatment of congenital heart disease in Mexico
A population health approach to address the burden of congenital heart disease in Kerala
Funders: the missing link in equitable global health research?
Impact of international quality improvement collaborative on congenital heart surgery in Pakistan
The role of congenital heart disease patient organizations in advocacy, resources, and support across the lifespan
Children at the heart of global cardiac surgery: an advocacy stakeholder analysis
Office of Innovation 2024
Unleashing frugal innovation in private higher education institutions via intellectual capital and information technology capability: a systematic literature review
Low‐cost innovations in global cardiac surgery
Guiding Principles of Frugal Education
Medical education and training within congenital cardiology: current global status and future directions in a post COVID‐19 world
An e‐learning pediatric cardiology curriculum for Pediatric Postgraduate trainees in Rwanda: implementation and evaluation
AI‐enabled medical education: threads of change, promising futures, and risky realities across four potential future worlds
Application of artificial intelligence in medical education: current scenario and future perspectives
Congenital heart disease in low‐ and lower‐middle‐income countries: current status and new opportunities
Task shifting to clinical officer‐led echocardiography screening for detecting rheumatic heart disease in Malawi, Africa
The experiences of sonographers with regard to report writing and communicating their findings
Development of a subspecialty cardiology curriculum for paediatric registrars in Malawi: implementation of a long‐distance hybrid model
Pediatric cardiac surgery Parent Education Discharge Instruction (PEDI) program: a pilot study
Nurse and parent perceptions associated with the parent education discharge instruction programme in southern India
Parent education discharge instruction program for care of children at home after cardiac surgery in southern India
Regional implementation of newborn screening for critical congenital heart disease screening in Abu Dhabi
A “fundamentals” train‐the‐trainer approach to building pediatric critical care expertise in the developing world
Children's HeartLink What We Do
The brain drain myth: retention of specialist surgical graduates in east, central and southern Africa, 1974–2013
6 billion people have no access to safe, timely, and affordable cardiac surgical care
Perspectives in training and professional practice of cardiac surgery in Latin America
Strategies for bridging the theory‐practice gap from the perspective of nursing experts
Competency‐based education in transitioning nurse practitioner students from education into practice
The impact of COSECSA in developing the surgical workforce in east central and southern Africa
Barriers and solutions to successful problem‐based learning delivery in developing countries—a literature review
Access to cardiac surgery services in sub‐Saharan Africa: quo vadis?
Medical education in the era of advancing technology
Overcoming language barriers in academia: machine translation tools and a vision for a multilingual future
The future of global health education: training for equity in global health