Evaluation of spin in the abstracts of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of stemless total shoulder arthroplasty
Background
The primary goal of this study was to identify and detail the incidence of spin in the abstracts of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of stemless component total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA). The secondary goal was to investigate general study characteristics and describe patterns in relation to spin.
Methods
A search of PubMed, Scopus, and SPORTDiscus databases was conducted to identify systematic reviews and meta-analyses related to stemless component TSA. The abstracts included were assessed by two independent reviewers to determine the presence of the 15 most common types of spin bias using a predetermined methodology. General characteristics were extracted including study title, authors, publication year, journal, level of evidence, study design, funding source, reported adherence to Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis guidelines, preregistration of the study protocol, and methodologic quality per A Measurement Tool to Assess Systematic Reviews Version 2 (AMSTAR 2).
Results
A total of 42 articles were identified, of which 12 were included for final analysis. At least 1 form of spin was observed in 10/12 (83.3%) studies. The most common type of spin was Type 5 (“The conclusion claims the beneficial effect of the experimental treatment despite a high risk of bias in primary studies”), which was found in 7/12 (58.3%) studies. According to AMSTAR 2, 11/12 (91.7%) of studies had confidence ratings of “low” or “critically low” due to 1 or more critical flaws. No significant difference was found between AMSTAR 2 rating and spin type. Statistical analysis did not reveal significant associations between presence of the four most common types of spin (Type 5, Type 9, Type 10, and Type 12) and study characteristics.
Conclusion
Spin is prevalent in abstracts of systematic reviews and meta-analyses covering stemless TSA. Reporting more favorable outcomes is the most common type, and physicians should be aware of this when making clinical decisions based on research.
Total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA) has emerged as a reliable surgical option for managing end-stage shoulder arthritis, complex fractures, and recurrent instability. There is extensive literature outlining positive outcomes, such as restoration of function and relief of pain, in patients undergoing TSA. Traditional TSA has employed the use of stemmed implants that are fitted to the intramedullary canal of the humerus. While initial adoption of stemmed implants in TSA demonstrated considerable success, they are not without complications, such as periprosthetic fractures, loss of bone stock, and stress shielding. In addition, stemmed humeral components can potentially lead to overstuffing and less anatomic reconstruction due to the location of the humeral head. These complications, along with the benefit of a potentially simplified revision surgery due to preserved bone stock, have prompted a search for alternative designs.
Stemless component TSA has been developed as a possible solution to the aforementioned stem-related complications and, as such, has garnered increasing attention. The stemless design utilizes a less invasive anchor device or cage to fix the component to the humerus, eliminating the need for potentially disruptive intramedullary fixation and allowing for greater preservation of bone stock. Recent studies of stemless TSA claim positive clinical outcomes and low rates of revision surgery. Despite these potential benefits, the adoption of this new technique has been hindered by other studies reporting instances of periprosthetic fracture, implant loosening, and humeral notching, the very complications that stemless implants were designed to address.
When new techniques are debuted, high-quality research is a prerequisite for safe and effective clinical implementation. To best ensure positive patient outcomes, supporting research needs to be free from bias. Bias in systematic reviews and meta-analysis, also known as “spin”, can decrease the trustworthiness of these manuscripts, which are often regarded as more reliable, due to higher levels of evidence. However, these reviews can be constructed from studies of lower levels of evidence that introduce this bias by selective reporting of results to highlight positive aspects of a study while downplaying less favorable outcomes. Yavchitz et al outlined 3 main types of spin in the abstracts of systematic reviews and meta-analyses: misleading interpretation, misleading reporting, and inappropriate extrapolation. As clinicians continue to make medical decisions based on abstracts alone, it is imperative to identify bias within these condensed summaries. The primary goal of this study was to identify and detail the incidence of spin in systematic reviews and meta-analyses of stemless component TSA. The secondary goal was to investigate general study characteristics, describe patterns in relation to spin, and evaluate methodologic quality using A Measurement Tool to Assess Systematic Reviews Version 2 (AMSTAR 2).

Methods

Study selection
This review follows the updated 2020 Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines. PubMed, Scopus, and SPORTDiscus databases were searched by a single author (A.F.) using combinations of the search criteria: “stemless shoulder arthroplasty,” “stemless total shoulder replacement,” “stemless shoulder prosthesis,” “anatomic shoulder arthroplasty,” “reverse shoulder arthroplasty,” “stemless reverse total shoulder arthroplasty,” “stemless anatomic shoulder replacement,” “shoulder joint replacement,” “anatomic,” “reverse,” “clinical trials,” “humans,” and “studies.” Results of the database queries were exported to EndNote X20 (Clarivate, Philadelphia, PA, USA) for sorting and deduping. Two authors (A.F. and D.M.) then screened articles for inclusion.

Study eligibility
In accordance with a priori inclusion and exclusion criteria, studies were deemed eligible for inclusion if determined to be systematic reviews or meta-analyses reporting on patient outcomes of stemless shoulder arthroplasty. Our criteria also specified that studies must be published in English in a peer reviewed journal and contain both abstract and full text to be included. Primary studies, nonEnglish language articles, articles lacking peer review, cadaveric or nonhuman studies, and studies without an available abstract or full text were excluded.

Data extraction
Three authors (A.F., B.B., and D.M.) underwent training to apply the spin classification scheme developed by Yavchitz et al to the included studies. In particular, review abstracts were evaluated against the 15 most common forms of abstract spin.
The recently revised systematic review appraisal tool, AMSTAR 2, was employed to critically assess full text of included studies. AMSTAR 2 is an instrument that uses 16 domains to critically evaluate systematic reviews, including criteria such as study selection, funding sources, risk of bias, and explanation of heterogeneity in results. Independently, Lorenz et al found AMSTAR 2 to be a reliable and valid means to evaluate the rigor and trustworthiness of systematic reviews.
Study data, including title, authors, date published, publishing journal, level of evidence (LoE), study type, funding declaration, adherence to PRISMA, registration with International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO), 2022 Clarivate Impact Factor, 2022 Scopus CiteScore, and primary and secondary outcome measures, were extracted from articles by two authors (B.B. and D.M.). Authors consulted the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Clinical Practice Guidelines to assign a LoE to studies that did not explicitly state the LoE in the full text.
Two authors (B.B. and D.M.) then independently evaluated study abstracts against the 15 most common types of spin, as characterized by Yavchitz et al. In addition, the authors completed a full text assessment of the reviews using the 16-point AMSTAR 2 rationale. A third author (A.F.) was designated to arbitrate disagreements in data extraction and spin assessment.

Statistical analysis
Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA, USA) was used to tabulate frequencies of the 15 most common types of abstract spin, as defined by Yavchitz et al, as well as frequencies of the 16 AMSTAR 2 domains. Findings were characterized with descriptive statistics and the Fisher's exact test was utilized to associate study characteristics, presence of spin, and AMSTAR-described flaws. Statistical analysis was performed in RStudio (RStudio, PBC, Boston, MA, USA) and statistical significance was set to P < .05. For the purposes of running Fisher's exact tests, median values of 2.80 and 4.95 were established for the Clarivate Impact Factor and Scopus CiteScore, respectively. We categorized “high scores” as above the median value and “low scores” as below the median value. Similarly, reviews published within the last 5 years were considered “recent”, while those older were considered “older”.

Results

Search and study characteristics
PRISMA flowchart. PRISMA, Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis.
Database queries generated 478 studies, with 369 remaining after the removal of 109 duplicate records. A total of 327 studies were subsequently excluded according to the exclusion criteria (Fig. 1). Of the 42 remaining articles, an additional 30 studies were removed during title and abstract screening. The 12 papers included in this study were reviewed in their entirety prior to inclusion.
Of the 12 studies included, 5/12 (41.7%) performed a meta-analysis. The remainder (7/12, 58.3%) performed a systematic review only. All papers addressed some sort of clinical outcome, though primary and secondary outcome measures were inconsistent. The Constant-Murley score was included most often and was the reported primary outcome in 5/12 review (41.7%). Given the recent development and increased adoption of stemless shoulder arthroplasty, the oldest included study was published in 2016. Of 12 studies, 11 (91.7%) were published within the last 5 years. The average LoE across the studies that reported LoE was 3.40 ± 0.84 (range: 2-4). Two of the included studies did not specify LoE. Of 12 studies, 10 (83.3%) included a statement of adherence to PRISMA, while only 4/12 (33.3%) reported registration with PROSPERO. The mean 2022 Clarivate Impact Factor was 2.65 ± 1.17 (range: 0.56-5.30) and mean 2022 Scopus CiteScore was 4.63 ± 2.34 (range: 0.50-8.20).

Describing spin
Type and frequency of spin in analyzed studies.
Category	Type	Spin description	Abstracts (%) (N = 12)	 	Misleading interpretation	1	The conclusion formulates recommendations for clinical practice not supported by the findings	1/12 (8.3)	 	2	The title claims or suggests a beneficial effect of the experimental intervention not supported by the findings	0/12 (0.0)	 	4	The conclusion claims safety based on nonstatistically significant results with a wide confidence interval	2/12 (16.7)	 	9∗	Conclusion claims the beneficial effect of the experimental treatment despite reporting bias	5/12 (41.7)	 	12	Conclusion claims equivalence or comparable effectiveness for nonstatistically significant results with a wide confidence interval	3/12 (25.0)	 	Misleading reporting	3	Selective reporting of or overemphasis on efficacy outcomes or analysis favoring the beneficial effect of the experimental intervention	0/12 (0.0)	 	5∗	The conclusion claims the beneficial effect of the experimental treatment despite a high risk of bias in primary studies	7/12 (58.3)	 	6	Selective reporting of or overemphasis on harm outcomes or analysis favoring the safety of the experimental intervention	0/12 (0.0)	 	10∗	Authors hide or do not present any conflict of interest	6/12 (50.0)	 	11	Conclusion focuses selectively on statistically significant efficacy outcome	0/12 (0.0)	 	13	Failure to specify the direction of the effect when it favors the control intervention	0/12 (0.0)	 	14	Failure to report a wide confidence interval of estimates	2/12 (16.7)	 	Inappropriate extrapolation	7	The conclusion extrapolates the review findings to a different intervention (eg, claiming efficacy of one specific intervention although the review covered a class of several interventions)	1/12 (8.3)	 	8	Conclusion extrapolates the review's findings from a surrogate marker or a specific outcome to the global improvement of the disease	0/12 (0.0)	 	15	Conclusion extrapolates the review's findings to a different population or setting	1/12 (8.3)
Three most prevalent spin types.
Of 12 (83.3%) included studies, 10 contained at least 1 type of spin. On average, we noted 2.33 ± 1.61 (range: 0-5) occurrences of spin in each transcript. We found Type 5 spin (“The conclusion claims the beneficial effect of the experimental treatment despite a high risk of bias in primary studies”) to be the most common form of spin, occurring in 7/12 (58.3%) of studies, followed by Type 10 spin (“Authors hide or do not present any conflict of interest”) and Type 9 spin (“Conclusion claims the beneficial effect of the experimental treatment despite reporting bias”), appearing in 6/12 (50.0%) and 5/12 (41.7%) of studies, respectively. Six categories of spin were not found to be present in the included studies. Table I illustrates the spin categories considered for this paper.

AMSTAR domains
AMSTAR 2 assessment of analyzed studies.
AMSTAR 2 domain	Critical domain	Deficient (%) (N = 12)	 	1	Did the research questions and inclusion criteria for the review include the components of PICO∗?		0/12 (0.0)	 	2	Did the report of the review contain an explicit statement that the review methods were established prior to the conduct of the review and did the report justify any significant deviations from the protocol?	✓	1/12 (8.3)	 	3	Did the review authors explain their selection of the study designs for inclusion in the review?		0/12 (0.0)	 	4	Did the review authors use a comprehensive literature search strategy?	✓	0/12 (0.0)	 	5	Did the review authors perform study selection in duplicate?		2/12 (16.7)	 	6	Did the review authors perform data extraction in duplicate?		5/12 (41.7)	 	7	Did the review authors provide a list of excluded studies and justify the exclusions?	✓	5/12 (41.7)	 	8	Did the review authors describe the included studies in adequate detail?		5/12 (41.7)	 	9	Did the review authors use a satisfactory technique for assessing the risk of bias (RoB) in individual studies that were included in the review?	✓	6/12 (50.0)	 	10	Did the review authors report on the sources of funding for the studies included in the review?		10/12 (83.3)	 	11	If meta-analysis was performed, did the review authors use appropriate methods for statistical combination of results?	✓	0/12 (0.0)	 	12	If meta-analysis was performed, did the review authors assess the potential impact of RoB in individual studies on the results of the meta-analysis or other evidence synthesis?		3/6 (50.0)	 	13	Did the review authors account for RoB in primary studies when interpreting/discussing the results of the review?	✓	7/12 (58.3)	 	14	Did the review authors provide a satisfactory explanation for, and discussion of, any heterogeneity observed in the results of the review?		9/12 (75.0)	 	15	If they performed quantitative synthesis did the review authors carry out an adequate investigation of publication bias (small study bias) and discuss its likely impact on the results of the review?	✓	6/9 (66.7)	 	16	Did the review authors report any potential sources of conflict of interest, including any funding they received for conducting the review?		0/12 (0.0)
AMSTAR 2, A Measurement Tool to Assess Systematic Reviews Version 2.
PICO, patient, intervention, comparison, outcome.
Sixteen AMSTAR 2 critical domains were used to rate the overall confidence in the results of the study. One study (1/12, 8.3%) had a results confidence rating of “high”, as it had 1 noncritical weakness. Three studies (3/12, 25.0%) had results confidence ratings of “low”, as they each had 1 critical flaw with or without additional noncritical weakness. The remaining 8/12 studies (66.7%) were rated as “critically low” regarding the confidence of their results, due to more than 1 critical flaw. The most common critical flaw, noted in 11/12 (91.7%) of studies, was a lack of registering protocol prior to commencement of the review. Table II contains descriptions of the AMSTAR 2 domains and frequency.

Lack of associations
Statistical analysis did not reveal significant associations between the presence of the four most common types of spin (Type 5, Type 9, Type 10, and Type 12) and study characteristics such as funding disclosure, PRISMA adherence, PROSPERO registration, Clarivate Impact Factor, Scopus CiteScore, or publication year. In addition, there was no significant association found between the mere presence of spin and the above-mentioned general characteristics.
Similarly, the presence of the five most common AMSTAR 2 flaws did not have a significant association with the included study characteristics. A lower AMSTAR 2 score (“low” or “critically low”) was not significantly associated with previously mentioned study characteristics.
Lastly, we found no significant association between the presence of spin and a lower AMSTAR 2 score.

Discussion
The primary objective of this study was to identify and detail the incidence of spin in systematic reviews and meta-analyses of stemless component TSA. The secondary objective was to investigate general study characteristics, describe patterns related to spin, and evaluate full-text methodologic quality using AMSTAR 2. We found 10/12 (83.3%) study abstracts contained at least 1 form of spin. The most common category of spin, misleading reporting, was found in 75% of studies. Of 12 studies, 8 (66.7%) had results confidence ratings of “critically low,” per the AMSTAR 2 domains. Thus, a high prevalence of abstract spin is present in this series. This group of studies were also found to be of lower quality when evaluated by a separate and independently validated, AMSTAR 2 criteria.
The most common form of spin identified was Type 5 (“The conclusion claims the beneficial effect of the experimental treatment despite a high risk of bias in primary studies”), which was found in 7/12 (58.3%) abstracts. This finding is consistent with several other spin studies that have similarly reported Type 5 spin as the most frequently identified type of spin in other orthopedic treatments/pathologies. An example of Type 5 spin is presented in the abstract of Hawi et al, stating that “all of the published studies of canal-sparing…stemless shoulder arthroplasty reported promising clinical and radiological outcomes.” While this review features detailed descriptions of the various implant types available and well-summarized primary studies, the authors neglect to evaluate risk of primary study bias in their methodology and the discussion focuses mainly on advantages of the stemless design. In the discussion, the authors state: “some studies were reported by the designer or codeveloper of the investigated implant, which suggests the possibility of a certain bias,” which does not adequately investigate the potential risk for bias. A structured and objective assessment of bias risk, as required by PRISMA guidelines, of the included primary studies would strengthen this paper's conclusion. The lack of such assessment casts doubts on the validity of the abstract's central claim. Regardless of the conclusion drawn, evaluation of bias in primary studies lends more credibility to the systematic review -- either by bolstering results or by offering rationale for why extreme care must be taken in transitioning findings to clinical practice. Failure to evaluate and meaningfully address bias also puts the onus on the reader to dig deeper into the primary studies and to give an extremely careful evaluation of the content of the study. These systematic reviews that contain Type 5 spin may result in inaccurate clinical guideline recommendations due to inadequate conclusions of primary studies with high risk of bias.
Risk of overestimating the clinical importance of the stemless component TSA due to spin is especially relevant when contextualized within current literature on the topic. Romeo et al and Wiater et al recently performed two large, multicenter, prospective, blinded randomized controlled trials evaluating short-term clinical and radiographic outcomes of stemless implants against their traditional stemmed counterparts. Both studies found a lack of significant difference between stemmed and stemless component clinical outcomes, complications, and reoperation rates within a 2-year follow-up period. In addition, the authors were careful to describe stemless implant performance as “noninferior,” “safe,” “effective,” or “promising.” Their findings stand in stark contrast to the Type 5 beneficial effect spinning that was most pervasive across the systematic reviews analyzed in the current study and suggest a pattern of overly optimistic conclusion-drawing despite randomized controlled trials that do not yet paint such a positive picture of the stemless technology.
Poor methodological reporting can result in bias when performing and reporting results. The most common reason for poor AMSTAR 2 score was criteria 2, “Did the report of the review contain an explicit statement that the review methods were established prior to the conduct of the review, and did the report justify any significant deviations from the protocol?” The rational for this criterion according to Shea et al is to reduce the risk of bias by ensuring author adherence to an agreed upon protocol. By reporting and adhering to an established protocol, studies are less likely to have variance in data collection and analysis. In a study conducted by Upfill-Brown et al comparing stemmed and stemless implants, the methodology vaguely states, “A manual reference check of previous reviews and published studies was conducted to identify any additional relevant studies.” However, the authors make the claim in the abstract that their review found the results of stemless implants to be like that of stemmed implants. Poor methodology in these reviews can ultimately manifest as an abstract spun to paint the experimental intervention in an overly positive light.
This work's primary focus on abstract spin is especially relevant as it has been established that some health-care providers make clinical judgments based on abstracts alone. Abstract spin has been shown to both mislead readers and impact clinicians' perceptions of the results. Spin is not inherently malicious and may be a byproduct of factors including small sample sizes, low levels of evidence not disclosed in systematic reviews, and strict abstract word counts. Strict word count limits may push authors to dedicate the allotted space to positive findings, which might result in a more favorable, and less nuanced, representation of the study. In addition, publication bias has led to an overwhelming majority of papers and findings in the medical literature reporting positive results, further encouraging positive findings in abstracts. We believe this publication bias may be a result of some researchers having pressure to meet publication requirements or increase research numbers for promotion, as research is more likely to be published if there are significant positive findings. The desire to have each study published may lead to more instances of spin. Insignificant findings from high-quality, well-designed studies should be valued and published as equally significant findings. As physicians can use abstracts to aid in decision-making, we urge for normalization of reporting insignificant findings which may help avoid some of the structural causes of spin.
Our findings suggest that readers should exercise prudence when evaluating this group of studies, as these spin types contain underlying biases that have the potential to distort the literature's conclusions. However, our work is not without its limitations. First, the sample size of our study is small, with only 12 studies meeting inclusion criteria. As a result of this small sample size, a powered statistical analysis was not possible, so instead we relied on descriptive statistics. Second, the LoE is greater than 3 in only 4/12 (33.3%) of the included studies. Third, although reviewers were trained to follow a standardized assessment protocol, the assessment of spin is inherently subjective as reviewers are asked to judge “satisfactory techniques” and “adequacy of explanations”, for example. All measures were made to reduce subjectivity as much as possible, including using multiple independent reviewers and training from an experienced reviewer.

Conclusion
Spin is prevalent in abstracts of systematic reviews and meta-analyses covering stemless TSA. Reporting more favorable outcomes is the most common type and physicians should be aware of this when making clinical decisions based on research.

Disclaimers:
Funding: No funding was disclosed by the authors.
Conflicts of interest: Frank A Petrigliano reports a relationship with Exactech Inc. that includes: consulting or advisory; a relationship with Stryker Orthopaedics that includes: consulting or advisory; a relationship with OSSIO Inc. that includes: food and beverage; a relationship with DePuy Synthes that includes: paid consultant. Joseph N Liu reports a relationship with Stryker Orthopaedics that includes: speaking and lecture fees; a relationship with Innocoll Biotherapeutics NA Inc. that includes: travel reimbursement; a relationship with Arthroscopy Association of North America as a board or committee member; a relationship with American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons as a board or committee member. The other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.

References
Evaluation of spin in systematic reviews and meta-analyses of minimally invasive surgical techniques and standard microdiscectomies for treating lumbar disc herniation
The safety of outpatient total shoulder arthroplasty: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Stemless reverse total shoulder arthroplasty: a systematic review
Family physicians' use of medical abstracts to guide decision making: style or substance?
Evaluation of spin in systematic reviews on the use of tendon transfer for massive irreparable rotator cuff tears
Impact of spin in the abstracts of articles reporting results of randomized controlled trials in the field of cancer: the SPIIN randomized controlled trial
Stemless humeral implants in total shoulder arthroplasty
Comparison of methodological quality of positive versus negative comparative studies published in Indian medical journals: a systematic review
Stemless versus stemmed anatomic total shoulder arthroplasty: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical studies at short term follow-up
Short-term results of the reverse Total Evolutive Shoulder System (TESS) in cuff tear arthropathy and revision arthroplasty cases
Spin in the abstracts of meta-analyses and systematic reviews: midshaft clavicle fracture
A randomized single-blinded trial of early rehabilitation versus immobilization after reverse total shoulder arthroplasty
Bias towards publishing positive results in orthopedic and general surgery: a patient safety issue? Patient
Nine-year outcome after anatomic stemless shoulder prosthesis: clinical and radiologic results
Evaluation of spin in systematic reviews and meta-analyses of superior capsular reconstruction
Humeral stem with low filling ratio reduces stress shielding in primary reverse shoulder arthroplasty
Stemless reverse total shoulder arthroplasty: a systematic review of contemporary literature
Reverse shoulder arthroplasty with a cementless short metaphyseal humeral implant without a stem: clinical and radiologic outcomes in prospective 2- to 7-year follow-up study
Stemless anatomic total shoulder arthroplasty: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Stemless reverse total shoulder arthroplasty: a systematic review of short- and mid-term results
Outcomes between stemmed and stemless total shoulder arthroplasty: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
A psychometric study found AMSTAR 2 to be a valid and moderately reliable appraisal tool
A comparison of the accuracy of clinical decisions based on full-text articles and on journal abstracts alone: a study among residents in a tertiary care hospital
Stemless anatomic total shoulder arthroplasty: surgical technique and review of the literature
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
The short- to midterm effectiveness of stemless prostheses compared to stemmed prostheses for patients who underwent total shoulder arthroplasty: a meta-analysis
Spin occurs in bariatric surgery randomized controlled trials with a statistically nonsignificant primary outcome: a systematic review
Levels of evidence backing the AAOS clinical practice guidelines
Eclipse stemless shoulder prosthesis vs. Univers II shoulder prosthesis: a multicenter, prospective randomized controlled trial
Multisociety consensus quality improvement revised consensus statement for endovascular therapy of acute ischemic stroke
Assessing the value to the patient of new technologies in anatomic total shoulder arthroplasty
Amstar 2: a critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews that include randomised or non-randomised studies of healthcare interventions, or both
Comparison of stemless and conventional stemmed shoulder arthroplasties in shoulder arthropathy: a meta-analysis
Outcomes of anatomic and reverse total shoulder arthroplasty in patients over the age of 70: a systematic review
The TESS reverse shoulder arthroplasty without a stem in the treatment of cuff-deficient shoulder conditions: clinical and radiographic results
Stemless shoulder arthroplasty: review of short and medium-term results
Improved external rotation with concomitant reverse total shoulder arthroplasty and latissimus dorsi tendon transfer: a systematic review
Prospective, blinded, randomized controlled trial of stemless versus stemmed humeral components in anatomic total shoulder arthroplasty: results at short-term follow-up
Results of stemless shoulder arthroplasty: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Spin within systematic review abstracts on antiplatelet therapies after acute coronary syndrome: a cross-sectional study
A new classification of spin in systematic reviews and meta-analyses was developed and ranked according to the severity
No institutional review board approval was required for this systematic review.