Technologies for Evaluation of Pelvic Floor Functionality: A Systematic Review
Pelvic floor dysfunction is a common problem in women and has a negative impact on their quality of life. The aim of this review was to provide a general overview of the current state of technology used to assess pelvic floor functionality. It also provides literature research of the physiological and anatomical factors that correlate with pelvic floor health. This systematic review was conducted according to the PRISMA guidelines. The PubMed, ScienceDirect, Cochrane Library, and IEEE databases were searched for publications on sensor technology for the assessment of pelvic floor functionality. Anatomical and physiological parameters were identified through a manual search. In the systematic review, 114 publications were included. Twelve different sensor technologies were identified. Information on the obtained parameters, sensor position, test activities, and subject characteristics was prepared in tabular form from each publication. A total of 16 anatomical and physiological parameters influencing pelvic floor health were identified in 17 published studies and ranked for their statistical significance. Taken together, this review could serve as a basis for the development of novel sensors which could allow for quantifiable prevention and diagnosis, as well as particularized documentation of rehabilitation processes related to pelvic floor dysfunctions.

1. Introduction
Pelvic floor dysfunction (PFD) is a common problem that mainly affects women. The symptoms caused by PFDs negatively affect women’s quality of life. Women are often restricted in their daily activities due to their symptoms, which can progressively lead to a loss of self-esteem and confidence and further to isolation, frustration, and depression. They even reduce the frequency and intensity of their physical exercising due to their complaints.
A well-functioning pelvic floor plays an important role in the support and retention of the pelvic organs, including the bladder, rectum, vagina, and uterus. In addition, a healthy pelvic floor helps to maintain urinary and fecal continence and is essential for a woman’s sexuality and the birth process. The female pelvic floor consists of a complex network of muscles, fascia, ligaments, connective tissue, and nerves that is located within the pelvis. Once the integrity of the pelvic floor is compromised, PFDs can occur. The most common PFDs are urinary incontinence (UI), anal incontinence (AI), and pelvic organ prolapse (POP). The latter describes a lowering of the pelvic organs.
Nygaard et al. estimated the prevalence of these PFDs in women in the US population. In total, 23.7% of the women studied had at least one PFD, including 15.7% with UI, 9% with fecal incontinence (FI), and 2.9% with POP. Furthermore, the prevalence of PFDs increased progressively with age. Almost half of the women aged 80 years or older suffered from of at least one PFD. As the population ages, the absolute number of PFDs is expected to increase dramatically in the coming years. Therefore, Wu et al. estimated the prevalence of PFD in the US female population from 2010 to 2050. During this period, the number of women with UI will increase from 18.3 to 28.4 million. Huge increases are also expected in the number of women affected by FI and POP. There will be an increase of 59% (from 10.6 million to 16.8 million) for FI and 46% (from 3.3 million to 4.9 million) for POP.
There are several methods of assessing pelvic floor functionality and diagnosing PFDs in clinical practice and research. The Oxford Grading Scale (MOS) is currently used to assess the contraction of the pelvic floor muscles. This involves a medical professional palpating the vagina during a pelvic floor contraction and rating the contractility of the pelvic floor muscles on a scale from 0 to 5.
The Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification (POP-Q) system is used to objectively assess the severity of pelvic organ prolapse in women. This is a standardized procedure for manually determining anatomical reference points and performing various distance measurements. Measurements are taken during a gynecological examination by medical professionals.
Furthermore, questionnaires on urinary and fecal incontinence (International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire Short Form—ICIQ-SF, Fecal Incontinence Severity Index—FISI) are currently used to assess the severity of incontinence. These include questions about the frequency and severity of symptoms, which are answered by those affected themselves. A scoring system is used to ultimately assess the severity of the incontinence.
In addition to medical examinations and questionnaires, sensor technology is already used in research to assess pelvic floor functionality. Although there are already reviews that provide an overview of sensor technologies related to pelvic floor functionality, these are usually limited to the investigation of one parameter. For example, both Keshwani and McLean and Moser et al. present technologies for measuring pelvic floor muscle activity, while Liao et al. focus on diagnostic sensors for measuring intra-abdominal pressure (IAP). However, they do not provide a general overview of all techniques for measuring pelvic floor functionality.
As pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT) is recommended for the treatment of PFDs, sensor technology is also being used in biofeedback systems. Biofeedback systems are designed to visualize the quality of PFMT and can be used for both prevention and rehabilitation purposes. A review by Woodley et al. presents current technologies designed to support women in performing PFMT. However, they focus more on digital solutions (mobile apps). Again, it does not provide a complete overview of all sensor technologies that may be associated with pelvic floor health.
Despite this range of multifaceted approaches to different focus areas published in the current review literature, most of them specialize only in smaller sub-areas of pelvic floor function sensing technology. The overall aim of this review was to provide a general basis for future research and development with a primary research question on the prevention of PFDs. In particular, this review was divided into a systematic search, with the aim of providing the current state of sensor technology used to assess pelvic floor functionality. In an additional step, a second aim was to gather current knowledge on the physiological and anatomical factors that correlate with PFDs. Altogether, a connection is made between the relevant parameters related to pelvic floor health and the measurable values and technical capabilities.

2. Materials and Methods

2.1. Study Design
This systematic review was conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines. The submitted pre-print was prospectively registered with the Open Science Framework.

2.2. Current Sensor Technology Assessing Pelvic Floor Function

2.2.1. Study Identifying
Following an initial search in GoogleScholar, a systematic search of databases was conducted. The electronic databases of PubMed, Cochrane Library, ScienceDirect, and IEEE were searched for publications in the English language. The specific search keywords and strategy with Boolean combinations were “pelvic floor” AND “sensor”. No restrictions were placed on the date of dissemination or the study design. Exceptions were made in the ScienceDirect database. Here, only the most relevant and recent publications from the years 2022 to 2024 were included in the screening process. The relevance of these publications was automatically determined by the database itself based on the number of hits, the significance and occurrence of keywords, proximity, and completeness. After the database research, manual searches of reference lists and citation tracking were undertaken to identify additional articles potentially eligible for inclusion. The search was conducted independently by two researchers in January 2024.

2.2.2. Study Screening
The full screening process was carried out by two researchers, whereas discrepancies were resolved through discussion.
In a first screening, all duplicates were removed, as well as all publications without the implementation of sensors or any evidence on the pelvic floor. Subsequently, the titles and abstracts were screened for the content limits of the review. Excluded were all studies that did not evaluate any specific functions of the pelvic floor. Then, all studies found were screened for eligibility. Inclusion and exclusion criteria were established a priori.
Studies were excluded based on the following criteria: (1) studies that did not assess pelvic floor function with sensor technology; (2) insufficient methodological quality, including studies with poorly defined research questions, inadequate sample sizes, or insufficient data analysis methods; (3) study designs with only male participants; and (4) studies that did not provide results or conclusions that were directly relevant to the research topic, such as those focusing on outcomes that do not contribute to the relationship between pelvic floor function and sensor technology. To avoid influences from pregnancy and childbirth, studies conducted (5) only with pregnant women or during birth were also excluded. (6) Review articles and case reports referring to specific disease patterns were not included in the analysis.

2.2.3. Study Inclusion
First, the identified studies were sorted according to sensor-type. Data were independently extracted from each study and transferred to a Microsoft Excel file. One spreadsheet per identified sensor-type was conducted. The following data were obtained if available: (1) title; (2) author; (3) year; (4) citation indices from PubMed; (5) sensor type; (6) sensor position; (7) supplement sensor information; (8) secondary sensors used; (9) obtained parameters; (10) reference to pelvic floor; (11) subject characteristics—subject groups, number of subjects, age, and parity; (12) testing position; (13) test activity; (14) and results/discussion/conclusion.
Since the focus of this study is to provide an overview of a wider range of methods, and the studies included therefore differ substantially in some cases, the analysis in this review was limited to a systematic review without a meta-analysis. Due to the high heterogeneity of the studies included in this review, no formal risk assessment using a standardized tool was performed.

2.3. Current Knowledge of Physiological and Anatomical Factors Associated with PFDs

2.3.1. Study Identifying
Literature research was conducted to identify physiological and anatomical factors associated with PFDs. This was carried out independently by two researchers using GoogleScholar. The search aimed for studies published in the English language that discuss factors with relations to pelvic floor functionality. There were no restrictions on the date of dissemination, but only studies involving trials with human probands were searched for. Reviews and other descriptive publications were not included. No distinction was made between univariate and multivariate analyses.

2.3.2. Study Screening
The titles and abstracts of the retrieved studies were screened against the content limitations of the search. If the studies screened in the systematic review process mentioned correlations between any type of physiological or anatomical factors affecting pelvic floor health, they were included in the process of this second basis-search.

2.3.3. Study Inclusion
The data were extracted from the identified trials and transferred to a Microsoft Excel file. They were screened for described, identified, discussed, or established physiological or anatomical factors with effects on the pelvic floor functionality—positive or negative. The provided factors were subsequently evaluated according to evidence indicators.
It must be noted that the inclusion of a parameter in the final results table was considered cautiously in each case. If, for example, a study investigated one specific factor relating to the pelvic floor but did not find significant differences in other known factors between its study and control group, those secondary—in this case, nonsignificant—parameters were not included in the results of this review part, as the focus was on some completely different factor.
The rating was illustrated using a color-coded scheme. The evidence was categorized according to the significance indicated in the respective studies. Factors were labelled green when a statistical correlation between a factor and the pelvic floor was identified. For the factors marked in red, no correlation was found.

3. Results
The aim of this work was to review the current literature on sensors used in scientific research to assess parameters that provide information on pelvic floor functionality, as well as to obtain physiological and anatomical factors associated with PFDs.

3.1. Current Sensor Technology Assessing Pelvic Floor Function
The flowchart in Figure 1 summarizes the process of study selection. An initial GoogleScholar search identified 41 records. The identification of studies via databases and registers concluded in a total of 2346 records, of which 2121 publications were removed before screening. A further citation search identified an additional 19 studies.
A total of 286 records were screened. In this screening process, in summary, 76 studies were excluded after a preliminary analysis of the title and abstract. During the assessment for eligibility, 39 records were excluded, as they fulfilled at least one of the exclusion criteria. This results in a total of 114 studies and reports included in this review.
The sorting of the included records resulted in 12 different sensor types: accelerometer, electrical stimulation (ES), electromagnetic tracking (EMT), electromyography (EMG), magnetic stimulation (MS), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), photogrammetry, pressure sensors, ultrasound, vibration, X-ray, and infrared thermography (IRT). No distinction was made between the type of application of each sensor. Therefore, sensors for diagnostic, therapeutic, and preventive applications were included in this review. Figure 2 shows the distribution of the publications included in the review, along with the respective number of studies identified per sensor category. The largest number of publications was found utilizing pressure sensors (41 studies) and EMG sensors (26 studies). Accelerometer (two studies), EMT (two studies), photogrammetry (two studies), vibration (one study), X-ray (three studies), and IRT (one study) were grouped as “Others” due to their much lower number of occurrences.
The extraction of the relevant data from the 114 studies resulted in a tabular file containing 12 tables, 1 per identified sensor-type, each with 14 columns. These are provided in the Supplementary Materials. For the purpose of simplification, an excerpt from the extensive table is shown in Table 1, Table 2, Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6 and Table 7, containing the following data for each sensor type: (1) author, year; (2) obtained parameter; (3) sensor position; (4) test activity; and (5) subject characteristics—subject groups, number of subjects, and age. For ES and MS, the data categories are slightly adapted. Since no parameters are determined by these technologies, but they are used to stimulate the pelvic floor muscles, the extracted data include (1) author, year; (2) stimulated part; (3) sensor position; (4) stimulation type; and (5) subject characteristics—subject groups, number of subjects, and age.
Figure 3 provides an overview of all parameters observed in the included publications, highlighting which sensors recorded each parameter and how many times it was acquired. Higher-level categories were used to group as many specific parameters as possible. Thus, among others, coccyx movement, urethra kinematics, puborectal position, and intravaginal acceleration were categorized as PF structure kinematics. Similarly, for example, thoracic kyphosis and lumbar lordosis were summarized as posture. When PFM activity was included, all sensor application types were grouped together and no longer distinguished between, for example, vaginal, rectal, perirectal, or other approaches. Similarly, vaginal, and rectal measurement methods were combined for the PFM strength parameter. Of all the parameters identified for all the sensors, PFM activity (32 times), PFM strength (23 times), and pelvic floor structure kinematics (19 times) were obtained the most. Only in a few cases were optical pressure, vaginal elasticity, and pelvic floor temperature (one time each) measured.
Figure 4 shows which activities were included in how many of the papers and how many times they were recorded. Of all 12 sensor types, maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) was by far the most recorded, with a total of 48 times. Activities such as jumping (three times), straining (four times), or lifting (two times) were recorded much less frequently in all the studies.
ES, MS, and vibration are not listed in Figure 3 and Figure 4, as these are sensors that do not measure anything per se but have been investigated as therapeutic or preventive tools.

3.2. Current Knowledge of Physiological and Anatomical Factors Associated with PFDs
The search for physiological and anatomical factors associated with PFDs resulted in the inclusion of 17 studies published between 1994 and 2023. The search identified 16 influencing parameters: age, menopause, parity, type of delivery, fetal macrosomia, hormone therapy, BMI, race, chronic cough, hysterectomy, physical activity, gastrointestinal pathology, gynecological pathology, other diseases (arthritis or osteoporosis), respiration, and spine curvature. Each study examined between one and ten of the factors listed. Table 8 summarizes the results obtained in this part of the review. The parameters age and parity were analyzed in nine of the included studies each. They are therefore the most common factors in the listed publications, followed by BMI (seven times), mode of delivery (six times), and spinal curvature (five times). The color scheme classifies each assessed parameter according to the level of evidence found in the respective study. Green indicates statistical correlation found, and red indicates no correlation found. When accumulated, nine factors were rated green, and seven were rated red. The parameters labelled green include, for example, age, parity, and BMI. In contrast, mode of delivery, hormone therapy, and fetal macrosomia are among the parameters marked in red.

4. Discussion
The aim of this work was to provide an overview of the current state of technology used to assess pelvic floor functionality, as well as of the current knowledge of the physiological and anatomical factors that correlate with PFDs.
In combination, these two reviews aim to provide an overview of which functional parameters of the pelvic floor are already covered by sensor technology and for which there is still potential for expansion. This information will add value to the development of future pelvic floor sensor technologies.

4.1. Current Sensor Technology Assessing Pelvic Floor Functionality

4.1.1. Distribution of the Sensor Technologies in the Included Publications
Figure 2 shows the distribution of the publications included in the review with the respective number of studies identified per sensor category. However, this should be seen only as a quantitative comparison. The figure reflects only how often each sensor type was used in the studies to assess pelvic floor functionality. Neither the relevance nor the evidence of a particular sensor technology for assessing pelvic floor functionality can be automatically inferred from their frequency of appearance in the table. Nevertheless, the frequent use of certain sensor types indicates that this technology has become somewhat established in the assessment of pelvic floor functionality.
The most commonly used sensor technologies, based on the studies identified, include pressure sensors, EMG, and ES. As the review considers sensors for prevention, diagnosis and rehabilitation, the identified sensor categories can be further broken down into their application areas. For diagnostic purposes, the technologies used are pressure measurement, EMG, ultrasound, MRI, accelerometry, EMT, photogrammetry, X-ray, and IRT. Pressure and EMG measurements are also used in biofeedback systems for prevention and rehabilitation purposes. In addition, ES, MS, and vibration are used for therapeutic applications. Categorizing sensors according to their application can serve as a support for the development of new technology or methods, for example, by extending the areas of application for existing sensors. Depending on the future purpose of a new sensor, different established technologies can be used as a reference.

4.1.2. Data Extracted from the Included Publications
All technologies included in the identified studies were categorized into different sensor types. The information from the studies was tabulated into different data categories. Identical data categories were used for most sensor types (Table 1, Table 2, Table 4, Table 6 and Table 7). The results of these sensor types are therefore comparable. For the sensor types ES (Table 3) and MS (Table 5), the data categories were slightly adjusted, as these technologies do not provide parameters but are used to stimulate PFM. The results of these technologies can be compared with each other. However, the comparison of sensor types from Table 1, Table 2, Table 4, Table 5 and Table 7 with the ones listed in Table 3 and Table 5 should be made with caution due to their different mechanism of action.

4.1.3. Measured Parameters
Figure 3 provides an overview of all the parameters relating to the female pelvic floor that have already been measured by sensors. The parameters listed contribute to the assessment of pelvic floor functionality. In particular, the PFM activity parameter is extensively summarized in Figure 3 and no longer differentiates between vaginal, rectal, or perirectal approaches. However, more detailed information can be found in the corresponding table, under “Sensor Position”. The color scheme in the tables shows which parameters have been measured with which sensor in how many publications. This reflects only the number of times a measurement method has been used to determine a particular parameter. The relevance and evidence of a particular parameter for assessing pelvic floor functionality should not be equated with the number of studies found for that parameter.
New, innovative methods for measuring other parameters related to pelvic floor functionality may provide relevance in the future, even if they have not been studied much to date. For example, the IRT method for measuring pelvic floor temperature (published 2022) and an optical method of measuring pressure (published 2023) were each found in only one study. However, this does not automatically mean that these new measurement methods and the parameters they provide are any less relevant or accurate.
The parameters obtained from EMG and pressure measurements are very different from those obtained from the other sensor types. These technologies are the most widely used in the current literature. It is therefore reasonable to analyze them in more detail.
EMG measurements were used to measure the activity of the PFM. Most studies used invasive vaginal and rectal surface EMG probes, while the remaining studies used surface EMG sensors around the perineum and anus. As the sensors are placed in a very intimate part of the body, the measurements may cause discomfort and embarrassment to the women. In addition, surface EMG measurements are often prone to error, so their results should be interpreted with caution. Identical positioning of the intravaginal and rectal EMG probes is a prerequisite for comparing results within a group of different women and within one test person (e.g., different trails and different training conditions). Furthermore, crosstalk is to be expected when using surface EMG measurements. If other surrounding muscles are activated in addition to the muscle area under consideration, this may have a negative effect on the validity of the measurement results. Especially in surface EMG measurements of pelvic floor activity during highly dynamic movements, crosstalk cannot be ruled out. Both Moser et al. and Leitner et al., who performed intravaginal surface EMG measurements during jumping and running, mentioned the possibility of crosstalk as a limitation of their studies. Despite the considerable potential for error of the EMG method, it currently appears to be the most effective method for measuring muscle activity in the pelvic floor.
Pressure sensors are mainly used in the literature to determine intravaginal and rectal PFM strength. They are also used to measure intra-abdominal, urethral, and intravesical pressures. It is therefore currently possible to measure both the pressure acting on the pelvic floor (IAP) and the pressure in the vagina/rectum caused by a contraction of the pelvic floor muscles (PFM strength). As these are mainly invasive measurements, there may be limitations to the types of activity that can be recorded by these techniques. Nevertheless, the current techniques for determining various pressure parameters should be considered as a basis for the further development of sensors.
Despite the limitations, EMG and pressure sensors have convincing advantages due to their simple handling, easy accessibility, and practical and versatile application. This makes them suitable for everyday use, as well as for conducting scientific studies.

4.1.4. Measured Activities
Figure 4 shows which types of activity have already been measured with which sensor technology. The color scheme for the different sensor–activity combinations merely illustrates the number of studies identified; thus, it should not automatically be equated with the relevance of a sensor technology for measuring a particular activity.
All types of activities listed in Figure 4 were observed for their activation of the pelvic floor muscles. However, depending on the type of activity, there is either a conscious or unconscious contraction of the pelvic floor muscles. In activities such as MVC, draw-in/curl-up/Kegel, sub-maximal contraction, and MEC, muscle activation is voluntarily induced. In contrast, involuntary activity in the pelvic floor muscles is thought to occur during coughing, exercising, running, jumping, straining, lifting, and performing the Valsalva and bear-down maneuvers. This difference should be kept in mind when developing future sensors. Depending on the application, different sensor technologies should be considered as a basis. For example, when measuring high-activity movements, the sensor technology needs to be able to adapt to these movements; for example, X-ray or MRI are likely to be unsuitable for dynamic recordings.

4.1.5. Future Sensor Developments
In the early stages of developing a new, innovative tool, this overview can be used to categorize technologies and parameters according to your own predefined requirements. Table 1, Table 2, Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6 and Table 7 can be used to eliminate inconvenient sensors and technologies and to compare all the requirement criteria against the tables to find a suitable technology. An example of a specific field of application for this would be the ever-increasing development of AI-supported sensor technology. The findings from the existing technology can be taken as a starting point. The overview from this review simplifies this process.
Table 1, Table 2, Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6 and Table 7 could be used to exclude and include sensor technology, depending on the invasiveness, type of movement patterns, static or dynamic measurements, recording of voluntary or involuntary contractions, or the location of use (home or practice).Therefore, if the main focus of the sensor development is put on a non-invasive sensor, all sensors with the positioning stated as intravaginal or intrarectal cannot be taken into consideration. Likewise, the use of MRI and X-ray is not suitable for a device intended to be used as a home-application tool.
In addition, with the information gained from this review, the further advancement of existing technologies can be taken in a new direction. The tables in the Section 3 of this work show the different application areas of 12 different sensor types. This allows developers to find impulses for individual extensions of their own modules. Ideas can be found in the comparison of one’s own sensor group, as well as in the application areas of another sensor group and thus positively enrich innovative sensor development.

4.2. Current Knowledge of Physiological and Anatomical Factors Associated with PFDs
What is missing from the list of physiological and anatomical factors affecting the pelvic floor is an assessment of the interactions between the individual factors. For example, it is known that the stage of a woman’s menopause is strongly linked to her age. Diseases such as osteoporosis and arthritis also occur more frequently at an older age. Now, further studies are needed to concretize the correlations between the parameters for the particular application area of pelvic floor health. For some factors, it is also necessary to further investigate whether they are responsible for the pelvic floor dysfunctions or whether a change in a parameter is a consequence of PFDs. An example would be the spinal curvature parameter.
A closer look at Table 8 reveals that the results of the 17 sources considered are sometimes not entirely consistent. For example, in the case of age and BMI, all the sources agree on a significant influence. The situation is more differentiated when it comes to the Mode of Delivery, for example. Three of the sources found a significant association with pelvic floor health, and three found no significant association. For such controversial parameters, a more detailed analysis and comparison of publications is needed for future work. Nevertheless, in most cases, the table provides a good and clear initial overview of the parameters considered in relation to pelvic floor health. With the exception of the abovementioned example, the color differentiation allows for a relatively clear tendency to be identified in terms of the determined significance.

4.3. Discussion of the Combination of All Results
A closer look at the parameters found in the second literature search suggests that some of the factors are partly biologically predetermined. However, DeLancey et al. emphasize in their study that the functionality of the pelvic floor can be actively influenced, both positively and negatively, by self-imposed variables. The biological changes that occur, in particular, with increasing age do not preclude pelvic floor health. Combining this knowledge with sensors that can objectively assess the condition of the pelvic floor offers great opportunities to make a lasting—and positive—difference in the lives of many women.
This point can, in turn, influence both the development of new sensor systems and the expansion of existing systems. With the background knowledge of which parameters have an influence on pelvic floor health, the development of new systems for parameters that are not currently measured can be initiated. Likewise, existing systems can be expanded to include factors that can possibly be recorded with the existing system but have not yet been integrated as output parameters.

4.4. Limitations
For the systematic review, there were a few restrictions on the inclusion criteria in order to cover all existing sensor technologies. Therefore, a large number of publications had to be considered. Subject studies that had already used established measurement technology were included. Other publications investigating the development of new sensor prototypes were also considered. Due to the different nature of the studies, it was not possible to compare them, and therefore no meta-study was conducted.
The second literature search was an initial, non-structured search, which resulted in a listing of studies. Therefore, the results may not be entirely representative of the current state of the art. More detailed studies need to be carried out to provide specific information on the parameters and to what extent each factor influences pelvic floor health and in what way each parameter has a positive or negative effect.
When evaluating the evidence of the individual parameters on the basis of the statistical assessment in the respective publications, it must be noted that different statistical tests and significance criteria were partially used. This was not taken into account in the list in Table 8. The color coding was based solely on the significance reported in the publications. The statistical methods and criteria used were disregarded.

5. Conclusions
The presented review that combines existing sensor technologies for assessing pelvic floor functionality with relevant anatomical and physiological parameters related to the pelvic floor could serve as a basis for further research. The field of sensor technology development can benefit from this work. Possible combinations of different sensor technologies could be considered to improve the functionality and acceptability of sensor applications in the field of pelvic floor health.
Identifying the physiological and anatomical factors involved in pelvic floor disorders provides a fundamental basis for the further expansion of technology integration in healthcare. Combined with further research and development of sensor technology that addresses these relevant factors, this work offers opportunities to facilitate the reference to diagnostic, prevention, and rehabilitation tools for PFDs.
Specifically, this involves quantifiable prevention and diagnosis, as well as detailed documentation of rehabilitation processes related to PFD. Taken together, this work highlights the opportunities for the development of novel sensors, as well as for their further optimization for the diagnosis, prevention, and rehabilitation of PFDs.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at , Table S1: Extended results table.

Author Contributions
N.F. and I.A. were equally responsible for the concept and design of this study, as well as for database searches, literature screening, data extraction, quality assessment, and drafting and editing the manuscript. The work was discussed by all authors. The final draft was reviewed by S.D. and F.S. S.D. was responsible for supervising this work. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

List of Abbreviations
The following additional abbreviations were used in the final results tables.
AMM	abdominal muscle maneuver	 	BF	biofeedback	 	CG	control group	 	CMJ	counter movement jump	 	CON	continence	 	CPP	chronic pelvic pain	 	DJ	drop jumps	 	INC	incontinence	 	MA	muscle activity	 	MEC	maximal endurance contraction	 	MVC	maximal voluntary contraction	 	NP	nulliparous	 	P	parous	 	PFME	pelvic floor muscle exercise	 	PP	perineal pressure

References
The Prevalence of Pelvic Floor Disorders and Their Relationship to Gender, Age, Parity and Mode of Delivery
Sexual Function and Pelvic Floor Disorders
Epidemiology of Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
Pelvic Floor Disorders Stop Women Exercising: A Survey of 4556 Symptomatic Women
The Investigation and Treatment of Female Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
Computational Modeling of the Female Pelvic Support Structures and Organs to Understand the Mechanism of Pelvic Organ Prolapse: A Review
The Most Common Functional Disorders and Factors Affecting Female Pelvic Floor
The Female Pelvic Floor Fascia Anatomy: A Systematic Search and Review
Can Pelvic Floor Muscle Training Prevent and Treat Pelvic Organ Prolapse?
Prevalence of Double Incontinence, Risks and Influence on Quality of Life in a General Female Population
Epidemiology and Natural History of Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
Pelvic Floor Symptoms and Severity of Pelvic Organ Prolapse in Women Seeking Care for Pelvic Floor Problems
Prevalence of Symptomatic Pelvic Floor Disorders in US Women
Forecasting the Prevalence of Pelvic Floor Disorders in U.S. Women: 2010 to 2050
Assessment of Pelvic Floor Muscle Contraction with Palpation, Perineometry and Transperineal Ultrasound: A Cross-Sectional Study
How to Use the Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification (POP-Q) System?
Correlations between the ICIQ-SF Score and Urodynamic Findings
Patient and Surgeon Ranking of the Severity of Symptoms Associated with Fecal Incontinence: The Fecal Incontinence Severity Index
The Fecal Incontinence Quality of Life Scale (FIQL) and Fecal Incontinence Severity Index (FISI): Validation of the Dutch Versions
State of the Art Review: Intravaginal Probes for Recording Electromyography from the Pelvic Floor Muscles
Pelvic Floor Muscle Activity during Impact Activities in Continent and Incontinent Women: A Systematic Review
Systematic Review of Diagnostic Sensors for Intra-Abdominal Pressure Monitoring
Urinary Incontinence in Physically Active Women and Female Athletes
Determining the Optimal Pelvic Floor Muscle Training Regimen for Women with Stress Urinary Incontinence
Digital Technologies for Women’s Pelvic Floor Muscle Training to Manage Urinary Incontinence Across Their Life Course: Scoping Review
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015 Statement
Technologies for Evaluation of Pelvic Floor Functionality: A Systematic Review 2024. Open Science Framework Registries
Intra-Abdominal Pressures during Activity in Women Using an Intra-Vaginal Pressure Transducer
Intra-Abdominal Pressure and Pelvic Floor Health: Should We Be Thinking about This Relationship Differently?
Development of a Novel Intra-Abdominal Pressure Transducer for Large Scale Clinical Studies
Development and Testing of a Vaginal Pressure Sensor to Measure Intra-Abdominal Pressure in Women
Intra-Abdominal and Perineal Pressures during Abdominal Exercises: A Cross Sectional Study in Postpartum Women
A Fiber-Optic Sensor-Based Device for the Measurement of Vaginal Integrity in Women
Assessing Exercises Recommended for Women at Risk of Pelvic Floor Disorders Using Multivariate Statistical Techniques
Do Measures of Muscular Fitness Modify the Effect of Intra-Abdominal Pressure on Pelvic Floor Support in Postpartum Women?
The Relationship between Urinary Incontinence, Pelvic Floor Muscle Strength and Lower Abdominal Muscle Activation among Women with Low Back Pain
Direction Sensitive Sensor Probe for the Evaluation of Voluntary and Reflex Pelvic Floor Contractions
Evaluation of the Dynamic Responses of Female Pelvic Floor Using a Novel Vaginal Probe
Variables Affecting Intra-Abdominal Pressure during Lifting in the Early Postpartum Period
An Assessment of Techniques and Practices Used to Elevate Intra-Abdominal Pressure When Assessing Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
Urethral Sleeve Sensor: A Non-Withdrawal Method to Measure Maximum Urethral Pressure|Cochrane Library
Novel Directionally Sensitive Sensor Probe for the Clinical Evaluation of the Pelvic Floor Biomechanics
Novel Instrumented Probe for Measuring 3D Pressure Distribution along the Vaginal Canal
Spatial Distribution of Vaginal Closure Pressures of Continent and Stress Urinary Incontinent Women
Home-Based Noninvasive Pelvic Floor Muscle Training Device to Assist Women in Performing Kegel Exercise in the Management of Stress Urinary Incontinence
The Effect of Biofeedback Pelvic Floor Training with ACTICORE1 on Urinary Incontinence: A Multicenter Randomized Clinical Pilot Trial
Tactile Imaging Markers to Characterize Female Pelvic Floor Conditions
Pelvic Floor Muscle Training Using an Extracorporeal Biofeedback Device for Female Stress Urinary Incontinence
Novel Insight into Pressurization of the Male and Female Urethra through Application of a Multi-Channel Fibre-Optic Pressure Transducer: Proof of Concept and Validation
Vaginal Pressure Sensor Measurement during Maximal Voluntary Pelvic Floor Contraction Correlates with Vaginal Birth and Pelvic Organ Prolapse-A Pilot Study
A Self-Directed Home Biofeedback System for Women with Symptoms of Stress, Urge, and Mixed Incontinence
Assessing Vaginal Pressure Profiles before and after Prolapse Surgery Using an Intravaginal Pressure Sensor (Femfit®)
Can You Train the Pelvic Floor Muscles by Contracting Other Related Muscles?
The Use of an Intra-Vaginal Pressure Sensor Device To Evaluate Changes in Intra-Vaginal Pressure Profiles Pre and Post Pelvic Organ Prolapse Surgery
Intra-Abdominal Pressure in the Morbidly Obese
Outpatient Biofeedback in Addition to Home Pelvic Floor Muscle Training for Stress Urinary Incontinence: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Pelvic Floor Muscle Function in Women with and without Breast Cancer: A Cross-Sectional Study
Comparison of Anorectal Function Measured Using Wearable Digital Manometry and a High Resolution Manometry System
Introduction to a New Technology for Measuring Urethral Pressures: 3D High-Resolution Manometry
Development of an Optical Pressure Sensing Array: Initial Validation
Does Pelvic Floor Muscle Training Abolish Symptoms of Urinary Incontinence? A Randomized Controlled Trial
Relationship Between Sexual Function and Pelvic Floor and Hip Muscle Strength in Women with Stress Urinary Incontinence
The Relationship between the Presence of Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms and Waist Circumference
Levator Ani Function before and after Childbirth
A Dynamometer-Based Wireless Pelvic Floor Muscle Force Monitoring
Subsequent Use of a Pressure Sensor to Record Intra-Abdominal Pressure after Maximum Vaginal Closure Force in a Clinical Trial
Comparison of Active and Passive Forces of the Pelvic Floor Muscles in Women with and without Stress Urinary Incontinence
Intra-Rater Reliability and Diagnostic Accuracy of a New Vaginal Dynamometer to Measure Pelvic Floor Muscle Strength in Women with Urinary Incontinence
A Pelvic Floor Muscle Training Program in Postmenopausal Women: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Characterization of Pelvic Floor Activity in Healthy Subjects and with Chronic Pelvic Pain: Diagnostic Potential of Surface Electromyography
Effect of BoNT/A in the Surface Electromyographic Characteristics of the Pelvic Floor Muscles for the Treatment of Chronic Pelvic Pain
Effect of Electromyographic Biofeedback as an Add-on to Pelvic Floor Muscle Exercises on Neuromuscular Outcomes and Quality of Life in Postmenopausal Women with Stress Urinary Incontinence: A Randomized Controlled Trial—Bertotto—2017—Neurourology and Urodynamics—Wiley Online Library
Effectiveness of Pelvic Floor Muscle Training Alone or Combined with Either a Novel Biofeedback Device or Conventional Biofeedback for Improving Stress Urinary Incontinence: A Randomized Controlled Pilot Trial
Electromyographic Characteristics of Pelvic Floor Muscles in Women with Stress Urinary Incontinence Following sEMG-Assisted Biofeedback Training and Pilates Exercises
Pelvic Floor Exercises with Biofeedback for Stress Urinary Incontinence
Randomized Controlled Trial of Pelvic Floor Muscle Training with or without Biofeedback for Urinary Incontinence
The Relative Activation of Pelvic Floor Muscles during Selected Yoga Poses
Reliability and Differentiation of Pelvic Floor Muscle Electromyography Measurements in Healthy Volunteers Using a New Device: The Multiple Array Probe Leiden (MAPLe): Reliability of the Multiple Array Probe
Pelvic Floor Muscle Activity during Jumps in Continent and Incontinent Women: An Exploratory Study
Evaluation of Pelvic Floor Muscle Activity during Running in Continent and Incontinent Women: An Exploratory Study
Postural and Respiratory Functions of the Pelvic Floor Muscles
Pelvic Floor Muscle Activity Patterns in Women with and without Stress Urinary Incontinence While Running
Relationship between Ankle Position and Pelvic Floor Muscle Activity in Female Stress Urinary Incontinence
Submaximal Pelvic Floor Muscle Contractions: Similar Bladder-Neck Elevation, Longer Duration, Less Intra-Abdominal Pressure
Investigation of Electromyographic Activity of Pelvic Floor Muscles in Different Body Positions to Prevent Urinary Incontinence
Pelvic Floor and Abdominal Muscle Responses during Hypopressive Exercises in Women with Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
Impact of Different Body Positions on Bioelectrical Activity of the Pelvic Floor Muscles in Nulliparous Continent Women
Contraction of the Pelvic Floor Muscles during Abdominal Maneuvers
The Role of Lumbopelvic Posture in Pelvic Floor Muscle Activation in Continent Women
Electromyographic Activity of the Pelvic Floor Muscles and Internal Oblique Muscles in Women during Running with Traditional and Minimalist Shoes: A Cross-Over Clinical Trial
Postural Activity of the Pelvic Floor Muscles Is Delayed during Rapid Arm Movements in Women with Stress Urinary Incontinence
Co-Activation of the Abdominal and Pelvic Floor Muscles during Voluntary Exercises
Activity Patterns of Pubococcygeal Muscles in Nulliparous Continent Women
Straining Puborectalis Reflex: Description and Significance of a “New” Reflex
New Device and New Concept for Treating Nocturnal Enuresis: Preliminary Results of a Phase One Study|Cochrane Library
Electrical Stimulation Compared with Tolterodine for Treatment of Urge/Urge Incontinence amongst Women--A Randomized Controlled Trial
Simultaneous Perineal Ultrasound and Vaginal Pressure Measurement Prove the Action of Electrical Pudendal Nerve Stimulation in Treating Female Stress Incontinence
Effect of Pelvic Floor Electrical Stimulation on Diaphragm Excursion and Rib Cage Movement during Tidal and Forceful Breathing and Coughing in Women with Stress Urinary Incontinence: A Randomized Controlled Trial
External Electrical Stimulation Compared with Intravaginal Electrical Stimulation for the Treatment of Stress Urinary Incontinence in Women: A Randomized Controlled Noninferiority Trial
Transvaginal Electrical Stimulation with Surface-EMG Biofeedback in Managing Stress Urinary Incontinence in Women of Premenopausal Age: A Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Randomized Clinical Trial
Electromyographic Evaluation of the Pelvic Muscles Activity after High-Intensity Focused Electromagnetic Procedure and Electrical Stimulation in Women with Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
Pelvic Floor Muscle Training for Stress Urinary Incontinence: A Randomized, Controlled Trial Comparing Different Conservative Therapies
Effects of Three Interventions in Facilitating Voluntary Pelvic Floor Muscle Contraction in Women: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Long-Term Results of a Clinical Trial Comparing Isolated Vaginal Stimulation with Combined Treatment for Women with Stress Incontinence
Comparison between Two Different Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation Protocols for the Treatment of Female Stress Urinary Incontinence: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Efectos de La Electroestimulación Superficial En Las Mujeres Mayores Con Incontinencia Urinaria de Esfuerzo: Estudio Piloto Aleatorio Controlado
Effects of Surface and Intravaginal Electrical Stimulation in the Treatment of Women with Stress Urinary Incontinence: Randomized Controlled Trial
Agreement and Reliability of Pelvic Floor Measurements during Contraction Using Three-Dimensional Pelvic Floor Ultrasound and Virtual Reality
Assessment of Pelvic Floor Movement Using Transabdominal and Transperineal Ultrasound
The Use of Perineal Ultrasound to Quantify Levator Activity and Teach Pelvic Floor Muscle Exercises
Differences in Motor Learning of Pelvic Floor Muscle Contraction between Women with and without Stress Urinary Incontinence: Evaluation by Transabdominal Ultrasonography
Levator Plate Movement during Voluntary Pelvic Floor Muscle Contraction in Subjects with Incontinence and Prolapse: A Cross-Sectional Study and Review
Mechanisms of Pelvic Floor Muscle Function and the Effect on the Urethra during a Cough
Pelvic Floor Function in Elite Nulliparous Athletes
Pelvic Floor Muscle Training in Women with Stress Urinary Incontinence Causes Hypertrophy of the Urethral Sphincters and Reduces Bladder Neck Mobility during Coughing
The Influence of Pelvis Reposition Exercises on Pelvic Floor Muscles Asymmetry: A Randomized Prospective Study
Ultrasound in the Quantification of Female Pelvic Organ Prolapse
Assessment of the Effectiveness of Pelvic Floor Muscle Training (PFMT) and Extracorporeal Magnetic Innervation (ExMI) in Treatment of Stress Urinary Incontinence in Women: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Extracorporeal Magnetic Innervation Therapy for Stress Urinary Incontinence
Extracorporeal Magnetic Innervation Treatment for Urinary Incontinence
Extracorporeal Magnetic Stimulation for the Treatment of Stress and Urge Incontinence in Women--Results of 1-Year Follow-Up
Patients’ Perception and Satisfaction with Pulsed Magnetic Stimulation for Treatment of Female Stress Urinary Incontinence
Pulsed Magnetic Stimulation for Stress Urinary Incontinence: 1-Year Followup Results
The Therapeutic Efficiency of Extracorporeal Magnetic Innervation Treatment in Women with Urinary Tract Dysfunction Following Radical Hysterectomy
The Appearance of Levator Ani Muscle Abnormalities in Magnetic Resonance Images after Vaginal Delivery
POPQ System and Dynamic MRI in Assessment of Female Genital Prolapse
Dynamic MRI of the Pelvic Floor Muscles in an Upright Sitting Position
Coccygeal Movement: Assessment with Dynamic MRI
Influence of Adequate Pelvic Floor Muscle Contraction on the Movement of the Coccyx during Pelvic Floor Muscle Training
Phase-Locked Parallel Movement of Diaphragm and Pelvic Floor during Breathing and Coughing—A Dynamic MRI Investigation in Healthy Females
Thoracic Kyphosis and the Prevalence of Advanced Uterine Prolapse
The Effect of the Correlation between the Contraction of the Pelvic Floor Muscles and Diaphragmatic Motion during Breathing
Lumbosacral Spine and Pelvic Inlet Changes Associated with Pelvic Organ Prolapse
Evaluation of Pelvic Floor Kinematics in Continent and Incontinent Women during Running: An Exploratory Study
Pelvic Floor Muscle Displacement during Jumps in Continent and Incontinent Women: An Exploratory Study
The Impact of Deep Muscle Training on the Quality of Posture and Breathing
The Relationship Between Static Standing Posture and Common Pelvic Floor Disorders
Pelvic Floor Tissue Damping during Running Using an Intra-Vaginal Accelerometry Approach
Development of a Wireless Accelerometer-Based Intravaginal Device to Detect Pelvic Floor Motion for Evaluation of Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
Pelvic Floor Stimulation: What Are the Good Vibrations?
Evaluation of the Female Pelvic Floor with Infrared Thermography: A Cross Sectional Study
Risk Factors for Pelvic Organ Prolapse
Pelvic Floor Dysfunction: Prevalence and Associated Factors
Prevalence of Pelvic Floor Disorders in the Female Population and the Impact of Age, Mode of Delivery, and Parity
The Frequency of Pelvic Floor Dysfunctions and Their Risk Factors in Women Aged 40–55
Urinary Incontinence in Elite Nulliparous Athletes
Prevalence and Trends of Symptomatic Pelvic Floor Disorders in U.S. Women
Pelvic Floor Muscle Function in Women with and without Urinary Incontinence: Are Strength and Endurance the Only Relevant Functions? A Cross-Sectional Study
Age- and Type-Dependent Effects of Parity on Urinary Incontinence: The Norwegian EPINCONT Study
Morbid Obesity Adversely Impacts Pelvic Floor Function in Females Seeking Attention for Weight Loss Surgery
Abnormal Spinal Curvature and Its Relationship to Pelvic Organ Prolapse
Abnormal Spinal Curvature as a Risk Factor for Pelvic Organ Prolapse
Prospective Study of the Determinants of Age at Menopause
The Disproportionate Impact of Chronic Arthralgia and Arthritis among Women
Perspective How Many Women Have Osteoporosis?
Graphic Integration of Causal Factors of Pelvic Floor Disorders: An Integrated Life Span Model
PRISMA flow diagram of the study-selection process.
Number of publications included in this review, presented by their corresponding sensor type.
Obtained Parameters with the extracted sensors with their number of acquirement.
Activities performed during the data assessment with the respective sensors, along with their number of occurrences.
Data extracted from the reviewed studies including pressure sensors.
Study	Obtained Parameter	SensorPosition	Test Activity	Subject Characteristics	 	Group	Number	Mean Age (Years)	 	Pressure Sensor/Transducer/Force Sensor	 	Shaw et al., 2014 	IAP	Intravaginal	31 activities of different intensity	Women	57	30.4 ± 9.3	 	Dietze-Hermosa et al., 2020 	IAP	Intravaginal	31 activities of different intensity	Women	57	30.4 ± 9.3	 	Niederauer et al., 2017 	IAP	Intravaginal	-	-	-	-	 	Rosenbluth et al., 2010 	IAP	Intravaginal	Coughing, Valsalva, squatting and jumping	Women undergoing routine filling cystometry	-	<21	 	Djivoh and Jaeger, 2023 	IAP, PP	Intrarectal and perineal	Coughing, MVC, curl-up, diaphragmatic aspiration, drawing-in	Postpartum women	17	28.5 ± 4.7	 	Parkinson et al., 2019 	Vaginal elasticity	Intravaginal	Valsalva, coughing, MVC	Parous women:Group 1: colposcopyGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 6Group 2: 4	18–76	 	Tian et al., 2018 	IAP	Intravaginal	10 exercises	Women	53	39	 	Nygaard et al., 2021 	IAP	Intravaginal	Lifting a car seat	Postpartum women	593	29.6 years ± 5.0	 	de Abreu et al., 2019 	Lower abdominal MA	Under the abdomen	Drawing-in	Women with low back pain:Group 1: CONGroup 2: INC	54Group 1: 23Group 2: 31	Group 1: 54.6 ± 8.0Group 2: 50.5 ± 7.5	 	Constantinou and Omata, 2007 	Distribution of anisotropic forces acting on the vagina	Intravaginal	MVC, coughing in supine	Women	6	63.8 ± 9.8 years	 	Constantinou et al., 2007 	Distribution of anisotropic forces acting on the vagina	Intravaginal	MVC, coughing in supine	Women	6	63.8 ± 9.8 years	 	Hsu et al., 2018 	IAP	Intravaginal	Lifting a car seat	Postpartum women	206	27.38 ± 5.00	 	El-Hamamsy et al., 2021 	IAP	Intrarectal	Valsalva, bear down in supine and standing	Group 1: healthy menGroup 2: healthy nulliparous women	Group 1: 10Group 2: 10	25 ± 9.25	 	Tan-Kim et al., 2010 	Intravesical and urethral pressure	Intravesical and urethral	Valsalva, coughing in supine and standing	Women:Group 1: CGGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 18Group 2: 7	Group 1: 40Group 2: 65	 	Omata et al., 2003 	PFM strength	Intravaginal	MVC, coughing	-	-	-	 	Cacciari et al., 2017 	PFM strength	Intravaginal	MVC, Valsalva	Women	26	37.0 ± 10.8	 	Peng et al., 2007 	PFM strength	Intravaginal	Rest, MVC in supine	Women:Group 1: CGGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 23Group 2:10	Group 1: 39.0 ± 2.3Group 2: 51.5 ± 5.3	 	Horng et al., 2022 	PFM contraction strength and duration	Between the upper inner thighs	Kegel exercises	Women, INC	60	53 ± 5.53	 	Paasch et al., 2023 	-	Sit on a sensor, not inserted	PFMT—Kegel exercises	INC:Group 1: PFMT + sensorGroup 2: CG	22 women, 2 men:Group 1: 10Group 2: 14	Group 1: 42.5Group 2: 41.0	 	van Raalte and Egorov, 2015 	Vaginal pressure—responses from the vaginal walls	Intravaginal	Vaginal Tactile Imager (VTI) examination in supine	Women:Group 1: CGGroup 2: POP	20Group 1: 4Group 2: 16	Range: 41 to 70	 	Lee et al., 2013 	PFM strength	Extracorporeal; Chair	MVC, EVC	Women, INC	71	52.2	 	Fiber Optic Pressure Sensor	 	Stafford et al., 2020 	urethral pressure	Intravesical	sub-maximal contractions, MVC, coughing	Group 1: womanGroup 2: man	Group 1: 1Group 2: 1	Group 1: 33Group 2: 47	 	Parkinson et al., 2022 	intravaginal pressure	Intravaginal	MVC, automated probe dilation cycle	Group 1: MVC measurementsGroup 2: resting tissue resistance measurements	Group 1: 46Group 2: 19	Group 1: 47.8 ± 20.0Group 2: 45.0 ± 21.5	 	Smith, et al., 2000 	PFM strength	Intravaginal	-	Women, INC	44	54	 	femfit® (array of eight pressure sensors)	 	Marriott et al., 2021 	intravaginal pressure	Intravaginal	Rest, MVC, coughing	Women with vaginal and/or uterine prolapse	19	63 ± 11.1	 	Kruger et al., 2019 	Intravaginal pressure	Intravaginal	MVC, MVC of abdominal and hip muscles, coughing	Women	21	43.7 ± 11.3	 	Pedofsky et al., 2019 	Intravaginal pressure	Intravaginal	Rest, MVC, coughing in supine and standing	Women with a vaginal/uterine prolapse	10	-	 	Manometer	 	Lambert et al., 2005 	Bladder pressure/IAP	Intravesical	Under anesthesia	Group 1: obese womenGroup 2: obese manGroup 3: CG	55Group 1: 37Group 2: 8Group 3: 4	Group 1 + 2: 38 ± 2Group 3: 46 ± 5	 	Fitz et al., 2017 	PFM strength	Intravaginal	MVC, training exercises in supine, sitting and standing	Women, INC:Group 1: manometry-BFGroup 2: PFMT	49Group 1: 25Group 2: 24	Group 1: 56.1 ± 10.5Group 2: 56.6 ± 12.0	 	Colombage et al., 2023 	PFM strength	Intravaginal	MVC	Group 1: women with breast cancer with treatmentGroup 2: CG	32 women Group 1: 16Group 2: 16	Group 1: 41.4 ± 7.3Group 2: 42.2 ± 7.6	 	Attari et al., 2020 	Intrarectal and anal sphincter pressure	Intrarectal	Rest, MVC, simulated defecation 	Previous anorectal or colonic surgery; men and women	16	median age: 61	 	Kirby et al., 2015 	Maximum urethral closure pressures	Intraurethral	Cough and strain conditions	Women, INC	65	-	 	Optical Pressure Sensing Array	 	Newcombe et al., 2023 	PFM pressure: change in the optical attenuation of light passing through a material that is being compressed by an unknown pressure.	To develop	-	-	-	-	 	Perineometer	 	Celiker Tosun et al., 2015 	PFM strength	Intravaginal	MVC	Women, INCGroup 1: PFMTGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 65Group 2: 65	Group 1: 51.7 ± 10.3Group 2: 52.5 ± 9.1	 	Hwang. et al., 2021 	PFM function: strength and endurance	Intravaginal	MVC	Women, INC	42	42.9 ± 8.1	 	de Oliveira et al., 2016 	PFM strength	Intravaginal	MVC	Women:Group 1: waist < 80 cmGroup 2: waist > 80 cm	Group 1: 70Group 2: 86	Group 1: 55.21 ± 5.24Group 2: 57.23 ± 6.12	 	Peschers et al., 1997 	PFM strength	Intravaginal	MVC	Women:Group 1: primiparaGroup 2: multiparaGroup 3: CG: caesarean delivery	55Group 1: 25Group 2: 20Group 3: 10	Group 1: 28.2 ± 4.31Group 2: 31.9 ± 3.88Group 3: 30.2 ± 4.9	 	Dynamometer	 	El-Sayegh et al., 2020 	PFM forces	Intravaginal	-	-	-	-	 	Niederauer et al., 2019 	Vaginal closure force	Intravaginal	-	-	-	-	 	Chamochumbi et al., 2012 	Maximal vaginal aperture; PFM active and passive strength	Intravaginal	MVC in supine	Women:Group 1: CGGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 16Group 2: 16	Group 1: 37 ± 8Group 2: 48 ± 7	 	Romero-Cullerés et al., 2017 	PFM strength	Intravaginal	MVC in supine	Women, INC	102	56 ± 10.3
Data extracted from the reviewed studies including EMG sensors.
Study	Obtained Parameter	SensorPosition	Test Activity	Subject Characteristics	 	Group	Number	Mean Age (Years)	 	Surface EMG	 	Alves et al., 2015 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	MVC in supine position	Women;Group 1: INC Group 2: CG	Group 1: 18Group 2: 12	INC: 66.11 ± 8.72CG: 65.67 ± 9.21	 	Albaladejo-Belmonte et al., 2021 	PFM activity	Perineum	MVC in dorsal lithotomy position	Women;Group 1: >35, PGroup 2: <35, NPGroup 3: >18, CPP	Group 1: 24 Group 2: 24Group 3: 24	Group 1: 40.9 ± 7.2Group 2: 28.1 ± 3.2Group 3: 43.8 ± 8.8	 	Albaladejo-Belmonte M. et al., 2021 	PFM activity	Electrodes on the Labia Majora	Relaxed state, MVC in dorsal lithotomy position	Women;Group 1: CPPGroup 2: healthy	Group 1: 24 Group 2: 24	Group 1: 43.8 ± 8.8Group 2: 40.9 ± 7.2	 	Bertotto et al., 2017 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	MVC, coughs; lithotomy, supine, seated, and standing positions	postmenopausal women with INCGroup 1: CGGroup 2: PFMEGroup 3: PFME + BF	Group 1: 14Group 2: 15Group 3: 16	Group l: 57.1 ± 5.3Group 2: 59.3 ± 4.9Group 3: 58.4 ± 6.8	 	Kannan et al., 2022 	PFM activity	Perineum	PFMT in lying, sitting and standing positions	Women INC;Group 1: PFMT with PelviSenseGroup 2: PFMT with BFGroup 3: CG	Group 1: 17Group 2: 17Group 3: 17	Group 1: 49.3 ± 5.5Group 2: 52.5 ± 6.2Group 3: 46.8 ± 8.3	 	Chmielewska et al., 2019 	PFM activity	Endovaginal	MVC in supine position, sEMG during 5 exercises in lying supine and standing position	Women;Group 1: PFMT with BFGroup 2: Training with Pilates	Group 1: 18 Group 2: 13	Group 1: 52.9 ± 4Group 2: 51.5–6 ± 5.2	 	Capelini et al., 2006 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	PFMT in lithotomy position	Women, INC;	14	49.6	 	Hirakawa et al., 2013 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	PFMT	Women, INC;Group 1: PFMTGroup 2: PFMT with BF	Group 1: 23Group 2: 23	Group 1: 58.3 ± 11.2Group 2: 55.3 ± 9.8	 	Blagg and Bolgla, 2023 	PFM activity(levator ani)	Perianal	Yoga poses	healthy, NP, regularly exercising females	25	23.7 ± 2.2	 	Voorham-van der Zalm et al., 2013 	PFM activity	Intravaginal, Intrarectal	MVC, MEC, coughs, Valsalva maneuvers in supine (women) or side (men) position	Group 1: malesWomen:Group 2: NP, premenopausal Group 3: P, premenopausal Group 4: NP, postmenopausal Group 5: P, postmenopausal	Group 1: 61Group 2: 86Group 3: 37Group 4: 5Group 5: 40	Group 1: 41 (19–70)Group 2: 24 (18–49)Group 3: 44 (32–56)Group 4: 54 (50–65)Group 5: 58 (51–72)	 	Moser et al., 2018 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	CMJ, DJ	Women;Group 1: CONGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 28Group 2: 22	21–58	 	Leitner et al., 2016 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	Running at 7, 11, and 15 km/h	Women;Group 1: CONGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 28Group 2: 22	18–60	 	Hodges et al., 2007 	PFM activity, Activity of external anal sphincter (men)	Women:IntravaginalMen:Intrarectal	Rapid arm movements, different types of breathing, in standing position	Women;Men;	Women: 6Man: 1	Women: 45.7 (35–63)Man: 30	 	Koenig et al., 2020 	PFM activity,wavelet analyses	Intravaginal	Running 7, 11, and 15 km/h	Women;Group 1: CONGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 28Group 2: 21	18–60	 	Chen et al., 2005 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	PFM rest and MVC standing, standing with the ankles dorsiflexed and plantar flexed	Women with INC;	39	38–72	 	Junginger et al., 2018 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	Maximal and submaximal PFMC in upright position	Women;Group 1: CONGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 14Group 2: 68	28–77 (median age 47)	 	Lee et al., 2019 	PFM activity	Intravaginal, Intrarectal	Ankle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion in standing position and in long sitting position	healthy adults (Women, Men) without pelvic floor dysfunction	Women: 33Men: 28	Women: 43.04Men: 37.86	 	Navarro Brazález et al., 2020 	PFM activity	Perineum	Hypopressive exercise in supine position with one leg raised, then in an orthostatic position	Parous women;	66	45	 	Chmielewska et al., 2015 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	MVC in lying, sitting, standing position	Healthy nulliparous women;	20	19–28	 	Surface EMG-Periform	 	Sapsford and Hodges, 2001 	MA of pubococcygeus	Women:IntravaginalMen:Intrarectal 	MVC; AMM in supine and standing position	Women;Man;	Women: 6Man: 1	Women: 45.7 (35–63)Man: 30	 	Capson et al., 2011 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	standing, coughing, Valsalva, MVC; load-catching task in three different standing postures 	Women; NP	16	Between 22 and 41	 	García-Arrabé et al., 2023 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	Running at 9, 11, and 13 km/h with two types of shoes	Female recreational runners, NP	10	20–38	 	Smith et al., 2006 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	Flex/extend their right arm as fast as possible in standing position	Women;Group 1: CONGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 14Group 2: 16	Group 1: 52.5Group 2: 49.8	 	Sapsford et al., 2001 	PFM activity	Intravaginal	MVC, lying with hips flexed to 60°, three different lumbar spine positions	Parous women;	7	49.3 (39–64)	 	Needle EMG	 	Deindl et al., 1993 	MA of pubococcygeal muscles	Percutaneously into pubococcygeal muscles	MA of pubococcygeal muscles during relaxation, MVC, squeezing, cough, Valsalva in supine and erect position	women; NP, CON	10	22–32	 	Shafik et al., 1991 	MA of puborectalis muscle	Into puborectalis muscle	Coughing or Valsalva’s maneuver	Women;Men;	Women: 9Men: 10	38.6 (22–58)
Data extracted from the reviewed studies including Electrical Stimulation.
Study	Stimulated Part	SensorPosition	Stimulation Type	Subject Characteristics	 	Group	Number	Mean Age (Years)	 	ES	 	Barroso Jr. et al., 2014 	Urethral external sphincter muscle	Perineum	During sleeping	Nocturnal enuresis patients	6	11	 	Frazén et al., 2010 	PFM	Vaginally and/or transanally	20 min stimulation sessions; 1–2 times per week	Women; INCGroup 1: ESGroup 2: tolterodine receive	61Group 1: 31Group 2: 30	Group 1: 55Group 2: 61	 	Wang and Zhang, 2012 	Pudendal nerve—urethral external sphincter	Pudendal nerve—lower back	60 min stimulation sessions, 3 times per week	Women, INC3 groups with different doctors	Group 1: 35Group 2: 60Group 3: 30	Group 1: 54.9 ± 9.7Group 2: 55.0 ± 10.6Group 3: 57.9 ± 10.6	 	Hwang et al., 2021 	PFM	Sacral and perivaginal regions—sitting on device	15 min stimulation sessions, 5 times per week	Women, INCGroup 1: ESGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 17Group 2: 16	Group1: 42.1 ± 8.8Group2: 41.1 ± 7.2	 	Dmochowski et al., 2019 	PFM	pelvic area	30 min stimulation sessions, 5 times per week	Women, INCGroup 1: ESGroup 2: comparator device	Group 1: 89Group 2: 91	46.9	 	Terlikowski et al., 2013 	PFM	Intravaginal	20 min stimulation sessions, twice a day	Women, INCGroup 1: ESGroup 2: CG	Group 1:64Group 2:29	Group 1: 46.9 ± 6.8Group 2: 45.6 ± 7.9	 	Elena et al., 2020 	PFM	Group 1: chairGroup 2: intravaginal	28 min stimulation sessions, 2–3 times per week	Women, PFDGroup 1: ES1Group 2: ES2Group 3: healthy CG	Group 1: 50Group 2: 25Group 3: 20	Group 1: 31.12 ± 1.52Group 2: 31.96 ± 3.20Group 3: 27.20 ± 2.02	 	Huebner et al., 2011 	PFM	Intravaginal	15 min stimulation sessions, 2 times a day	Women, INCGroup 1: PFMT + ES1Group 2: PFMT + ES2Group 3: PFMT	Group 1: 33Group 2: 28Group 3: 27	49.8 ± 12.9	 	ES—Dualpex 961® Quark Co	 	Mateus-Vasconcelos et al., 2018 	PFM	Intravaginal	20 min stimulation sessions	Women, PFDGroup 1: ESGroup 2–4: CG	Group 1: 33Group 2: 33Group 3: 33Group 4: 33	Group 1: 55.6 ± 10.3Group 2: 53.7 ± 14.0Group 3: 49.6 ± 11.3Group 4: 53.5 ± 14.0	 	Fürst et al., 2014 	PFM	Intravaginal	30 min stimulation sessions, twice a week	Women, INCGroup 1: ESGroup 2: ES + PFMT	Group 1: 24Group 2: 24	49.6 ± 10.60	 	Alves et al., 2011 	Neuromuscular—PFM	Intravaginal	20 min stimulation sessions, twice a week	Women, INC	20	55.55 ± 6.51	 	Pereira et al., 2012 	PFM	Suprapubic region and ischial tuberosity	20 min stimulation sessions, twice a week	Women, INCGroup 1: ESGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 7Group 2: 7	Group 1: 68.57 ± 10.93Group 2: 69.28 ± 6.94	 	Correia et al., 2014 	PFM	Group 1: suprapubic region and ischial tuberosityGroup 2: intravaginal	20 min stimulation sessions, twice a week	Women, INCGroup 1: surface ESGroup 2: intra-vaginal ESGroup 3: CG	Group 1: 15Group2: 15Group3: 15	Group 1: 64.46 ± 8.83Group2: 59.86 ± 4.82Group3: 60.13 ± 9.35
Data extracted from the reviewed studies including ultrasound.
Study	Obtained Parameter	SensorPosition	Test Activity	Subject Characteristics	 	Group	Number	Mean Age (Years)	 	Ultrasound	 	Speksnijder et al., 2012 	Levator ani hiatus during maximal contraction	Transabdominal	MVC; supine	Symptomatic Women	100	57	 	Thompson et al., 2005 	PFM contraction	Transabdominaltransperineal	MVC, Valsalva; supine	WomenGroup 1: INCGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 60Group 2: 60	43 ± 7	 	Dietz et al., 2001 	Bladder neck displacement	Translabial	Rest, MVC; supine	WomenGroup 1: INCGroup 2: CG	212	53.8	 	Yoshida et al., 2017 	Bladder base displacement; PF morphology	Transabdominal	MVC; supine	WomenGroup 1: INCGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 22Group 2: 51	Group 1: 33.2 ± 4.7Group 2: 32.2 ± 4.2	 	Thompson and O’Sullivan, 2003 	Bladder and levator Plate displacement	Transabdominal	MVC; supine	Patients with INC and/or POP	104	45.03 ± 13.1	 	Lovegrove Jones et al., 2010 	Kinematics of urethra and pubic symphysis; anorectal angle	Perineal	Coughing; supine	WomenGroup 1: INCGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 9Group 2: 23	Group 1: 47.9 ± 13.2Group 2: 41.1 ± 13.6	 	Kruger et al., 2007 	Pelvic organ displacement; levator hiatus	Translabial	Rest, MVC, Valsalva; supine	Women:Group 1: HIFIT athletesGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 24Group 2: 22	Group 1: 28.5Group 2: 27.6	 	McLean et al., 2013 	Urethral morphology and mobility	Transperineal	Coughing, Valsalva; supine	Women, INCGroup 1: PFMTGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 15Group 2: 17	Group 1: 49.5 ± 8.2Group 2: 54.0 ± 8.4	 	Oleksy et al., 2019 	PFM asymmetry	Transabdominal	Rest, MVC	Healthy, nulliparous women	30	-(young)	 	Dietz et al., 2001 	Position of the bladder neck, leading edge of a cystocele, the cervix, cul-de-sac, and rectum	Translabial	Coughing, MVC; supine	-	145	-
Data extracted from the reviewed studies including magnetic stimulation.
Study	Stimulated Part	SensorPosition	Stimulation Type	Subject Characteristics	 	Group	Number	Mean Age (Years)	 	Extracorporeal MS—Neo Control Chair	 	Weber-Rajek et al., 2020 	Transversus abdominis muscle, perineum	Chair	Group 1: 45 min sessions, 3 times a weekGroup 2: 15 min sessions, 3 times a week	Women, INCGroup 1: MS 1Group 2: MS 2Group 3: CG	Group 1: 40Group 2: 37Group 3: 34	Group 1: 70.12Group 2: 66.71Group 3: 69.79	 	Galloway et al., 1999 	Transversus abdominis muscle, perineum	Chair	20 min sessions, twice a week	Women, INC	64	55 ± 12	 	Yokoyama et al., 2004 	Transversus abdominis muscle, perineum	Chair	20 min sessions, twice a week	INCGroup 1: stress-UIGroup 2: urge UI	Group 1: 17Group 2: 15	Group 1: 60.1 ± 12.6Group 2: 68.5 ± 14.2	 	Ünsal et al., 2003 	Transversus abdominis muscle, perineum	Chair	20 min sessions, twice a week	Women, INCGroup 1: stress-UIGroup 2: urge UI	Group 1: 29Group 2: 15	Group 1: 55Group 2: 58	 	Extracorporeal MS—QRS®-1010 PelviCenter	 	Lim et al., 2018 	PFM, thigh muscles, gluteus muscles, lumbar spine	Chair	20 min sessions, twice a week	Women, INCGroup 1: MSGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 57Group 2: 58	Group 1: 51.8 ± 10.0Group 2: 52.7 ± 7.8	 	Lim et al., 2017 	PFM, thigh muscles, gluteus muscles, lumbar spine	Chair	20 min sessions, twice a week	Women, INCGroup 1: MSGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 57Group 2: 58	Group 1: 51.8 ± 10.0Group 2: 52.7 ± 7.8	 	Other MS	 	Sun et al., 2015 	PFM, sacral roots	Chair	20 min sessions, twice a week	women with urinary tract dysfunction following radical hysterectomy	32	Median age: 61
Data extracted from the reviewed studies including MRI.
Study	Obtained Parameter	SensorPosition	Test Activity	Subject Characteristics	 	Group	Number	Mean Age (Years)	 	MRI	 	DeLancey, 2003 	Levator ani muscle	-	-	Women:Group 1: NPGroup 2: primiparas and CONGroup 3: primiparas and INC	Group 1: 80Group 2: 80Group 3: 80	Group 1: 29.2 ± 5.5Group 2: 29.8 ± 4.4Group 3: 30.0 ± 5.7	 	Dynamic MRI	 	El-Gharib, 2013 	pubococcygeal line	-	Supine position	Patients having clinical manifestations suggesting pelvic floor weakness	60	38 ± 4.2	 	Bø et al., 2001 	Movement of bladder neck and coccyx movement	-	PFM function during contraction and straining in an upright sitting position	Women;Group 1: CONGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 9Group 2: 7	Group 1: 39.4 ± 3.9Group 2: 52.4 ± 8.3	 	Grassi et al., 2007 	Coccyx movement	-	Defecation act in supine position: rest, contraction, straining and evacuation	Women;Men;Patients with clinical indication for dynamic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) defecography	Women: 95Men: 17	Women: 58.0 (25–84)Men: 67.0 (33–75)	 	Fujisaki et al., 2018 	Coccyx movement	-	PFM contraction and strain	Women;Group 1: INCGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 57Group 2: 6	median: 50 (30–81)	 	Talasz et al., 2011 	Cranio-caudal movement of diaphragm and PF	-	Breathing, coughing in supine position	Healthy volunteers	8	25 ± 6 (19–33)
Data extracted from the reviewed studies including all other sensor technology, such as X-ray, electromagnetic tracking, photogrammetry, accelerometer, vibration, and infrared thermography.
Study	Obtained Parameter	SensorPosition	Test Activity	Subject Characteristics	 	Group	Number	Mean Age (Years)	 	X-ray	 	Lind et al., 1996 	Thoracic kyphosis	X-ray	Standing in natural, upright postures, arms clasped overhead	Women;Group 1: advanced uterine prolapseGroup 2: no evidence of prolapse	Group 1: 48Group 2: 48	matched age (±4 years) of Group 1 and Group 2	 	Park and Han, 2015 	Diaphragmatic motion with contraction of the PFM during breathing	X-ray	Diaphragmatic motion was measured before and during contraction of the PFM in a supine position	Healthy women	20	22.5	 	Nguyen et al., 2000 	Angles of lumbar lordosis and pelvic inlet	X-ray	Participants standing in their usual upright posture, with their shoes on and their hands at chest level	Parous women;Group 1: with prolapseGroup 2: without prolapse	Group 1: 20Group 2: 20	Group 1: 55.3 ± 9.0Group 2: 53.4 ± 9.5	 	EMT	 	Leitner et al., 2018 	PFM kinematics	Sensor 1: vaginal probe Sensor 2: skin, second sacral vertebrae	Running at speeds of 7, 11, and 15 km/h	Women;Group 1: CONGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 27Group 2: 19	Group 1: 38.7 (18–60)Group 2: 45.3 (18–60)	 	Moser et al., 2019 	PFM kinematics	Sensor 1: vaginal probe Sensor 2: skin, second sacral vertebrae	CMJ and DJ	Women;Group 1: CONGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 24Group 2: 21	Group 1: 39.3 (18–60)Group 2: 45.8 (18–60)	 	Photogrammetry	 	Szczygieł et al., 2018 	Posture (head, pelvic, trunk) and breathing	Reflective markers on head, pelvic, and trunk	Different exercises	Participants without any respiratory disorders, chest deformations, pain complaints, or visible postural defects	18	25.7 ± 3.5	 	Zhoolideh et al., 2021 	Lumbar lordosis and thoracic kyphosis, head sagittal tilt angle, head coronal tilt,scapular alignment	Reflex markers on anatomical landmarks	-	Women;Group 1: with PFDsGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 47Group 2: 47	Group 1: 37.74 ± 6.29Group 2: 37.43 ± 6.17	 	Accelerometer	 	Niederauer et al., 2022 	Intravaginal acceleration,pelvis acceleration	Posterior fornix of the vagina	Running at different speeds	Women;Group 1: CONGroup 2: INC	Group 1: 7Group 2: 10	Group 1: 39.8 ± 11.3Group 2: 45.6 ± 11.8	 	Bohorquez et al., 2020 	Vaginal tilt angle,fornix tilt angle	Anterior, posterior, and lateral areas of the fornix	Rest, Valsalva, MVC, with maximal hold, during repeated contractions in supine, seated and standing position	Women with INC	10	>18	 	Vibration	 	Lauper et al., 2009 	-	Whole-body vibration platform	MVC, different vibration intensities, vibration + MVC	Women;Group 1: Post-partumGroup 2: CG	Group 1: 17Group 2: 21	Group 1: 31.7 ± 3.4Group 2: 30.0 ± 4.7	 	IRT	 	Da Silva et al., 2022 	PF temperature	Camera perpendicular to the perineum	Rest, MVC in supine position (with bent knees and flexed and abducted hips)	Women;	231	58.4 ± 6
The most common factors in the analyzed studies, with a color-coded classification of each parameter according to the level of evidence stated in the respective study. Green color represents statistical correlation between the factor and the pelvic floor health. Red color means that no correlation was found.
Factors	Age	Menopause	Parity	Mode ofDelivery	FetalMacrosomia	Hormone Therapy	BMI	Race	Chronic Cough	Hysterectomy	PhysicalActivity	Gastrointestinal Pathology	Gynecological Pathology	Other Diseases *	Respiration	Spine Curvature	 	Study		 	Kim et al., 2007 																	 	Peinado-Molina et al., 2023 																	 	Kepenekci et al., 2011 																	 	Eftekhar et al., 2012 																	 	Nygaard et al., 1994 																	 	MacLennan et al., 2000 																	 	Wu et al., 2014 																	 	Nygaard et al., 2008 																	 	Hwang et al., 2021 																	 	Vieira et al., 2020 																	 	Rotveit et al., 2001 																	 	Wasserberg et al., 2007 																	 	Capson et al., 2011 																	 	Mattox et al., 2000 																	 	Melli and Alizadeh, 2007 																	 	Nguyen et al., 2000 																	 	Zhoolideh et al., 2021
* Arthritis and osteoporosis.