Rationale for a Multi-Factorial Approach for the Reversal of Cognitive Decline in Alzheimer’s Disease and MCI: A Review
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a multifactorial, progressive, neurodegenerative disease typically characterized by memory loss, personality changes, and a decline in overall cognitive function. Usually manifesting in individuals over the age of 60, this is the most prevalent type of dementia and remains the fifth leading cause of death among Americans aged 65 and older. While the development of effective treatment and prevention for AD is a major healthcare goal, unfortunately, therapeutic approaches to date have yet to find a treatment plan that produces long-term cognitive improvement. Drugs that may be able to slow down the progression rate of AD are being introduced to the market; however, there has been no previous solution for preventing or reversing the disease-associated cognitive decline. Recent studies have identified several factors that contribute to the progression and severity of the disease: diet, lifestyle, stress, sleep, nutrient deficiencies, mental health, socialization, and toxins. Thus, increasing evidence supports dietary and other lifestyle changes as potentially effective ways to prevent, slow, or reverse AD progression. Studies also have demonstrated that a personalized, multi-therapeutic approach is needed to improve metabolic abnormalities and AD-associated cognitive decline. These studies suggest the effects of abnormalities, such as insulin resistance, chronic inflammation, hypovitaminosis D, hormonal deficiencies, and hyperhomocysteinemia, in the AD process. Therefore a personalized, multi-therapeutic program based on an individual’s genetics and biochemistry may be preferable over a single-drug/mono-therapeutic approach. This article reviews these multi-therapeutic strategies that identify and attenuate all the risk factors specific to each affected individual. This article systematically reviews studies that have incorporated multiple strategies that target numerous factors simultaneously to reverse or treat cognitive decline. We included high-quality clinical trials and observational studies that focused on the cognitive effects of programs comprising lifestyle, physical, and mental activity, as well as nutritional aspects. Articles from PubMed Central, Scopus, and Google Scholar databases were collected, and abstracts were reviewed for relevance to the subject matter. Epidemiological, pathological, toxicological, genetic, and biochemical studies have all concluded that AD represents a complex network insufficiency. The research studies explored in this manuscript confirm the need for a multifactorial approach to target the various risk factors of AD. A single-drug approach may delay the progression of memory loss but, to date, has not prevented or reversed it. Diet, physical activity, sleep, stress, and environment all contribute to the progression of the disease, and, therefore, a multi-factorial optimization of network support and function offers a rational therapeutic strategy. Thus, a multi-therapeutic program that simultaneously targets multiple factors underlying the AD network may be more effective than a mono-therapeutic approach.

1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) was officially listed as the sixth-leading cause of death in the United States in 2019 and is the fifth leading cause of death among Americans aged 65 and older. As it has impacted the lives of the elderly around the world, it is now more important than ever to develop an effective treatment not only to slow the progression of this disease but also to create a preventive approach.
The major genetic risk factor for AD is apolipoprotein E, epsilon 4 allele (ApoE4), and the inheritance of one or two copies of ApoE ε4 increases AD risk approximately 3- or 12-fold, respectively. Based on recent findings, it appears that ApoE4 acts as a transcription factor and binds to the promoters of genes involved in a range of processes linked to AD disease pathogenesis. Interestingly, several of these genes have previously been linked to AD pathogenesis and include genes involved in inflammation, energy metabolism, cardiovascular disease, estrogen regulation, axon guidance, neuronal survival, and cell death. The transcriptional role of ApoE4 needs further investigation since it influences brain health and homeostasis beyond the known β-amyloid or Tau pathways, thus pointing to novel therapeutic strategies for AD.
While the development of effective treatment and prevention is a major healthcare goal, unfortunately, therapeutic approaches to AD to date have not led to sustainable improvements. The best results from recent clinical trials have been to delay the progression of cognitive decline rather than improve cognition or halt the decline. More than two hundred promising drug candidates have failed clinical trials in the past decade, suggesting that AD and its causes may be complex. Some of the potential reasons for failure in effective drug development include the following: (1) AD starts out with a long pre-symptomatic period, but treatment is typically initiated late in the pathophysiological process; (2) it appears that AD is not a single disease as it exhibits several different subtypes; (3) there may be multiple potential contributors to AD, such as inflammation, toxins, infections, trophic withdrawal, insulin resistance, vascular compromise, and trauma; (4) The model of AD on which the drug targets are based (e.g., amyloid-β peptide, tau) is incomplete owing to several potential contributors.
Based on recent evidence from a number of independent groups, it appears that AD is unique to each individual and, in different individuals, has different genetics, epigenetics, biochemistry, subtypes, and, thus, different responses to treatment. Several of the recent clinical trials and observational studies showed superior outcomes when a multitude of these potential contributors was taken into account and addressed simultaneously. Table 1 shows that, given the complex nature of AD pathophysiology, a “perfect” drug may be required to be highly multi-functional. Thus, identifying and addressing all potential contributors to cognitive decline with a personalized, multi-therapeutic approach may be a more effective disease-modifying strategy. Shown in Figure 1 are the various strategies for the reversal of AD and optimization of brain health.
This article systematically reviews clinical trials and observational studies that have incorporated multiple strategies to target numerous factors simultaneously to reverse, prevent, or treat cognitive decline and dementia.

2. Multiple Strategies to Optimize Brain Health

2.1. Diet & Nutrition
A healthy dietary management strategy including dietary patterns, food, and dietary supplements may be a component of an effective protocol to prevent MCI or AD-associated cognitive impairment. Since gut microbiome and other gastrointestinal (GI) issues, metabolic syndromes, such as diabetes and obesity, gut inflammation, and oxidative stress have long been considered to play major roles in cognitive impairment and AD, not surprisingly, most of the research studies focusing on diet and dietary intervention trials have involved foods or dietary supplements that addressed the above issues. There is sufficient evidence from epidemiological and observational studies and randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that suggest a neuroprotective role of the Mediterranean diet, the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet, the Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay (MIND) diet, and the KetoFLEX 12/3 diet in reducing cognitive decline.
The Mediterranean, DASH, and MIND diets encompass a multi-nutrient dietary profile that includes fruits, vegetables, nuts, cereals, legumes, olive oil (as the main source of fat), moderate consumption of fish, and a low to moderate intake of dairy products, red meat, and meat products.
The DASH diet also emphasizes foods that are low in sodium and rich in potassium, calcium, and magnesium. Higher adherence to these diets was associated with better cognitive function, lower rates of cognitive decline, and reduced risk of AD. Furthermore, certain food groups included in these various diet options, such as fruits and vegetables, legumes, whole grains, nuts, and olive oil, are by themselves known to improve cognitive functioning. Specific nutrients like unsaturated fatty acids, antioxidants, and dietary flavonoids have also been associated with better cognitive functioning and a lower risk of cognitive decline in the follow-up period.
The Finnish Geriatric Intervention Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability (FINGER) program, which was initially developed to improve heart and vascular health, relies on a diet that includes fish, fruits, vegetables, and oils. The intervention also includes physical exercise, cognitive training, social activities, and the management of vascular and metabolic risk factors. This multi-domain lifestyle intervention prevents or slows down cognitive decline. While the participants in the FINGER trial did not exhibit any cognitive issues, they had an increased risk for dementia based on vascular risk factors. While improvement was observed in both the intervention and the placebo groups, the improvement was much greater and better sustained in the intervention group in all cognitive tests administered, namely executive function, information processing, and complex memory tasks. The risk of cognitive decline was 30% higher for the control group compared to the intervention group.
The KetoFLEX 12/3 diet is a part of the ReCODE Program, and unlike other programs (FINGER, DASH, etc.), it is a precision medicine approach that utilizes seven foundational strategies, as well as targeted therapeutics for identified pathogens, toxins, deficiencies, and immune dysfunction, to optimize brain health. KetoFLEX 12/3 is a plant-rich ketogenic diet that has proved to be an important component of an effective strategy for the reversal of cognitive decline associated with AD and MCI health. It is a heavily plant-based, nutrient-dense, whole-food diet that emphasizes local, organic, and seasonal non-starchy vegetables from every color of the rainbow, combined with an adequate amount of protein and generous amounts of healthy fat. KetoFLEX 12/3 also incorporates a long daily fast—a minimum of 12 h, with at least 3 h of fasting before bedtime. This approach utilizes multiple mechanisms to support the brain to prevent and reverse cognitive decline, such as increased energy (via ketosis), insulin sensitivity, reduced inflammation, improved vascular health, and detoxification.
Patients with cognitive impairment and the onset of AD who enrolled in the ReCODE program showed significant improvement in cognitive functioning with outcome measures such as Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), AQ-21 (a subjective scale completed by the significant other or study partner), and AQ-C change scale (a subjective scale of cognitive improvement or decline completed by the significant other or study partner). Furthermore, participants in the ReCODE program experienced improved metabolic parameters and cognition, resulting in either arrested cognitive decline or, in most cases, improved cognitive performance.

2.2. Physical Exercise
Aerobic exercise increases heart rate and oxygen uptake, thereby improving cardiovascular health, which in turn benefits the brain. Studies have shown that aerobic exercise improves blood flow to the brain and stimulates the release of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which promotes neuroplasticity, thereby preserving brain volume. Moderate to vigorous aerobic exercise also activates the glymphatic system that promotes the clearance of β-amyloid and other toxins.
Strength training physical exercises improve muscle strength, muscle mass, and endurance, thereby preventing sarcopenia. Furthermore, strength training exercise improves higher-level cognitive processes and memory, stabilizes brain volume, and decreases white matter lesions.
Mind-body exercise combined with body movement improves balance, coordination, gait, and agility; improves neuronal, synaptic, and vascular systems of the brain; promotes the connectivity of brain regions, thereby improving executive function, memory, and emotional status; and curbs neuronal inflammation, all of which improve brain health.
Physical exercise (PE) has been proven to help prevent and remediate cognitive decline. Research studies have shown that a consistent practice of physical activity is associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular disease and physically active individuals are less likely to develop dementia. Research at the cellular and molecular levels coupled with in silico studies suggested that physical exercise impacts brain health by regulating and enhancing genes, proteins, and other neurotrophic factors that directly affect memory, mood, assimilation, and growth. Specifically for brain health, three types of exercise are recommended:
A multifactorial intervention involving diet, PE, and other lifestyle changes may be more effective for ameliorating cognitive decline and may have a sustained beneficial effect that is more pronounced than a single intervention. While adherence to a Mediterranean-type diet and higher physical activity was associated with reduced risk for dementia, the FINGER trial and the ReCODE program clearly demonstrated that physical exercise in combination with other interventions, including vascular risk management, diet, and cognitive training, was associated with improved cognitive performance. Among the best improvements were those seen in cognitive functions, cognitive impairment, overall health, and mood status.

2.3. Sleep
The core functions of sleep are to repair, reorganize, maintain brain health, and clear waste. Sleep facilitates memory consolidation and new learning while also laying down new memories as long-term memories. Often sleep disturbances will appear in the preclinical phase of AD. Cognitive decline and an increased risk of mild cognitive impairment and dementia are associated with poor sleep quality. Older adults with disturbed sleep experience a faster decline in cognition than those who sleep well. It is now known that people with AD often have sleep difficulties, and the lack of sleep may, in turn, influence Alzheimer’s-related brain changes that can begin several years before memory loss and other AD symptoms appear. Poor sleep or sleep deprivation triggers β-amyloid build-up in brain regions that include the thalamus and hippocampus, which are vulnerable to damage in the early stages of AD. Study participants with elevated levels of β-amyloid reported mood disturbances after sleep deprivation. Researchers have suggested that a wide variety of cognitive functions, ranging from attention and memory to language and reasoning, are affected by the lack of adequate sleep.
AD may be accompanied by other co-morbid medical conditions or behavioral disorders which can contribute to sleep issues. Conditions including but not limited to restless legs syndrome and mental health disorders, including anxiety and depression, are all associated with sleep difficulties. Certain medications, such as decongestants, steroids, and some medicine for high blood pressure, asthma, and depression, can also trigger sleep disruptions. Nearly 15% of AD cases may be attributed to sleep problems that can also be due to the long-term use of benzodiazepines. Further evaluation of the neurophysiological and cellular mechanisms by which poor sleep contributes to AD may help in identifying new molecular targets for intervention.
Melatonin is a sleep-influencing, circadian-rhythm-dependent neuroendocrine hormone that has a protective role in the development of AD because of its anti-inflammatory and antioxidative effects. Studies have shown that healthy subjects have higher levels of melatonin compared to AD patients. Melatonin acts as an anti-oxidant by blocking free radical production, reduces Aβ- and NFκB-induced inflammation and, thus, serves as an attractive therapeutic candidate for AD. Thus, combined with a proper diet, PE, and other lifestyle changes, sleep intervention may be more effective in ameliorating cognitive decline and may have a sustained beneficial effect that is more pronounced than a single intervention.

2.4. Mind and Mental Exercise
Several research studies have now clearly shown the remarkable ability of the brain to reorganize and network in response to various sensory experiences. This neuroplasticity involves adaptive structural and functional changes to the brain. Both healthy and diseased brains have the ability to change their activity in response to intrinsic or extrinsic stimuli by reorganizing their structure, functions, or connections following mental stimulation, brain training, or even traumatic injuries. AD is characterized by altered hippocampal synaptic efficacy leading to synaptic dysfunction, neuronal degeneration, and cognitive impairment. During the pre-AD phase, individuals usually present with mild cognitive impairment. In the mild to moderate stages of AD, cognitive impairment becomes more profound and widespread, and functional disability becomes increasingly evident—particularly in relation to more complex activities. In the more advanced stages of AD, most cognitive and functional abilities are profoundly impaired.
One of the most important sensory activities is the sense of sound, which has the power to stimulate the brain, which is why hearing loss has a profound impact on brain health. Recent studies suggest that hearing loss causes brain changes that raise the risk for AD. Individuals with moderate to severe hearing loss are up to five times as likely to develop AD-associated dementia, though more research is needed to determine the exact connection between sound, hearing loss, and AD.
AD also features emotional disturbances, including depression, anxiety, irritability, and apathy, that are commonly observed during the mild–moderate stage of AD. Mood disorders in AD patients are also associated with structural changes in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and other regions of the temporal lobe. Researchers believe that mood disorders trigger inflammation and disturb the normal balance of neurotransmission, leading to microglial activation and neurofibrillary tangle formation, which result in neuronal loss, suggesting the need for mental stability and mood stabilizing strategies.
Results from several observational studies and randomized clinical trials have indicated that people who engage in cognitively stimulating activities may show improvement in moods, thinking, hearing, problem-solving, reasoning, and memory and have a lower risk of cognitive decline and dementia. Improvement was also seen in activities of daily living (ADLs).
The ReCODE program clearly demonstrated that cognitive training, together with the other interventions, was associated with improvement in MoCA scores, CNS Vital Signs Neurocognitive Index, and AQ-C. The cognitive improvements were sustained, and no serious adverse events were recorded.

2.5. Stress Management
Research studies have shown that stress is one of the key factors involved in the development of AD. In animal models of AD, stress, in large part, activates the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, which in turn elevates circulating corticosteroid levels. The dysregulation of the HPA axis and elevated levels of cortisol are commonly seen in people with AD. Stress disrupts the balance between the cortisol receptors (glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid) that are present in the hippocampal area, leading to atrophy and the degeneration of the hippocampus. Stress affects other biological pathways as well, including the brain’s immune system, by producing pro-inflammatory cytokines, thereby promoting inflammation, which underlies AD pathogenesis. These findings suggest that stress management is critical to maintaining optimal cognitive health.
Stress management techniques for people with AD that are effective in improving the subjective well-being state include breathing exercises, mindfulness techniques, meditation, yoga, tai chi, spiritual practice, socialization, and other activities that focus on the present moment rather than allow distractions of continuous thoughts and mental turbulence.
Other interventions to mitigate lifestyle stressors are dance and music. These interventions have proven to be useful in improving verbal fluency and language ability in patients with AD, specifically those with MCI. There is growing evidence that music and dance reduce stress, increase cognitive acuity, promote a sense of well-being, and improve health span. Dance movements involve a lot of physical activity. Furthermore, dance steps, arm patterns, formations, speed, and various rhythmic movements keep the subjects in a constant mental learning process. The most challenging aspect of dance training required the subjects to recall the dance steps and routines in a timely manner. While all forms of dance reduce stress, improve cardiovascular health, and stimulate social connectivity, some dance forms that involve split-second changes in steps and complicated moves have an advantage over others when it comes to boosting cognitive acuity. Dancing involves continuous learning, which improves the kinesthetic, rational, musical, and emotional aspects of the brain, and ultimately promotes neural connectivity.
Additionally, music therapy (playing or listening) and art (drawing, painting, and sculpture) improve the quality of life and cognitive and emotional functions. Furthermore, these interventions have also improved stress, mood, well-being, sleep, and the quality of life in adults with subjective cognitive impairment (SCI), MCI, or AD. Significant improvements in anxiety and depression were also observed, and in all these cases, the physical and cognitive benefits were sustained.
The ReCODE program also reiterates the importance of stress management, which emphasizes regular deep breathing exercises and regular brain training.

2.6. Toxicity and Detoxification
Toxins are increasingly recognized to raise the risk of developing AD. Specific toxins that can lead to dementia are called dementogens and include metals, organic chemicals, and biotoxins. Research studies show that most people have varying levels of these toxins within their bodies, which can have a deleterious impact on brain structure and function.

2.6.1. Metal Toxicity
Mercury, aluminum, arsenic, lead, and cadmium are associated with numerous health issues, even at low levels of exposure. Although manganese, iron, zinc, and copper are essential metals, toxic levels can be harmful. The neurotoxicity of these metals and their roles in AD pathology have been documented in cell and animal models. Human epidemiologic studies have shown a close relationship between elevated levels of these metals and impaired cognitive function and cognitive decline.

2.6.2. Chemical Toxicity
In addition to metal toxicity, chemical toxicity that is a risk for developing AD arises from exposure to inorganic and organic hazards, which include pesticides (e.g., organochlorine and organophosphate insecticides), industrial chemicals (e.g., flame retardants), and air pollutants (e.g., particulate matter). Long-term exposure and the bioaccumulation of these environmental chemicals trigger neuroinflammation and neuropathology, paving the way for developing AD. Chronic exposure to chemical toxins triggers the reduction in volumes of the hippocampus and total gray matter. Brain imaging studies have also found that the areas of the brain most vulnerable to the toxic effects of chemicals and other environmental toxins are the pre- and post-central gyri, temporal transverse gyrus, and the calcarine regions. While epidemiologic associations between environmental chemical exposure and AD are still limited, the risk of developing AD in older adults due to neurologic impairments caused by environmental toxins is well established.
Studies in cell and animal models have revealed alterations in neural pathways and metabolism associated with AD. Neuro-imaging studies have reported associations between exposure to toxic chemicals and white matter volume reduction. Other reported effects include reduced gray matter, larger ventricular volume, and smaller corpus callosum. In addition, studies have also reported associations between a range of chemical pollutants and effects on cognitive function in older people, including the acceleration of cognitive decline and the induction of dementia.

2.6.3. Infections and Biotoxins
Recent studies have provided overwhelming evidence about the possibility of an infectious etiology for AD. The infiltration of the brain by pathogens, including but not limited to B. fragilis, HSV-type 1, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and P. gingivalis, is most frequently implicated in AD pathogenesis. These pathogens may directly cross a weakened blood–brain barrier and trigger neurological damage by eliciting neuroinflammation. Alternatively, increased gut permeability induced by gut microbiota may promote AD. Inflammatory microorganisms in gut microbiota are associated with peripheral inflammation in subjects with cognitive impairment. Chlamydia pneumoniae can infect the central nervous system via the olfactory and trigeminal nerves resulting in the dysregulation of key pathways involved in AD pathogenesis. Similarly, bacteria can travel from infections in the mouth through the bloodstream to the brain, and this is one mechanism influencing the cascade of events that leads to dementia. Older adults with signs of gum disease and mouth infections were more likely to develop antibodies against the oral bacterium P. gingivalis, which could cluster with other bacteria, such as C. rectus and P. melaninogenica, to further increase the risk of developing AD.
Similarly, viruses including Herpes simplex 1 (HSV-1) and Varicella zoster virus (VZV) activate the NF-kB-pro-inflammatory signaling system and have been associated with an increased risk of AD. This suggests that AD can be mitigated using appropriate antivirals for treatment or just possibly for prevention. Given the pro-inflammatory nature of the type 4 allele of the apolipoprotein E gene (APOE-ε4), this population may especially benefit from an antiviral regimen.
Additionally, while mold exposure has historically been connected with asthma and lung disease, mold-exposed people have reported impaired memory and concentration. Mold toxins, including trichothecenes from Stachybotrys, aflatoxin from Aspergillus, and ochratoxin A from Aspergillus and Penicillium, are risk factors for the progression of AD because of their neurotoxic effects and ability to impair cognitive functioning. Researchers are beginning to outline the specific inflammatory pathways by which mold affects the brain, particularly in relation to type 3 (toxic) AD. Mold spores trigger the body to mount an immune response, and people who develop chronic inflammation (including brain inflammation) following mold exposure are most likely to experience cognitive decline.
Thus, preventing and treating dementogen exposure and limiting ongoing exposure are paramount to optimizing brain health. Detoxification needs to be an integral part of any personalized, multi-therapeutic program to address overall health optimization and improve cognition.

2.7. Supplements & Neuroprotective Herbs
Neuroprotective herbs and supplements have great potential as part of an overall program for preventing and treating cognitive decline associated with MCI and AD. Numerous medicinal plants and their constituents are recommended to enhance cognitive function and alleviate other symptoms of AD, including poor cognition, memory loss, and depression. A single herb or a mixture of herbs is normally recommended, depending on the severity of the condition. The rationale is that the bioactive principles present in the medicinal plant act synergistically and modulate the activity of other constituents from the same plant or other plant species. Numerous plants and their constituents are reputed in traditional practices of medicine to enhance cognitive function. This approach has been used in Ayurveda, traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), and the Native American system of medicine, where a single herb or a combination of two or more herbs is commonly prescribed.
Various herbs that inhibit acetylcholinesterase activity, improve cholinergic function, possess anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities, contain natural COX-2 inhibitors, protect against brain cell degeneration, help in the reduction of amyloid, improve focus and alertness, improve the levels of NGF, stimulate neuronal branching, aid in detoxification, and boost the immune system are recommended for the prevention or treatment of AD.
Supplements are also a very important contributor to healing for those suffering from specific deficiencies that affect cognitive health. Long-term supplementation with anti-oxidant vitamins and mineral supplements is the most promising area for future research. Supplements including but not limited to ß-carotene, vitamin B12, folate (vitamin B9), vitamin B6, vitamin C, vitamin E, selenium, zinc, omega 3-fatty acids, glutathione, coenzyme Q10, alpha lipoic acid, choline, phosphatidylserine, and acetyl-L-carnitine may (a) improve short term memory in aging patients who have difficulty with recall, (b) improve the memory of patients with SCI or MCI, (c) help reverse some of the degenerative changes in brain function, and (d) prevent age-related mental decline and slow the progression of AD.
Thus, as one part of a comprehensive protocol, high-quality herbs and supplements tailored to the specific, evolving needs of each individual with SCI, MCI, or AD have proven to be important in treating or reversing AD.

3. Conclusions
Alzheimer’s disease is now the fifth leading cause of death for adults aged 65 and older and the most common cause of dementia among older adults. Research studies have indicated one of the major risk factors for late-onset AD is gender, with postmenopausal women contributing to over 60% of all those affected. Based on the fact that women comprise approximately two-thirds of all AD patients, researchers have put forward the “estrogen hypothesis,” which explains how 17β-estradiol exerts a neuroprotective effect by protecting the female’s brain from AD development. This hypothesis is supported by recent findings showing estradiol’s role in signaling and transcriptional pathways involving cognition and memory. While more work is needed to understand the mechanism of estradiol’s neuroprotective action in AD, recent data lend support to the use of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) as a successful intervention for women at risk for AD.
Furthermore, ethnicity also has a role in AD, with African Americans and Hispanics at greater risk than whites to have AD. While African Americans are about two times more likely than whites to have AD, Hispanics are about one and one-half times more likely than whites to have AD and other dementias. While more studies are needed to understand the mechanisms responsible for these differences, better management of these risk factors may help reduce the risk of AD among women, African Americans, and Hispanics.
While the development of effective AD treatment and prevention is a major healthcare goal for all people at risk for AD, thus far, billions have been spent on research and clinical trials, and there is still no mono-therapeutic drug(s) to delay or reverse AD. The recently approved FDA drugs have failed to show any significant slowing down of the actual symptoms of AD. The drugs for Alzheimer’s that have failed are based on the concept that removing the amyloid would ameliorate AD symptoms. The various amyloid-removing drugs may have reduced the amyloid levels but failed to improve cognition. There may be several reasons for such repeated failure: (1) Treatment for AD is typically initiated late in the pathophysiological process; (2) Alzheimer’s disease is not a single disease but rather exhibits several different subtypes; and (3) AD is a complex chronic condition, and there are several potential contributors to AD, such as inflammation, various chronic pathogens, trophic withdrawal, insulin resistance, vascular defects, trauma, and exposure to specific toxins.
Table 1 illustrates the criteria for a perfect treatment for AD and suggests that a mono-therapeutic approach is likely to be suboptimal; instead, a personalized, multifactorial program based on each individual’s genetics and biochemistry may be preferable, as shown in Figure 1 and Table 2. Research studies from several independent groups have now revealed an extensive network of molecular interactions involved in AD pathogenesis, suggesting that a network-based therapeutic approach that addresses all the potential contributors to cognitive decline simultaneously, rather than a single target-based approach, may be more effective for the treatment of dementia or MCI due to AD.
In all these cases, the root cause(s) of the degenerative process is/are being targeted. Thus the AD pathogenesis itself is impacted, resulting in a sustained improvement that represents a major advantage over mono-therapeutics.
The management strategies to treat/reverse cognitive decline include but are not limited to diet, physical exercise, sleep, stress management, brain exercise, detoxification, herbs, and supplements, as shown in Table 1 and Table 2 and Figure 1. A balanced dietary approach utilizes multiple mechanisms to support the brain optimally to prevent and reverse cognitive decline by mechanisms such as increased energy, insulin sensitivity, reduced inflammation, improved vascular health, and detoxification. Physical exercise is one of the best ways to reverse cognitive decline. It improves oxygenation, insulin sensitivity, and sleep; reduces overall stress; optimizes BMI (body mass index); and improves overall brain and body physiology. Obstructive sleep apnea and other causes of poor oxygenation are risk factors for poor cognitive health. Sleep is vital for memory consolidation and promotes metabolic health, reduces inflammation, and upregulates the immune system. In addition, people who engage in cognitively stimulating activities have a lower risk of cognitive decline and dementia. Mental stimulating tasks improve thinking, problem-solving, reasoning, and memory. Improvement is also seen in activities of daily living. Stress, especially chronic, unresolved, or severe stress, is another key contributor to AD. Stress management practices are required to reverse stress-associated cognitive decline. The detoxification of toxins and avoiding exposure to bacteria, viruses, or mold, which are turning out to be major contributors to cognitive decline, especially in genetically susceptible individuals, is a vital part of optimizing brain health. Herbs and supplements are needed to address any specific nutritional deficiency that affects cognitive health and, thus, can be a very important contributor to reversing cognitive decline.
Thus, results to date suggest that to successfully treat SCI, MCI, or AD, a mono-therapeutic drug strategy may not be optimal; instead, the most pragmatic approach involves addressing the above-mentioned targets underlying AD pathophysiology simultaneously. In other words, a network-based, multi-therapeutic approach may be feasible and potentially more effective (Table 2). While each of these strategies has been shown to reverse cognitive decline and promote neuroplasticity, when practiced together, their combined effect may be additive or even synergistic, and the benefits may be sustained, leading to overall health optimization and improved cognition.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization, D.E.B. and R.V.R.; Methodology, K.G.S., D.E.B. and R.V.R.; Data curation, K.G.S., D.E.B. and R.V.R.; original draft preparation and writing, K.G.S., J.G., A.L.B., and R.V.R.; reviewing and editing, J.G., A.L.B., C.C., S.O., L.K., D.E.B. and R.V.R. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Institutional Review Board Statement
Not Applicable.

Informed Consent Statement
Not Applicable.

Data Availability Statement
Not Applicable.

Conflicts of Interest
This manuscript is not under consideration by another journal, nor has it been published. None of the authors have any competing financial interest.

References
2022 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures
Precision Medicine Approach to Alzheimer’s Disease: Successful Pilot Project
Contribution of Alzheimer disease to mortality in the United States
A 2 year multidomain intervention of diet, exercise, cognitive training, and vascular risk monitoring versus control to prevent cognitive decline in at-risk elderly people (FINGER): A randomised controlled trial
The Finnish Geriatric Intervention Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability (FINGER): Study design and progress
Individualized clinical management of patients at risk for Alzheimer’s dementia
ApoE in Alzheimer’s disease: Pathophysiology and therapeutic strategies
Direct Transcriptional Effects of Apolipoprotein E
Apolipoprotein E4 Effects a Distinct Transcriptomic Profile and Dendritic Arbor Characteristics in Hippocampal Neurons Cultured in vitro
Differential Signaling Mediated by ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4 in Human Neurons Parallels Alzheimer’s Disease Risk
APOE4 impairs myelination via cholesterol dysregulation in oligodendrocytes
Transcriptional Effects of ApoE4: Relevance to Alzheimer’s Disease
Binding and repressive activities of apolipoprotein E3 and E4 isoforms on the human ApoD promoter
Identification of a Nuclear Respiratory Factor 1 Recognition Motif in the Apolipoprotein E Variant APOE4 linked to Alzheimer’s Disease
Reasons for Failed Trials of Disease-Modifying Treatments for Alzheimer Disease and Their Contribution in Recent Research
Why do trials for Alzheimer’s disease drugs keep failing? A discontinued drug perspective for 2010–2015
Proceedings of the Meeting of the International Working, G.; the American Alzheimer’s Association on “The Preclinical State of, A.D.; July; Washington Dc, U.S.A. Preclinical Alzheimer’s disease: Definition, natural history, and diagnostic criteria
Reversal of cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease
ReCODE: A Personalized, Targeted, Multi-Factorial Therapeutic Program for Reversal of Cognitive Decline
Protective genes and pathways in Alzheimer’s disease: Moving towards precision interventions
A review of multidomain interventions to support healthy cognitive ageing
Reversal of Cognitive Decline: 100 Patients
A Comprehensive, Multi-Modal Strategy to Mitigate Alzheimer’s Disease Risk Factors Improves Aspects of Metabolism and Offsets Cognitive Decline in Individuals with Cognitive Impairment
Paths to Alzheimer’s disease prevention: From modifiable risk factors to biomarker enrichment strategies
Case Study: A Precision Medicine Approach to Multifactorial Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease
A Personalized 12-week “Brain Fitness Program” for Improving Cognitive Function and Increasing the Volume of Hippocampus in Elderly with Mild Cognitive Impairment
Complementary and Integrative Medicine for Neurocognitive Disorders and Caregiver Health
The Coaching for Cognition in Alzheimer’s (COCOA) trial: Study design
Demonstrated brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer’s disease patients is associated with IGF-1 resistance, IRS-1 dysregulation, and cognitive decline
Inflammatory markers and the risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: A meta-analysis
Common neurodegenerative pathways in obesity, diabetes, and Alzheimer’s disease
Effects of Nutrition on Cognitive Function in Adults with or without Cognitive Impairment: A Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Clinical Trials
Adherence to a Mediterranean diet, cognitive decline, and risk of dementia
MIND diet slows cognitive decline with aging
Dietary Patterns and Cognitive Health in Older Adults: A Systematic Review
Influence of the Mediterranean and Ketogenic Diets on Cognitive Status and Decline: A Narrative Review
Lifestyle and neurocognition in older adults with cognitive impairments: A randomized trial
Longer Term Effects of Diet and Exercise on Neurocognition: 1-Year Follow-up of the ENLIGHTEN Trial
Association Between Insulin Resistance, Plasma Leptin, and Neurocognition in Vascular Cognitive Impairment
Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay (MIND) study: Rationale, design and baseline characteristics of a randomized control trial of the MIND diet on cognitive decline
Mediterranean diet, cognitive function, and dementia: A systematic review
Multidomain lifestyle intervention benefits a large elderly population at risk for cognitive decline and dementia regardless of baseline characteristics: The FINGER trial
MIND diet associated with reduced incidence of Alzheimer’s disease
Mediterranean diet and cognitive function in older adults
Association of Adherence to a Healthy Diet with Cognitive Decline in European and American Older Adults: A Meta-Analysis within the CHANCES Consortium
The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension Diet, Cognitive Function, and Cognitive Decline in American Older Women
The Mediterranean, Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH), and Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay (MIND) Diets Are Associated with Less Cognitive Decline and a Lower Risk of Alzheimer’s Disease-A Review
A Critical Review of the Study of Neuroprotective Diets to Reduce Cognitive Decline
Fruit and vegetable intake and cognitive impairment: A systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies
Nut Consumption for Cognitive Performance: A Systematic Review
Extra-virgin olive oil for potential prevention of Alzheimer disease
Mediterranean and MIND Diets Containing Olive Biophenols Reduces the Prevalence of Alzheimer’s Disease
Dietary intake of unsaturated fatty acids and age-related cognitive decline: A 8.5-year follow-up of the Italian Longitudinal Study on Aging
Flavonoid intake and cognitive decline over a 10-year period
Benefits in cognitive function, blood pressure, and insulin resistance through cocoa flavanol consumption in elderly subjects with mild cognitive impairment: The Cocoa, Cognition, and Aging (CoCoA) study
Protective effects of flavanol-rich dark chocolate on endothelial function and wave reflection during acute hyperglycemia
Dietary changes and cognition over 2 years within a multidomain intervention trial-The Finnish Geriatric Intervention Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability (FINGER)
Multimodal strategy to rescue the brain in mild cognitive impairment: Ketogenic oral nutrition supplementation with B vitamins and aerobic exercise
Mild cognitive impairment: When nutrition helps brain energy rescue-a report from the EuGMS 2020 Congress
Reshaping the path of mild cognitive impairment by refining exercise prescription: A study protocol of a randomized controlled trial to understand the “what,” “for whom,” and “how” of exercise to promote cognitive function
Exercise training for depressed older adults with Alzheimer’s disease
Cognitive and structural cerebral changes in amnestic mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease after multicomponent training
Metabolic Architecture of Acute Exercise Response in Middle-Aged Adults in the Community
Aerobic exercise training in older men and women-Cerebrovascular responses to submaximal exercise: Results from the Brain in Motion study
Aging process, cognitive decline and Alzheimer`s disease: Can strength training modulate these responses?
Physical activity attenuates age-related biomarker alterations in preclinical AD
Alzheimer’s disease genes and proteins associated with resistance and aerobic training: An in silico analysis
Physical exercise in MCI elderly promotes reduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and improvements on cognition and BDNF peripheral levels
Effects of aerobic exercise on mild cognitive impairment: A controlled trial
Vascular hippocampal plasticity after aerobic exercise in older adults
Cognitive Effects of Aerobic Exercise in Alzheimer’s Disease: A Pilot Randomized Controlled Trial
Worksite-based intensive lifestyle therapy has profound cardiometabolic benefits in people with obesity and type 2 diabetes
Exercise as a Potential Therapeutic Strategy to Target the Clinical Link Between Depression and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Narrative Review
Aerobic exercise and vascular cognitive impairment: A randomized controlled trial
Exercise training and nutritional supplementation for physical frailty in very elderly people
Behavioral treatment of depression in dementia patients: A controlled clinical trial
Therapeutic non-invasive brain treatments in Alzheimer’s disease: Recent advances and challenges
Aerobic exercise promotes executive functions and impacts functional neural activity among older adults with vascular cognitive impairment
Improving cognition and function through exercise intervention in Alzheimer’s disease
Exercise interventions preserve hippocampal volume: A meta-analysis
Alzheimer’s disease, cerebrovascular dysfunction and the benefits of exercise: From vessels to neurons
The Link Between Physical Activity and Cognitive Dysfunction in Alzheimer Disease
Connecting Mind-Body Therapy-Mediated Effects to Pathological Features of Alzheimer’s Disease
Physical activity, diet, and risk of Alzheimer disease
Role of physical exercise on cognitive function in healthy older adults: A systematic review of randomized clinical trials
A quantitative, theoretical framework for understanding mammalian sleep
Sleep Deprivation and Neurological Disorders
The Sleeping Brain: Harnessing the Power of the Glymphatic System through Lifestyle Choices
About sleep’s role in memory
Sleep-dependent memory triage: Evolving generalization through selective processing
Alzheimer’s disease and sleep disturbances: A review
beta-Amyloid accumulation in the human brain after one night of sleep deprivation
Does sleep disturbance affect the amyloid clearance mechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease?
Sleep and beta-Amyloid Deposition in Alzheimer Disease: Insights on Mechanisms and Possible Innovative Treatments
Neuroendocrine-Metabolic Dysfunction and Sleep Disturbances in Neurodegenerative Disorders: Focus on Alzheimer’s Disease and Melatonin
Sleep Fragmentation and the Risk of Incident Alzheimer’s Disease and Cognitive Decline in Older Persons
Deconstructing and reconstructing cognitive performance in sleep deprivation
Sleep disorders in aging and dementia
Sleep disturbances and chronic disease in older adults: Results of the 2003 National Sleep Foundation Sleep in America Survey
Sleep Disturbance, Cognitive Decline, and Dementia: A Review
Current treatments for sleep disturbances in individuals with dementia
Circadian activity rhythms and risk of incident dementia and mild cognitive impairment in older women
Sleep, Cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Benzodiazepines and Related Drugs as a Risk Factor in Alzheimer’s Disease Dementia
Sleep disturbances in dementia
Sleep disorders in Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias
Characterizing sleep problems in persons with Alzheimer’s disease and normal elderly
Sleep and cognition in people with Alzheimer’s disease
Melatonin in Alzheimer’s Disease: A Latent Endogenous Regulator of Neurogenesis to Mitigate Alzheimer’s Neuropathology
Mechanisms of Melatonin in Alleviating Alzheimer’s Disease
Clinical aspects of melatonin intervention in Alzheimer’s disease progression
The human pineal gland and melatonin in aging and Alzheimer’s disease
Melatonin levels in the Alzheimer’s disease continuum: A systematic review
Early neuropathological Alzheimer’s changes in aged individuals are accompanied by decreased cerebrospinal fluid melatonin levels
Neurotoxins: Free radical mechanisms and melatonin protection
The role of melatonin in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer’s disease
Alzheimer’s disease: Pathological mechanisms and the beneficial role of melatonin
Effects of a diet integration with an oily emulsion of DHA-phospholipids containing melatonin and tryptophan in elderly patients suffering from mild cognitive impairment
Therapeutic application of melatonin in mild cognitive impairment
Add-on prolonged-release melatonin for cognitive function and sleep in mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease: A 6-month, randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial
Neuroplasticity in Alzheimer’s disease
Brain plasticity-based therapeutics
Dynamic Brains and the Changing Rules of Neuroplasticity: Implications for Learning and Recovery
Synaptic Plasticity, Dementia and Alzheimer Disease
Synaptic dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: Mechanisms and therapeutic strategies
Alzheimer’s disease is a synaptic failure
Duration of preclinical, prodromal, and dementia stages of Alzheimer’s disease in relation to age, sex, and APOE genotype
Mild cognitive impairment represents early-stage Alzheimer disease
Mild cognitive impairment: Clinical characterization and outcome
Estimating Alzheimer’s Disease Progression Rates from Normal Cognition Through Mild Cognitive Impairment and Stages of Dementia
Cognitive training for people with mild to moderate dementia
Cognitive impairment in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease: A meta-analysis
Clinical features of Alzheimer’s disease
Reported Hearing Loss in Alzheimer’s Disease Is Associated With Loss of Brainstem and Cerebellar Volume
Hearing loss and Alzheimer’s disease: A Review
Impact of Aging on the Auditory System and Related Cognitive Functions: A Narrative Review
Degenerative dementias: Alterations of emotions and mood disorders
Behavioral and Neuropsychiatric Disorders in Alzheimer’s Disease
Neurocognitive impairment and dementia in mood disorders
Neuropsychological assessment in the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease
Memory enhancement in healthy older adults using a brain plasticity-based training program: A randomized, controlled study
Cognitive interventions in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases: Emerging mechanisms and role of imaging
A cognitive training program based on principles of brain plasticity: Results from the Improvement in Memory with Plasticity-based Adaptive Cognitive Training (IMPACT) study
Goal-oriented cognitive rehabilitation for early-stage Alzheimer’s and related dementias: The GREAT RCT
Alzheimer’s Disease, Hearing Loss, and Deviance Detection
The relationship between stress and Alzheimer’s disease
The Role of Chronic Stress as a Trigger for the Alzheimer Disease Continuum
HPA axis responses to laboratory psychosocial stress in healthy elderly adults, younger adults, and children: Impact of age and gender
Stress-induced declarative memory impairment in healthy elderly subjects: Relationship to cortisol reactivity
The acute effects of corticosteroids on cognition: Integration of animal and human model studies
Stress acts cumulatively to precipitate Alzheimer’s disease-like tau pathology and cognitive deficits
Is Dysregulation of the HPA-Axis a Core Pathophysiology Mediating Co-Morbid Depression in Neurodegenerative Diseases?
Is AD a Stress-Related Disorder? Focus on the HPA Axis and Its Promising Therapeutic Targets
Long-term cortisol measures predict Alzheimer disease risk
High Cortisol and the Risk of Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Review of the Literature
Association between cortisol and aging-related hippocampus volume changes in community-dwelling older adults: A 7-year follow-up study
A longitudinal study of hippocampal volume, cortisol levels, and cognition in older depressed subjects
Glucocorticoids increase amyloid-beta and tau pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease
Plasma Cortisol, Brain Amyloid-beta, and Cognitive Decline in Preclinical Alzheimer’s Disease: A 6-Year Prospective Cohort Study
Effects of inflammation on hippocampus and substantia nigra responses to novelty in healthy human participants
Stress and aging act through common mechanisms to elicit neuroinflammatory priming
Inflammatory Cytokines and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Review from the Perspective of Genetic Polymorphisms
A yoga and compassion meditation program reduces stress in familial caregivers of Alzheimer’s disease patients
Coping with Stress During Aging: The Importance of a Resilient Brain
Stress management and resilience training among Department of Medicine faculty: A pilot randomized clinical trial
Stress, Meditation, and Alzheimer’s Disease Prevention: Where The Evidence Stands
Meditation effects on cognitive function and cerebral blood flow in subjects with memory loss: A preliminary study
Neurochemical and Neuroanatomical Plasticity Following Memory Training and Yoga Interventions in Older Adults with Mild Cognitive Impairment
Impact of mind-body interventions in older adults with mild cognitive impairment: A systematic review
The impact of Tai Chi on cognitive rehabilitation of elder adults with mild cognitive impairment: A systematic review and meta-analysis
The Effects of Yoga on Patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment and Dementia: A Scoping Review
Yoga and Meditation Can Help Improve Cognitive Functioning in Older Adults With Mild Cognitive Impairment and Dementia
Effects of Meditation versus Music Listening on Perceived Stress, Mood, Sleep, and Quality of Life in Adults with Early Memory Loss: A Pilot Randomized Controlled Trial
Dancing or Fitness Sport? The Effects of Two Training Programs on Hippocampal Plasticity and Balance Abilities in Healthy Seniors
The Effects of Music Therapy on Cognition, Psychiatric Symptoms, and Activities of Daily Living in Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease
The Effect of Music-Based Intervention on General Cognitive and Executive Functions, and Episodic Memory in People with Mild Cognitive Impairment and Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Recent Randomized Controlled Trials
Effects of music participation for mild cognitive impairment and dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Six months of dance intervention enhances postural, sensorimotor, and cognitive performance in elderly without affecting cardio-respiratory functions
Superior sensory, motor, and cognitive performance in elderly individuals with multi-year dancing activities
Effect of 3-Month Aerobic Dance on Hippocampal Volume and Cognition in Elderly People With Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Effects of Aerobic Dance on Cognition in Older Adults with Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Improvisational Movement to Improve Quality of Life in Older Adults With Early-Stage Dementia: A Pilot Study
Dance movement therapy for dementia
Dance movement therapy for neurodegenerative diseases: A systematic review
Balance, sensorimotor, and cognitive performance in long-year expert senior ballroom dancers
Music therapy increases serum melatonin levels in patients with Alzheimer’s disease
Study protocol for the Alzheimer and music therapy study: An RCT to compare the efficacy of music therapy and physical activity on brain plasticity, depressive symptoms, and cognitive decline, in a population with and at risk for Alzheimer’s disease
Effect of music therapy on anxiety and depression in patients with Alzheimer’s type dementia: Randomised, controlled study
The impacts of visual Art Therapy for elderly with Neurocognitive disorder: A systematic review
The use of arts interventions for mental health and wellbeing in health settings
The impact of a visual arts program on quality of life, communication, and well-being of people living with dementia: A mixed-methods longitudinal investigation
Painting for a Purpose: A Visual Arts Program as a Method to Promote Engagement, Communication, Cognition, and Quality of Life for Individuals With Dementia
Dementia associated with toxic causes and autoimmune disease
Toxicant exposure and bioaccumulation: A common and potentially reversible cause of cognitive dysfunction and dementia
Linking pesticide exposure and dementia: What is the evidence?
Exposure to widespread environmental toxicants and children’s cognitive development and behavioral problems
Inhalational Alzheimer’s disease: An unrecognized–and treatable–epidemic
Environmental toxins and Alzheimer’s disease progression
Role of environmental pollutants in Alzheimer’s disease: A review
The role of metals in the etiology of Alzheimer’s disease
Biomonitoring of Mycotoxins in Plasma of Patients with Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Disease
Environmental risk factors for dementia: A systematic review
Environmental factors and risks of cognitive impairment and dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Different Brain Regions are Infected with Fungi in Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroinflammation in neurodegeneration via microbial infections
Heavy Metals Exposure and Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias
Metal Toxicity Links to Alzheimer’s Disease and Neuroinflammation
Pesticides, cognitive functions and dementia: A review
Exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls and organochlorine pesticides and risk of dementia, Alzheimer’s disease and cognitive decline in an older population: A prospective analysis from the Canadian Study of Health and Aging
Assessment of Persistent, Bioaccumulative and Toxic Organic Environmental Pollutants in Liver and Adipose Tissue of Alzheimer’s Disease Patients and Age-matched Controls
Role of environmental contaminants in the etiology of Alzheimer’s disease: A review
Impact of urban environmental exposures on cognitive performance and brain structure of healthy individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s dementia
Glyphosate infiltrates the brain and increases pro-inflammatory cytokine TNFalpha: Implications for neurodegenerative disorders
The role of air pollution in cognitive impairment and decline
Impact of Long-Term Exposure to Air Pollution on Cognitive Decline in Older Adults Without Dementia
Long-term exposure to ambient air pollution and risk of dementia: Results of the prospective Three-City Study
A critical review of the epidemiological evidence of effects of air pollution on dementia, cognitive function and cognitive decline in adult population
Organochlorine pesticide levels and risk of Alzheimer’s disease in north Indian population
Mitrabasu, Gene-environment interaction in Alzheimer’s disease
Pesticide exposure and risk of Alzheimer’s disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Neuropathological Mechanisms Associated with Pesticides in Alzheimer’s Disease
The Gut Microbiota-Brain Axis: A New Frontier on Neuropsychiatric Disorders
Infectious agents and Alzheimer’s disease
Chlamydia pneumoniae can infect the central nervous system via the olfactory and trigeminal nerves and contributes to Alzheimer’s disease risk
Pathogenic microbes, the microbiome, and Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
Time to test antibacterial therapy in Alzheimer’s disease
Overwhelming Evidence for a Major Role for Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 (HSV1) in Alzheimer’s Disease (AD); Underwhelming Evidence against
The Role of the Microbiota-Gut-Brain Axis in the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease
Lipopolysaccharide-stimulated, NF-kB-, miRNA-146a- and miRNA-155-mediated molecular-genetic communication between the human gastrointestinal tract microbiome and the brain
Mold, Mycotoxins and a Dysregulated Immune System: A Combination of Concern?
Linking mechanisms of periodontitis to Alzheimer’s disease
Clinical and Bacterial Markers of Periodontitis and Their Association with Incident All-Cause and Alzheimer’s Disease Dementia in a Large National Survey
Association of periodontitis and oral microbiomes with Alzheimer’s disease: A narrative systematic review
Potential Involvement of Varicella Zoster Virus in Alzheimer’s Disease via Reactivation of Quiescent Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1
Vaccination Reduces Risk of Alzheimer’s Disease, Parkinson’s Disease and Other Neurodegenerative Disorders
Increased occurrence of Treponema spp. and double-species infections in patients with Alzheimer’s disease
The Analysis of Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 (HSV-1)-Encoded MicroRNAs Targets: A Likely Relationship of Alzheimer’s Disease and HSV-1 Infection
Viruses and the brain: From inflammation to dementia
The viral hypothesis: How herpesviruses may contribute to Alzheimer’s disease
Interaction between APOE4 and herpes simplex virus type 1 in Alzheimer’s disease
Neurologic and neuropsychiatric syndrome features of mold and mycotoxin exposure
Are infections seeding some cases of Alzheimer’s disease?
When the infectious environment meets the AD brain
Environmental mold and mycotoxin exposures elicit specific cytokine and chemokine responses
Effects of Mycotoxins on Neuropsychiatric Symptoms and Immune Processes
Ethnobotanical treatment strategies against Alzheimer’s disease
Alzheimer’s Disease-Part 2—A Botanical Treatment Plan
Neuroprotective Herbs for the Management of Alzheimer’s Disease
Ayurvedic medicinal plants for Alzheimer’s disease: A review
Whole plant extracts versus single compounds for the treatment of malaria: Synergy and positive interactions
Synergy research: Approaching a new generation of phytopharmaceuticals
Ayurvedic genomics: Establishing a genetic basis for mind-body typologies
Polyherbal formulation: Concept of ayurveda
Herbal Medicine: Clinical Perspective & Regulatory Status
Plants used in Chinese and Indian traditional medicine for improvement of memory and cognitive function
Traditional used Plants against Cognitive Decline and Alzheimer Disease
The Multifaceted Role of Neuroprotective Plants in Alzheimer’s Disease Treatment
Natural products and supplements for geriatric depression and cognitive disorders: An evaluation of the research
Effects of cocoa extract and a multivitamin on cognitive function: A randomized clinical trial
B vitamins and prevention of cognitive decline and incident dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Homocysteine, B Vitamins, and Cognitive Impairment
Effects of oral nutrition supplements in persons with dementia: A systematic review
Use of nutritional complete supplements in older adults with dementia: Systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical outcomes
Current experience in testing mitochondrial nutrients in disorders featuring oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction: Rational design of chemoprevention trials
Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Neurodegenerative Disorders: Role of Nutritional Supplementation
The emerging role of glutathione in Alzheimer’s disease
Cognitive Improvement with Glutathione Supplement in Alzheimer’s Disease: A Way Forward
Brain delivery of supplemental docosahexaenoic acid (DHA): A randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial
DHA may prevent age-related dementia
Choline as a prevention for Alzheimer’s disease
Sex and Gender Driven Modifiers of Alzheimer’s: The Role for Estrogenic Control Across Age, Race, Medical, and Lifestyle Risks
Ovarian steroid hormones: A long overlooked but critical contributor to brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease
Female Sex and Alzheimer’s Risk: The Menopause Connection
Sex and the development of Alzheimer’s disease
Association of Race and Ethnicity With Incidence of Dementia Among Older Adults
Systematic review of dementia prevalence and incidence in United States race/ethnic populations
Association of Race and Ethnicity With Dementia
The costs of developing treatments for Alzheimer’s disease: A retrospective exploration
Alzheimer’s drug approved despite murky results
The Multidisciplinary Approach to Alzheimer’s Disease and Dementia. A Narrative Review of Non-Pharmacological Treatment
A comprehensive approach to reablement in dementia
Identifying and addressing potential contributors to cognitive decline with a personalized, multi-therapeutic approach is supportive of cognitive health. Shown in the figure are the various core strategies for the reversal of AD and MCI and for optimizing brain health.
Criteria for a perfect AD drug. A perfect drug is one that increases and optimizes all parameters on the left as they tend to be lowered or down-regulated in AD. The same drug decreases, lowers, or reduces the parameters on the right side, as these tend to be elevated in AD. The highlighted items indicate the targets of preference for most pharmaceutical companies. While some drugs are designed to target amyloid, others are focused on tau. However, here again, it is a mono-therapeutic strategy, and past single target-based failures have cast doubts on this approach.
Increase/Optimize	Decrease/Prevent/Optimize	 	APP α-cleavage	homocysteine	 	Neprilysin	APP β-cleavage	 	IDE	APP γ-cleavage	 	Aβ clearance	Caspase-6 cleavage	 	Autophagy	Caspase-3 cleavage	 	BDNF	APP b-oligomerization	 	NGF	P-tau and PHF	 	Netrin-1	Oxidative damage and ROS production	 	ADNP	NFkB	 	SIRT1	Glial scarring	 	PP2A activity	Inflammation	 	Phagocytosis	Synaptoclastic signaling	 	Insulin sensitivity	Neuronal cell death	 	Axoplasmic transport		 	Mitochondrial function		 	Cholinergic neurotransmission		 	Long-term potentiation		 	Vit D, B12, and Zinc		 	Resolvins		 	Detoxification		 	Vascularization		 	cAMP		 	Glutathione		 	Estradiol, progesterone, pregnenolone, DHEA, GABA, free T3, free T4, TSH
Reversing AD-associated cognitive health requires addressing potential contributors to cognitive decline with a personalized, multi-therapeutic approach. Each of the strategies mentioned in the table has the ability to improve cognition and brain health, and when practiced together, they create a powerful synergy with sustained improvement.
Multi-Therapeutic Strategies	Goals	 	Nutrition	Improves cognition and supports brain health bycreating insulin sensitivitypromoting metabolic flexibility/ ketosisreducing inflammationimproving vascular healthpromoting autophagy	 			 	Exercise	increases brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) that stimulates neuroplasticityincreases cerebral blood flow and oxygenationmitigates overall stressoptimizes body mass index (BMI)improves insulin sensitivityreduces inflammationstabilizes brain volume and decreases white matter lesions	 			 	Sleep	enhances ability to focus, learn, and memorizereduces stresspromotes neuroplasticityimproves waste-clearing capacity	 			 	Stress Management	activates parasympathetic arm of HPA axis and balances stress hormonesincreases cerebral blood flow and oxygenationimproves insulin sensitivityreduces inflammationboosts cognitive acuity	 			 	Mental exercise(Brain stimulation)	promotes neural connectivity in response to new learningimproves mood, thinking, hearing, problem-solving, reasoning, and memorylowers risk of cognitive decline and dementiaimproves activities of daily living	 			 	Detoxification	Improves cognition and supports brain health bytreating dementogen exposure and limiting ongoing exposurereducing systemic and brain inflammationoptimizing gut, oral and nasal microbiomeupregulating the immune system and mitochondrial energetics	 			 	Herbs & Supplements	Improve cognition and support brain health bypromoting neural connectivity and effective synaptic supportoptimizing trophic supportupregulating the immune system and gut healthreducing inflammationboosting cognitive acuityimproving vascular healthneutralizing free radicals