Cost-of-illness and Economic Evaluation of Interventions in Children and Adolescents With Chronic Pain
Objectives:
Chronic pain in children and adolescents (CPCA) is widespread with an increasing prevalence. It is associated with a decreased quality of life and an increased parental work loss. Accordingly, CPCA may pose a substantial economic burden for patients, health care payers, and society. Therefore, this systematic review aimed to synthesize (1) the results of existing cost-of-illness studies (COIs) for CPCA and (2) the evidence of economic evaluations (EEs) of interventions for CPCA.
Methods:
The systematic literature search was conducted in EMBASE, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, NHS EED, and HTA Database until February 2023. Title, abstract, and full-text screening were conducted by 2 researchers. Original articles reporting costs related to CPCA published in English or German were included. Study characteristics, cost components, and costs were extracted. The quality of studies was assessed using standardized tools. All costs were adjusted to 2020 purchasing power parity US dollars (PPP-USD).
Results:
Fifteen COIs and 10 EEs were included. The mean annual direct costs of CPCA ranged from PPP-USD 603 to PPP-USD 16,271, with outpatient services accounting for the largest share. The mean annual indirect costs ranged from PPP-USD 92 to PPP-USD 12,721. All EEs reported a decrease in overall costs in treated patients.
Discussion:
The methodology across studies was heterogeneous limiting the comparability. However, it is concluded that CPCA is associated with high overall costs, which were reduced in all EEs. From a health-economic perspective, efforts should address the prevention and early detection of CPCA followed by specialized pain treatment.
Chronic pain in children and adolescents (CPCA) is widespread. It is estimated that about 11% to 38% of children and adolescents are experiencing chronic pain worldwide. Chronic pain “cannot be viewed as a purely physical or psychological phenomenon.” When identifying potential causes of chronic pain, it is important to consider a wide range of dimensions, such as biological, psychological, and sociocultural. Psychosocial factors: anxiety disorders, depression, and low self-esteem, as well as chronic health problems and low socioeconomic status, are associated with a higher prevalence of chronic pain. CPCA can have various negative effects on children and their families. It is associated with frequent school absenteeism, parental absence from work, impaired social relationships, sleep disturbances, increased family stress, and a lower health-related quality of life. Accordingly, CPCA is likely to cause a substantial economic burden for families, health care payers, and society.
Several treatment strategies may help reduce the burden related to CPCA. Existing interventions include, among others, intensive interdisciplinary pain treatments (IIPT) and psychological therapies, such as cognitive- behavioral therapies (CBT) as well as relaxation and biofeedback. Claus et al analyzing IIPT found large improvements in the mean pain intensity, disability, and number of missed school days as well as moderate improvements in anxiety and depression. Psychological therapies were found to have a large positive effect on pain reduction: CBT (OR: 4.13; 95% CI: 2.61-6.54), relaxation (OR: 9.93; 96% CI: 4.38-22.54), and biofeedback (OR: 23.34; 95% CI: 5.87-92.72). Fisher et al found psychological therapies in general to have a moderate beneficial effect on pain intensity and a small beneficial effect on pain-related disability. No significant effects were found for depression or anxiety. Although effective treatment strategies exist, there are different access barriers to specialized care for CPCA. The number of specialized treatment centers, especially in rural areas, is limited resulting in long travel distances representing an additional burden on patients and their families. Children of parents with a higher occupational skill level and a higher income were found to travel longer distances to a pain clinic. Accordingly, the long distances may lead to social disparities based on socioeconomic status and educational level and delayed referrals to pain clinics. Moreover, Jay et al found that fewer children from more deprived areas were referred for specialized chronic pain management. In addition, long waiting times represent another barrier to accessing multidisciplinary pain treatment.
The increasing prevalence of CPCA in the last decades and a potentially ineffective treatment due to access barriers may also be an issue from a health-economic perspective. To better understand these economic consequences, cost-of-illness studies (COIs) can help to give an overview of costs related to CPCA while economic evaluations (EEs) help to analyze the economic potential of different interventions with varying levels of effectiveness in CPCA. Both kinds of economic studies help to inform decision-makers on the burden of a disease and which treatment to recommend, reimburse, or apply from a health-economic perspective. Various cost perspectives can be adopted when analyzing costs including the health care payer perspective and the societal perspective. From a health care payer perspective, usually, all costs reimbursed by a third-party payer are relevant, which are primarily direct costs (eg, outpatient and inpatient services, medication). The societal perspective is broader and includes not only direct but also indirect costs in terms of economic productivity losses (eg, parents’ lost work days due to a child’s chronic pain) not to be borne only by the health care payers but by other actors within the society.
However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no systematic review addressing the health economics of CPCA. Thus, the aim of this study was to compile and analyze (1) the costs related to CPCA based on published COIs and (2) the economic effects of interventions for CPCA based on published EEs. Considering the existing evidence, we derive policy implications and identify the need for future research.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Literature Search and Selection Criteria
This systematic review follows the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement. A literature search was conducted in EMBASE (via Ovid), MEDLINE (via Ovid), PsycINFO (via Ovid), the NHS Economic Evaluation Database (via CRD), and the HTA Database (via CRD) from inception to February 23, 2023. The search strategy consisted of 3 parts: the search terms in the first 2 parts, which identified studies including children and adolescents experiencing chronic pain, were derived from existing systematic reviews. The third part identified COIs and EEs including search terms suggested by Wilczynksi et al and McKinlay et al. Thus, the search strategy contained the combination of the following terms: child*, adolescen*, infant, pediatric*, paediatric*, juvenile*, young person*, young adult*, migraine, fibromyalgia, neuralgia, chronic*, recurrent, persistent, neuropathic, functional, pain*, headache*, cost*, economic*. Furthermore, the exploded MeSH terms child, adolescent, infant, chronic pain, migraine, headache disorders, costs, and costs analysis were used to identify further relevant studies. As the MeSH term “costs and cost analysis” is not available in EMBASE, we replaced it with the search term “health care cost*” for searching in EMBASE following McKinlay et al. Since the floating subheading for economics “/ec” is not available in EMBASE (via Ovid) and PsycINFO (via Ovid), we did not use a floating subheading when searching these databases. The applied exploded MeSH terms are slightly different depending on the available terms in each database. The detailed search strategy is displayed in the supplemental material (Supplemental Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/CJP/B78).
Studies examining children and adolescents up to 24 years experiencing chronic pain were included. Chronic pain is defined as “persistent or recurrent pain lasting longer than 3 months.” The age limit was chosen according to the current definition of adolescence. There were no restrictions regarding the treatment in the intervention or control group. We included COIs as well as all types of EEs reporting mean costs expressed in monetary terms published in English or German since the year 2000. This lower boundary was chosen to increase comparability of reported costs, since health technologies progress substantially over time. There were no restrictions on study design, length of follow-up, or data source used. We excluded reviews and specific types of publications, such as case studies, conference abstracts, protocols, editorials, comments, and letters. Studies were independently screened by 2 researchers (A.K. and V.M.). After removing duplicates, title, abstract, and full-text articles were screened. To detect further relevant publications, a hand search of the reference lists as well as a forward reference search of the included studies were performed. Any conflict between the 2 researchers was resolved by discussion. If no consensus was achieved, a third researcher (D.S.) was involved. The results of this process are shown using a PRISMA flow diagram with documented reasons for excluding studies (Fig. 1).
Flowchart. The figure shows the process of the systematic literature search with the databases used and reasons for excluding studies. HTA indicates Health Technology Assessment Database; NHS EED, National Institute for Health Research Economic Evaluation Database.

Data Extraction and Adjustment
Two researchers (A.K. and D.W.) separately extracted the data into a structured form. Data were repeatedly compared to the original paper if there were any differences in the extracted data. For a comprehensive overview, study characteristics, data sources, cost perspectives, costs, included cost components, and incremental costs were extracted. If no incremental costs were reported, these were calculated if the information given in the study was sufficient to do so. For the COIs, the incremental costs were calculated by subtracting the reported costs in the control group from the reported costs in the chronic pain group. The incremental costs in EEs were calculated by subtracting the costs reported for the postphase or intervention group from the reported costs in the prephase or control group. Since costs vary considerably depending on the health care system, a relative cost reduction was calculated to improve the comparability. For this purpose, the incremental costs were divided by the costs reported for the prephase or control group. Costs, which were calculated for this review, are indicated as such in the respective tables.
Finally, the extracted costs were adjusted for inflation and currency. Therefore, the local currency was inflated for 2020 using the gross domestic product (GDP) deflator. Following Turner et al, costs that were not reported in the local currency were converted into the local currency first. Exchange rates from the database of the World Bank were used for conversion. If the currency year was not stated, the exchange rates of the study’s publication year were used. After adjusting for inflation, costs were converted into international dollars using the implied purchasing power parity (PPP) exchange rates relating to 2020 provided by the International Monetary Fund.

Quality Assessment
For the critical appraisal of the included EEs, the quality was assessed using the 10-item checklist by Drummond et al. These items help to assess the methodological quality regarding the description of the study objective and the intervention analyzed, the inclusion of relevant cost components arising from the study objective, the measurement and valuation of costs, and the discussion of the results. The tool developed by Stuhldreher et al was used to assess the quality of the included COIs. This tool consists of 22 items assigned to the following categories: scope, general economics, calculation of costs, study design and analysis, presentation of the results, and discussion. Two researchers (A.K. and D.W.) assessed the methodological quality independently. Any differing assessments were discussed. If no consensus was achieved, a third researcher (D.S.) was consulted. The quality criteria as well as the results of the quality assessment are shown in Tables 1 and 2.
Quality Assessment of Cost-of-illness Studies Based on Stuhldreher et al
Study objective	Inclusion and exclusion criteria	Disease and diagnostic criteria	Cost-description	Nondiseased comparison group or disease-specific costs	Currency	Reference year	Perspective	Costs incorporated from more than one category	Data source	Valuation of costs	Discounting*	Missing data and imputation method	Statistics appropriate	Sensitivity analyses	Sample size (subgroup)	Demographics (minimum age and sex)	Arithmetic mean costs	Standard deviations (errors)	Results discussed with respect to other studies	Limitations discussed	Conclusions appropriate regarding uncertainty in results	% of quality criteria fulfilled	 	Campbell et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗	✗	✗	✓	✗	✓	✓	NA	NA†	✗	✗	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	✗	60.0	 	Chen et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓‡	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	NA	NA†	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	85.0	 	Ellyson et al	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓§	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗	NA	✗	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	76.2	 	Groenewald et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓‡	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	NA	✗	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	90.5	 	Groenewald et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓§	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	NA	NA†	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	95.0	 	Hoekman et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓‡	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	NA	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	95.2	 	Hogan et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓§	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	NA	NA†	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗	95.0	 	Hollier et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	NA	✗	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✗	✗	✓	✓	78.3	 	Kafle et al	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓	✗	✓	✓	NA	✗	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗	71.4	 	Mazzotta et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓‡	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✓	NA	✗	✗	✗	✓	✓	✓	✗	✗	✗	✗	61.9	 	Obermeier et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓§	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	NA	NA†	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	✗	90.0	 	Pesa et al	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓§	✗	✗	✓	✓	✓	✓	NA	NA†	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗	70.0	 	Ruhe et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓‡	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	NA∥	NA	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	90.0	 	Sleed et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓‡	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗	NA	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	85.7	 	Tian et al	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✓	NA	NA†	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	✗	✓	✓	✓	80.0	 	% of studies fulfilling criterion	100	100	93.3	86.7	86.7	86.7	60.0	100	73.3	100	85.7		37.5	86.7	6.7	100	100	100	53.3	80.0	93.3	60.0
No future costs included.
Claims or administrative data.
Disease-specific costs.
Nondiseased control group.
Direct assessment of costs.
NA indicates not applicable.
Quality Assessment of Economic Evaluations Based on the 10-item Checklist by Drummond et al
Evans et al	Ho et al	Lalouni et al	Law et al	Lopez Lumbi et al	Mahrer et al	Ruhe et al	Ruhe et al	Sommers et al	Torigoe-Lai et al	% of studies fulfilling criterion	 	1	Was a well-defined question posed in answerable form?	✗*	✗†	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗*	70.0	 	2	Was a comprehensive description of the competing alternatives given?	✓	✗‡	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗‡	✓	80.0	 	3	Was the effectiveness of the programmes or services established?	✗§	✓	✓	✓	✗§	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗§	70.0	 	4	Were all the important and relevant costs and consequences for each alternative identified?	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	100	 	5	Were costs and consequences measured accurately in appropriate physical units prior to valuation?	✓	✗∥	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	90.0	 	6	Were costs and consequences valued credibly?	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✗¶	✓	✓	90.0	 	7	Were costs and consequences adjusted for differential timing?	NA#	NA#	NA#	NA#	NA#	NA#	NA#	NA#	NA#	NA#		 	8	Was an incremental analysis of costs and consequences of alternatives performed?	✓	✗**	✓	✗**	✗**	✗**	✗**	✗**	✓	✗**	30.0	 	9	Was uncertainty in the estimates of costs and consequences adequately characterized?	✗††	✗††	✓	✗††	✗††	✗††	✗††	✗††	✗††	✗††	10.0	 	10	Did the presentation and discussion of study results include all issues of concern to users?	✗‡‡	✗‡‡	✓	✓	✗§§	✓	✗§§	✗‡‡§§	✗§§	✗‡‡§§	30.0	 		% of quality criteria fulfilled	55.6	33.3	100	77.8	55.6	77.8	66.7	55.6	66.7	44.4
No sufficient information on population.
Perspective not clear.
Description on treatment not sufficient.
No potential bias recognized.
No sufficient information on sources of resource use.
No sufficient information on valuation of resource use.
Not model-based (no future costs).
No consideration of consequences.
No sensitivity analysis.
Generalizability not sufficiently discussed.
Potential issues of implementation not discussed.
NA indicates not applicable.

RESULTS

Search Results
The literature search revealed 5471 results published until February 23, 2023 (Fig. 1). Of all records, 1157 were duplicates, 402 were published before the year 2000, and 148 were not published in English or German. In total, 368 articles were reviews, case studies, conference abstracts, protocols, editorials, comments, or letters. Overall, 235 articles did not focus on children and adolescents. An additional 1987 articles did not deal with chronic pain, and a further 1150 articles did not include cost estimates or did not report mean costs. After the eligibility assessment, 24 articles were included for the in-depth analysis from the database search. Moreover, one further article was identified in the forward reference search. Finally, 15 COIs and 10 EEs met the inclusion criteria and thus were included in this systematic review.

Study Characteristics
The included studies contain data from 9 different countries (Tables 3 and 4). Thirteen studies were from the United States, 5 from Germany, 3 from Canada, and 1 each from the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Italy, and Sweden. The most recent studies were published in 2022 and the earliest in 2004. The included studies obtained their data either from questionnaires completed by parents or from administrative databases, such as claims data, hospital charges, and medical record reviews (Supplemental Digital Content 2, http://links.lww.com/CJP/B79).
Study Characteristics of Cost-of-illness Studies
Study	Country	N	Age group in years (mean)	Girls in %	Race/ethnicity in %	Type of pain	Diagnostic inclusion criteria	 	Campbell et al	Canada	100	5–18 (13.9)	72.0	NR	Chronic pain	Treated at pain clinic	 	Chen et al	Canada	279	15–19 (NR)	100	NR	Chronic pelvic/perineal pain	Admitted for chronic pelvic pain (ICD-10 CA, R102)	 	Ellyson et al	USA	148	10–18 (15.1)	75.7	NR	Chronic postsurgical pain	Self-reported pain ≥3 on an 11-point numeric rating scale 4 mo after surgery	 	Groenewald et al	USA	149	10–17 (NR)	72.5	White, non-Hispanic 78.5; African American: 4.7; Hispanic:4.0	Idiopathic chronic pain (abdomen, musculoskeletal, head, multiple locations)	Chronic pain for at least 3 mo at least once a week without any serious comorbid conditions	 	Groenewald et al	USA	1544	6–17 (14.2)	47.8	White, non-Hispanic: 58.3; Hispanic: 19.84; Black, non-Hispanic: 16.05; Asian, non-Hispanic:3.9; Other: 1.93	Chronic pain (abdominal, back or neck, head, other)	Frequent or severe headaches including migraines, recurring headaches other than migraine, abdominal pain, back or neck pain, or other chronic pain.	 	Hoekman et al	Netherlands	258	8–18 (13.4)	70.9	NR	Functional abdominal pain	ROME III criteria	 	Hogan et al	Canada	558	12–17 (NR)	NR	NR	Chronic pain	Patients endorsing chronic pain	 	Hollier et al	USA	5305	4–18 (NR)	58.7	White, non-Hispanic: 59.2; Hispanic: 11.1; Black, non-Hispanic: 9.9; Other: 5.5	Abdominal migraine	ICD-9 346.2.x; ICD-10 G43.Dx	 	Kafle et al	USA	21,436	6–18 (13.6)	72.0	White: 75.0; Black: 13.0; Asian American: 1; American Indian: 0.3	Migraine	ICD-9, ICD-10 (Code: NR)	 	Mazzotta et al	Italy	25	7–18 (13.0)	56.0	NR	Chronic headache	ICHD-II criteria	 	Obermeier et al	Germany	2597	6–11 (9.3)	47.1	NR	Migraine	ICD-10 G43.x	 	Pesa et al	USA	890	5–18 (14.3)	63.4	NR	Migraine	ICD-9 346.xx	 	Ruhe et al	Germany	101	NR (14.5)	77.0	NR	Chronic pain	Treated at pain clinic	 	Sleed et al	UK	52	11–18 (15.2)	63.0	NR	Chronic pain	Pain for at least 3 mo	 	Tian et al	USA	80	NR (15.0)	89.0	White: 86.3; Black: 5.0: Asian: 1.3; Latino/Hispanic: 2.5; > one race and ethnicity: 3.8: other: 1.3	Primary chronic musculoskeletal pain	Diagnosed by rheumatologist
NR indicates not reported.
Study Characteristics of Economic Evaluations
Study	Country	N	Age Group in years (mean)	Girls in %	Race and ethnicity in %	Type of pain	Diagnostic inclusion criteria	Study design	 	Evans et al	USA	127	8–22 (15.2)	74.6	NR	Chronic pain (abdominal, head, back)	Treated at pain clinic	BA	 	Ho et al	USA	74	10–18 (14.5)	68.9	NR	Chronic pain (abdominal, chest, back/neck, shoulder head)	Treated at pain clinic	BA	 	Lalouni et al	Sweden	90	8–12 (10.2)	61.0	NR	Functional abdominal pain	ROME IV criteria	RCT	 	Law et al	USA	228	11–17 (14.7)	74.9	Anglo-American: 83.5, Black or African American: 5.1; Hispanic/Latino: 4.0; Other: 4.4; Missing: 3.0	Primary chronic pain (abdominal, musculoskeletal, head)	Chronic pain for at least 3 mo at least once a week without any serious comorbid conditions	RCT	 	Lopez Lumbi et al	Germany	119	<21 (15.3)	68.9	NR	Primary chronic pain	ICD-10 F45.4, F45.41	BA	 	Mahrer et al	USA	191	3-20 (14.5)	65.0	NR	Chronic pain	ICD-10 F45.42	BA	 	Ruhe et al	Germany	65	NR (14.3)	73.8	NR	Primary chronic pain	ICD-10 F45.4x	BA	 	Ruhe et al	Germany	56	NR (14.2)	71.4	NR	Primary chronic pain	ICD-10 F45.40, F45.41	BA	 	Sommers et al	USA	83	4-22 (14.7)	80.0	White: 43.0; African American: 26.0; Other: 31.0	Abdominal, musculoskeletal, headache, others	Treated at pain clinic	BA	 	Torigoe-Lai et al	USA	191	<21 (NR)	NR	NR	Chronic pain	ICD-10 F45.42	CBA
BA indicates before-and-after trial; CBA, controlled before-and-after trial; NR, not reported; RCT, randomized controlled trial.
Overall, the COIs included 33,522 patients aged from 4 to 19 years (Table 3). Four studies did not report the mean age. The mean age across the remaining studies was 13.8 years (SD=1.7 y). The share of girls was 68.9% (SD=14.6%) on average. One study did not report the gender distribution. Four studies reported the distribution of race and ethnicity. In these studies, the samples were predominately White, non-Hispanic. Included pain types were chronic pain without further specification on pain location, chronic headaches or migraine, abdominal pain, musculoskeletal pain, back or neck pain, and pelvic/perineal pain. The related diagnostic inclusion criteria for these types of chronic pain are displayed in Table 3 as well.
In the EEs, 1224 patients aged from 0 to 22 years were included (Table 4). One study did not report the mean age. The mean age across the studies reporting age was 14.6 years (SD=0.6 y). On average, 70.9% (SD=5.7%) of the included patients were girls. One study did not report the gender distribution. In the 2 studies reporting race and ethnicity, the sample was predominately White, non-Hispanic. Five of the EEs included chronic pain without further specification. The remaining studies distinguished between different types of pain, such as chronic headache, abdominal pain, musculoskeletal pain, back, and chest pain. The diagnostic inclusion criteria for these types of chronic pain are listed in Table 4. All included EEs were trial-based studies.

Methodological Characteristics of COIs
COIs were performed from a health care payer perspective in 9 studies, from a societal perspective in 5 studies, and from a patient perspective in 1 study. All COIs included direct costs, but the cost components varied greatly across the studies (Table 5). Overall, direct costs included outpatient services, inpatient services, medication, community services, physical and occupational therapy, and out-of-pocket (OOP) expenses. One study focused on OOP expenses only. Three solely included hospital-related costs; 1 study solely outpatient service costs. Four COIs included indirect costs including parents’ lost work time. In addition, opportunity costs for informal care, extra support from school, and school hours lost were included in some of the included COIs. One study did not provide any information on the included cost components.
Included Cost Components
Cost components	Campbell et al	Chen et al	Ellyson et al	Groenewald et al	Groenewald et al	Hoekman et al	Hogan et al	Hollier et al	Kafle et al	Mazzotta et al	Obermeier et al	Pesa et al	Ruhe et al	Sleed et al	Tian et al	Evans et al	Ho et al	Lalouni et al	Law et al	Lopez Lumbi et al	Mahrer et al	Ruhe et al	Ruhe et al	Sommers et al	Torigoe-Lai et al	 			Cost-of-illness studies	Economic evaluations	 	Direct costs	Outpatient services	✓		NR	✓	✓	✓	✓			✓	✓	✓		✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	 		Inpatient services		✓	NR	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓		✓	✓		✓	✓	✓	✓		✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	✓	 		Medication			NR	✓	✓	✓				✓	✓	✓		✓				✓	✓	✓		✓	✓		✓	 		Community services			NR	✓										✓					✓							 		Physical and occupational therapy			NR	✓							✓			✓		✓	✓		✓	✓	✓	✓	✓		✓	 		Out-of-pocket expenses (eg, co-payments, transportation, special meals)			NR	✓									✓	✓			✓	✓	✓	✓			✓			 	Indirect costs	Parent’s lost work time			NR	✓		✓				✓				✓		✓	✓*	✓	✓				✓			 		Opportunity costs for informal care			NR	✓										✓			✓*	✓	✓							 		Reduced efficiency at work			NR															✓								 		Extra support from school			NR			✓																				 		Lost school hours			NR							✓							✓*	✓								 		Reduced efficiency at school			NR															✓
Not valued monetarily.
NR indicates not reported.

Outcomes of COIs
The incremental direct costs for CPCA compared to a control group ranged from PPP-USD 603 to PPP-USD 4186 (Table 6). Direct costs related to the chronic pain condition, that is, disease-specific costs, ranged from PPP-USD 1207 to PPP-USD 16,271. Two studies reported general costs, not exclusively attributable to the chronic pain condition, resulting in costs of PPP-USD 1107 and PPP-USD 2094 per patient. In studies reporting the costs for subcategories of direct costs, the largest share is attributable to outpatient services across all these studies. In most studies, medication accounted for the smallest share of direct costs.
Results From Cost-of-illness Studies, Annual Mean Costs Per Patient in 2020 PPP-USD
Direct costs	Indirect costs	 		Country	Perspective		Inpatient services (%)	Outpatient services (%)	Medication (%)		Contribution to overall costs in %	 	Studies including a control group	 				Incremental costs*				Incremental costs*		 	Ellyson et al	USA	Societal	1044†	—	—	—	1185	46.6	 	Groenewald et al	USA	Health care payer	1495	—	—	20.8	—	—	 	Hogan et al	Canada	Health care payer	852	32.0	53.0	4.0	—	—	 	Obermeier et al	Germany	Health care payer	603	18.7	56.7	10.8	—	—	 	Pesa et al	USA	Health care payer	4186†	10.2	57.6	31.9	—	—	 	Studies without control group (disease-specific costs‡)	 				Costs				Costs		 	Chen et al	Canada	Health care payer	1534§	—	—	—	—	—	 	Groenewald et al	USA	Societal	9958	19.9	52.6	5.8	2959	22.9	 	Hoekman et al	Netherlands	Societal	2607	35.7	55.6	8.8	878	25.2	 	Hollier et al	USA	Health care payer	7195§	—	—	—	—	—	 	Kafle et al	USA	Health care payer	7813§	—	—	—	—	—	 	Mazzotta et al	Italy	Societal	1207	—	—	7.0	92	7.7	 	Ruhe et al	Germany	Patient	2694∥	—	—	—	—	—	 	Sleed et al	UK	Societal	16,271	—	—	—	12,721	43.9	 	No disease-specific costs‡ or control group	 	 Campbell et al	Canada	Health care payer	1107	—	—	—	—	—	 	 Tian et al	USA	Health care payer	2094	38.3	42.8	—	—	—
Compared to a nondiseased control group.
Own calculations.
Costs are directly related to the chronic pain condition.
Mean costs in hospitalized patients.
Out-of-pocket expenses only.
Some studies also reported indirect costs for CPCA. One study reported incremental indirect costs of PPP-USD 1185 for postsurgical chronic pain compared to a control group. Indirect disease-specific costs ranged between PPP-USD 92 for chronic headache and PPP-USD 12,721 for not further specified chronic pain. The share of indirect costs on overall costs ranged from 7.7% to 46.6%.
The highest direct and indirect costs were reported in a study from the United Kingdom and in a study from the United States both analyzing disease-specific costs and including the most cost components. The lowest direct costs were reported in a German study analyzing migraine and including a control group, while an Italian study reported the lowest indirect costs considering the disease-specific parental work loss related to chronic headache.

Methodological Characteristics of EEs
Five studies adopted a health care payer perspective and further 5 a societal perspective. None of the EEs took a patient perspective. Similar to the COIs, the included cost components varied across the EEs (Table 5). All EEs included outpatient services and all but one study included inpatient services. Other cost components considered in the analyses were medication, community services, physical and occupational therapy, and OOP expenses. Five studies additionally considered indirect costs, such as parents’ lost work time, opportunity costs for informal care, reduced efficiency at work, lost school hours, and reduced efficiency at school. In all but 3 EEs, either an interdisciplinary or a multidisciplinary treatment was analyzed (Table 7). Two studies evaluated an adjunctive internet cognitive- behavioral therapy intervention (I-CBT) or an adjunctive internet education (I-EDU). Complementary integrative medicine, that is, biofeedback, acupuncture, and massage were evaluated in a further study. Five studies analyzed an outpatient treatment, 3 studies an inpatient treatment, and 1 study analyzed a mix of both. A further study did not report if the treatment was inpatient or outpatient.
Results from Economic Evaluations, Annual Mean Costs Per Patient in 2020 PPP-USD
OverallIncremental costs	IndirectIncremental costs		 		Country	Perspective	Follow-up	Costs	Absolute	Relative (%)*	Absolute	Relative (%)*	Intervention/costs	 	Studies comparing cost before and after intervention	 					Pre	Post						 	Evans et al	USA	Societal	1 y	85,927	17,804	−68,123	−79.3	−12,782	−90.3	Interdisciplinary pediatric chronic pain rehabilitation program (Inpatient and outpatient)/36,725	 	Ho et al	USA	Societal	6 mo	10,584	1333	−9251*	−87.4	NR	−56.7	Multidisciplinary pain treatment (Outpatient)/1205	 	Law et al	USA	Societal	1 y	20,102	16,227	−3875*	−19.3	−1541	−34.4	Adjunctive I-CBT (Outpatient)/NR	 	Law et al	USA	Societal	1 y	18,795	12,043	−6752*	−35.9	−3575	−66.6	Adjunctive I-EDU (Outpatient)/NR	 	Lopez Lumbi et al	Germany	Health care payer	2 y	7873	5670	−2203*	−45.3	—	NA	Intensive interdisciplinary pain treatment (Inpatient)/NR	 	Mahrer et al	USA	Health care payer	1 y	124,352	85,009	−39,344	−30.8	—	NA	Interdisciplinary pain treatment (Outpatient)/2389	 	Ruhe et al	Germany	Health care payer	1 y	4147†	3116†	−332†	−8.0	—	NA	Intensive interdisciplinary pain treatment (Inpatient)/NR	 	Ruhe et al	Germany	Societal	1 y	10,097	7107	−2990*	−19.6	−1474	−78.6	Intensive interdisciplinary pain treatment (Inpatient)/NR	 	Sommers et al	USA	Health care payer	1 y	3651	1050	−2600	−71.2	—	NA	Interdisciplinary pain treatment/NR	 	Studies comparing costs in control (TAU) and intervention group	 					Control	Intervention						 	Lalouni et al	Sweden	Societal	6 mo	4038	2789	−1130	−40.5	−1015	−27.5	10-week therapist-guided I-CBT (Outpatient)/200	 	Torigoe-Lai et al	USA	Health care payer	1 y	NR	NR	−20,057	NA	—	NA	CIM: acupuncture, massage, and biofeedback (Outpatient)
Own calculations.
Median.
CIM indicates complementary integrative medicine; I-CBT, Internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy; I-EDU, Internet education; NR, not reported; TAU, treatment as usual.

Outcomes of EEs
Similar to the COIs, the results and methods of the EEs varied. The included EEs comparing costs before and after treatment reported mean incremental overall costs between PPP-USD −332 and PPP-USD −68,123; incremental indirect costs ranged between PPP-USD −1474 and PPP-USD 12,782. The lowest relative cost reduction was reported in a German study adopting a health care payer perspective and the highest reduction of costs was reported in a study from the United States adopting a societal perspective. Both studies considered a follow-up period of 1 year.
Two studies compared costs between the control and intervention groups: the EE from the United States reported overall incremental costs of PPP-USD −20,057 considering a follow-up period of 1 year adopting a health care perspective; the study from Sweden estimated incremental overall costs to be PPP-USD −1130 considering a follow-up period of 6 months adopting a societal perspective. In addition to these direct costs, this study also reported mean incremental indirect costs (PPP-USD −1015) with a relative cost reduction of 27.5%. All studies reported a reduction in costs related to the respective intervention. Four studies included the costs for the respective intervention, which ranged between PPP-USD 200 for an I-CBT in Sweden and PPP-USD 36,725 for an inpatient and outpatient intensive pain rehabilitation program in the United States. A detailed description of the reported effectiveness and the details of interventions are displayed in Supplemental Digital Content 3, http://links.lww.com/CJP/B80.

Quality Assessment
The COIs fulfilled an average of 81.6% (SD=11.7%) of the quality criteria (Table 1). The study with the highest quality fulfilled 95.2% and the study with the lowest quality fulfilled 60.0% of the criteria. All studies defined a study objective, and reported the sample size, data source, and the type of costs as well as the chosen method of cost valuation. The diagnostic criteria were described sufficiently in all but one study. The majority of the studies did not perform a sensitivity analysis; this quality criterion was met by only 1 included study.
The EEs met an average of 63.4% (SD=18.9%) of the quality criteria (Table 2). The study with the highest quality fulfilled 100% whereas the study with the lowest quality fulfilled 33.3% of the criteria. Two criteria were met by all studies: first, based on the study objective, all studies considered the relevant costs, and second, in all studies, mean costs were calculated. Similar to the COIs, only 1 EE performed a sensitivity analysis. Furthermore, the results were discussed sufficiently in only 2 EEs. This refers to the discussion of the generalizability or the potential issues of implementation. Moreover, most of the analyses were no full economic evaluations, meaning no consequences, such as quality-adjusted life years, were considered in these analyses. Furthermore, the included EEs were trial-based studies not considering future costs. For this reason, the criterion of cost adjustment for differential timing was not applicable.

DISCUSSION
The aim of this review was to compile the existing evidence on costs related to CPCA and to summarize the results of studies evaluating the economic effects of interventions for these patients. Although the comparability of the results is limited due to the considerable heterogeneity, relevant trends can be identified when analyzing the results. First, CPCA is related to substantial direct and indirect costs, with outpatient services accounting for the largest share of direct costs. Second, a specialized pain treatment can reduce overall costs. Third, indirect costs were not included in most studies, which may lead to an underestimation of the overall costs.
This review gives a comprehensive summary of costs in CPCA and EEs of interventions and shows that the economic burden related to CPCA is substantial. This result is even more salient when considering that overall costs are likely to be underestimated, as indirect costs are not included in most studies. In studies including indirect costs, these accounted for about 30% of overall costs on average. The magnitude of the costs associated with CPCA can be illustrated by comparing these to the costs of other prevalent diseases in children and adolescents. Groenewald et al compared the incremental health care costs per capita in the United States in 2007 for pain-related conditions (USD 1339) with those for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (USD 2132), asthma (USD 1107), and obesity (USD 74) in the young population. This highlights the economic impact of chronic pain in the young population, especially when considering the prevalence rates, which are 18.04% for chronic pain, 8.87% for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, 9.92% for asthma, and 20.35% for obesity in the population aged 6 to 17 years. Considering that, this systematic review reveals a further important finding; mamely, the considered interventions were found to reduce the economic burden of CPCA. Even though different interventions were analyzed, all studies reported a cost reduction regardless of which perspective was adopted. This suggests that both direct and indirect costs incurred by CPCA can be avoided
Most studies had a short follow-up period of 1 year, which may have an effect on the reported cost reduction. This hypothesis is supported by the results of 2 other studies not included in this review as no mean costs were reported. These studies analyzed the development of economic parameters after inpatient-based intensive interdisciplinary pain treatment and found that these parameters decrease after treatment, especially in the long term. That a longer follow-up period may be associated with a greater reduction of costs can be seen partially in the current review as well. Two of the included studies used similar methods in a comparable setting, except for the considered time to follow-up of 2 and 1 year, respectively. As expected when considering the aforementioned assumption, the study with a longer time to follow-up found a greater reduction of costs.
The follow-up period may not be the only reason for greatly varying costs across the studies. Other underlying methods, the analyzed type of chronic pain, the different country-specific characteristics, as well as the respective structures of health care systems, may widen the range of reported costs. Regarding the methodologies, the considered cost components seem to have an effect on the reduction of costs. For example, Ruhe et al adopted a societal perspective including OOP expenses and indirect costs resulting in a higher cost reduction compared to Ruhe et al adopting a health care payer perspective not considering OOP expenses and indirect costs. As expected, the 2 COIs including most cost components reported the highest costs. Country-specific characteristics, such as the proportion of caregivers in paid work, may influence the amount of reported indirect cost as well—most studies used, among others, caregivers working hours lost for calculation of indirect costs. This might lead to underestimated costs in countries with a lower proportion of employed caregivers. Finally, the varying costs may also reflect the differing health care systems; for example, EEs from the United States tend to report higher costs compared to the remaining studies, likely reflecting the structure of the health care system. However, looking at the relative cost reduction, the range is similar across the studies. Even though the included studies applied greatly varying methods and were conducted in different settings, all COIs estimated non-negligible costs for CPCA. Furthermore, all EEs found a reduction in health-related resource use among children and adolescents receiving specialized pain treatment.

Strengths and Limitations
Some limitations have to be considered when interpreting the results of this systematic review. Only a few studies included indirect costs associated with CPCA, which may lead to an underestimation of overall costs. Not only the productivity losses due to missed work by parents but also patients’ missed school days could have been considered. Even though these indirect costs are difficult to value in monetary terms, it might be important to report at least the quantity of school days missed, as learning losses may lead to substantial costs from a societal perspective.
Furthermore, the EEs are no full economic evaluations, as neither the effectiveness nor the intervention costs were included in the respective analysis—never both, as would be preferable to get a full overview. On the one hand, costs for intervention could be unreasonably high in relation to the reduced costs. On the other hand, these costs may well be reasonable when put in relation to the effectiveness of the intervention. For this reason, a final evaluation is difficult. However, in the included studies reporting the intervention costs, these do not exceed the cost reduction. In these studies, intervention costs are as high as 23% of the reduced costs on average, with a maximum of 52%.
Moreover, due to the limited comparability, no conclusion regarding an exact amount of costs related to CPCA or the cost reduction attributable to a specific intervention is possible. All EEs reported a decrease in costs. Since there is a higher probability for studies with positive outcomes to be published, we cannot exclude the presence of a publication bias. To increase the comparability, we only included studies reporting the mean costs for CPCA in monetary terms. The inclusion of studies analyzing health care utilization could have broadened the findings and helped to better understand the burden of CPCA. In addition, all of the included studies are from high-income countries according to the World Bank, which on the one hand contributes to a better comparability among the included studies, but on the other hand limits the transferability of the results to low-income and middle-income countries.
The number of systematic reviews addressing costs in chronic pain is limited. One systematic review of the costs of chronic pain in adults in Europe found health care costs within a similar range, which supports the results. With the current systematic review, a first step has been taken to put the reported costs of CPCA or economic effects of interventions for CPCA into perspective. Apart from that, a methodological strength of this systematic review is that it was conducted in close adherence to the PRISMA guideline. The quality of the included studies was comprehensively assessed, which allows a transparent interpretation of the results.

CONCLUSIONS
Despite differing methodologies between the included studies limiting the comparability of the results, it is clear that the costs of CPCA are high and efforts should be made to reduce these costs both from a health-economic and societal perspective. The analysis of the EEs shows that specialized pain interventions exist, which can reduce these costs. Therefore, several challenges could be addressed: first, the implementation of prevention programs to reduce the number of CPCA patients; second, the early identification of CPCA using effective screening tools in primary care to shorten the path patients with chronic pain take through the health care system; and third, providing a specialized pain treatment tailored to the patient’s needs. All these measures are vital to reduce the physical, psychosocial, and economic burden. With these measures firmly implemented within health care, studies are likely to find lower direct and indirect costs of CPCA. However, to ensure a specialized pain treatment it might be necessary to increase the number of specialized treatment facilities reducing potential access barriers due to long distances. Digitally delivered psychological pain treatment may also help to reduce access barriers not only caused by long distances to specialized pain treatment but also by long waiting times.
Future research should focus on cost-effectiveness analyses of interventions for CPCA to address costs and set these in relation to the effectiveness (eg, QALYs or clinical outcomes). These studies should not only include direct but also all relevant kinds of indirect costs over a life time horizon. This is necessary as CPCA can have negative long-term effects on patients and cost-effectiveness analyses should capture all costs and consequences, irrespective of when they occur. Furthermore, there is an urgent need for (economic) research in the field of CPCA in low-income and middle-income countries.

Supplementary Material
This work is funded by the Innovation Fund of the Joint Federal Committee (Gemeinsamer Bundesausschuss, G-BA, 01VSF20008) Berlin, Germany. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Supplemental Digital Content is available for this article. Direct URL citations are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal's website, www.clinicalpain.com.

REFERENCES
The epidemiology of chronic pain in children and adolescents revisited: a systematic review
Pediatric chronic pain: biopsychosocial assessment and formulation
Impaired school functioning in children with chronic pain: a national perspective
The economic costs of chronic pain among a cohort of treatment-seeking adolescents in the United States
Impact of recurrent and chronic pain on child and family daily functioning: a critical review of the literature
Pediatric chronic pain and health-related quality of life
Effectiveness of a psychosocial aftercare program for youth aged 8 to 17 years with severe chronic pain: a randomized clinical trial
Specialized rehabilitation programs for children and adolescents with severe disabling chronic pain: indications, treatment and outcomes
Intensive interdisciplinary pain treatment for children and adolescents with chronic noncancer pain: a preregistered systematic review and individual patient data meta-analysis
Systematic review and meta-analysis of psychological therapies for children with chronic pain
Psychological therapies for the management of chronic and recurrent pain in children and adolescents
Chronic pain in children and adolescents: an economic perspective
Randomized controlled trials of psychological therapies for management of chronic pain in children and adolescents: an updated meta-analytic review
Influence of parental occupation on access to specialised treatment for paediatric chronic pain: a retrospective study
Challenges in accessing multidisciplinary pain treatment facilities in canada
Confronting challenges to opioid risk mitigation in the U.S. Health System: recommendations from a panel of national experts
Household income determines access to specialized pediatric chronic pain treatment in Germany
Chronic pain in children: a look at the referral process to a pediatric pain clinic
Inequalities in access to a tertiary children’s chronic pain service: a cross-sectional study
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Prevalence of chronic pain in the UK: a systematic review and meta-analysis of population studies
Optimal search strategies for detecting health services research studies in medline
Optimal search strategies for detecting cost and economic studies in embase
A classification of chronic pain for ICD-11
Defining chronic pain in epidemiological studies: a systematic review and meta-analysis
The age of adolescence
Exploring the technology–healthcare expenditure nexus: a panel error correction approach
Adjusting for inflation and currency changes within health economic studies
Cost-of-illness studies and cost-effectiveness analyses in eating disorders: a systematic review
The association between pediatric chronic pain clinic attendance and health care utilization: a retrospective analysis
Hospital-associated costs of chronic pelvic pain in Canada: a population-based descriptive study
Healthcare utilization and costs among pediatric patients with chronic postsurgical pain after major musculoskeletal surgery
The price of pain: the economics of chronic adolescent pain
Annual costs of care for pediatric irritable bowel syndrome, functional abdominal pain, and functional abdominal pain syndrome
Incremental health care costs for chronic pain in Ontario, Canada: a population-based matched cohort study of adolescents and adults using administrative data
United States healthcare burden of pediatric functional gastrointestinal pain disorder hospitalizations from 2002 to 2018
Association of psychiatric comorbidities with treatment and outcomes in pediatric migraines
Cost assessment of headache in childhood and adolescence: preliminary data
Total health insurance costs in children with a migraine diagnosis compared to a control group
The medical costs of migraine and comorbid anxiety and depression
Economic effects of chronic pain in childhood and adolescence: self-assessment of health care costs for affected families before and after a multidisciplinary inpatient pain therapy [Familiäre finanzielle belastung durch chronische schmerzen im kindes-und jugendalter Selbsteinschätzung der Krankheitskosten für betroffene Familien vor und nach einer stationären interdisziplinären Schmerztherapie]
The economic impact of chronic pain in adolescence: methodological considerations and a preliminary costs-of-illness study
Healthcare use patterns and economic burden of chronic musculoskeletal pain in children before diagnosis
The cost-effectiveness of intensive interdisciplinary pediatric chronic pain rehabilitation
Healthcare utilization and indirect burden among families of pediatric patients with chronic pain
Clinical and cost effectiveness of online cognitive behavioral therapy in children with functional abdominal pain disorders
Impact on health care costs for adolescents receiving adjunctive internet-delivered cognitive-behavioral therapy: results of a randomized controlled trial
Economic long-term effects of intensive interdisciplinary pain treatment in paediatric patients with severe chronic pain: analysis of claims data
A cost-analysis of an interdisciplinary pediatric chronic pain clinic
Health care utilization and cost in children and adolescents with chronic pain: analysis of health care claims data 1 year before and after intensive interdisciplinary pain treatment
Integrative approaches to pediatric chronic pain in an urban safety-net hospital: cost savings, clinical benefits, and safety
A secondary analysis of integrated pediatric chronic pain services related to cost savings
Inpatient-based intensive interdisciplinary pain treatment for highly impaired children with severe chronic pain: randomized controlled trial of efficacy and economic effects
Clinical and economic long-term treatment outcome of children and adolescents with disabling chronic pain
Chronic diseases in the European Union: the prevalence and health cost implications of chronic pain
Introduction to the special issue: Advances in behavioral and psychological pain research in children: from prevention through chronic pain management
Development of a screening tool for pediatric neuropathic pain and complex regional pain syndrome: pediatric painscan
A digital health psychological intervention (webmap mobile) for children and adolescents with chronic pain: results of a hybrid effectiveness-implementation stepped-wedge cluster randomized trial
Measurement instruments of productivity loss of paid and unpaid work: a systematic review and assessment of suitability for health economic evaluations from a societal perspective
Long-term impact of adolescent chronic pain on young adult educational, vocational, and social outcomes
Choosing a time horizon in cost and cost-effectiveness analyses