Evaluation of Objective Sedation Monitoring Practices in Critically Ill Adult Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
OBJECTIVES:
To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis to determine if objective sedation monitoring practices reduce duration of mechanical ventilation and other clinical and healthcare utilization outcomes in critically ill adult patients.
DATA SOURCES:
Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, PsycINFO, Web of Science, Cochrane Library and PROSPERO, and the grey literature.
STUDY SELECTION:
Observational or interventional original research studies, conducted in adult critically ill patients undergoing invasive mechanical ventilation, evaluating any objective sedation monitoring practice (e.g., electroencephalography [EEG]), and reporting on duration of mechanical ventilation or other secondary outcomes (e.g., length of stay) were included.
DATA EXTRACTION:
Meta-analysis was performed for pooled estimates of the primary outcome and each individual secondary outcome using random-effects modeling.
DATA SYNTHESIS:
Twenty studies (3410 patients) were included with 15 studies evaluating processed EEG monitoring, 2 evaluating EEG monitoring, and 3 evaluating processed facial electromyography (EMG). Processed EEG was not associated with reduced duration of mechanical ventilation (standardized mean difference [SMD] –0.33; 95% CI, –0.91 to 0.25; I2 = 84.4%). Secondary outcomes of processed EEG monitoring showed decreased hospital length of stay (days) (SMD –0.89; 95% CI, –1.17 to –0.62; I2 = 13.4%), reduced total sedative dose (reported in propofol equivalents, mg) (SMD –1.29; 95% CI, –2.27 to –0.31; I2 = 96.6%), and reduced total opioid dose (reported in morphine equivalents, mg) (SMD –0.40; 95% CI, –0.76 to –0.04; I2 = 77.0%). Processed facial EMG was associated with an increased risk of adverse events (risk ratio 1.40; 95% CI, 1.03–1.90; I2 = 0.00%). Risk of bias was serious for 65% (n = 13/20) of included studies.
CONCLUSIONS:
Processed EEG monitoring is not associated with reduced duration of mechanical ventilation but may be associated with reduced sedative and opioid exposure and decreased hospital length of stay. Processed facial EMG monitoring may be associated with increased adverse events.
Current guidelines recommend the use of goal-directed sedation administration with a preference for light sedation as the standard of care for mechanically ventilated critically ill adult patients unless otherwise medically indicated. Suboptimal sedation practices impact both patient and health system outcomes in patients receiving mechanical ventilation. Deep sedation increases the risk of adverse outcomes in critically ill patients, including longer duration of mechanical ventilation, longer ICU stays, and higher mortality. Insufficient sedation increases the risk of patient safety events such as self-extubation.
Identifying reliable instruments to monitor sedation across heterogeneous ICU patient populations remains an ongoing challenge. Over the last 2 decades, focus has been on the development and validation of sedation assessment scales to streamline and reduce variability in how sedation is reported clinically. Currently, depth of sedation is commonly evaluated subjectively with instruments such as the Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS). Limitations exist with these sedation monitoring instruments as they are dependent on subjective assessments by healthcare professionals and cannot evaluate the depth of sedation in the setting of neuromuscular blockade use, where a lack of motor responses limit accurate sedation assessment scoring.
Objective sedation monitoring practices, which include the use of tools such as biochemical monitoring (e.g., therapeutic drug monitoring), electroencephalography (EEG) (e.g., Bispectral Index [BIS]), and electromyography (EMG) (e.g., Responsiveness Index) have been examined as sedation monitoring tools among critically ill adult patients in comparison to subjective clinical assessments such as the RASS. These objective sedation monitoring practices may serve as effective adjuncts to monitor sedation in critically ill mechanically ventilated patients when subjective sedation monitoring practices are insufficient. What remains unknown is whether the use of any objective sedation monitoring practices to guide sedation delivery in mechanically ventilated critically ill patients impacts clinical outcomes. Our objective was to evaluate if objective sedation monitoring practices for critically ill patients receiving sedation during mechanical ventilation reduce the duration of mechanical ventilation and other clinical and health resource-related outcomes.

METHODS

Search Strategy
The systematic review was conducted in accordance with methodologic standards and reported following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA-SR) checklist (Appendix 1, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534). The systematic review and protocol were registered in PROSPERO under registration number CRD42023439190. The search was executed on June 29, 2023, in Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, PsycINFO, Web of Science, Cochrane Library, and PROSPERO for relevant published and unpublished systematic reviews. The grey literature, using sources listed in the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health Grey Matters and the WHO International Clinical Trial Registry, was also searched for ongoing trials. The search strategy was developed in consultation with content experts and a health services librarian and approved by a second librarian with completion of a PRESS checklist. Search terms included ICU, mechanical ventilation, sedation monitoring, and all related synonyms and Boolean logic (Appendix 2 for full search strategy, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534). No restrictions were applied related to date or language of publication. If articles were not available in English, they were translated using Google Translate. Reference lists of all included articles were manually searched to identify additional studies.

Study Selection
Duplicate study records were removed using the de-duplication strategy outlined by Bramer et al. Following a calibration exercise to ensure 100% agreement between reviewers, three reviewers (N.J., A.H., T.P.) independently and in duplicate screened title and abstracts and full-texts using Covidence (Veritas Health Innovation, Melbourne, Australia) and applied inclusion criteria. Disagreements were resolved through discussion. Included studies were observational (i.e., cohort, cross-sectional) or interventional (i.e., randomized, quasi-randomized) original research studies, conducted in adult (age 18 yr or older) critically ill invasively mechanically ventilated patients in any critical care setting, evaluating any objective sedation monitoring practice, and reported on duration of mechanical ventilation or other prespecified secondary outcomes. Case-control or case series study designs were excluded due to uncertainty in the sample denominator.

Data Extraction and Study Quality
Three reviewers (N.J., A.H., T.P.) completed data extraction independently and in duplicate. The following data were extracted: study identifiers and type (study location, study design, sample size, ICU type, study primary outcome), participant demographics (age, biological sex, reason for admission, comorbidities, illness severity), intervention information (monitoring strategy, monitoring indication), and outcome measures (duration of mechanical ventilation, total sedative and opioid exposure, ICU mortality, ICU length of stay, hospital length of stay, delirium occurrence, need for tracheostomy, adverse events). We contacted corresponding authors via email with no follow-up for additional data, if missing.
Risk of bias assessments were completed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias 2 tool for all included randomized and quasi-randomized studies and the Risk of Bias in Non-randomized Studies - of Interventions (ROBINS-I) tool for all included non-randomized studies. Disagreements on final quality assessment were resolved through discussion.

Data Synthesis and Analysis
Meta-analysis was performed for pooled estimates of the primary outcome and each secondary outcome with 95% CIs calculated using DerSimonian-Laird random-effects modeling with inverse-variance. For all estimates, p value of less than 0.05 was defined as statistically significant. For continuous outcomes, treatment effects were presented as standardized mean differences (SMDs). Studies that reported continuous outcomes as medians and interquartile ranges (IQRs) were converted to means and sds. For dichotomous outcomes, treatment effects were reported as a risk ratio (RR). Studies reporting sedative and opioid doses used varied units, preventing data pooling. To standardize, doses were converted to milligrams per 24 hours per 70 kg, or per the reported average weight when available. Given the variety of sedatives reported, all doses were standardized to propofol equivalents (midazolam 5 mg/hr = lorazepam 3 mg/hr = propofol 200 mg/hr). We standardized all opioid doses to morphine equivalents (1 mg morphine = 100 μg alfentanil; fentanyl 0.01 mg = hydromorphone 0.15 mg = morphine 1 mg). Statistical heterogeneity was quantified using the I2 statistic. We assessed publication bias via visual inspection of funnel plots and Egger’s regression test. Statistical analysis was carried out in STATA, Version 16 (StataCorp, College Station, TX) using the metan package to produce the pooled estimates and forest plots. Prespecified subgroup analyses for the primary outcome defined in our protocol as subgroup analysis of patients receiving deep sedation, neuromuscular blockade, or having a primary neurologic diagnosis were not possible due to lack of available data from included studies. Post hoc subgroup analyses at the study level were completed to assess the influence of methodologic (study location, study design, study quality) and clinical factors (ICU type) on the primary outcome. Sensitivity analysis where publication bias was identified excluding relevant studies was also undertaken.

RESULTS

Description of studies
Following de-duplication, 6273 unique citations were identified. After title and abstract screening, 334 studies were eligible for full-text screening with 20 studies totaling 3410 patients included in the systematic review (Fig. 1). Of the included studies, 10 were observational (8 prospective cohort studies, 2 retrospective cohort studies) and 10 were randomized control trials (7 single-center, 3 multicenter). Fifteen studies evaluated processed EEG monitoring, two studies evaluated raw EEG monitoring, and three studies evaluated processed facial EMG monitoring. No studies were identified using biochemical monitoring of sedation. Among studies evaluating processed EEG monitoring, 12 (80%) used the BIS sedation monitoring modality, a proprietary system that analyzes EEG frequencies to calculate a depth of sedation index. Additional study characteristics are available in Supplemental Table 1 (https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534). Data from studies evaluating raw EEG monitoring were insufficient to be able to be pooled and included in the study meta-analysis.
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses diagram of study selection. Reproduced with permission from Page et al.

Primary Outcome: Duration of Mechanical Ventilation
Six studies reported on the primary outcome. Five studies evaluated processed EEG monitoring (i.e., BIS), and one study evaluated processed facial EMG. Pooled data from the five studies (n = 349) evaluating processed EEG monitoring demonstrated that processed EEG monitoring was not associated with reduced duration of mechanical ventilation (SMD –0.33; 95% CI, –0.91 to 0.25). Statistical heterogeneity was significant for this outcome (I2 = 84.4%, p < 0.001) (Fig. 2). Processed facial EMG (n = 74) was not associated with reduced duration of mechanical ventilation (SMD –0.06; 95% CI, –0.51 to 0.40).
Forest plot of studies evaluating the association between objective sedation monitoring practices and duration of mechanical ventilation. BIS = Bispectral Index, DL = DerSimonian-Laird, RI = Responsiveness Index, SMD = standardized mean difference.

Secondary Outcomes

Total Sedative Dose
Eleven studies reported on total sedative dose administered. One study was excluded from meta-analysis due to a lack of reported units used for medication administration. Nine studies reporting on total sedative dose evaluated processed EEG (i.e., BIS, auditory evoked potentials [AEP], Cerebral State Index [CSI]) and one study evaluated processed facial EMG. Pooled data from nine studies evaluating processed EEG monitoring (n = 884) identified that processed EEG monitoring was associated with a reduced total sedative dose (propofol equivalents, mg) (SMD –1.29; 95% CI, –2.27 to –0.31). Significant statistical heterogeneity was identified for this outcome (I2 = 96.6%, p < 0.001) (Supplemental Fig. 1, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534). Publication bias was identified for this outcome (described in the following section). Therefore, sensitivity analysis was completed for this outcome excluding the study completed by Kamali and colleagues which when excluded demonstrated that processed EEG monitoring did not reduce total sedative dose (SMD –0.32; 95% CI, –0.68 to 0.04; I2 = 71.4%; p = 0.002) (Supplemental Fig. 2, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534). Processed facial EMG (n = 74) was not associated with reduced total sedative dose (SMD –0.19; 95% CI, –0.65 to 0.27).

Total Opioid Dose
Ten studies reported on total opioid dose used. One study was excluded from meta-analysis due to a lack of reported units used for medication administration. Eight studies reporting on total opioid dose evaluated processed EEG (i.e., BIS, AEP, CSI) and one study evaluated processed facial EMG. Pooled data for eight studies (n = 584) evaluating processed EEG monitoring identified that processed EEG monitoring was associated with a reduced total opioid dose (SMD –0.40; 95%CI, –0.76 to –0.04). Significant statistical heterogeneity was identified for this outcome (I2 = 77.0%, p < 0.001) (Supplemental Fig. 3, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534). Processed facial EMG (n = 74) was not associated with reduced total sedative dose (SMD –0.01; 95% CI, –0.47 to 0.44).

ICU Mortality
Two studies evaluated ICU mortality with one study evaluating processed EEG (n = 125) (i.e., BIS) and one study evaluating processed facial EMG (n = 74). Neither processed EEG or processed facial EMG monitoring was associated with ICU mortality with a reported RR of 0.37 (95% CI, 0.04–3.40) and RR 1.73 (95% CI, 0.93–3.22), respectively (Supplemental Table 2, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534).

ICU and Hospital Length of Stay
Five studies reported on ICU length of stay (in days). Four studies evaluated processed EEG monitoring (BIS, CSI, Narcotrend) and one study evaluated processed facial EMG. Pooled data from the four studies (n = 544) evaluating processed EEG monitoring showed that processed EEG monitoring was not associated with reduced duration of ICU length of stay (days) (SMD –0.16; 95% CI, –0.67 to 0.35) with evidence of significant statistical heterogeneity (I2 = 74.2%, p = 0.009) (Supplemental Fig. 4, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534). Processed facial EMG (n = 31) was also not associated with reduced duration of ICU length of stay (SMD –0.07; 95% CI, –0.78 to 0.63).
Three studies reported on hospital length of stay (days) with all evaluating processed EEG monitoring (BIS, CSI). Pooled data from these three studies (n = 270) showed that processed EEG monitoring was associated with decreased hospital length of stay (in days) (SMD –0.89; 95%CI, –1.17 to –0.62). There was minimal statistical heterogeneity for this outcome (I2 = 13.4%, p = 0.315) (Supplemental Fig. 5, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534).

Tracheostomy and Adverse Events
Three studies evaluated the need for tracheostomy. Two studies evaluated this outcome in the setting of processed EEG monitoring (i.e., BIS) and one study evaluated this outcome in the setting of processed facial EMG. Pooled data for the two studies (n = 160) evaluating processed EEG monitoring identified no association between processed EEG monitoring and need for tracheostomy (RR 0.29; 95% CI, 0.02–5.03); however, there was significant statistical heterogeneity with this outcome (I2 = 75.0%, p = 0.046) (Supplemental Fig. 6, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534). Processed facial EMG (n = 31) was not associated with need for tracheostomy in the one included study (RR 1.06; 95% CI, 0.24–4.57).
Adverse events defined in the included studies as unintended extubation, removal of nasogastric tubes and/or removal of central venous catheter was evaluated in four studies (n = 1679), one study evaluating processed EEG (n = 102) (i.e., BIS) and three studies evaluating processed facial EMG (n = 1577). Pooled data for the three studies evaluating adverse events during processed facial EMG monitoring identified an increased risk of adverse events in patients monitored with processed facial EMG (RR 1.40; 95% CI, 1.03–1.90) with minimal heterogeneity with this result (I2 = 0.00%, p = 0.861) (Supplemental Fig. 7, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534). Processed EEG was not associated with increased risk of adverse events (RR 5.29; 95% CI, 0.22–126.66).

Delirium Occurrence
Two studies reported on delirium occurrence, both of which evaluated the use of processed EEG (i.e., BIS). Due to differences in how delirium outcomes were reported (i.e., delirium-free days, delirium occurrence), results could not be pooled. Tobar et al reported on delirium incidence among patients who did and did not undergo processed EEG monitoring for sedation and found no difference between groups (52% vs. 36%, p = 0.39). Bass et al did not identify a difference in the number of delirium-free days between patients undergoing processed EEG monitoring compared with those patients not undergoing processed EEG monitoring (median [IQR] (days) 0 [0–1] vs. 0 [0–6], p = 0.43) (Supplemental Table 3, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534).

Sources of Heterogeneity
Post hoc subgroup analyses were limited to methodologic (study location, study design, study quality) and clinical factors (ICU type) on the primary outcome related to processed EEG as there was only one study that reported on processed facial EMG. Results from all subgroup analyses did not explain the heterogeneity observed for the primary outcome (Supplemental Figs. 8–11, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534).

Study Quality Assessment
Risk of bias was assessed for all included studies. Thirteen studies (65%) were evaluated to have serious risk of bias. Full results of the risk of bias assessment can be found in Supplemental Tables 4 and 5 (https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534).

Publication Bias
There was no evidence of significant publication bias for the primary and most secondary outcomes evaluated by visual inspection of funnel plots and Egger’s tests (all p value > 0.05). Total sedative dose outcome was found to have evidence of publication bias (Egger’s test p = 0.007) (Supplemental Figs. 12–19, https://links.lww.com/CCX/B534). Publication bias for this outcome was explained by the exclusion of the study completed by Kamali et al which evaluated propofol doses during cardiovascular surgery where BIS monitoring was subsequently used postoperatively to evaluate duration of mechanical ventilation.

DISCUSSION
In this systematic review and meta-analysis on the use of objective sedation monitoring practices in mechanically ventilated critically ill adults, we found most studies evaluated processed EEG monitoring with no reduction in the duration of mechanical ventilation. However, the use of processed EEG monitoring may be associated with reduced total sedative and opioid exposure and shorter hospital length of stay, but not ICU length of stay. An explanation for our findings of reduced hospital length of stay could not be ascertained in this systematic review but may reflect a lower burden of complications following critical illness because of lower total sedative and opioid exposure. Studies evaluating processed facial EMG were less frequently reported, but their use for sedation monitoring may be associated with an increased risk of adverse events. Several of the identified outcomes demonstrated significant statistical heterogeneity and most included studies were at high risk of bias.
A recent Delphi consensus process of experts in Neuroanesthesiology and Neurocritical care on the use of processed EEG had strong consensus on the use of processed quantitative EEG to monitor levels of sedation, but did not endorse the use of dimensionless numerical scales of alertness to determine levels of sedation (e.g., BIS). Processed EEG relies on montages using a limited number of electrodes placed on the frontal areas of the brain that monitor electrical activity through raw EEG tracings as both spatial and temporal variations of electric fields from the skull surface. Subsequent proprietary algorithms deliver a dimensionless scaled index that can be used to help clinicians with raw EEG interpretation in most processed EEG modalities. These dimensionless scaled indices are moderately to strongly correlated with clinical sedation scales but may be less reliable in the setting of neuromuscular blockades. Analysis of processed EEG waveforms in addition to dimensionless scaled indices may allow for improved characterization of waveform frequency range related to depth of sedation and presence of burst suppression. However, the skills and knowledge necessary for accurate and continuous EEG waveform interpretation have limited the current applicability of quantitative EEG (raw and processed) at the clinical bedside for sedation monitoring and medication titration. Further, the interpretation of processed EEG is influenced by patient physiology, sedative medications, and neuromuscular blockade. For example, in awake volunteers, the administration of neuromuscular blockade while depth of sedation was monitored with processed EEG resulted in a decrease in processed EEG values consistent with that of general anesthesia suggesting that processed EEG may be an unreliable indicator of depth of sedation. This helps contextualize our systematic review results and suggests further studies are needed to evaluate processed EEG with EMG monitoring as reliable measures of depth of sedation.
Facial EMG measures the electrical impulse generated by contraction of the frontalis muscle which can subsequently be monitored quantitatively. Our systematic review emphasizes a paucity of data available regarding the use of processed facial EMG which relies on facial muscle activity within the preceding hour to assess depth of sedation and highlights potential increased risk of adverse events related to using this modality of sedation monitoring alone. However, facial EMG may serve as an important adjunct to EEG sedation monitoring. Facial EMG is reliably reactive to nociceptive stimuli even during deep sedation in critically ill patients and EMG remains a reliable measure of reactivity under partial neuromuscular blockade. Exploratory evidence evaluating the use of processed EEG monitoring (i.e., BIS) and facial EMG has demonstrated moderate predictive probabilities with patient RASS scores suggesting potential feasibility as a multimodal approach to evaluate the level and adequacy of sedation in critically ill patients. No currently available studies have assessed the combined use of these modalities on patient outcomes in critically ill patients. Multimodal approaches to sedation monitoring that combine quantitative EEG and EMG remains a largely unexplored and potentially effective strategy for optimal objective sedation monitoring in critically ill patients.
Our study has several strengths, including the use of a broad search strategy across multiple databases. Further, we translated as many articles as possible that were not published in English for potential inclusion in this systematic review. Our study also has several limitations. Not all articles could be sourced or translated from their original language and were excluded despite potentially meeting inclusion criteria. Further, there was serious risk of bias for most included studies. Although we identified several randomized control trials, most of the studies were single-center study designs with small sample sizes. Few studies could be pooled for analysis, particularly for the primary outcome, which was limited to evaluating only processed EEG monitoring. Lastly, due to the few studies included, there was limited ability to explore sources of methodologic and clinical heterogeneity.

CONCLUSIONS
Three categories of objective sedation monitoring practices for critically ill patients including raw EEG, processed EEG, and processed facial EMG were identified. Most studies examined processed EEG as an objective sedation monitoring practice within which there was no reduction in duration of mechanical ventilation for critically ill adults. Processed EEG monitoring was associated with shorter duration of hospital stay and reduced total sedative and opioid doses. There was significant statistical heterogeneity in many of the evaluated outcomes, and all included studies had moderate to high risk of bias. Additional studies are needed to better understand the clinical implications of objective sedation monitoring practices on critically ill patients.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Diane Lorenzetti from the University of Calgary Health Sciences Library and Michelle Dalidowicz from the Saskatchewan Polytechnic Library for helping in developing the search strategy for this study.

Supplementary Material
All authors participated in the design and development of the study. Dr. Jaworska drafted the article, and all authors read and approved the final article. All those designated as authors have met all International Committee of Medical Journal Editors criteria for authorship. They are substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work; or the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work. All authors involved in drafting the work or revising it critically for important intellectual content; final approval of the version to be published; and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.
The authors of this systematic review received research funding from Alberta Health Services Critical Care Strategic Clinical Network for this study.
The authors have not disclosed that they do not have any potential conflicts of interest.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal’s website (http://journals.lww.com/ccejournal).

REFERENCES
Monitoring sedation status over time in ICU patients: Reliability and validity of the Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS).
Clinical practice guidelines for the prevention and management of pain, agitation/sedation, delirium, immobility, and sleep disruption in adult patients in the ICU.
Effect of a nursing-implemented sedation protocol on the duration of mechanical ventilation.
Efficacy and safety of a paired sedation and ventilator weaning protocol for mechanically ventilated patients in intensive care (Awakening and Breathing Controlled trial): A randomised controlled trial.
Daily interruption of sedative infusions in critically ill patients undergoing mechanical ventilation.
Protocolized versus non-protocolized weaning for reducing the duration of mechanical ventilation in critically ill adult patients.
The incidence of sub-optimal sedation in the ICU: A systematic review.
A systematic review of the impact of sedation practice in the ICU on resource use, costs and patient safety.
Sedation depth and long-term mortality in mechanically ventilated critically ill adults: A prospective longitudinal multicentre cohort study.
Protocol-directed sedation versus non-protocol-directed sedation in mechanically ventilated intensive care adults and children.
Controlled sedation with alphaxalone-alphadolone.
The Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale: Validity and reliability in adult intensive care unit patients.
Multidisciplinary management of sedation and analgesia in critical care.
BIS monitoring versus clinical assessment for sedation in mechanically ventilated adults in the intensive care unit and its impact on clinical outcomes and resource utilization.
Systematic review and meta-analysis of the correlation between bispectral index (BIS) and clinical sedation scales: Toward defining the role of BIS in critically ill patients.
A randomized controlled proof-of-concept trial of early sedation management using responsiveness index monitoring in mechanically ventilated critically ill patients.
The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews.
PRESS peer review of electronic search strategies: 2015 guideline statement.
The accuracy of Google Translate for abstracting data from Non–English-Language trials for systematic reviews.
De-duplication of database search results for systematic reviews in EndNote.
Incidence and prevalence of delirium subtypes in an adult ICU: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
RoB 2: A revised tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials.
ROBINS-I: A tool for assessing risk of bias in non-randomised studies of interventions.
Meta-analysis in clinical trials.
Optimally estimating the sample mean from the sample size, median, mid-range, and/or mid-quartile range.
Estimating the sample mean and standard deviation from the sample size, median, range and/or interquartile range.
Impact of a national propofol shortage on duration of mechanical ventilation at an academic medical center.
Daily sedation interruption versus no daily sedation interruption for critically ill adult patients requiring invasive mechanical ventilation.
Opioid conversions in acute care.
Bias in meta-analysis detected by a simple, graphical test.
Bispectral index monitoring can be an effective method to assess sedation levels after open-heart surgery.
Bispectral index monitoring to facilitate early extubation following cardiovascular surgery.
Bispectral index for titrating sedation in ARDS patients during neuromuscular blockade.
Early clinical and electrophysiological brain dysfunction is associated with ICU outcomes in COVID-19 critically ill patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome: A prospective bicentric observational study.
Is the bispectral index appropriate for monitoring the sedation level of mechanically ventilated surgical ICU patients?
Monitoring sedation for bronchoscopy in mechanically ventilated patients by using the Ramsay sedation scale versus auditory-evoked potentials.
Studying the effects of BIS monitoring (depth of anesthesia) in early extubation of patients candidated for non-emergency CABG.
Monitoring of anesthetic depth during surgical correction of acquired valvular disorders: Single center, randomized trial.
Utility of bispectral index in the management of multiple trauma patients.
A randomized evaluation of bispectral index-augmented sedation assessment in neurological patients.
Exploring the impact of augmenting sedation assessment with physiologic monitors.
Automated pupillometry for prediction of electroencephalographic reactivity in critically ill patients: A prospective cohort study.
EEG monitoring for the control of sedation: Shortening of treatment in the ICU. [German].
Electroencephalography spectral edge frequency and suppression rate-guided sedation in patients with COVID-19: A randomized controlled trial.
Frequency and clinical impact of preserved bispectral index activity during deep sedation in mechanically ventilated ICU patients.
Staff education, regular sedation and analgesia quality feedback, and a sedation monitoring technology for improving sedation and analgesia quality for critically ill, mechanically ventilated patients: A cluster randomised trial.
Presence of electroencephalogram burst suppression in sedated, critically ill patients is associated with increased mortality.
The impact of bispectral index monitoring on sedation administration in mechanically ventilated patients.
Responsiveness index versus the RASS-based method for adjusting sedation in critically ill patients.
Bispectral index for improving anaesthetic delivery and postoperative recovery.
Bispectral index in multitrauma patient.
Processed electroencephalogram-based monitoring to guide sedation in critically ill adult patients: Recommendations from an International Expert Panel-Based Consensus.
Broad use of processed EEG: Ready for prime time yet?
Instruments for monitoring intensive care unit sedation.
Role of bedside electroencephalography in the adult intensive care unit during therapeutic neuromuscular blockade.
Response of bispectral index to neuromuscular block in awake volunteers.
Responsiveness of the frontal EMG for monitoring the sedation state of critically ill patients.
Novel insights on association and reactivity of Bispectral Index, frontal electromyogram, and autonomic responses in nociception-sedation monitoring of critical care patients.
Effects of partial neuromuscular blockade on facial nerve monitorization in otologic surgery.