An Evaluation of Foreign Clinical Data in the Approval Reviews of Antimicrobial Medicines in Japan: Considering Ethnic and Regional Differences in Data Extrapolations in Accordance With Regulatory Circumstances
ABSTRACT
The approval requirements in new regions that do not require domestic clinical data and the clinical data evaluation of multi‐regional clinical trials (MRCTs) and foreign clinical trials (FCTs) in the Japanese approval review processes for antimicrobial medicines were explored. Foreign clinical data has been used to evaluate the efficacy of more than 60% (45/70) of approved antimicrobial drugs in Japan. Two FCT extrapolations based on bridging strategies were used for antimicrobial medicine approvals in the early 2000s after the issuance of International Council for Harmonization—Efficacy Guideline 5 (ICH‐E5), but 40 approvals extrapolated efficacy evaluations from outside of Japan without bridging studies. Participation in MRCTs has increased since the 2010s, following Japan's notification “Basic Principles on Global Clinical Trials” for global clinical trials in 2007. From the commencement of the use of FCT extrapolations, comparisons of pharmacokinetic data have been used to examine regional differences. As experience with inter‐regional data interpretation increases, similarities in the drug susceptibilities of infectious agents (pharmacodynamic data) and the medical environment (extrinsic factors) are being examined. In one approval in Japan, a different dose was set compared with that approved overseas because of differences in pharmacokinetics. We demonstrated that MRCTs and FCTs of antimicrobial medicines have been accepted as confirmatory trials in Japan without the need for bridging studies, which has been enabled by examining regional differences using pharmacokinetic data and additional comparisons of pharmacodynamic data and extrinsic factors.

Abbreviations
AUC
area under the curve
DCT
domestic clinical trial
FCT
foreign clinical trial
ICH
International Council for Harmonization
MHLW
Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare
MRCT
Multi‐regional clinical trial
PD
pharmacodynamics
PK
pharmacokinetics

Introduction
Although many medicines have similar properties and effects across different populations, some countries are reluctant to rely on foreign clinical data when approving new drugs. Concerns stem from potential ethnic factors that may affect the safety, efficacy and optimal dosage of medicines. Even though ethnic differences among populations may affect drug safety, efficacy and dosing, extensive duplication of clinical evaluations wastes drug development resources and delays the introduction of new therapies. Therefore, clarifying the requirements for an approval application package that does not necessarily require data from individuals in that region (e.g., Japan) without overlooking possible ethnic or regional differences has become a priority research focus.
A study of the approval review of anti‐human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) medicines in Japan, which utilized foreign approval application materials, suggested that the influence of ethnicity on the biological response to anti‐HIV medicines may no longer need to be considered. This conclusion was because pharmacokinetic (PK) studies conducted in Japan did not reveal any clinically significant ethnic differences, and anti‐HIV medicines have been used without problems in Japan at the same doses as used in other countries. In addition to anti‐HIV drugs, there may be other medicines without significant ethnic differences in biological responses of clinical concern. The characteristics demonstrated by these medicines may meet the requirements for approval application packages that do not necessarily require clinical data in new regions.
To examine the attributes of this hypothesis that some drugs may have characteristics that enable the drugs to meet the requirements for approval application packages that do not necessarily require clinical data in new regions, we focused on approval reviews of antimicrobial drugs. Similar to anti‐HIV drugs, antimicrobial drugs have an effect on the bacteria, fungi, viruses and parasites that cause infectious diseases rather than on the host per se. Specifically, we examined the following factors in the approval review process for individual antimicrobial drugs in Japan: (1) the evaluation and utilization of results from pivotal studies determining efficacy profiles and indications (multi‐regional clinical trials [MRCTs] and foreign clinical trials [FCTs]) in the clinical data packages; (2) intrinsic and extrinsic factors for examining domestic and foreign differences (ethnic or regional differences) when utilizing and evaluating results from MRCTs/FCTs; (3) temporal changes in the roles of MRCTs/FCTs in clinical data packages and the factors for examining domestic and foreign differences; (4) relationships with regulatory changes; and (5) if there are any examples of approvals in which clinical ethnic differences were observed, such as different doses being appropriate in different countries. Using this analysis, we aimed to evaluate the use of data from MRCTs/FCTs in the clinical data packages of the approval reviews of antimicrobial drugs.

Methods
From the beginning of April 1999 to the end of March 2025, 90 new active ingredients or combination drugs indicated as anti‐infective agents (Therapeutic Category 6: Agents against pathogenic organisms and parasites, excluding Category 63: Biological preparations) were approved in Japan (not including anti‐HIV drugs). The therapeutic categories for all drugs included in the present study are listed in Table S1. The approval review process, reexamination system, and achievement of approval conditions analyzed in the present study were based on publicly available data from the Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency, the Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare (MHLW), and the Review Report for New Drug Approval Database in the Japan Pharmaceutical Information Center. All 90 approvals are shown in Table S1.
The flowchart in Figure 1 outlines the process for extracting approvals for detailed review. We excluded approvals that did not incorporate an evaluation of FCT or MRCT data: (1) five approvals (I in Figure 1) that were based on an evaluation of the descriptions in guidelines and textbooks related to the drug, rather than on a direct evaluation of the results of clinical trials (Those five approvals were recognized as Public Knowledge‐Based Applications by the Evaluation committee on unapproved or off‐labeled drugs with high medical needs); (2) six approvals (II in Figure 1) for which there was no overseas development at the time of the application for approval in Japan and only the results of domestic clinical trials (DCTs) were evaluated; and (3) nine approvals (III in Figure 1) for infections caused by SARS‐CoV‐2 were excluded from the detailed review of FCT data because these drugs were approved under the Special Approval for Emergency or Emergency Regulatory Approval systems in Japan. After extraction, 70 approvals that incorporated the results of FCTs, including MRCTs, in the approval reviews were included in the present study.
The flowchart for extracting approvals that used foreign clinical data in the approval review process in Japan.
These 70 approvals were categorized into six types according to the incorporation of MRCTs, adoption of bridging strategies, and the roles of the MRCTs/FCTs in the clinical data packages for approval review (Table 1), as shown in the flowchart in Figure 2. Classification was based on the review reports and is shown in Figures 1 and 2 (The data coding process involved two researchers: R.S. as the primary coder and M.I. as the secondary coder. For cases where coding results differed, both coders reexamined the evidentiary statements in the PMDA Review Reports to identify the root cause of the inconsistency. It was determined that the discrepancies stemmed from insufficient granularity in the initial classification criteria. After refining the definitions to ensure higher precision, the coders re‐evaluated the data, resulting in a 100% inter‐rater agreement). URL links for the review reports of each approval that served as the basis for classification are provided in Table S1.
Classification of six roles of MRCTs/FCTs in clinical data packages.
Evaluation of MRCTs	 	Bridging strategies not involving evaluation of MRCTs	 	Evaluation of FCTs, not including MRCTs or bridging strategies	 	C‐1. No clinical trials of patients conducted in Japan	 	C‐2. Evaluation of FCTs for efficacy	 	C‐3. Evaluation of FCTs for dose selection	 	C‐4. Evaluation of FCTs for safety
Abbreviations: FCT, foreign clinical trial; MRCT, multi‐regional clinical trial.
The flowchart for classifying the types of MRCTs/FCTs in clinical data packages in Japan.

Results

Roles of MRCTs/FCTs in Clinical Data Packages in Approval Reviews
We designated six MRCT/FCT role types (Table 1) according to the extent of implementation of clinical trials involving Japanese patients, as shown in the flowchart in Figure 2. The classification policy was defined as follows: To examine the institutional impact exemplified by (International Council for Harmonization—Efficacy Guideline) ICH‐E17 and E5, priority was given to classifying approvals into two categories: those including results from MRCTs (Type A) and those developed using bridging strategies (Type B), regardless of whether the regulatory authorities accepted the bridging. Twelve approvals evaluated MRCTs in the approval review (A) and five approvals used a bridging strategy in the clinical development (B).
Garenoxacin: Differences in PK parameters between patients in Japan and in the foreign country for bridging studies could not be explained by differences in body weight, and the indications and dose of the control drug differed between Japan and other countries.
Zanamivir: The placebo‐controlled bridging study failed to demonstrate superiority over the placebo.
Moxifloxacin: The bridging strategy compared active‐control studies in which the control drug used was different between Japan and the foreign country for bridging studies.
Of the five approvals for which bridging strategies were planned (B), only one approval (entecavir) contained data from dose–response studies as bridging studies. The other four approvals were based on placebo‐ or active‐controlled trials, and only one case (oseltamivir) was successful. The bridging strategies were unsuccessful in three approvals for the following reasons:
For these three approvals, active‐ or placebo‐controlled trials had been conducted in Japan, and thus these drugs were approved based on the results of DCTs, without relying on FCT extrapolation.
The remaining 53 approvals, designated as Type C, consisted of those including FCT results (but excluding MRCTs). These were further sub‐classified based on how the FCT results were utilized in the evaluation for approval:
Types C‐1 and C‐2 were approvals in which efficacy (covering either the full or partial range of indications) was evaluated based on FCTs. Specifically, six approvals that included no evaluation of Japanese patients and were evaluated solely on FCT results were classified as C‐1. These drugs were for treating smallpox (one approval), malaria (two approvals), drug‐resistant bacteria (two approvals), and cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with HIV (one approval). These infectious diseases affect a very small number of patients in Japan and thus evaluating efficacy within Japan is not feasible. The 22 approvals that included some DCTs were classified as C‐2.
Type C‐3 comprised the 10 approvals in which FCTs were used for dose selection; specifically, those in which the dose determined by FCT results was subsequently verified in DCTs.
Type C‐4 comprised the remaining 15 approvals in which the dose and efficacy were determined using DCTs, and in which FCTs were used primarily for safety evaluation (including determining the scope of investigation for dose‐finding studies).
MRCTs/FCTs were identified and evaluated as the trials that directly affected indications in Japan in classifications A, B, C‐1, and C‐2. Thus, the approval of more than 60% (45/70, 64%) of antimicrobial drugs relied on MRCTs/FCTs to evaluate at least part of the efficacy.

Temporal Changes in the Roles of MRCTs/FCTs
Participation in MRCTs (A) began in the late 2000s and is continuing (application dates: October 2009 or later; approval dates: January 2010 or later).
For the five approvals using the bridging strategy (B), applications and approvals occurred in the early 2000s (application dates: August 1999 to May 2006; approval dates: December 1999 to July 2007).
The use of MRCTs/FCTs from 2020 onward focused on extrapolations and evaluations as confirmatory trials in clinical data packages for Japan [A, C‐1 and C‐2]. The other types of approvals [B, C‐3 and C‐4] had application dates up to January 2019 and approval dates up to January 2020, but there were no more after these dates. These temporal changes in the roles of MRCTs/FCTs will be discussed in relation to the factors for identifying differences between domestic and foreign medical backgrounds—PK, pharmacodynamics (PD), diagnoses and treatments—in later sections.
The roles of MRCTs/FCTs in approval reviews [A, B and C‐1–C‐4], the number of approvals, the number of approvals that completed the re‐examination application (the number in parentheses is the number of approvals for which sales ceased before re‐examination), and the distribution of approval and application dates by type in clinical data packages are summarized in Table 2. All re‐examination results were Category 1—the quality, efficacy and safety of the drug were confirmed, and decisions on marketing authorisation were maintained. The application and approval timing characteristics for each type of MRCT/FCT in clinical data packages can be summarized as follows:
The number of approvals and completed re‐examination applications and application and approval dates for each type of MRCT/FCT role in clinical data packages.
Type	No. of approvals	No. of reexaminationsa (discontinuedb)	Approval dates	Application dates	 	Average	Median (range)	Average	Median (range)	 	A	12	4	13/8/2017	22/7/2017 (13/1/2010–24/6/2024)	1/7/2016	28/11/2016 (30/10/2009–26/4/2023)	 	B	5	5	3/3/2004	11/10/2005 (27/12/1999–31/7/2007)	29/12/2002	30/9/2002 (2/8/1999–30/5/2006)	 	C–1	6	4	18/4/2012	11/11/2012 (4/4/2001–27/12/2024)	22/8/2011	9/2/2012 (14/7/2000–10/4/2024)	 	C–2	22	13 (2)	31/10/2010	9/10/2011 (10/3/2000–24/6/2024)	13/9/2009	1/12/2010 (19/12/1997–17/11/2023)	 	C–3	10	5 (2)	29/4/2012	2/1/2015 (21/11/2001–8/1/2019)	16/6/2011	12/4/2014 (27/4/2001–15/5/2018)	 	C–4	15	7 (6)	28/11/2007	31/7/2007 (3/7/2000–19/1/2018)	14/11/2005	30/9/2003 (21/12/1994–27/1/2017)
Completed re‐examinations.
Sales discontinued before re‐examination.

Factors for Comparing Foreign and Japanese Medical Backgrounds: Relationships With MRCT/FCT Roles and Temporal Changes
We compared several factors between domestic (Japanese) and foreign medical backgrounds when an evaluation of MRCTs/FCTs was included in approval reviews. Three primary factors were assessed: (1) PK parameters (60 approvals); (2) varieties of etiological agents (drug susceptibilities and variants of bacteria, fungi, viruses and parasites) (26 approvals) and (3) medical environments related to the diagnosis and treatment of the target diseases (23 approvals). The numbers of approvals that assessed each factor are listed in Table 3, classified by the role of the MRCTs/FCTs in the clinical data package (Table 1). PK parameter comparisons in types A, B and C‐1 to C‐3 were conducted in 96% (53/55) of the approvals. Among these types, in which the MRCTs/FCTs directly affected indications and dose settings in Japan, the data packages for two approvals, laninamivir (Inavir, A) and lamivudine (Zefix, C‐2), did not compare PK parameters. Laninamivir is an anti‐influenza drug formulated as an inhaler, and drug concentrations in the target site (the lungs) were not measured. Therefore, comparing PK parameters based on plasma concentrations may not have been considered clinically relevant. Regarding lamivudine, anti‐HIV tablets (Epivir), containing the same active ingredient as Zefix, were approved in Japan at the same dosage as in other countries. As such, it was assumed that there was no need to reexamine the PK parameters.
Factors for comparing domestic and foreign medical backgrounds: Relationships with MRCT/FCT roles in clinical data packages.
Type	No. of approvals	Factors for comparing domestic and foreign medical backgrounds	 	Pharmacokinetic parameters	Etiological agent	Diagnosis/Therapy	Other	 	A	12	11	10	9	2	 	B	5	5	3	1	2	 	C‐1	6	6	2	4	1	 	C‐2	22	21	10	8	7	 	C‐3	10	10	1	1	2	 	C‐4	15	7	0	0	2	 	Total	70	60	26	23	16
The remaining two factors [variety of etiological agents (etiological agent) and medical environments (diagnosis/therapy)] have not been compared as extensively as the PK parameters (Table 3). However, when the results of an MRCT/FCT are extrapolated to evaluate the efficacy of an indication, that is, when the approval is classified as A, B or C‐1 to C‐2, these two factors tended to be relatively well examined (etiological agent: 25/45, 56%; diagnosis/therapy: 22/45, 49%). This tendency is particularly strong in the approvals classified as Type A, involving participation of Japanese patients in MRCTs (etiological agent: 10/12, 83%; diagnosis/therapy: 9/12, 75%). Conversely, when efficacy was evaluated in domestic confirmatory trials, i.e., classifications C‐3 to C‐4, these two factors were rarely compared (etiological agent: 1/25, 4%; diagnosis/therapy: 1/25, 4%). The FCTs were extrapolated as the basis for dose setting in DCTs and sources for the safety profile.
Table 4 lists the approvals that evaluated these three factors for comparing domestic (Japanese) and foreign medical backgrounds, and the application and approval dates. Comparisons of PK parameters were conducted across almost all periods. The etiological agent and diagnosis/therapy have been investigated in evaluations of MRCT/FCT results in applications since 2003 and 2005, respectively, and in approvals since 2005 and 2006, respectively. Differences in these three factors, which relate to the roles of extrapolated MRCTs/FCTs in clinical data packages and time‐dependent changes in the factors used to compare domestic and foreign medical backgrounds, will be discussed further in the Discussion section.
Factors for comparing domestic and foreign medical backgrounds: Relationships with application and approval dates.
Assessment factors	No. of approvals	Approval dates	Application dates	 	Average	Median (range)	Average	Median (range)	 	Pharmacokinetic parameters	60	3/11/2011	25/12/2012 (27/12/1999–27/12/2024)	25/9/2010	22/12/2011 (26/12/1997–10/4/2024)	 	Etiological agent	26	8/12/2015	5/7/2017 (11/4/2005–24/6/2024)	11/9/2014	31/3/2016 (26/6/2003–26/4/2023)	 	Diagnosis/Therapy	23	18/11/2017	23/2/2018 (26/7/2006–27/12/2024)	19/12/2016	29/5/2017 (31/8/2005–10/4/2024)

Consideration of Ethnic Differences in Dose‐Setting Strategies
Of the 70 approvals investigated in the present study, only two had doses that differed from those approved in the US: simeprevir [C‐4] and voriconazole [C‐2]. Simeprevir, approved in September 2013, is a second‐generation protease inhibitor approved at a dose of 150 mg in the US and 100 mg in Japan. Because the AUC24h (area under the curve for 24 h) value of simeprevir in Japanese patients is 1.5–2.0 times higher than that in US patients, a Japanese Phase II trial was conducted using doses of 50 and 100 mg, resulting in the 100 mg dose being selected. The dose of simeprevir approved in Japan did not undergo re‐examination because the sale of simepevir was discontinued in 2023 (before the re‐examination application was due) as a result of the emergence of new antiviral drugs with greater efficacy and fewer side effects. Voriconazole, approved in April 2005, had a lower dose limit in Japan compared with that in the US because Japanese people tend to weigh less than non‐Japanese people. However, no domestic dose–response study was conducted in Japan, and there are essentially no differences in the usual dose settings in Japan compared with the US. After re‐examination, voriconazole was rated Category 1, and the dosage remained unchanged. Simeprevir was the only drug of the 70 approvals investigated in the present study with a different dose in Japan than in the US.
Apart from the two approvals mentioned above, PK parameter differences were only discussed in the review reports of garenoxacin (B) and posaconazole [C‐2] in the 70 approvals. Garenoxacin was approved at the same dose in Japan as overseas, although it was considered inappropriate to attribute the difference in AUC values solely to differences in body weight because the mean AUC value and body weight in Japanese patients are both approximately 1.5 times higher than in patients in the foreign country for bridging studies. Furthermore, the differences in PK parameters for posaconazole (Cavg and Cmin values are approximately 2.5 times higher in Japanese patients compared with patients in the foreign country for bridging studies) were not considered clinically significant, and thus a unique dosage was not established in Japan.

Discussion
We classified drug approvals in Japan according to the role of the MRCTs/FCTs in the clinical data packages (Table 1), and analyzed temporal changes in the roles of MRCTs/FCTs (Table 2) and the factors examined to identify domestic and foreign differences (ethnic differences) (Tables 3 and 4).
To examine the institutional impact, we prioritized the classification of Type A and Type B. ICH‐E5 introduced a framework for evaluating ethnic factors in 1998, enabling FCT data evaluation for applicability in Japan. The impact of ICH‐E5 on the approval review of foreign clinical data in Japan was significant. Bridging strategies for utilizing foreign clinical data received immediate attention in the approval review process. The approval review reports of five antimicrobials (micafungin [C‐2], quinupristin/dalfopristin [C‐2], linezolid [C‐1], ciprofloxacin [C‐4] and azithromycin [C‐2]) which were under review between 1997 and 2002 clearly state that the use of foreign clinical data was not based on a bridging strategy.
The five approvals classified as Type B had application and approval periods that spanned from 1998 to the early 2000s. One reason why bridging strategies have been discontinued is that the clinical trial environment has become more conducive to implementing MRCTs. The 2006 ICH‐E5 Q&A outlined the concept of global clinical trials as bridging studies, and the MHLW in Japan additionally notified the “Basic Principles on Global Clinical Trials” on September 28, 2007. Furthermore, the publication of ICH‐E17 (issued in 2018) had made it easier to accept results from MRCTs/FCTs. Consistent with this regulatory trend, the present study found that participation of Japanese patients in antimicrobial MRCTs (A) began in the late 2000s and is continuing. In a study of all pharmaceuticals in Japan, the use of data from MRCTs/FCTs for approvals was primarily based on bridging strategies until 2008. However, from 2009 to 2010, the number of approvals that used bridging strategies was almost equal to those that were based solely on data from MRCTs, and since 2011, MRCTs have become the mainstream source of foreign clinical data for approvals. In another study of all drug category approvals from 2005 to 2018, there was at least one approval in which a bridging strategy was implemented between 2006 and 2013, and another between 2015 and 2018. Therefore, the transition from bridging strategies to MRCTs was relatively early for antimicrobials, compared with other drug categories.
A reason for this early transition is that clinical dose‐finding of antimicrobials differs from that of other therapeutic areas. The clinical dose of antimicrobials can be estimated from the antimicrobial activity and PK parameters. In other words, the dosage in confirmatory trials can be determined from PK/PD analyses; there is no need to repeat similar dose–response studies in Japan when PK data comparison is possible from trials in other countries. Of the five approvals (B) for which bridging strategies were planned, only one approval (entecavir) contained dose–response studies as bridging studies. Studies on bridging strategies have concluded that a typical bridging data package, showing that the dose–response relationship and safety profile of a Japanese dose–response study (bridging study) are similar to those of a foreign dose–response study, enables the extrapolation of a FCT as a confirmatory trial in a Japanese clinical data package without needing to perform a confirmatory trial in Japan. We speculate that the lack of need for repeated dose–response studies in the development of antimicrobials is one of the reasons why the bridging strategy has not been very successful and has not been frequently adopted.
Of the three factors that are used to compare domestic and foreign medical backgrounds, two factors, etiological agent and diagnosis/therapy, have not been compared as extensively as PK parameters. These two factors were compared prominently in Type A approvals, whereas comparisons were rare in Types C‐3 and C‐4. This difference is presumably because, as experience in incorporating MRCTs/FCTs into clinical data packages in Japan has accumulated, the considerable assessment factors have become clearer. In participating in the MRCTs of antimicrobials in Japan and evaluating the results for approval, PK, etiological agent, and diagnosis/therapy have been selected as assessment factors that require confirmation of similarity. Additionally, regarding the etiological agent, the “Guidelines for Clinical Evaluation of Antibiotics” (2017) states that “the distribution of drug susceptibilities of the target bacterial species in Japan and overseas must be similar” as one of the conditions to enable an approval application to omit a dose‐setting study in Japanese patients and use the results of FCTs instead.
Prior to ICH‐E5, FCTs were evaluated in the approval review process for antimicrobial drugs, as in certain circumstances, drugs must be approved before there are any patients with a particular infectious disease in the country. After ICH‐E5 was published, bridging studies were considered in drug development for a period of less than 10 years, but the bridging strategy never became mainstream as an approach for extrapolating foreign data. Moreover, participation in MRCTs increased after the MHLW's notification in 2007. When accepting data from MRCTs/FCTs, PK data were compared from the beginning of clinical development. In addition, comparisons of differences in the drug susceptibility of infectious agents and the medical environment began to be considered as assessment factors from the late 2000s (Table 4), based on experience with the acceptance of foreign clinical data.
Various studies have reported the use of different dosage settings between Japan and Western countries. These findings lend credibility to the concern that ethnic differences may affect the safety, efficacy, and dosage of a medication in new regions.
There are minimal regional differences in the approved dosages of antiviral drugs, as stated in previous reports, consistent with our previous results for anti‐HIV drugs. Differences in dosage settings are affected by the development pathway. When FCTs, such as MRCTs, are included in the clinical data package, dosage differences are less likely to occur. When medicines are developed by foreign companies and domestic dosage trials are not conducted, dosage differences still tend not to occur. Approximately 80% of the difference in the usual dosage between Japan and the US is reported to be related to the AUC ratio. We have previously reported that the effect of ethnicity on the biological responses to anti‐HIV drugs may no longer need to be considered. The present study suggests that the effect of ethnicity may also be discounted for other antimicrobial drugs.
The present study indicates that inter‐regional acceptance of foreign clinical data is made possible by comparing PK data as well as PD data (the drug susceptibility of infectious agents) and the medical environment (disease diagnosis and treatment) between regions. Therefore, comparing PK data as well as PD data and the medical environment could be an option for application packages to not necessarily require DCT data while also acknowledging ethnic differences. As experience with the mutual acceptance of clinical data between countries continues to grow, the scientific and social requirements for creating application packages that do not necessarily require clinical data from a new region will become clearer.

Author Contributions
Masayuki Ikeda: writing – review and editing, validation, methodology, investigation. Rumiko Shimazawa: conceptualization, funding acquisition, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing, supervision, project administration, data curation, methodology, investigation, visualization, resources.

Funding
This study was supported by a grant‐in‐aid for Scientific Research (C) (24K13399, RS) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

Ethics Statement
The authors have nothing to report.

Consent
The authors have nothing to report.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
The data that supports the findings of this study are available in the supporting information (Table S1) of this article.

References
Consideration of Ethnic Differences in Approvals for Anti‐HIV Medicines in Japan: Evaluation Based on Pharmacokinetic Studies and Post‐Marketing Data
“Japan Standard Commodity Classification, Division 87 Drugs and Related Commodities,”
“Post Marketing Safety Requirements (Japan),”
“Search for Prescription Drugs,”
“Review Report for New Drug Approval Database,”
Japan's Special Approval for Emergency System During the COVID‐19 Pandemic
Establishment of an Emergency Regulatory Approval System in Japan in Response to the COVID‐19 Pandemic and Challenges in Developing Domestically Produced Vaccines
Letter to the Editor: Japan's Emergency Approval System Under the COVID‐19 Pandemic
“E17: General Principles for Planning and Design of Multi‐Regional Clinical Trials,”
“E5 (R1): Ethnic Factors in the Acceptability of Foreign Clinical Data,”
“E5 Implementation Working Group Questions & Answers (R1),”
“Basic Principles on Global Clinical Trials,”
Regulatory Challenges in the Review of Data From Global Clinical Trials: The PMDA Perspective
Comparison of Successful and Unsuccessful Cases of New Drug Approvals Based on the International Council on Harmonization E5 Guidelines in Japan
Successful Bridging Strategy Based on ICH E5 Guideline for Drugs Approved in Japan
“Guideline for Clinical Evaluation of Antibiotics,”
Exploring Differences in Drug Doses Between Japan and Western Countries
Differences Between Japan and the United States in Dosages of Drugs Recently Approved in Japan
Assessment of Factors Associated With Dose Differences Between Japan and the United States
Comparisons of Usual Dose of Pharmaceutical Products Used in Japan and United States: Can Differences be Explained by Pharmacokinetics Alone?
Differences in Approved Doses and Drug Lag in Drugs Approved Between 2012 and 2021: A Comparison Between Japan and the U.S