A patient-centred approach to malignant pleural effusion
ABSTRACT
Background
Malignant pleural effusion (MPE) occurs in up to 20% of malignancies, most commonly from a breast or pulmonary primary. It confers a poor prognosis, with a median survival of less than a year, and the mainstay in treatment has previously been achieving pleurodesis.
Aims and methods
This review provides an overview of the most up to date literature for the treatment of MPE using a PubMed search, with a focus on patient-centred care.
Results
There is increased focus on outpatient management and control of symptoms for patients with MPE, allowing more in-depth conversations to be had over what individual patient goals are. The development of new approaches such as indwelling pleural catheters (IPC) and local anaesthetic thoracoscopy (LAT) also increase the options available. When manging the complexities of MPE, such as non-expansile lung and septated effusions, various approaches can be taken to treat them including fibrinolytics and IPC.
Discussion
The treatment of MPE has changed in the last 15 years to focus on outpatient management and symptom control. Careful discussions must be undertaken on a patient-by-patient basis.

Introduction and background
Malignant pleural effusion (MPE) is defined by the presence of a pleural effusion secondary to invasion of the pleura from any cancer type. The global incidence of MPE is around 70 per 100,000 with a growing rate year on year, complicating up to 20% of malignancies. The vast majority of MPE is caused by metastatic disease rather than primary pleural disease, such as mesothelioma. A pulmonary origin is most common followed by breast cancer, although near any form of both solid organ or haematological malignancy can lead to the pleura being affected.
MPE forms most commonly because of haematogenous spread to the visceral pleura, with subsequent spread to the parietal pleura by seeding along adhesions, or via sloughing of malignant cells into the pleural space. This causes local inflammation and increased vascular permeability, with resultant excess production of pleural fluid. Excess fluid production is often accompanied by malignant invasion of the lymphatic system and so reduced resorptive ability. Why some patients with malignant pleural invasion develop effusions whilst others do not is yet to be established. MPEs are commonly exudates, with 42–79% of exudative effusions ultimately diagnosed as MPE.

Prognostication
The presence of MPE confers a poor prognosis, with a median survival of less than a year from diagnosis, although this is improving with advent of immunotherapy. Tumour type, in addition to stage at diagnosis and performance status (PS) affects prognosis as with any malignancy. Two validated prognostic scoring systems have been published, LENT and PROMISE.
The LENT system utilises pleural LDH, European Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) PS, neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio and tumour type to divide patients into low-, moderate- and high-risk groups. PROMISE consists of a clinical and biological score to categorise patients into four groups based on predicted 3-month mortality. Whilst these scoring systems are useful, there is as yet no evidence that their utilisation impacts patient outcomes. The role of low pleural pH and low pleural glucose in predicting prognosis have been explored with conflicting results, summarised in a meta-analysis demonstrating neither to be of sufficient positive predictive value to be of clinical use.

Clinical characteristics and aims of treatment
MPE most commonly presents with dyspnoea. The mechanism for this is multifactorial through a combination of gas exchange alteration, reduction in lung function and anatomical change such as expansion of the thoracic cage. It is likely that flattening or inversion of the diaphragm plays a large role in breathlessness, and reversal in this may improve symptoms. Up to a quarter of patients may not have significant breathlessness, with other symptoms including cough, chest pain and constitutional features relating to the underlying malignancy.
Given the poor prognosis associated with MPE, the aims of treatment are largely symptom relief and prioritising quality of life (QOL). Treatment decisions are therefore based not on the presence of excessive pleural fluid alone, but by the impact the fluid is likely having on the patient’s QOL and level of function.

Aim and methods
The aim of this narrative review is to describe the treatment options available to allow clinicians to discuss each pathway with their patients and empower them to make an informed decision. A literature search was performed on pubmed.gov in September 2024 and updated in January 2025 using the search strings: ‘malignant pleural effusion AND treatment’, ‘malignant pleural effusion AND pleurodesis’, ‘malignant pleural effusion AND indwelling pleural catheter’, ‘malignant pleural effusion AND treatment AND cost analysis’, ‘malignant pleural effusion AND surgery’, ‘malignant pleural effusion AND treatment AND quality of life’ and ‘malignant pleural effusion AND medical thoracoscopy’. In addition, the Cochrane library was searched for reviews on malignant pleural effusion. References within the identified papers were then included if relevant.

Treatment options
Research in MPE management has been historically focussed on a primary outcome of pleurodesis. More recently, however, there has been a transition towards patient reported outcome measures (PROMs), in particular dyspnoea and chest pain, an important change given the focus on symptom control. The treatments available can either be for fluid prevention through pleurodesis, or fluid management through repeated removal. There are multiple ways fluid can be drained, whether through therapeutic thoracentesis, an intercostal drain (ICD), indwelling pleural catheter (IPC) or medical thoracoscopy. The procedural risk for ICD and IPC is similar, whereas medical thoracoscopy has other associated risks. Each of these, aside from therapeutic thoracentesis, may also be used to induce pleurodesis.

Therapeutic thoracentesis
Most patients with MPE will begin their journey with a therapeutic thoracentesis, aiming to improve symptoms and to obtain diagnostic samples. This, in combination with post-thoracentesis imaging and the patient’s symptomatic response to fluid aspiration, is an important step in a patient’s treatment pathway. Thoracentesis allows the patient to be assessed for non-expandable lung (NEL), which is the lack of apposition between the visceral and parietal pleura, and helps guide future appropriate treatment options.
Common adverse events associated with needle thoracentesis.
Adverse event	Frequency of occurrence per procedure*	 	Organ puncture	 < 1%	 	Vasovagal syncope/symptomatic hypotension	 	Intra-pleural bleeding	 	Failure to complete procedure	4%	 	Pneumothorax	 < 5%	 	Pain	5%
The vast majority of patients with MPE will experience symptomatic relief from basic needle thoracentesis. The procedure is relatively quick to perform and can be undertaken readily on an outpatient basis. Patient waiting times for thoracentesis can therefore be short. The adverse events for which patients should be consented are described in Table 1.
A further risk to be considered is re-expansion pulmonary oedema (RPO). Current practice is to remove a maximum of 1.5 litres in a single aspiration to theoretically minimise the RPO risk. This is due to studies showing high mortality associated with RPO. Much larger studies have since, however, highlighted no reported deaths following over 10,000 procedures and have identified a RPO rate of just 0.01%–0.54%. Whilst this is possibly an underestimate as most studies have not routinely performed any imaging for all patients post-procedure, it is likely to be a good estimate of clinically significant RPO.
The speed at which an MPE will reaccumulate after aspiration is an important factor in planning care to avoid symptom recurrence and emergency hospital visits, particularly as up to a third of patients will require a repeat intervention within 2 weeks of their first. The REPEAT study reported preliminary data which generated the first validated scoring system in this area. The RED score combines respiratory rate, effusion depth and dyspnoea (using a visual analogue scale) to group patients into low, medium and high score groups based on predicted time until the next pleural intervention is needed. Sequential procedures to treat reaccumulation will further expose patients to the associated risks and so repeated thoracentesis is only recommended for those with a very short prognosis.

Patients with no symptomatic benefit from aspiration
Some patients do not experience significant relief from fluid removal, with the PLEASE study finding 27% did not find any benefit. This is because of the complex physiology of breathlessness in MPE, as well as the possibility that there may be other causes for breathlessness in these patients. Ongoing breathlessness despite fluid removal should lead to a focus on symptoms with other methods such as long-term oxygen, fan therapy and opiates.

Indwelling pleural catheter
Although repeated thoracocentesis is not an optimal strategy for most patients, fluid management can be achieved through the placement of IPCs. These are long-term catheters that can be drained at regular intervals in the community either by nurses or, more increasingly, by patients and their families. Therefore, they provide an option for patients who want to avoid hospital admission and are comfortable with a permanent device.
The TIME2 study compared IPC use to the insertion of an ICD with talc pleurodesis. The two arms had equal improvement in symptoms in terms of chest pain and dyspnoea score, but the IPC group had fewer total days in hospital over 1 year. There were more adverse events in the IPC group which was mainly due to catheter blockage and pleural infection, but no significant difference in serious adverse events.
Subsequent studies have similarly shown that IPCs are a good option for outpatient management of MPE. A prospective 2016 study compared four treatments in terms of patient recorded outcomes and breathlessness scores. The arms were as follows: IPC, video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS), VATS with IPC and ICD with talc. They found no significant difference between any of the arms and therefore concluded that IPC could be used if outpatient management was favoured. Further leading credence to this, the 2017 multinational AMPLE study demonstrated that patients treated with an IPC had 2.92 fewer hospital days compared to those treated with ICD and talc, as well as the IPC arm requiring fewer pleural procedures on the ipsilateral side. Additionally, the OPTIMUM study demonstrated equal improvements in QoL up to 90 days with either IPC or ICD and talc.
Although IPCs have been shown to have good symptomatic control, the background rate of pleurodesis is only around 15–25%. This raises the question of whether different drainage strategies can lead to higher rates of autopleurodesis. The ASAP trial prospectively compared patients with IPCs to have drainage either daily or on alternate days, finding that the daily drainage group reached autopleurodesis in 47% of cases compared to 24% for alternate day drainage. The AMPLE2 study similarly found that daily drainage gave spontaneous pleurodesis at 6 months of 44.2%, whereas symptomatic drainage only had 15.9% autopleurodesis at this time point. However, this study found no difference in symptoms between the two groups.
The specific risks for IPCs are due to their nature of being a permanent line and the associated infection risk. However, the risk of infection is low, with less than 5% of patients experiencing a pleural infection. These infections can usually be treated with a course of antibiotics but may require the IPC to be removed. Other risks include the possibility of loculations forming in up to 10% of patients and seeding of tumour along the line, particularly in mesothelioma. Some patients may find the cosmetic and psychological effects of having an indwelling line burdensome, although there is only limited research into this effect. One small single centre study found that patients can become reliant on caregivers and may have significantly reduced activities that they can perform due to the IPC.
IPCs provide an excellent option for the management of MPE. They can be used as a first-line measure in patients who prefer a focus on symptom control and hospital avoidance, especially if they have a short prognosis. They are generally safe and can be managed at home by patients, their families or district nurses. This is supported by the 2020 Cochrane review showing they are comparable to talc poudrage and talc slurry for breathlessness control and have a lower risk of requiring repeat invasive pleural procedures. As discussed below, they can also be offered to patients with NEL. However, the baseline pleurodesis rate of around 15–25% means that in patients in which fluid prevention is the aim, other options should be taken. For patients with high fluid output, an IPC could be considered, although there have been no studies comparing this to ICD insertion or other treatment strategies. However, a few studies have used output volume when stratifying patients into groups for randomisation, demonstrating that this can be a hard to manage patient population.

Chemical pleurodesis
Traditionally, the main aim of treatment of MPE has been pleurodesis. The primary means of doing this is to introduce agents into the pleural space. A broad range of sclerosant options have been examined including talc, bacterial products, antibiotics, antiseptics and others. Marked heterogeneity in study methods and outcomes has meant meaningful meta-analysis is challenging, although the 2020 Cochrane study examined different pleurodesis options. This demonstrated that talc slurry and poudrage are likely to have the lowest pleurodesis failure rate. This review also found talc to have the lowest adverse effects, although in general the pleurodesis agents had good adverse event profiles.

Intercostal chest drain and chemical pleurodesis
The mainstay for sclerosant instillation is through an ICD. These are first placed to drain the effusion, with sclerosant subsequently instilled. The efficacy rates of ICD and talc are 65–90%, and the rates of significant complications are low, making this an approach potentially a good option to definitively manage patients’ MPE. In addition, a wealth of published data is available regarding this technique meaning clinicians can be well armed with accurate data to help their patient make an informed decision.
In contrast, the literature on the impact of chest tube size has presented conflicting results. In the TIME1 Trial, the largest, and only multi-centre, randomised controlled trial (RCT) in this area, the use of small-bore tubes (12F) was found to be inferior to larger bore drains. Whilst small-bore tubes were associated with lower pain scores, this reached statistical but not clinical significance. There was no significant difference in adverse events and all-cause mortality between groups. In contrast, a meta-analysis found no significant difference between small or large-bore drains in terms of pleurodesis successes, pain or complications. The differences in findings may be in part explained by the higher number of patients unable to receive talc and the higher rates of tube dislodgement (and so reduced fluid drainage) in the small-bore group versus the large-bore group in TIME1. Finally, and of particular relevance to patients, there is a lack of data presented on the impact of tube diameter on length of hospital stay in any available RCTs.
The most reported side effects of talc instillation are fever and pain. By contrast, the adverse event of greatest concern is acute respiratory distress syndrome triggered by the proinflammatory effects of talc. Once thought to be a frequent outcome of this treatment, a large meta-analysis (n = 4482), in combination with a prospective cohort study of talc outcomes (n = 558) identified zero occurrences of ARDS. Smaller studies and published service review papers have also identified low rates of 0–4%.
The timing of sclerosant instillation on length of stay (LoS) has been explored through a collection of small single-site studies assessing optimal duration of drainage both before and after sclerosant instillation. Two studies demonstrated equal pleurodesis rates and reduced LoS utilising shorter drainage after sclerosant instillation (12 hours or 24 hours) versus usual care. A combination approach utilising both shorter pre- and post-sclerosant drainage techniques also identified shorter LoS without compromised pleurodesis rates. There is therefore considerable scope for more robust research to optimise this approach to MPE treatment in order to make it more palatable for patients.
A proportion of patients will not respond to talc, and this raises the question of what the next step would be. There are very few studies exploring this question, and so the options should be carefully considered with each patient. There are case studies of success with repeated talc instillation, and there is the possibility of trialling a different agent. Alternatively, watching and waiting or placing an IPC may be the most prudent option.
As discussed above, utilisation of ICD and sclerosant requires an inpatient stay for MPE patients. This is a significant drawback given the often poor prognosis of the patient cohort and so makes this treatment pathway potentially unsuitable for patients with a very short life expectancy as the average LoS in studies examining ICD plus talc is 4–15.4 days.

Local anaesthetic thoracoscopy and talc poudrage
Local anaesthetic thoracoscopy (LAT), also known as medical thoracoscopy, offers both a diagnostic test in unexplained effusions and an opportunity to deliver definitive treatment for MPE by mechanically breaking septations. The technique allows talc poudrage and the insertion of an IPC.
The frequency of successful pleurodesis with talc poudrage is around 80%. This in combination with the opportunity to both diagnose and treat patients through one procedure and one hospital stay makes LAT and poudrage an attractive option to patients and clinicians.
Although LAT has similar risks to other procedures in terms of placement accessing the chest wall and the placement of devices, patients are required to lie in the lateral decubitus position for a reasonable length of time. They must also be able to tolerate the required sedation and associated sedation risks. This may be too arduous for some more frail patients, narrowing the pool of patients who could be appropriately managed by this approach.

Local anaesthetic thoracoscopy and talc poudrage vs ICD and talc slurry
Crucial to helping patients navigate the options of MPE treatment is not only understanding each approach but how they compare. The comparison of talc poudrage (TP) versus talc slurry (TS) has been the subject of numerous studies. This is challenging as the talc poudrage cohort in several trials often takes the form of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) under general anaesthesia, rather than LAT, and LAT itself often involves additional procedures such as breaking septations, making differences in difficult to be confident if outcome measures are genuinely due to the mode of talc delivery.
The TAPPS study was a multicentre RCT which compared ICD and talc slurry vs LAT and talc poudrage in 330 MPE patients. The authors demonstrated no significant difference in pleurodesis failure, adverse events, QOL or LoS. This is supported by work by other groups which similarly have published no significant difference in pleurodesis rates, overall adverse event rates, chest pain, QOL, dyspnoea or LoS. Whilst a similarly impactful study of ICD with TS vs TP by Dressler and colleagues (2005) also identified no significant difference in pleurodesis rates, it did report higher rates of respiratory complications in the TP group. As this group underwent general anaesthetic for thoracoscopy, this finding is potentially less relevant to hospitals utilising LAT. A review by the BTS, however, did note an increased rate of per patient complications with LAT and TP versus ICD and TS. Finally, the Dressler et al. study in post-hoc analysis did demonstrate a statistically significant difference in pleurodesis rates favouring TP in those with breast and lung in cancer, suggesting future studies may be beneficial in these patient groups.
Comparison pleurodesis failure odds ratio and failures per 100 for different interventions and sclerosants. Adapted from 2020 Cochrane review.
Intervention	Odds ratio (95% confidence interval)	Failures per 100 participants	Cochrane interpretation of findings	 	Talc slurry	Reference comparator	18 (11–21)	Reference comparator	 	Talc poudrage	0.78 (0.16 – 2.08)	10 (4–19)	Probably comparable	 	Bleomycin	3.93 (1.10 – 16.94)	32 (17–52)	May be inferior	 	IPC – not daily drainage	8.60 (2.25 – 30.15)	62 (26–82)	Probably inferior	 	Doxycycline	1.89 (0.32–8.84)	36	May be inferior	 	Placebo	17.46 (3.33–97.26)	77	Probably inferior
A 2020 Cochrane review looked at the best intervention for MPE, with pleurodesis success being the primary outcome. Table 2 shows the overall outcome for pleurodesis failure, demonstrating that TP and TS have similar rates for studies with low risk of bias. This review was published prior to full TAPPS reporting and identified significant heterogeneity in all clinical and statistical outcomes.

Local anaesthetic thoracoscopy and indwelling pleural catheter
IPCs may be inserted during their LAT procedure to aid fluid management. The only RCT in this area is the TACTIC study. Whilst the full report is yet to be published, preliminary data identified that combining IPC placement at the time of LAT and TP reduced the need for further pleural procedures compared to the LAT and TP alone arm, without significant differences in complications or pain scores. The pleurodesis rate in this experimental arm, however, was lower than the comparable published data for talc poudrage.
Supporting the feasibility of IPC insertion at LAT are two small non-randomised prospective observational trials which contrastingly reported high pleurodesis rates (both above 90%), in addition to short hospital LOS (≤3 days), better post-procedure breathlessness, minimal complications and the ability to remove the IPC in a median of 6–7.54 days).

IPC with talc
Sclerosants can also be delivered via IPCs to achieve fluid prevention. The main evidence for this to date comes from the 2018 IPC-plus trial which studies 154 patients with non-trapped lung after IPC placement. NEL was excluded at 10 days using chest X-ray, and patients were subsequently randomised to receive either talc slurry or placebo via their IPC, with primary outcome of successful pleurodesis after 35 days. The talc group had 43% success compared to 23% with placebo, and there were no significant differences in adverse events. This indicates that talc may be an option for patients with an IPC in place, but pleurodesis rate would remain lower with IPC compared to other approaches.

Biomarkers to guide treatment success
Biomarkers which may be able to predict the success of pleurodesis either with an ICD or IPC would help guide conversations with patients when discussing treatment options. Unfortunately, there have been few large prospective studies in this area to enable this.
The largest systematic review in 2020 demonstrated that low pleural LDH, high pleural glucose and high pleural pH may give the best indication for pleurodesis success with talc. A pooled analysis of three studies totaling 232 patients investigating pleural LDH found that there was a mean difference of −726 IU/L (95% CI −1499 to − 43) between the success and failure groups. Six studies were included which examined fluid pH, and found that the successful groups had a mean difference of 0.124 (0.107 – 0.140). However, neither the studies examining LDH nor pH identified cut offs that could be used to predict response to treatment. Pleural fluid glucose had been examined in five studies including a meta-analysis, and these demonstrated a mean difference of 36.6 mg/dL (16.3 – 56.2) in successful groups compared to unsuccessful groups. Potential cut offs for pleural glucose were suggested by two groups, but neither of these included other clinical variable or a validation cohort. Other biomarkers such as pleural neutrophils, protein and CRP have been studied, but only in small studies and so firm conclusions cannot be drawn.
There are very few studies investigating biomarkers to predict outcomes for IPCs. A retrospective study of 956 patients found that fluid levels of total protein, albumin and percentage of eosinophils were correlated with increased rates of autopleurodesis. However, the cut off values suggested had limited predictive value. Another retrospective study of 308 patients found higher rates of autopleurodesis in patients with better baseline performance status and if the lung has re-expanded after drainage, but no significant association between autopleurodesis and biomarkers. This same study did, however, find that a pleural fluid CRP < 15 mg/L prior to IPC insertion independently predicted IPC-related infection, although with a wide 95% confidence interval for the odds ratio (OR 4.42, 1.26 – 15.52).
Given the paucity of data and the limitations to the studies that have been performed, fluid biomarkers currently cannot be used to guide treatment options in MPE, and discussions with patients should focus on other factors. One other factor that has been explored is a radiological biomarker of lung sliding after pleurodesis. The SIMPLE trial randomized 313 patients with MPE undergoing talc pleurodesis to either usual care, or tube removal based on when lung sliding was no longer appreciable on ultrasound. The study found that the ultrasound group had a shorter hospital stay of 2 days compared to 3 days (p < 0.0001), with no other significant differences between the groups. Although this aids timing of chest tube removal and discharge, the study still does not provide a biomarker to guide decisions between pleurodesis or placing an IPC.

Systemic anti-cancer therapy and adjunctive therapies for MPE
There are a wide range of systemic anti-cancer therapies (SACT) used to treat patients with MPE given the heterogeneity of the population. The timing of delivering SACT and its effect on MPE are difficult to establish due to the complete lack of RCTs comparing the effect of SACT vs no SACT on the need for definitive pleural procedures for MPE control.
On an individual tumour basis, there has been particular interest in the role of vascular endothelium growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors, particularly the monoclonal antibody bevacizumab, in the treatment of MPE in non-small cell lung cancer, the most common cause of MPE. Fifteen out of 21 patients with stage 4 lung adenocarcinoma treated with bevacizumab as part of combination chemotherapy were found to have complete or partial resolution of MPE, with 12 patients reaccumulating fluid after treatment cessation. Another study documented a 92% ‘control’ rate of MPE in non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with bevacizumab and chemotherapy. The study, however, poorly defined control rate and noted seven patients underwent ICD with a sclerosant. A study of 86 patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutant and acquired EGFR-TKI (tyrosine kinase inhibitors) resistant NSCLC showed a combined 77.9% response rate (both complete and partial response) in those treated with bevacizumab and either ongoing EGFR-TKI therapy or switch chemotherapy, with superior MPE control in the former group.
Intrapleural bevacizumab has also been studied in MPE control in lung cancer. In an RCT of non-squamous NSCLC (n = 72), the MPE combined response rate was 50% in the intrapleural cisplatin group versus 83.3% in the cisplatin plus bevacizumab group. Di et al. conducted a phase II study of intrapleural bevacizumab for non-squamous NSCLC with a resultant 50% combined response rate. One small RCT identified superiority in MPE control utilising intrapleural versus intravenous bevacizumab for NSCLC.
Until larger scale RCTs are performed in this area, there will be insufficient evidence to determine whether definitive management of MPE can be delayed pending a trial of SACT. As such, this approach is not recommended in guidelines.

Surgery
Some patients with MPE may wish to discuss surgical treatment options. Given the often frail and co-morbid population diagnosed with MPE, any surgical approach remains high risk and reserved for individual cases. The main surgical technique that remains in use is VATS as this allows biopsy, talc poudrage and then possible placement of an ICD or IPC after the procedure. However, studies over the last 20 years have failed to demonstrate that it is superior to ICD with talc slurry when treating MPE or pleural mesothelioma. Complication rates for VATS can be high with long hospital stays. There have been no large, prospective randomised trials published to date, but some of this equipoise may be answered by the currently recruiting AMPLE3 trial.

Complexity in malignant pleural effusion
The inflammatory component of MPE leads to septations and NEL. Up to 60% patients will develop septations although this may be an underestimate with the increasing use of ultrasound meaning septated effusions are more frequently diagnosed. Unfortunately, the treatment options for patients with significant septation are limited.
Fibrinolytics had been found to give some symptomatic benefit in two small studies. The subsequent TIME3 RCT randomised 71 patients non-draining MPEs to either urokinase or placebo and found no difference in dyspnoea at 28 days. However, the study did find reduced effusion size, mildly reduced hospital stay and overall longer survival. There was no difference in pleurodesis rates at 12 months, seen as a positive due to previous concerns that fibrinolytics could increase pleurodesis failure. The slight drawback to this study was that the power calculation to find a statistical difference in VAS was reduced from 120 patients to 40 towards the end of the trial.
Two retrospective studies investigating septations around IPCs without comparator arms showed that the use of fibrinolytics in these patients increased flow rate in up to 93% of cases alongside a corresponding improvement in dyspnoea. No serious adverse events were reported.
Given the above, fibrinolytics could be offered to patients to improve drainage and dyspnoea, but it should be explained that there is no evidence for improved survival. Whether the increased drainage corresponds to overall reduction in size has not been proven, and it may be that only septations immediately around a drain are broken down. Septated effusions also may represent later disease, when a focus on comfort and a reduction in interventions may be the optimum approach.
Chest radiograph of non-expansile lung.
NEL refers to the lack of apposition between the visceral and parietal pleura. NEL is typically diagnosed on a combination of post-aspiration CXR or CT appearances as seen in Figure 1, in addition to whether significant pain is experienced during or after aspiration. In clinical practice, it is also common for clinicians to judge the presence of NEL based on thoracoscopic appearances. There are, however, significant challenges in these approaches. One study found only 12.5% NEL was successfully predicted at thoracoscopy. The degree of lung apposition required to diagnose NEL also varies with 10–50% being utilised in the literature.
Newer approaches to diagnosing NEL include the use of ultrasound, particularly M-mode and speckle-tracking imaging, to allow more objective measures of lung expansion. Similarly, a small number of studies have utilised pleural manometry in the detection of NEL, most commonly suggesting a pleural elastance of > 14.5-19cmH20 as a usable cut off. These practices, however, have yet to reach widespread practice.
The evidence base guiding treatment in MPE with NEL is weak as data is garnered from small observational studies and subgroups of larger RCTs. In addition, many studies exclude patients with NEL. Due to fears over possible poor efficacy rates of chemical sclerosant-induced pleurodesis, IPCs are currently the mainstay of treatment for NEL with some evidence that this reduces symptom burden. Surgical decortication has been studied for patients with NEL but has a high mortality and is unlikely to be suitable for most patients with MPE.
There are questions over the presumed poor efficacy of talc pleurodesis in NEL given it may not be a static phenomenon. A trial of thoracoscopy vs ICD for talc administration demonstrated that despite recruiting patients based on >90% lung expansion after therapeutic thoracentesis, 55% of these patients on baseline CT after talc delivery had minimal to partial lung expansion. In addition, lung expansion on baseline CT had no significant influence on the degree of lung expansion at follow-up imaging. Finally, there was no significant correlation between baseline CT appearances and radiographic or clinical outcomes.

Conclusion
MPE remains a disease with high mortality and morbidity, with a poor prognosis at time of diagnosis. Patients are often already frail and comorbid when diagnosed, but many will still be independent. Therefore, the goals and choice of treatments should be carefully considered for each patient. Those patients whose priority is to minimise time in hospital may opt for an IPC, whereas those with a longer prognosis or already in hospital may prefer to have an ICD placed with talc pleurodesis. The emergence of LAT which may be able to provide diagnosis and definitive treatment on one day raises the possibility that this may be a pathway for many patients, as long as they have the physiological reserve to undergo the required sedation. In any case, further work is required to elucidate which patients are most suited to each treatment.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

References
Malignant pleural effusion: current understanding and therapeutic approach
Managing pleural malignancy
Malignant pleural effusion: tumor-host interactions unleashed
Pleural diseases related to metastatic malignancies
Management of malignant pleural effusions
Development and validation of response markers to predict survival and pleurodesis success in patients with malignant pleural effusion (PROMISE): a multicohort analysis
Immunotherapy improves the survival of stage 4 non–small cell lung cancer patients at the US population level: the real-world evidence
Predicting survival in malignant pleural effusion: development and validation of the LENT prognostic score
Pleural fluid pH as a predictor of survival for patients with malignant pleural effusions
Prognostic biomarkers of malignant patients with pleural effusion: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Malignant pleural effusion: presentation, diagnosis, and management
Physiology of breathlessness associated with pleural effusions
The pleural effusion and symptom evaluation (please) study of breathlessness in patients with a symptomatic pleural effusion
Clinical course of asymptomatic malignant pleural effusion in non-small cell lung cancer patients
Management of malignant pleural effusion: challenges and solutions
Breathlessness predicts survival in patients with malignant pleural effusions: meta-analysis of individual patient data from five randomized controlled trials
Randomized controlled trial of urokinase versus placebo for nondraining malignant pleural effusion
Indwelling pleural catheters: complications and management strategies
Safety and complications of medical thoracoscopy
Thoracoscopy and talc poudrage compared with intercostal drainage and talc slurry infusion to manage malignant pleural effusion: the TAPPS RCT
Critical analysis of the utility of initial pleural aspiration in the diagnosis and management of suspected malignant pleural effusion
Clinical predictors and outcomes of non-expandable lung following percutaneous catheter drainage in lung cancer patients with malignant pleural effusion
Management of malignant pleural effusions in patients with trapped lung with indwelling pleural catheter: how to do it
Diagnosis and management of malignant pleural effusions: state of the art in 2017
Complications of thoracentesis: incidence, risk factors, and strategies for prevention
Reexpansion pulmonary edema
Pulmonary edema following the rapid reexpansion of a totally collapsed lung due to a pneumothorax: a clinical and experimental study
Large-volume thoracentesis and the risk of reexpansion pulmonary edema
Thoracentesis outcomes: a 12-year experience
Predicting time to next procedure in patients with malignant pleural effusion undergoing therapeutic aspiration: derivation and validation of the RED score [Internet]
Comparison of modified Borg scale and visual analog scale dyspnea scores in predicting re-intervention after drainage of malignant pleural effusion
Oxygen therapy in palliative care
Fan therapy for the treatment of dyspnea in adults: a systematic review
Opioids for the palliation of refractory breathlessness in adults with advanced disease and terminal illness
Efficacy and safety of indwelling catheter for malignant pleural effusions related to timing of cancer therapy: a systematic review
Indwelling pleural catheters for malignancy-associated pleural effusion: report on a single centre’s ten years of experience
Caring for indwelling pleural catheters: self-management vs district nursing care
British Thoracic Society guideline for pleural disease
Effect of an indwelling pleural catheter vs chest tube and talc pleurodesis for relieving dyspnea in patients with malignant pleural effusion: the TIME2 randomized controlled trial
A prospective study of patient-centred outcomes in the management of malignant pleural effusions
Effect of an indwelling pleural catheter vs talc pleurodesis on hospitalization days in patients with malignant pleural effusion: the AMPLE randomized clinical trial
The impact of outpatient versus inpatient management on health-related quality of life outcomes for patients with malignant pleural effusion: the optimum randomised clinical trial
Randomized trial of pleural fluid drainage frequency in patients with malignant pleural effusions. The ASAP trial
Aggressive versus symptom-guided drainage of malignant pleural effusion via indwelling pleural catheters (AMPLE-2): an open-label randomised trial
Complications of indwelling pleural catheter use and their management
Is there a role for prophylactic radiotherapy to intervention tract sites in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma?
The psychosocial impact of indwelling pleural catheters: a scoping review
A survey-based study of patient-centered costs associated with indwelling pleural catheters
Interventions for the management of malignant pleural effusions: a network meta-analysis
Use of an implantable pleural catheter for trapped lung syndrome in patients with malignant pleural effusion
What you need to know about: the management of malignant pleural effusion
Chemical pleurodesis – a review of mechanisms involved in pleural space obliteration
Phase III intergroup study of talc poudrage vs talc slurry sclerosis for malignant pleural effusion
Treatment of malignant pleural effusion with drainage, with and without instillation of talc
Effect of opioids vs NSAIDs and larger vs smaller chest tube size on pain control and pleurodesis efficacy among patients with malignant pleural effusion: the TIME1 randomized clinical trial
Effect of chest tube size on pleurodesis efficacy in malignant pleural effusion: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Complications of thoracoscopic talc insufflation for the treatment of malignant pleural effusions: a meta-analysis
Safety of pleurodesis with talc poudrage in malignant pleural effusion: a prospective cohort study
Talc should be used for pleurodesis
To study the efficacy of time dependant vs volume dependant chest drain removal protocol for talc slurry pleurodesis in patients with malignant pleural effusion
Efficacy of short-term versus long-term chest tube drainage following talc slurry pleurodesis in patients with malignant pleural effusions: a randomised trial
Thoracoscopic talc insufflation versus talc slurry for symptomatic malignant pleural effusion
Video-assisted thoracoscopic (VATS) pleurodesis for malignant effusion: an Australian teaching hospital’s experience
Medical thoracoscopy: survey of current practice-how successful are medical thoracoscopists at predicting malignancy?
The randomised thoracoscopic talc poudrage+indwelling pleural catheters versus thoracoscopic talc poudrage only in malignant pleural effusion trial (TACTIC): study protocol for a randomised controlled trial
Talc poudrage versus talc slurry in the treatment of malignant pleural effusion. A prospective comparative study
Day case local anaesthetic thoracoscopy - a review of service | European Respiratory Society
S83 the use of indwelling pleural catheters (IPC) with or without concurrent talc poudrage (TP) at medical thoracoscopy (MT) for cases of suspected trapped lung (TL)
Outpatient talc administration by indwelling pleural catheter for malignant effusion
Pleural fluid biomarkers to predict response to pleurodesis or indwelling pleural catheter for malignant pleural effusion: still a long way to go
Predictors of outcome of pleurodesis in patients with malignant pleural effusion: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Predictive value of systemic and local inflammation parameters in talc pleurodesis assessment
C-reactive protein predicts pleurodesis success in malignant pleural effusion patients
Clinical predictors of successful and earlier pleurodesis with a tunnelled pleural catheter in malignant pleural effusion: a cohort study
Predictors of indwelling pleural catheter removal and infection: a single-center experience with 336 procedures
Role of thoracic ultrasonography in pleurodesis pathways for malignant pleural effusions (simple): an open-label, randomised controlled trial
Response to bevacizumab combination chemotherapy of malignant pleural effusions associated with non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer
Bevacizumab plus chemotherapy for advanced non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer with malignant pleural effusion
Addition of bevacizumab for malignant pleural effusion as the manifestation of acquired EGFR-TKI resistance in NSCLC patients
Intrapleural combination therapy with bevacizumab and cisplatin for non-small cell lung cancer‑mediated malignant pleural effusion
A phase II study of bevacizumab in non-squamous, non-small-cell lung cancer patients with malignant pleural effusion
A randomized clinical study to compare intrapleural infusion with intravenous infusion of bevacizumab in the management of malignant pleural effusion in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer
Management of malignant pleural effusions. An official ATS/STS/STR clinical practice guideline
Current practices in the management of malignant pleural effusions: a survey among members of the European Society of Thoracic Surgeons
Efficacy and cost of video-assisted thoracoscopic partial pleurectomy versus talc pleurodesis in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma (MesoVATS): an open-label, randomised, controlled trial
Australasian malignant pleural effusion (ample)-3 trial: study protocol for a multi-centre randomised study comparing indwelling pleural catheter (±talc pleurodesis) versus video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery for management of malignant pleural effusion
Management of septated malignant pleural effusions
Streptokinase for malignant pleural effusions: a randomized controlled study
The palliative treatment with intrapleural streptokinase in patients with multiloculated malignant pleural effusion: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study
Intrapleural fibrinolytic therapy in patients with nondraining indwelling pleural catheters
Intrapleural fibrinolysis for the treatment of indwelling pleural catheter-related symptomatic loculations: a multicenter observational study
Diagnosis of non-expandable lung using thoracic ultrasound
Malignant pleural effusion in the presence of trapped lung. Five-year experience of PleurX tunnelled catheters
Management of malignant pleural effusion associated with trapped lung syndrome
Ultrasound in the diagnosis of non-expandable lung: a prospective observational study of M-mode, B-mode, and 2D-shear wave elastography
Novel use of pleural ultrasound can identify malignant entrapped lung prior to effusion drainage
Manometry performed at indwelling pleural catheter insertion to predict unexpandable lung
Routine monitoring with pleural manometry during therapeutic large-volume thoracentesis to prevent pleural-pressure-related complications: a multicentre, single-blind randomised controlled trial
Long-term follow-up of video-assisted talc pleurodesis in malignant recurrent pleural effusions
Malignant pleural effusions and trapped lung
Is full postpleurodesis lung expansion a determinant of a successful outcome after talc pleurodesis?