Evaluation of Living Liver Donors Using Dual‐Contrast‐Agent Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Cholangiopancreatography (MRCP)—Technical Development
ABSTRACT
The indications for liver transplantation continue to expand to meet the growing need of patients with end‐stage liver disease and select hepatic malignancies. Living donor liver transplantation allows for access to transplant with recipient outcomes superior to deceased donor liver transplantation. To ensure absolute safety of the donor and optimal outcome of the recipient, potential liver donors are subjected to an exhaustive preoperative evaluation. Radiological studies play a pivotal role in assessing the donor liver anatomy to assess suitability for donation and to facilitate surgical planning. Many living donor centers supplement single‐agent contrast‐enhanced MRCP (gadobenate dimeglumine or gadoxetate disodium) with contrast‐enhanced CT angiography (CTA) for delineation of arterial anatomy. Excellent hepatic and portal venous mapping as well as biliary tract visualization has been seen, eliminating the need for CTA in studies. This review provides a case‐based analysis of the proposed dual‐contrast‐enhanced MRCP protocol, emphasizing the advantages of a single diagnostic study over traditional multi‐modality approaches while also discussing potential limitations and areas requiring further investigation.
Evidence level: 4.
Technical efficacy: Stage 1.

Introduction
Liver transplant is the primary treatment for end‐stage liver disease, fulminant hepatic failure, and select hepatic malignancies. There has been a continued rise in the incidence of chronic liver disease, largely driven by obesity, alcohol‐related liver disease (ALD), and metabolic dysfunction‐associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD). With advances in surgical technique and systemic treatment, the role of liver transplantation continues to expand; for example, recent data has shown acceptable outcomes with liver transplantation in patients with unresectable colorectal hepatic metastases. The number of deceased donors available for transplantation has not increased sufficiently, thus exposing candidates to a significant risk of waiting list death or drop‐out due to progression of disease. There has been increasing use of living donor liver transplant (LDLT) to address the mismatch between waitlist demand and deceased donor supply. LDLT currently accounts for approximately 5% of all transplants in the US.
LDLT expands access to transplantation, but it comes with the challenges of substantial technical complexity and simultaneous risk to two patients: the donor and the recipient. Donors are therefore subjected to an exhaustive evaluation to ensure safety of both the donor and recipient operations. Precise understanding of the arterial, venous, and biliary anatomy is key to the technical success of LDLT. For example, knowing the arterial origin and venous drainage of segment 4 is of paramount importance for right lobe donation. Preserving the segment 4 arterial supply and venous drainage, while dividing the right hepatic artery (RHA) for right lobe graft is crucial, as injury to the arterial inflow to segment 4 may compromise the future liver remnant (FLR) in the donor and increase the risk of postoperative liver insufficiency and biliary and infectious complications. Similarly, avoiding aberrant left biliary ducts draining to the right hepatic duct are additional important considerations when planning a right lobe graft. Imaging also facilitates calculation of segmental liver volumes to ensure sufficient graft size for the recipient and sufficient FLR for the donor. In addition to estimating graft size to enable appropriate selection, imaging also allows identification of anatomic variants that are crucial to surgical planning and allows for the assessment of underlying liver disease, such as hepatic steatosis and fibrosis, which may affect the function of the graft and remnant liver.
High‐quality arterial phase and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) imaging are critical, yet challenging imaging sequences to obtain during liver donor assessment. Arterial phase imaging is performed during breath holding using a high‐resolution three‐dimensional (3D) T1w sequence, with time to peak arterial enhancement determined using methods such as bolus tracking or rapid multiphase imaging, following the intravenous administration of a gadolinium‐based contrast agent (GBCA). Two types of GBCAs are used: nonspecific extracellular agents (e.g., gadobenate dimeglumine [MultiHance]) for vascular and parenchymal opacification and liver specific agents (e.g., gadoxetate disodium [Eovist]) which provide vascular and parenchymal opacification in addition to biliary opacification secondary to extraction in bile. Standard MRCP is performed without contrast, exploiting the fluid signal within the ducts using a heavily T2w 3D sequence acquired over 7–10 min during free breathing, with respiratory triggering to minimize breathing motion artifact. Single‐contrast‐enhanced MRI and MRCP is the technique widely used to assess living donor anatomy. However, each protocol has its limitations, for example, respiratory motion artifact at 3D unenhanced MRCP; transient tachypnea with gadoxetate disodium (especially with higher doses), longer acquisition time than CT and other technical factors (Figure 1). Studies by Welle et al. and Lee et al. compared CT with iodinated contrast to gadoxoetate disodium MRI in liver donor candidates and reported sensitivities and specificities for hepatic steatosis detection of 77%–95% and 81%–97%, respectively. A 94% accuracy has been reported for hepatic venous mapping, 100% in portal vein delineation and 91% in biliary tract visualization, indicating that MRI can effectively replace CT in certain aspects of liver donation. Despite advances, in select cases, there is still a need to perform computed tomography angiography (CTA) to determine the arterial anatomy. To address these challenges, our institution has implemented a reliable multi‐contrast agent MRCP imaging protocol using gadobenate dimeglumine (Multihance) and gadoxetate disodium (Eovist) to enable high‐reliability imaging in the arterial phase (gadobenate) and of the bile ducts (non‐contrast MRCP + gadoxetate hepatobiliary phase), substantially reducing the need for repeat or adjunctive imaging (e.g., CTA). The purpose of this non‐systematic pictorial review is to illustrate key imaging challenges and solutions in evaluating potential liver donors, with a focus on the implementation of dual‐contrast MRI and MRCP protocol via case‐ based examples.
(A) Coronal MRCP MIP of donor biliary tree shows conventional anatomy: The right posterior hepatic duct (arrow) joins the right anterior hepatic duct before merging with the left hepatic duct to form the common hepatic duct. (B) Axial contrast enhanced dynamic arterial phase MRI image: Segment 4 artery visualized (arrow), however origin cannot be clearly identified on this exam.

Technical Evolution in MRI Protocol for Living Liver Donor

Phase I: Traditional Protocol
All living donor MRIs at our institution are performed on a 3.0‐T Siemens Vida scanner using a 30‐channel phased array coil. The initial protocol included: axial and coronal T2‐weighted half Fourier acquisition single‐shot turbo spin echo (HASTE), axial T1‐weighted dual echo gradient recalled echo (GRE), axial T2‐weighted respiratory‐triggered fast spin echo (FSE) with fat saturation, coronal 3D MRCP with respiratory triggering for biliary tree evaluation, axial mDixon Quant for fat quantification, diffusion‐weighted imaging (DWI) with b values of 0 and 800 s/mm2 for lesion identification, axial T1‐weighted 3D spoiled GRE with fat saturation pre‐contrast and dynamic post‐contrast following contrast agent administration (0.1 mmol/kg; injected at 2 mL/s, followed by a 20 mL saline chaser in early arterial [16–20 s], venous [60–90s], and late dynamic [120–150 s] phase) (Table 1). Bolus tracking was used for arterial phase timing. Respiratory motion artifacts were counteracted by radial K‐space sampling and parallel imaging technique; Controlled aliasing in parallel imaging resulting in higher acceleration; Siemens Healthcare (CAIPIRINHA) that combines higher acceleration and efficient parallel imaging to speed up image acquisition and reduce motion. We encountered a few challenges with this initial protocol, including difficulty determining variant biliary anatomy if the 3D MRCP was of poor quality, and suboptimal arterial phase imaging due to inadequate timing, suboptimal spatial resolution, or motion artifact preventing accurate determination of the origin of the critical segment 4 artery (Figure 2).
Initial protocol with order of sequence acquisition via a single‐contrast agent, gadoteridol (Prohance).
Order of sequence acquisition	Coverage	 	Initial protocol—single‐contrast agent	 	Series 1	3 plane localizer		 	Series 2	Coronal T2w BH	Whole abdomen	 	Series 3	Axial IP/OP	Liver	 	Series 4	Axial Q‐Dixon (iron)	Liver	 	Series 5	Coronal 3D MRCP navigator	Biliary tree	 	Series 6	Radial MRCP	Biliary tree	 	Series 6a	Optional. 3D Grace MRCP_BH	Biliary tree	 	Series 7	Axial DWI	Liver and pancreas	 	Series 8	Axial T2w fat sat	Liver and pancreas	 	Series 9	Axial T1w fat saturate pre contrast	Liver	 	Inject Prohance (0.2 mmol/kg, max 20 mL at 2 mL/s)	 	Series 10	Axial dynamic: Single‐phase arterial via bolus tracking	Liver	 	Series 11	Axial dynamic: Venous and equilibrium phases	Liver	 	Series 12	Coronal post‐contrast T1ww fat sat	Liver	 	Series 13	3 min delay axial e‐thrive	Liver
Abbreviations: BH, breath hold; DWI, diffusion‐weighted imaging; Grace, gradient‐refocused acquisition in the center for MR cholangiopancreatography; IP, in phase, OP, out of phase.
An Optional 3D GRACE MRCP breath‐hold sequence may be acquired as a complementary technique to the standard navigator‐based or radial MRCP acquisitions. Compared to radial MRCP, the 3D GRACE breath‐hold technique enables rapid acquisition of high‐resolution images within a single breath‐hold, offering superior ductal sharpness and reduced scan time in patients with adequate breath‐hold capacity. In contrast, radial MRCP provides greater motion robustness as is advantageous in patients unable to perform breath‐hold though with slightly lower spatial resolution.
(A, B) Contrast‐enhanced arterial phase MRI using gadobenate dimeglumine. Arterial anatomy could not be determined in this liver donor on arterial‐phase post‐contrast images. The origin of the left hepatic artery (arrow) could not be identified without MRA. (C) MIPS were created to visualize the proximal left hepatic artery by reconstructing oblique images. The left hepatic artery (arrow) is seen arising from the left gastric artery. The segment 4 arterial supply could not be identified.

Phase II: Transition to Gadoxetate Disodium for Improved Biliary Imaging
To improve delineation of the bile ducts, we switched from gadoteridol to gadoxetate disodium hepatobiliary contrast to acquire contrast‐enhanced MRCP to supplement the 3D unenhanced MRCP, which is a heavily T2‐weighted respiratory‐triggered sequence that usually takes 7–10 min to acquire and is prone to motion‐related artifact. Contrast‐enhanced T1w 3D MRCP images were acquired following the acquisition of arterial, venous, and delayed images at approximately 20 min in axial and coronal planes. Switching to gadoxetate disodium significantly improved interpretation of biliary anatomy and decreased reliance on the motion‐prone 3D MRCP sequence but resulted in poor image quality of the arterial phase due to transient tachypnea (Figures 3 and 4). Transient tachypnea is a well‐known documented phenomenon initially reported by Davenport et al., which has a deleterious effect on arterial phase MR image quality. We mitigated this side effect by reducing the dose and reducing the injection rate to 0.5–1 mL/s (lengthening peak aortic enhancement to promote better mixing and binding to plasma protein), yet arterial contrast‐to‐noise ratio (CNR) remained inadequate, preventing reliable identification of segmental arteries such as the segment 4 branch.
(A, B) Coronal and axial MRI 20‐min delayed hepatobiliary MIP shows trifurcation branching pattern of the biliary tree. (C, D) Illustration and coronal 3D MRCP shows trifurcation branching pattern. (E, F) Same patient arterial phase provides limited assessment of segment 4 origin because of arterial phase motion artifact despite protocol optimization.
(A) Coronal MIP MRCP and (B) Coronal T1 post‐contrast hepatobiliary phase showing the right posterior duct (blue arrow) joining the right anterior duct (yellow arrow). Exact drainage site is not visualized on MRCP (A) but well seen on the hepatobiliary phase (B) which also shows an additional small accessory duct draining segment V/VI into the common hepatic duct (red arrow). This was not seen on MRCP. (C) Illustration showing the variant biliary anatomy seen on (A, B).
With inadequate arterial evaluation at MRI, several patients were referred for CTA of the liver to adequately assess arterial anatomy (Figure 5). Performing supplemental CTA improved anatomic evaluation of the arteries but incurred ionizing radiation exposure to these young healthy volunteers as well as added cost, donor time, and scheduling demands.
(A, B) Axial arterial phase MR images at different levels, obtained with gadoxetate disodium, showing the proper hepatic artery (blue arrow). The segment 4 artery is not well visualized due to suboptimal timing and arterial phase motion artifact. (C) CT angiography of the same patient shows segment 4 branch (red arrow) arising from the left hepatic artery (yellow arrow). Additional green arrow points to the right hepatic artery.
A study by Jhaveri et al. retrospectively evaluated hepatic vascular anatomy in 82 patients utilizing gadoxetate disodium enhanced magnetic resonance angiography with CAIPIRINHA technique and compared this to CTA as the reference standard. The accuracy of determining arterial anatomy and segment 4 arterial origin was 73% and 55%, respectively, and subjective image quality for depiction of the hepatic arteries with MR angiography was significantly lower than with CTA (p < 0.001).

Phase III: Dual‐Contrast MRI Approach
To overcome the limitations of the single‐agent technique, we adopted a dual‐contrast MRCP approach. The updated protocol retained baseline sequences (T2‐weighted half Fourier acquisition single‐shot turbo spin‐echo [HASTE], axial T1‐weighted dual echo GRE, axial T1‐weighted mDixon quant, coronal oblique 3D Haste T2‐weighted MRCP) and introduced a two‐step contrast strategy, that is, axial 3D T1‐weighted spoiled GRE MR angiogram (MRA) utilizing gadobenate dimeglumine (weight‐based dose of 0.2 mmol/kg power injected at 3 mL/s followed by saline infusion of 20 mL at 2 mL/s) with two arterial phases. The first arterial phase was an early acquisition acquired at 16–20 s with reduced z‐axis coverage to include the celiac trunk and superior mesenteric artery to maintain optimal SNR and spatial resolution. This was acquired via bolus tracking technique (Figure 6) with acquisition triggered when contrast was identified in the proximal descending thoracic aorta. The second arterial phase was triggered at 30 s with full liver coverage at the cost of reduced SNR to look at the entire liver for any enhancing masses. The purpose of this phase was to improve detection of liver masses. Next, T1‐weighted fat saturated dynamic post‐contrast imaging was obtained in the venous phase (30 s later) and delayed phase (at 180 s). Following dynamic acquisition, gadoxetate disodium was injected at a rate of 0.1 mL/kg (~10 mL). Axial T1‐weighted fat saturated VIBE (Volumetric Interpolated Breaht‐hold examination) was obtained at 10 min and then axial and coronal T1‐weighted fat saturated VIBE was obtained at 20 min to assess the biliary tree. Persistent arterial phase timing issues prompted integration of T1‐weighted fat saturated 3D time resolved angiography with stochastic trajectories volumetric interpolated breath‐hold examination (TWIST VIBE) before and dynamically following contrast material administration. The TWIST VIBE sequence was acquired during expiration, preceded by a prescan to confirm adequate anatomical coverage from the supraceliac region to the level of the renal arteries. Following the prescan, a 60‐s pause was utilized to deliver standardized breathing instructions, culminating in a 13‐s breath hold. With 5–7 s remaining in the countdown, gadobenate dimeglumine was administered at a rate of 2 mL/s (total dose: 20 mL). The scanner then automatically initiated the acquisition of eight dynamic arterial phases upon countdown completion. Implementation of the TWIST VIBE technique substantially enhanced consistency in arterial phase visualization while preserving high‐quality hepatobiliary imaging using the gadoxetate disodium‐based contrast agent (Table 2). Detailed scan parameters are provided in Table S1.
(A) MRCP with maximum intensity projection (MIP) failed to show drainage of the posterior right hepatic lobe. (B) Coronal T1w post‐contrast image in hepatobiliary phase shows the right posterior duct (blue arrow) draining into the right anterior hepatic duct (yellow arrow). (C) MRA of the same patient with gadobenate dimeglumine reveals conventional hepatic arterial anatomy with segment 4 branch (red arrow) arising from the left hepatic artery (green arrow). (D) Illustration showing conventional biliary drainage as seen on the MR.
Dual‐contrast protocol with gadobenate dimeglumine (Multihance) and gadoxetate disodium (Eovist) highlighting the two intravenous contrast injection time points and the corresponding sequences acquired before and after each injection.
Order of sequence acquisition	Coverage	 	Updated protocol—dual‐contrast technique	 	Series 1	3 plane localizer		 	Series 2	Coronal T2w HASTE	Whole abdomen	 	Series 3	Axial T2w HASTE	Liver	 	Series 4	Axial in/out‐of‐phase	Liver	 	Series 5	Axial Q‐Dixon (iron quant)	Liver	 	Series 6	Oblique coronal 3D MRCP	Biliary tree	 	Series 7	Radial oblique HASTE slices	Biliary tree	 	Series 8	Axial pre T1 fat sat dynamic (to check coverage, important to keep breath‐hold time at 13 s)	Liver	 	Pause for 60 s. Inject Multihance (20 mL) with breath‐hold instructions	 	Series 9	Axial T1 TWST MRA pre/8 phase dynamic	Supra celiac to renal arteries	 	Series 10	Axial fat sat dynamic: venousAxial and coronal fat sat dynamic: 3 min delay	Liver	 	Inject 10 mL Eovist	 	Series 11	Axial DWI	Liver and pancreas	 	Series 12	Axial T1 FS vibe 10 min delay	Liver	 	Series 13	Axial T2w fat sat	Liver and pancreas	 	Series 14	Axial T1w FS vibe 20 min delay	Biliary tree	 	Series 15	Coronal T1ww FS vibe 20 min delay	Biliary tree

Key Takeaways From Case‐Based Examples
The case‐based examples highlight key lessons learned in the evaluation of LDLT candidates, showcasing both successes and limitations of various imaging protocols. In Case 1 (Figure 1), we rely on a traditional protocol to identify biliary anatomy but encounter challenges in evaluating segment 4 arterial drainage. Case 2 (Figure 2) demonstrates the limitations of gadobenate dimeglumine with bolus tracking, leading to suboptimal arterial imaging and the need for CTA. By switching to gadoxetate disodium in Case 3 (Figure 3), we achieve better delineation of biliary anatomy but face challenges in arterial evaluation due to transient tachypnea. In Cases 4 and 5 (Figures 4 and 5), motion artifact hinders unenhanced 3D MRCP imaging of variant biliary anatomy, with better visualization achieved on delayed hepatobiliary phase. Similarly, arterial assessment was suboptimal due to motion and poor timing via bolus tracking method on MRI, requiring CTA. Case 6 (Figure 6) illustrates the potential of multi‐contrast MRI and MRCP in providing excellent delineation of biliary and arterial anatomy. In Case 7 (Figure 7), the TWIST (time‐resolved angiography with stochastic trajectories) VIBE (volumetric interpolated breath‐hold examination) technique with gadobenate dimeglumine enables segment 4 arterial evaluation, while some patients require complementary CT angiograms for clarity. Case 8 (Figure 8) highlights the accurate depiction of variant biliary anatomy on delayed hepatobiliary phase imaging. Finally, Cases 9–11 (Figures 9, 10, 11) underscored the limitations of innovative protocols, offering alternative imaging techniques to address gaps and optimize evaluation. These cases collectively emphasize the importance of our innovative protocol as a one stop shop to enhance diagnostic accuracy and improve transplant outcomes.
(A, B) Axial and coronal arterial MIP images following gadobenate dimeglumine administration clearly shows segment 4 branch (arrow) arising from the left hepatic artery. (C) Axial MIP MRA of a different patient showing left hepatic artery giving rise to segment 4 arterial supply medially (red arrow) and segment 2/3 branch laterally (blue arrow). (D) CT angiography of the same patient confirming arterial anatomy as illustrated on the following picture (E). (F) Coronal MRA with MIP reconstruction of another patient shows segment 4 arterial supply (red arrow) coming off of the right hepatic artery as seen on the following illustration (G). (H) Coronal MRA with MIP reconstruction of a different subject showing a replaced left hepatic artery (blue arrow) arising from the left gastric artery and segment 4 branch (red arrow) arising from the right hepatic artery. (I) Illustration depicting the arterial anatomy of patient described in (H).
(A) Subpotimal quality MRCP fails to show precise biliary anatomy due to patient's inability to hold breath. (B) Coronal hepatobiliary MIP image of the same patient shows an accessory duct draining segment 4 (arrow) into the common duct as seen on the following illustration (C). (D) MRCP image of another patient shows the right posterior hepatic duct (yellow arrow) possibly draining into the left hepatic duct (blue arrow). (E) Coronal MIP hepatobiliary phase of the same patient confirms the suspected biliary anatomy as depicted on the following illustration (F). (G, H) Coronal and axial hepatobiliary MIP images of a different patient shows low insertion of the cystic duct (yellow arrow) and segment 5 duct (blue arrow) draining into the common hepatic duct as seen on the following illustration (I).
(A) Coronal MRA with MIP reconstructions showing a complex course of segment 4 artery (arrow). (B, C) coronal and axial reformats of a prior CT angiography for the same patient, performed for other purposes, were used for comparison and demonstrated again the complexity of segment 4 supply. (D) Illustration depicting the arterial anatomy seen on CT and MR, with two segment 4 arterial branches: One arising from the left hepatic artery (blue arrow) and the second arising from the right hepatic artery (green arrow) and looping around the first segment 4 branch.
(A) Coronal T1w post‐contrast image in portal venous phase shows segment 4 arterial branch arising from the left hepatic artery via a short common trunk (arrow). This was not visualized on axial MIP arterial phase (B) which only depicts the left hepatic artery (arrow).
MRCP and hepatobiliary MRI provide a complimentary role which can increase scanning time. (A) 3D MRCP shows the right posterior hepatic duct (yellow arrow) draining into the left hepatic duct (blue arrow). (B) Hepatobiliary coronal T1W post‐contrast image of the same patient shows poor hepatic duct delineation due to inadequate timing and reduced flip angle.

Experience at Our Quaternary Center
Since we introduced dualcontrast MRCP in November 2022, additional adjustments to the protocol have been made to further increase the quality of imaging. Through May 2024, a total of 52 potential liver donors have undergone imaging. Seven have undergone partial hepatectomy as donors. One of the seven required correlation with CTA for confirmation of complex arterial anatomy. Of the remaining, eight have been approved but have not yet donated and the rest were excluded based on inadequate liver volumes (N = 15), complex arterial or venous anatomy (N = 8), or other factors (N = 12) such as medical exclusions, hepatic steatosis, or donor withdrawal.
The dual‐contrast MRCP approach routinely results in high quality MRA which provides excellent image quality for evaluation of arterial variants that may impact donor selection and may not be evident with regular arterial phase imaging at MRI (Figure 7). Complex biliary anatomy that can influence donor selection or operative planning can also be confidently evaluated which may not be possible with routine 3D MRCP (Figure 8). At a median follow‐up of 8 months (range 6–18), all seven living liver donors were well without postoperative complications.

Evaluation of Anatomical Structures: Comparison of Dual‐Contrast Technique Versus Traditional Method
Arterial phase imaging with gadobenate dimeglumine via bolus tracking is often suboptimal due to a narrow imaging window and can lead to difficult visualization of small caliber vessels like segment 4, which is critical for donor evaluation. Gadoxetate disodium, on the other hand, causes transient tachypnea, further degrading the arterial phase imaging. Hence, supplemental CTA is needed for confirmation. The dual‐contrast technique utilizing TWIST VIBE time‐resolved angiography allows acquisition of multiple arterial phases, removing reliance on precise bolus timing. In our experience, the segment 4 artery was successfully visualized in the majority of cases, indicating a marked improvement in reliability. Gadoxetate‐enhanced delayed imaging provides superior biliary duct visualization, reducing dependency on motion‐prone T2w 3D MRCP (reliably identifying bile duct variants and the critical segment 4 drainage) without the additional time, cost, and radiation requirements of CTA. This technique has also eliminated the need for quality control by a radiologist, which had been the standard with our traditional protocol for assessing the biliary tree on 3D unenhanced MRCP. With our current imaging protocol, quality control is being performed by the lead MRI technologist of the day to ensure adequate opacification of the biliary tree is seen on the 20‐min delayed hepatobiliary phase. Understanding the arterial supply, venous, and biliary drainage of segment 4 is crucial, as inadvertent injury can lead to ischemia, harm the donor, compromise the FLR, and lead to hemorrhage and risk of bile leak. Due to its small size, the segment 4 artery requires high‐quality imaging for identification. Given the prevalence of biliary variants, delineation of biliary anatomy is important for the prevention of postoperative leak and bile duct stricture. While dual‐contrast agent MRI is being used in some institutions for characterization of hepatic lesions, its application in liver donor imaging is not yet common. In our preliminary experience, this new technique obviated the need for CTA in most cases. Transition from bolus tracking to TWIST VIBE eliminated the need to accurately track bolus arrival. Table 3 summarizes the key changes between traditional and dual‐contrast protocols. Overall, the comprehensive nature of the dual‐contrast protocol streamlines all evaluations in one session. Gadobenate dimeglumine functions as both an extracellular and hepatobiliary agent, allowing for dynamic vascular imaging and delayed biliary visualization, while gadoxetate disodium, with its higher hepatocyte uptake and biliary excretion, is particularly effective in delineating biliary anatomy during the hepatobiliary phase. In the context of liver donor evaluation, studies have shown that combining these agents enhances the diagnostic accuracy of MRCP, reducing the need for additional CTA and thereby decreasing the overall radiation burden. Furthermore, Welle et al. demonstrated that dual‐contrast MRI provided superior visualization of biliary anatomy in 93% of cases without significantly increasing gadolinium retention risk.
Comparison of traditional versus dual‐contrast MRI protocol in recognition of key anatomical structures.
Anatomical structure	Traditional protocol (gadobenate or gadoxetate disdoum ± CTA)	Dual‐contrast protocol (gadobenate dimeglumine plus gadoxetate disodium)	 	Segment 4 artery	Often not visualized with gadoxetate	Visualized reliably in most cases with TWIST VIBE with gadobenate	 	Aberrant bile ducts	Missed if MRCP is motion degraded	Clearly detected in hepatobiliary phase (Gadoxetate disodium)	 	Venous anatomy	Adequate	Comparable quality	 	Lesions	Adequate with both	Provides superior imaging quality for confirmation of lesions like FNH	 	Need for additional CTA	Frequent (~20%–30%)	Rare (1 in 7 in our case)

Potential Risks and Limitations
While the dual‐contrast MRI protocol offers significant diagnostic advantages in evaluating complex arterial and biliary anatomy in liver donors, several limitations and potential harms must be considered. First, while the technique is promising, it has not yet been validated in large prospective cohorts specific to living liver donors. Our experience reflects a single‐center experience with a relatively modest sample size, which may limit generalizability. Second, administering two GBCAs increases total gadolinium dose. Although both gadobenate dimeglumine (Group II) and gadoxetate disodium (Group III) are considered to have low risk for nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) in patients with normal renal function, this dual exposure should be approached with caution in donors with reduced glomerular filtration rate (eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2). This is rarely a concern as the majority of donors are healthy subjects. A study by Weinreb et al. also suggested that the risk of nephrogenic systemic sclerosis, from multiple closely spaced, standard doses of Group II or Group III agents in patients with eGFR < 30 mL/min per 1.73 m2 is likely very small. Third, the long‐term clinical significance of gadolinium retention in the brain and other tissues remains unknown. Hence, the utilization of dual GBCAs in the proposed protocol warrants careful ethical and clinical consideration, particularly given concerns regarding cumulative gadolinium exposure and potential deposition in tissues. However, the rationale for employing both gadobenate dimeglumine and gadoxetate disodium lies in their complementary imaging characteristics, which provide a more comprehensive anatomical evaluation in living liver donors. While the incremental gadolinium load remains a valid concern, the clinical justification for dual contrast use in this context is supported by evidence of improved anatomical delineation, reduction in overall diagnostic steps, and minimization of ionizing radiation exposure. Nonetheless, rigorous patient selection is essential to mitigate potential risks associated with cumulative gadolinium exposure. Fourth, administering two contrast agents in a single session theoretically increases the risk of allergic or physiological reactions, although none were observed in our cohort of 52 donors. Next, given the inherently lower spatial resolution of MR compared to CT, CTA may still be required for some challenging cases, despite advancements in higher‐acceleration parallel imaging (Figure 9). The coronal T1‐weighted fat saturated venous imaging can help identify the segment 4 artery in some cases when the arterial phase data is too motion degraded (Figure 10). Additionally, ensuring high‐quality images requires a team of well‐trained technologists. Lastly, the technique has a longer scan time than the original protocol due to the need for hepatobiliary phase imaging (Figure 11) with a study showing even improved visualization of the biliary anatomy with 3‐h delayed imaging following gadoxetate disodium.

Conclusion
Dual‐contrast MRCP with gadobenate dimeglumine and gadoxetate disodium coupled with multi seven‐phase arterial TWIST VIBE provides adequate assessment of the arteries, veins, and bile ducts with generally excellent depiction of the critical segment 4 supply and drainage. Further iteration will likely involve moving to a high relaxivity macrocyclic extracellular agent and continued refinement of arterial phase timing and spatial resolution.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

References
Indications and Contraindications for Liver Transplantation
Imaging Evaluation of Living Liver Donor Candidates: Techniques, Protocols, and Anatomy
Indications and Results of Right‐Lobe Living Donor Liver Transplantation
Anatomical Variations of the Origin of the Segment 4 Hepatic Artery and Their Clinical Implications
Adult Living Donor Liver Imaging
CT and MR Imaging Evaluation of Living Liver Donors
Current State‐of‐the‐Art MRI for Comprehensive Evaluation of Potential Living Liver Donors
MAFLD: A Consensus‐Driven Proposed Nomenclature for Metabolic Associated Fatty Liver Disease
Liver Transplantation in Metastatic Colorectal Cancer: Are We Ready for It?
The Current State of Liver Transplantation for Colorectal Liver Metastases in the United States: A Call for Standardized Reporting
Evaluation of Living Liver Donors
A Worldwide Survey of Live Liver Donor Selection Policies at 24 Centers With a Combined Experience of 19 009 Adult Living Donor Liver Transplants
Patient Selection for Living Donor Liver Transplantation in Acute‐On‐Chronic Liver Failure
Living Donor Liver Transplantation in the USA
Evaluation of Donor Workups and Exclusions in a Single‐Center Experience of Living Donor Liver Transplantation
Selection and Outcome of the Potential Live Liver Donor
Living Donor Liver Transplantation: Preoperative Planning and Postoperative Complications
Imaging Evaluation of the Living Liver Donor: A Systems‐Based Approach
Anatomical Variations and Surgical Strategies in Right Lobe Living Donor Liver Transplantation: Lessons From 120 Cases
Computed Tomography Evaluation of the Arterial Supply to Segment 4 of the Liver
Segment IV Hepatic Artery in Potential Donors for Living Related Liver Transplantation: Evaluation With Multi‐Detector CT
Surgical Anatomy of Segment Four of Liver and Its Implications in Hepato‐Biliary Surgery and Liver Transplantation
Multidetector CT in the Evaluation of Potential Living Donors for Liver Transplantation
Preoperative CT Evaluation of Potential Donors in Living Donor Liver Transplantation
Preoperative Evaluation of Liver Parenchyma of Potential Donors in Living Donor Liver Transplantation
Multidetector Computed Tomography Angiography in the Evaluation of Potential Living Donors for Liver Transplantation: Single‐Center Experience in China
Evaluation of the Hepatic Artery in Potential Donors for Living Donor Liver Transplantation by Computed Tomography Angiography Using Multidetector‐Row Computed Tomography: Comparison of Volume Rendering and Maximum Intensity Projection Techniques
Clinical Usefulness of Gadoxetic Acid‐Enhanced MRI for Evaluating Biliary Anatomy in Living Donor Liver Transplantation
MRI in Donor Candidates for Living Donor Liver Transplant: Technical and Practical Considerations
Dual Contrast Liver MRI: A Pictorial Illustration
High‐Resolution MR Imaging With Gadoxetate Disodium for the Comprehensive Evaluation of Potential Living Liver Donors
Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography: The ABC of MRCP
Comparison of Acute Transient Dyspnea After Intravenous Administration of Gadoxetate Disodium and Gadobenate Dimeglumine: Effect on Arterial Phase Image Quality
Matched Within‐Patient Cohort Study of Transient Arterial Phase Respiratory Motion‐Related Artifact in MR Imaging of the Liver: Gadoxetate Disodium Versus Gadobenate Dimeglumine
Respiratory Motion Artifact Affecting Hepatic Arterial Phase Imaging With Gadoxetate Disodium: Examination Recovery With a Multiple Arterial Phase Acquisition
Respiratory Motion Artifacts During Arterial Phase Imaging With Gadoxetic Acid: Can the Injection Protocol Minimize This Drawback?
Evaluation of Optimal Scan Delay for Gadoxetate Disodium‐Enhanced Hepatic Arterial Phase MRI Using MR Fluoroscopic Triggering and Slow Injection Technique
Peak Contrast Enhancement in CT and MR Angiography: When Does It Occur and Why? Pharmacokinetic Study in a Porcine Model
Mapping of Hepatic Vasculature in Potential Living Liver Donors: Comparison of Gadoxetic Acid‐Enhanced MR Imaging Using CAIPIRINHA Technique With CT Angiography
Biliary Complications After Adult‐To‐Adult Living‐Donor Liver Transplantation: An International Multicenter Study of 3633 Cases
Contrast‐Enhanced T1‐Weighted Magnetic Resonance Cholangiography Using Gadoxetate Disodium in Potential Living Liver Donors: Qualitative and Quantitative Improvement With 3‐Hour Delayed Imaging
Use of Intravenous Gadolinium‐Based Contrast Media in Patients With Kidney Disease: Consensus Statements From the American College of Radiology and the National Kidney Foundation