Vaccination in Patients with Cardiovascular Disease: A Case-Based Approach and Contemporary Review
Vaccination is a crucial preventative strategy, particularly in individuals with cardiovascular (CV) disease (CVD). People living with CVD are at increased risk of morbidity and mortality from vaccine-preventable infections such as influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome-corona virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), varicella zoster virus (VZV), and pneumococcal disease. These infections also have been associated with downstream CV complications, including ischemic events and myocarditis. Randomized controlled trials have demonstrated that influenza vaccination reduces major adverse CV events and all-cause mortality, especially in people with CVD. The same has been observed in registry analyses during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Pooling of data from observational and cohort studies also has shown significant benefit of vaccination against RSV, VZV, and pneumococcal disease in older populations and those with CV comorbidities. Despite recommendations from national public health guidelines and immunization programs, vaccination uptake in patients with CVD remains suboptimal. This low uptake is influenced by lack of vaccine information, access issues, and mistrust in the healthcare system, all summarized in the term “vaccine hesitancy.” Vaccination promotion should focus on addressing these gaps in communication and access barriers at the provider, community, and public health levels. Healthcare providers including cardiologists are reminded, through this review, of the importance of emphasizing vaccination recommendations during clinical encounters. Addressing patient misconceptions and providing patient decision aids strongly improves acceptance rates. Continued efforts at the community and public health levels should address barriers to access and advance surveillance methods to target improved clinical outcomes for groups at risk.
Vaccine-preventable illnesses represent a large global burden, as evidenced by the recent severe acute respiratory syndrome-corona virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic. On an annual basis, viral infections such as influenza, and syndromes such as pneumonia, contribute to millions of severe illnesses and deaths worldwide. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), up to 650,000 people die of respiratory diseases linked to seasonal influenza each year. Most deaths occur in older adults and in the countries with the lowest incomes and resources. Globally, lower-respiratory-tract infections were listed as the fifth cause of disability-associated life years (DALYs) in patients aged > 75 years. In Canada, influenza and pneumonia caused 6363 deaths in 2023, with pneumonia contributing to thousands of hospitalizations annually and a significant number of intensive care unit (ICU) admissions among older adults. The morbidity and mortality associated with these illnesses are compounded by its economic impact. Billions of dollars are spent annually on the direct medical costs associated with managing these infections and the resultant productivity losses.
Multiple mechanisms have been proposed for the association between viral infection and vasculopathy. The inflammatory state of an infection promotes the production of prothrombotic autoimmune antibodies, including IgM and IgG, and immune complexes that increase plaque formation. The virus also causes pathologic vascular remodelling, including intimal proliferation, disruption of the internal elastic lamina, and a decrease in smooth muscle cells, leading to an increased likelihood of plaque rupture. In addition to promoting thrombogenesis and plaque rupture, respiratory viral infection may lead to hypoxia, hypotension, and increased metabolic demand, all of which decrease oxygen supply to the heart and may contribute to type 2 myocardial infarction. Finally, viruses have been implicated as the most common etiology for myocarditis, but they can also lead to heart failure (HF), arrhythmias, acute myocardial infarction (AMI), venous thromboembolism, and stroke. In fact, a bidirectional relationship between viral infection and cardiovascular disease (CVD) has been demonstrated—the infection can trigger cardiovascular (CV) events, and conversely, people with underlying CVD are at an increased risk of complications from the infection.
The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) notes specific groups in whom influenza vaccination is particularly important. This urgency applies more widely to all vaccines mentioned in this paper, but it is generally relevant to people who are at high risk of infection and people who are capable of transmitting to those who are at high risk. The high-risk groups include children aged 6-59 months, adults with chronic health conditions, including CVD, pregnant individuals, adults aged ≥ 65 years, and individuals in nursing homes and other chronic care facilities. The category of adults with chronic health conditions includes those with cardiac disorders, which are the focus of this paper. Other chronic conditions included are diabetes mellitus, cancer, renal disease, neurodevelopmental disorders, and immunocompromising conditions, such as solid organ transplantation. People capable of transmitting the infection to high-risk individuals include healthcare providers, household contacts, and those providing regular childcare and other occupational services to the public.
The uptake of vaccines has declined noticeably over recent years, at least in the Canadian population. This impact of this change was augmented by the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, which highlighted the key barriers to vaccination—vaccine hesitancy, communication and mistrust, access issues, and health inequities. Some Canadians expressed anti-vaccine sentiments, some of which were rooted in skepticism and mistrust, and some of which stemmed from lack of vaccine information and awareness. We now recognize the essential nature of communicating clearly and addressing fears in a patient-centred manner. Access issues include financial issues, inequitable distribution of resources, and the lack of nearby administering sites. The existing social and physical environments also predispose marginalized populations to face inequities when it comes to vaccination. Public health plans are now starting to integrate social determinants of health (SDOH) in facilitating easier access and distributing resources more equitably.
In 2024, the Lancet published an article that looked at the impact of the Expanded Programme on Immunization (EPI) launched by the WHO. After 50 years since the program’s inception, vaccination has averted an estimated 154 million deaths worldwide. The introduction of public vaccination programs in the 20th century significantly reduced the burden of vaccine-preventable diseases in Canada. The incidence rates and the incidence of severe outcomes of SARS-CoV-2 were consistently found to be higher among unvaccinated individuals and lowest among those who completed the primary series. Vaccinations not only incur direct health benefits, but also benefit society via the infrastructure created to facilitate access to vaccination. This benefit may include improved access to healthcare and the enhancement of preventative-based medicine practices. The development of immunization programs in developing countries was found to be unequivocally cost-effective. The World Bank estimates that the gross national product of most low-income countries is around 765 USD$ or less, and the vaccines themselves cost no more than 20 USD$ per year of healthy life gained.
Vaccines have transformed the global health landscape by dramatically reducing, and in some cases eradicating, once-deadly diseases. In this paper, we chose to focus on the following 5 vaccines in particular: influenza, SARS-CoV-2, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), varicella zoster virus (VZV), and pneumococcal vaccines. These infections have the highest combined global and national disease burden and have been studied to varying degrees in terms of the impact of vaccination. We reviewed the bidirectional relationship between vaccine-preventable illness and CVD, the impact of vaccination on ameliorating outcomes in people with CVD, and the topic of vaccine hesitancy. We conclude with a practical approach to the promotion of vaccination in preventative medicine.

Case Vignette
A 35-year-old male patient with a history of systemic lupus erythematosus on hydroxychloroquine had a week of fevers, chills, and rhinorrhea. He went to a walk-in clinic, and his examination revealed a temperature of 38.5°C and tachycardia at 105 beats per minute, with blood pressure of 125/83 mm Hg. His nasal swab was positive for SARS-CoV-2. He had not received any vaccinations apart from his childhood vaccines. He continued to rest at home with adequate hydration. A few days later, he presents to the hospital with fatigue, shortness of breath, and chest discomfort. His vital signs show ongoing tachycardia at 120 beats per minute and blood pressure of 100/85 mm Hg. His electrocardiogram shows diffuse ST elevations not in keeping with a vascular territory and without reciprocal changes. His high-sensitivity troponin test comes back positive at 230 ng/L (normal, < 14 ng/L), and his C-reactive protein level is 115 mg/L (normal, < 12 mg/L). He undergoes an echocardiogram that reveals a mildly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, at 45%, and global hypokinesis. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging shows late gadolinium enhancement in keeping with myocarditis. Coronary angiography and endomyocardial biopsy were deferred in this case, given the high clinical suspicion for viral myocarditis and clinical stability. He improves with supportive care and steroids after a 5-day hospitalization and is discharged home.

Epidemiology of Vaccine-Preventable Illness and CVD

Influenza
Influenza infection contributes to a significant number of hospitalizations and deaths on an annual basis, mainly secondary to the respiratory complications of the illness. A study estimated that influenza is associated with 4% of ischemic heart disease (IHD) deaths globally. In the 2022-2023 annual influenza report, a total of 74,344 laboratory-confirmed influenza detections were reported in Canada. Among those, 4216 influenza-associated hospitalizations occurred, with the highest cumulative hospitalization rate being that among adults aged ≥ 65 years. The morbidity and mortality incidence of this preventable illness in someone with underlying CVD is increased. In a study that followed patients across 8 influenza seasons, with an annual mean of 70,570 patients with HF, influenza activity was associated with an annual excess of 2.6% of all-cause deaths. This study also found an annual excess of 2.9% of all CV deaths, and 5.0% of all hospitalizations for pneumonia or influenza in patients with HF.
Further, the cardiac complications of influenza infection are well documented in the literature; these include myocarditis, HF, arrhythmia, acute coronary syndrome (ACS) including AMI, and stroke. In a meta-analysis of 18 observational studies and 1 randomized controlled trial (RCT), the cumulative incidence of HF in participants who contracted influenza was found to be the highest, at 17.47% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 5.06%-34.54%). The incidences of other cardiac complications, including arrhythmia, myocarditis, AMI, and stroke, were not as elevated, with the second-highest being arrhythmia at 6.12% (95% CI: 0.00%-21.92%). Although it has not been studied extensively, a correlation exists between prior flu-like syndromes and the risk of developing CVD in the future. These findings underscore the need to recognize influenza as not only a respiratory illness but also a contributor to adverse CV outcomes, especially in at-risk groups.

SARS-CoV-2
Until July of 2024, 4,562,906 cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection have been confirmed, with 60,871 total deaths having occurred prior to September of 2024 in Canada. The incidence of morbidity and mortality of SARS-CoV-2 infection in someone with underlying CVD is higher than that in the average population, especially in patients with preexisting HF. In a prospective cohort study of 5279 patients, underlying HF was one of the strongest predictors of hospital admission and critical illness, including ICU stay, mechanical ventilation, and death. Patients suffering simultaneously from SARS-CoV-2 and ACS are found to experience 3-fold higher mortality rates, compared to those experiencing ACS alone. Concomitant ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) with SARS-CoV-2 led to a 29% in-hospital mortality incidence vs STEMI without SARS-CoV-2, which led to 5.5% in-hospital mortality incidence, in a retrospective study comparing 62 vs 310 participants, respectively.
At the same time, infection with SARS-CoV-2 is associated with multiple cardiac complications. Myocarditis caused by SARS-CoV-2 is a well-known disease entity that ranges from uncomplicated inflammation of the heart muscle to fulminant myocarditis presenting with cardiogenic shock. A meta-analysis that included 1064 patients with SARS-CoV-2 found that the cumulative incidence of in-hospital acute HF ranged between 7% and up to 63%. These patients also had an increased risk of death, with an odds ratio (OR) of 9.36. An import point to note is that SARS-CoV-2 infection can be considered a risk factor for developing CVD, as evidenced in studies that have followed patients longitudinally after their viral infection, to assess the incidence of CVD. The study by Xie et al. showed that the hazard ratio (HR) was increased for all CVDs, including stroke (HR = 1.52), transient ischemic attack (HR = 1.49), atrial fibrillation (AF; HR = 1.71), ventricular arrhythmias (HR = 1.84), cardiac arrest (HR = 2.45), pericarditis (HR = 1.85), myocarditis (HR = 5.38), AMI (HR = 1.63), ischemic cardiomyopathy (HR = 1.75), nonischemic cardiomyopathy (HR = 1.62), pulmonary embolism (HR = 2.93), and deep vein thrombosis (HR = 2.09). Although the long-term sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 are less clearly elucidated from a pathophysiology perspective, the evidence suggests that a strong link exists between this viral illness and CV complications.

RSV
RSV can cause severe respiratory distress, especially in older adults. The cardiac complications associated with RSV are less well known. In a cross-sectional study of 6248 hospitalized adults aged > 50 years with RSV, over 5 seasons, the estimated prevalence of a cardiac event was 22.4% (95% CI: 21.0%-23.7%). The estimated prevalence of acute HF was 15.8% (95% CI: 14.6%-17.0%); the prevalence of acute IHD was 7.5% (95% CI: 6.8%-8.3%), and that of cardiogenic shock was 0.6% (95% CI: 0.4%-0.8%). This study found that patients with underlying CVD had a greater adjusted risk ratio (ARR) of an acute cardiac event compared to those who did not have CVD (33.0% vs 8.5%; ARR 3.51; 95% CI: 2.82-4.32). More than 15% of patients required ICU admission, and around 5% died during hospitalization.

VZV
VZV usually presents with a prodrome of headache, myalgia, and fever, followed by an acute phase of unilateral, vesicular rash that is associated with severe pain. The short- and long-term complications following VZV infection also have been studied. A large systematic review and meta-analysis, including 12 studies of 7.9 million patients up to 28 years after VZV infection, showed an increased risk of CV and cerebrovascular events. The odds ratio (OR) of CV events at up to 3 months following VZV infection was 1.31 (95% CI: 1.02-1.70). The OR dropped to 1.19 at up to 1 year and to 1.12 at more than 1 year. An interesting finding is that the OR of cerebrovascular events was similarly elevated at up to 3 months following VZV infection, at 1.34 (95% CI: 1.22-1.46), and it remained elevated at up to 1 year, at 1.22, and at more than 1 year, at 1.40.
Another study on the association between VZV infection and AMI followed patients for 30 days following VZV infection. Myocardial infarction occurred in 244 (0.34%) of those in the VZV cohort and in 5782 (0.28%) of the those in the control cohort (P = 0.0016). The association between VZV and stroke in a similarly designed study was stronger, with an OR of 1.93 (95% CI: 1.57-2.4; P < 0.0001) in VZV patients, compared to control patients, within 30 days of infection. In a retrospective study of 41,930 patients, the risk of major adverse cardiac and cerebrovascular events (MACCE) was higher by 19% in the VZV group, compared to a control group, over 1 year of follow-up. In a longitudinal cohort study of 79,658 women in the Nurses’ Health Study (NHS), 93,932 women in the Nurses’ Health Study II (NHS II), and 31,440 men in the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study (HPFS) reported an elevated risk of major CV events (MACE) that may persist for up to and beyond 12 years following VZV infection.
Beyond CV outcomes, the association of VZV with other complications is well documented, including but not limited to postherpetic neuralgia, herpes zoster ophthalmicus, encephalitis, meningitis, viral pneumonia, and end organ damage to the liver and kidney. Briefly, postherpetic neuralgia occurs in the same dermatomes as the VZV infection, where patients tend to experience allodynia and hyperalgesia. Estimates are that around 5%-20% of those who contract VZV will go on to develop postherpetic neuralgia. Although the incidence rate of herpes zoster ophthalmicus has not been studied specifically in a nationwide study, this is a known complication with debilitating effects ranging from conjunctival injection and chemosis, punctate keratitis, which can progress to corneal opacification, and uveitis. The other non-CV complications mentioned above can be life-threatening, but these are beyond the scope of this review.

Pneumococcal
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) is responsible for high rates of hospitalization and death in the Canadian population. From 2019 to 2023, the National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) identified 14,563 isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae causing invasive disease in adults. The most affected age group was adults aged ≥ 65 years, at 39%. In a retrospective cohort study done in Spain, 99,346 patients were hospitalized for pneumonia with comorbid CVD over a period of 19 years, from 1997 to 2015. Overall, 13.8% died; per 100,000 inhabitants, the annual hospitalization rate was 55.27 (95% CI: 54.92-55.61) and the annual in-hospital mortality rate was 32.71 (95% CI: 21.16-33.26). In those aged ≥ 85 years, the rate of deaths reached 656.50 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants. Underlying CVD thus predisposes participants to increased morbidity and mortality from pneumonia.
The CV complications of CAP are life-threatening. A prospective cohort study that followed 1182 patients hospitalized for CAP over 30 days found that 380 patients (32.2%) experienced intra-hospital CV events. The mean age for the study was 73 years. During the hospital stay, 281 patients (23.8%) experienced new or worsening HF, 109 patients (9.2%) had a new episode of AF, 78 patients (6.6%) had an NSTEMI, 11 patients (0.9%) had a STEMI, 11 patients (0.9%) had an ischemic stroke, and 1 patient (0.1%) had venous thromboembolic disease (VTE). A total of 28 deaths (2.4%) due to CV causes occurred in this cohort. Among the patients with new or worsening HF, 55 experienced concurrent AF, 45 NSTEMI, 4 STEMI, and 24 died of CV causes. Most of these CV events (90%) happened within the first week of enrollment into the study, highlighting the high risk of developing cardiac complications in the acute phase of CAP. A similar study found that the in-hospital and 30-day mortality was significantly increased in patients with CV events (HR 1.69, 95% CI: 1.14-2.51; P = 0.009). The rehospitalization rate and mean duration of hospital stay were also significantly increased (P = 0.002 and P < 0.0001, respectively) among patients with CV events.

Case Vignette
A 65-year-old female patient from a retirement home presented to her family doctor for an annual physical examination and check-up. Her past medical history is relevant for type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and stable coronary artery disease (CAD) with no prior myocardial infarction. She remains stable on aspirin, atorvastatin, metformin, and ramipril. She takes her influenza vaccine annually and the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine every 6 months. During this visit, her family doctor advised her to take the recombinant zoster vaccine (RZV) and the conjugate pneumococcal vaccine (PNEU-C-20), and she agreed. Later that year, an influenza outbreak occurred in her retirement home; she tested negative for the virus and did not sustain any immediate complications.

The Importance of Vaccination

Vaccine schedule
According to the Canadian Public Health Services, everyone aged ≥ 18 years should receive the influenza vaccine on an annual basis, and the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine every 6 months. The NACI recommends that all adults aged ≥ 50 years, including those previously vaccinated with live zoster vaccine or who have had a previous VZV episode, should be vaccinated with the RZV. RSV vaccination is recommended for adults aged ≥ 75 years, particularly those with underlying cardiac disease. These recommendations are closely consistent with vaccination recommendations from the recent European Society of Cardiology clinical consensus statement.
Vaccination recommendations for high-risk groups
Infection	Vaccine name	Target populations (per NACI)	 	Influenza	Seasonal influenza vaccines:QIVHigh-dose or adjuvanted QIV	All adults aged ≥ 65 y (prefer high-dose or adjuvanted QIV)Children aged 6 mo–5 yPregnant individualsHealthcare workers, LTC facility residents	 	SARS-CoV-2	mRNA COVID-19 vaccines (eg, Moderna, Pfizer XBB.1.5)	All Canadians aged ≥ 6 moOlder adults aged ≥ 65 yImmunocompromised individualsHealthcare and LTC facility workers	 	Respiratory syncytial virus	Nirsevimab (Beyfortus)RSVPreF3 (Arexvy)	Infants aged < 8 months born during or entering the RSV seasonOlder adults aged ≥ 60 y (especially those age ≥ 65 y)High-risk adults with comorbidities or in LTC facilities/nursing homes	 	Varicella zoster virus	Recombinant zoster vaccine (RZV, Shingrix)	Adults aged ≥ 50 yAdults aged ≥ 18 y who are immunocompromised or on immunosuppressive therapy	 	Pneumococcal	PCV20 (pneumococcal conjugate vaccine)PPSV23 (polysaccharide vaccine)	Adults aged ≥ 65 yAdults aged 18–64 y with chronic health conditions or immunocompromisedChildren with certain medical conditions
Shown are the 5 infections with their respective vaccines and recommended target population based on the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) guidelines.
LTC, long-term care; QIV, quadrivalent inactivated; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2.
S. pneumoniae has over 90 known serotypes, with some known to cause severe forms of CAP. Five conjugate vaccines and one polysaccharide vaccine are approved in Canada—PNEU-C-10 (Synflorix), PNEU-C-13 (Prevnar 13), PNEU-C-15 (Vaxneuvance), PNEU-C-20 (Prevnar 20), PNEU-C-21 (Capvaxive), and PNEU-P-23 (Pneumovax23). Conjugate vaccines offer longer-lasting protection against the illness. NACI recommends that all adults aged ≥ 65 years should be offered PNEU-C-20. The vaccine is also recommended for adults aged 50-64 years who are living with risk factors. Chronic heart disease requiring regular medication and follow-up, or IHD, congenital heart disease, chronic HF, or hypertension with cardiac complications are predisposing risk factors. Younger adults aged 18-49 years with immunocompromising conditions should also receive the vaccine, such as the heart transplantation population. As of now, the PNEU-C-20 vaccine is not funded publicly by provincial and territorial immunization programs. As an alternative recommendation, NACI suggests administering PNEU-C-15 or PNEU-C-13 followed 8 weeks later by PNEU-P-23. Despite S. pneumoniae being the most common culprit causing CAP, a noteworthy point is that other organisms that cause CAP are not covered by these vaccines. The vaccinations and national recommendations for immunization by age group are summarized in Table 1.

Primary and secondary prevention of CVD associated with vaccine-preventable infections
Individuals at high risk include older adults, people with chronic diseases, and people with organ transplantation. Major adverse cardiovascular events are defined as nonfatal stroke, nonfatal myocardial infarction, and cardiovascular death in most randomized controlled trials, and cohort and observational studies. The cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and thromboembolic complications reported from the included 5 vaccine-preventable infections include myocarditis, heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism and venous thromboembolism, arrhythmias including atrial fibrillation, and stroke. RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2; VZV, varicella zoster virus.
Primary prevention refers to the prevention of illness before it occurs, and vaccination is considered a cornerstone of this goal. By stimulating the immune system to recognize and respond to specific pathogens or their antigens, vaccines reduce the risk of infection and its transmission within the community. This process not only protects the individual, but also contributes to herd immunity. The concept of herd immunity refers to the idea that the spread of an infectious disease is reduced when a large proportion of individuals in a population have acquired immunity to this disease. In the high-risk groups shown in Figure 1, including older adults, people with chronic diseases, and immunocompromised individuals such as people with organ transplantation, immunization can prevent serious complications and reduce the risk of hospitalization and death.
In the context of secondary prevention, vaccines help prevent the recurrence of an infection and reduce the severity of a recurrent illness. They may also contribute to secondary prevention in patients with preexisting CVD. The FLUCAD (Influenza Vaccination in Prevention From Acute Coronary Events in Coronary Artery Disease) study showed that influenza vaccination reduces the frequency of incident coronary ischemic events in patients with preexisting CAD, compared to unvaccinated controls. Similarly, the intention associated with administering multiple doses of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine is to minimize the risk of severe disease in previously infected or immunized individuals. This benefit is especially important in vulnerable populations. The following section illustrates the impact of vaccination on improving CV outcomes.

Case Vignette
A 55-year-old male patient working in the business industry developed high-grade fever, chills, myalgias, and a dry cough while at work. His past medical history included obesity, with a body mass index > 30, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and non-STEMI in the last year managed medically with aspirin, ticagrelor, and atorvastatin. He has never been vaccinated for influenza and received only 2 doses of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine, to be able to work, expressing concerns about vaccine side effects and believing that he rarely contracts viral illnesses. He continued to go to work despite these symptoms until 48 hours later when he started feeling increasingly fatigued and experienced central chest discomfort for an hour. He presented to the emergency department and was found to be febrile at 38.9°C, and hypotensive at 94/58 mm Hg. His electrocardiogram showed ST-elevations in leads V2 to V6, with reciprocal changes in inferior leads. A high-sensitivity troponin test came back positive at 23,000 ng/L (normal, < 14 ng/L), and his nasal swabs in triage returned positive for Influenza A. A code STEMI was called and the patient was transferred to the coronary angiography suite for percutaneous intervention. He was found to have an acute thrombotic occlusion of the left anterior descending artery, which was treated with balloon angioplasty and stenting. His echocardiogram showed evidence of left ventricular dysfunction, with an ejection fraction of 35%. He complained of dyspnea, and his N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level was found to be elevated at 9800 ng/L (normal, < 450 ng/L). The patient was ultimately discharged on goal-directed medical therapy for HF with reduced ejection fraction, loop diuretics, dual antiplatelet therapy, and high-dose statin.

Impact of Vaccination in People with CVD

The impact of influenza vaccination
Influenza vaccination has been shown in multiple studies to reduce the risk of MACE and all-cause mortality. A meta-analysis that evaluated 4 RCTs and 12 observational studies quoted a relative risk ratio (RR) of 0.75 (95% CI: 0.60-0.93) for all-cause mortality, an RR of 0.82 (95% CI: 0.80-0.84) for CV mortality, and an RR of 0.87 (95% CI: 0.80-0.94) for MACE. Two years later, a meta-analysis of 6 RCTs showed similar results. Five of the trials included patients with IHD, except the Influenza Vaccine to Reduce Adverse Vascular Events (IVVE) trial, which included patients with HF. The meta-analysis reported a reduced incidence of the primary composite endpoint, encompassing CV death, ACS, stent thrombosis or coronary revascularization, and stroke or HF hospitalization (HR 0.74, 95% CI 0.63-0.88; P < 0.001). The incidence of CV death (HR 0.63, 95%CI 0.42-0.95; P = 0.028) and all-cause death (HR 0.72, 95% CI 0.54-0.95; P = 0.0227) were also reduced with influenza vaccination. The baseline CV risk for patients included in these trials was high, as they all had underlying CVD. The outcomes observed in the IVVE trial were not as convincing in favour of vaccination, suggesting the need for further trials in patients with HF to assess this benefit. Notably, the IVVE trial also was conducted in low- to middle-income countries, and the other 5 were not, which may have influenced the results.
The impact of vaccination against influenza in patients with underlying HF has been studied more extensively in observational and cohort studies rather than RCTs. Data from the Prospective Comparison of ARNi With ACEi to Determine Impact on Global Mortality and Morbidity in Heart Failure (PARADIGM-HF) trial were used to assess predictors of vaccination and outcomes. In this branch study, 1769 participants out of 8099 (21%) received the influenza vaccine and were found to have a reduced risk for all-cause mortality, with a HR of 0.81 (95% CI: 0.67-0.97; P = 0.015). A prospective cohort study of 1964 patients with acute HF found that the in-hospital, 1-year, and 4-year mortality HR were 0.71 (P = 0.19), 0.81 (P = 0.04), and 0.83 (P = 0.006), respectively, in patients vaccinated for influenza. Two similarly designed studies included participants during the winter season and measured mortality outcomes in HF patients. Mefford et al. demonstrated a lower risk of all-cause mortality and CV mortality, with an HR of 0.66 (95% CI: 0.63-0.70) and 0.68 (95% CI: 0.63-0.74), respectively, in vaccinated vs unvaccinated patients. Gotsman et al. found that vaccinated patients had reduced mortality (HR 0.77, 95% CI: 0.65-0.91; P < 0.01), and death and CV hospitalizations (HR 0.83, 95% CI: 0.76-0.90; P < 0.001). This finding was further corroborated by a meta-analysis of 6 cohort studies evaluating 179,158 patients with HF in terms of reduced all-cause mortality with vaccination.

The impact of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination
The benefit of full vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 has been shown in recent analyses of data registries from the US and Korea. Using information from the National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C), 1,934,294 patients were investigated for the association between vaccination and MACE. These patients all had prior SARS-CoV-2 infection. Patients were classified as fully vaccinated if they received 2 or more mRNA vaccines or one Johnson & Johnson vaccine ≥ 14 days before infection, and as partially vaccinated if they received either only one mRNA vaccine or their second mRNA vaccine or one Johnson & Johnson vaccine within 14 days of infection. The Cox proportional hazard model showed that fully vaccinated patients had an adjusted HR of 0.59 (95% CI: 0.55-0.63), and partially vaccinated patients had an adjusted HR of 0.76 (95% CI: 0.65-0.89), compared to unvaccinated patients. The reduced risk of MACE in this American-based analysis is further supported by evidence from a retrospective cohort study of the Korean nationwide COVID-19 registry and the Korean National Health Insurance Service database. The study included 168,310 fully vaccinated patients and 62,727 unvaccinated patients previously diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Statistically significant reductions occurred in the risk of the primary composite outcome of hospitalizations for AMI and ischemic stroke (adjusted HR 0.42, 95% CI: 0.29-0.62; P < 0.001), AMI events (adjusted HR 0.48, 95% CI: 0.25-0.94; P = 0.03), and ischemic stroke events (adjusted HR 0.40, 95% CI: 0.26-0.63; P < 0.001). Although only 2 major studies have been conducted to date, both included many participants and have robust methodology. This strong signal toward the benefit of vaccination on CV and cerebrovascular outcomes indicates that an effective intervention was provided in times when the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic was a major public health concern.
Concerns have arisen following the widespread administration of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine; these concerns are reviewed here. Several cases of myocarditis following the SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine have been documented in the literature. One of the largest studies was a retrospective cohort study published in the New England Journal of Medicine, which identified 136 cases of definite or probable myocarditis. By May of 2021, more than 5.1 million registry subjects who had received 2 doses of the vaccine were in the included surveillance period. Magnetic resonance imaging showed findings consistent with myocarditis in the 48 patients in whom it was performed. Of these, 129 cases (94.9%) were classified as mild, with resolution of myocarditis as judged by clinical symptoms, biomarkers, electrocardiographic and echocardiographic normalization, and a short length of hospital stay. One person experienced fulminant myocarditis and died. The ejection fraction was found to be severely reduced in only 4 patients (2.9%). In this study, age and sex data were available for 95 people, and the most commonly affected were male patients (91%) aged < 30 years (76%).
Another complication of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination was seen after the adenoviral vector vaccine ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 was administered, which led to cases of thrombosis and thrombocytopenia. This complication was found to be more common in female patients. The index case was a previously healthy healthcare provider who experienced a drop in platelets to 18,000 per cubic millimeter and was found to have portal vein thrombosis and peripheral pulmonary emboli. The other cases involved cerebral venous thrombosis (81.8%), splanchnic vein thrombosis (27.3%), and pulmonary embolism (27.3%). A total of 11 cases were reported in the case series, out of the 132,686 individuals who had received the first doses of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine. All of them had concurrent thrombocytopenia. This result led to the termination of administration for this type of vaccine in most countries, including Canada. Another adenoviral vaccine was found to be associated with cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). In 130 cases reported from February to July, 2021, a total of 121 were found to be serious (93.1%), including 1 death. The estimated crude rate was 1 case of Guillain-Barré syndrome per 100,000 doses administered. The other serious adverse effect reported following the administration of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine was anaphylaxis, with an estimated crude rate of 2.5 cases per million doses administered. Most of them occurred after the first dose of the vaccine was received.

The impact of respiratory syncytial virus vaccination
Only a paucity of evidence is available on the specific benefits of RSV vaccination in those with CVD. The RSVPreF3-adjuvanted protein-based vaccine was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in May 2023. An RCT investigated the efficacy of this vaccine over 3 years in adults aged ≥ 60 years. Consistent findings indicated vaccine efficacy in reducing the risk of lower respiratory tract disease, vs placebo. In subgroup analyses by age group, participants with preexisting comorbidities, such as underlying CVD, vaccine efficacy was 94.6% and 93.8% in adults aged 70-79 years. Another formulation is the RSV.preF vaccine, which was found to be efficacious in 85.7% of patients with 3 or more symptoms of RSV lower respiratory tract disease. Further studies are needed to delineate the impact of RSV vaccination on MACE and other CV outcomes.

The impact of varicella zoster virus vaccination
In the early stages of vaccine approval, a crucial step is to establish that the vaccine effectively protects against the targeted illness. Two RCTs published in the New England Journal of Medicine investigated the RZV in adults aged ≥ 50 years and ≥ 70 years. The vaccine demonstrated 97.2% efficacy (95% CI: 93.7-99.0; P < 0.001) in adults aged ≥ 50 years, and 89.8% efficacy (95% CI: 84.2-93.7; P < 0.001) in adults aged ≥ 70 years. In pooled analyses from these 2 RCTs, vaccine efficacy against postherpetic neuralgia was found to be 88.8% (95% CI: 68.7-97.1; P < 0.001). Vaccine recipients were found to experience an increased incidence of injection-site and systemic reactions, compared to controls.
The impact of the RZV on CVD risk reduction was also demonstrated in the literature. A study on the association between VZV and AMI followed 2,165,584 patients for 30 days following acquisition of VZV. This study found that patients who received the RZV were less likely to have an AMI postinfection, with an OR of 0.82 (95% CI: 0.74-0.92; P = 0.0003). Receiving the RZV also decreased the risk of stroke, with an OR of 0.57 (95% CI: 0.46-0.72; P < 0.0001). A review of 12 observational studies showed that vaccinated individuals had a reduced risk of stroke, with an OR of 0.78 (95% CI: 0.68-0.90; P = 0.001), whereas antiviral therapy for VZV infection was not similarly associated with a reduced risk of stroke, compared to no treatment. The protective effects of both vaccination and antiviral therapy were investigated in a retrospective cohort study of 112,637 patients with VZV infection. The primary outcome in this study was defined as the first diagnosis of CVD, including stroke, AMI, HF, or unstable angina within 365 days of the index date. The RZV alone reduced the risk of CVD by 21%; antiviral therapy alone reduced the risk by 22%; and both reduced the risk by 39%, compared to receiving neither.

The impact of pneumococcal disease vaccination
Older adults have an increased risk of morbidity and mortality from CAP, as outlined previously. Vaccination for this group is especially beneficial and is universally recommended, not just in Canada. In a meta-analysis by Marra et al. published in the International Journal of Infectious Diseases, a literature search from January 1946 to September 2019 was conducted. The paper included 18 studies and a total of 716,108 participants, investigating specifically the 23-valent polysaccharide pneumococcal vaccine (PPV23). Vaccination with PNEU-P-23 was associated with a decreased risk of any CV event (RR 0.91, 95% CI: 0.84-0.99), AMI (RR 0.88, 95% CI: 0.79-0.98), and all-cause mortality (RR 0.78, 95% CI: 0.68-0.88). The findings were even more significant in patients aged ≥ 65 years. Data stratification according to those aged < 65 years and ≥ 65 years was determined a priori, which adds to the reliability of the results. Unlike the data on influenza vaccination, PNEU-P-23 was not associated with risk reduction of cerebrovascular events, as compared to the control group. Overall, following recommendations from the NACI to vaccinate adults aged ≥ 65 years would provide excellent risk reduction for CV outcomes.

Case Vignette
A 59-year-old male patient with a history of poorly controlled type 2 diabetes and hypertension presents to a community health clinic with worsening upper respiratory tract symptoms. He is a part-time construction worker who recently lost his drug coverage and has been living in temporary housing after being evicted 2 months ago. The patient was found to have RSV, and supportive care was recommended. When checking the patient’s medical record, his healthcare provider noted that he had never received vaccinations before. When asked for the reason, the patient explained that he had difficulty accessing a regular provider due to frequent housing issues, lack of transportation, and job insecurity. He also expressed mistrust in the healthcare system, mentioning that “no one really follows up” and “no one tells me why I should get these needles every year.” He ultimately recovers from this viral illness but has ongoing problems because of poor glycemic control and socioeconomic stressors.

A Word on Barriers to Vaccination
The reluctance to vaccinate despite the availability of vaccines represents a major public health challenge known as vaccine hesitancy. Canadian national data suggest that < 70% of adults with heart disease receive the annual influenza vaccine, and the level of reception of pneumococcal and SARS-CoV-2 vaccine boosters is low in some age groups who need them. Rooted in a complex interplay of factors including communication gaps, access issues, mistrust in the health systems, perceived risks, and cultural beliefs, vaccine hesitancy threatens to undermine the success of immunization programs. A systematic review of the barriers to adult vaccination in Canada found that 41% of the frequently reported barriers were related to the lack of vaccine information. Under this category, participants reported a lack of vaccine awareness in their area. Common misconceptions that were not addressed included the perception of resilience to the vaccine-preventable disease and doubts about the effectiveness of the vaccine. Issues of access were reported in 38% of the studies, especially in areas with marginalized populations and significant systemic inequities. Rural and remote communities often face logistical barriers, such as lack of transportation and infrequent outreach services. Financial and language barriers were also a major concern for groups such as immigrants, refugees, and individuals with low income.
Mistrust in the healthcare system was also a major contributor to antivaccine sentiments that were expressed. These sentiments were related to concerns that receiving the vaccine has more risks than benefits, fear of adverse effects, and the belief that insufficient research has been conducted on the vaccine. Negative personal experiences, either in participants themselves or someone they know, increased the incidence of vaccine refusal. Although only 3% reported this barrier in the systematic review, fear of needles is a commonly encountered barrier to vaccination. The Canadian Immunization Guide lists other reasons for vaccine hesitancy that are rooted in not only individual biases but also systemic and infrastructural gaps. Healthcare providers may fail to recommend vaccinations due to limited knowledge about adult immunization guidelines and available vaccines, leading to missed opportunities in clinics, hospitals, and long-term care facilities. Structural barriers, such as the absence of publicly funded vaccines and limited reimbursement to providers, exacerbate these challenges. In some areas, access to accurate, up-to-date records may be insufficient, which hinders the continuity of care and population-level tracking.

Case Vignette
A 52-year-old female patient who underwent heart transplantation 6 months earlier for end-stage nonischemic cardiomyopathy presented to the multidisciplinary transplant clinic for the first time. She remains on immunosuppressive therapy with tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and low-dose prednisone. Providers at the clinic she went to include cardiologists, infectious diseases specialists, pharmacists, nurses, and social workers. The infectious diseases consultant reviewed her post-transplant immunization schedule and counselled her on her increased risk of severe infections and CV complications from infections, including influenza, SARS-CoV-2, RSV, VZV, and pneumonia. She is educated on avoiding live-attenuated vaccines unless otherwise specified. The pharmacist sees the patient to ensure that her medications do not interfere with vaccine responses. Her cardiologist reinforces the importance of following the guidelines for vaccination and answers the patient’s questions to her satisfaction. Over the next few months, she receives the inactivated influenza vaccine, RZV in 2 doses, PNEU-C-20, RSV vaccine, and the SARS-CoV-2 booster. All vaccines are timed appropriately to optimize their efficacy and safety.

Vaccination Promotion: A Multi-Pronged Approach
Flow diagram showing the interventions proposed to improve vaccination uptake at the provider, community, and public health levels.
Vaccination promotion plays an important role in safeguarding public health and should be approached through coordinated efforts at the provider, community, and system-wide levels, as displayed in Figure 2. Healthcare providers are uniquely positioned to influence vaccination behavior through direct patient interactions. The recommendations of trusted practitioners, including cardiologists, have been shown consistently to be one of the strongest predictors of vaccine acceptance. Integrating vaccination discussions into routine follow-up appointments and hospital discharge summaries can improve uptake drastically. Addressing patient misconceptions and fears through a clear and empathetic discussion is an important part of closing gaps in communication. Acknowledging the probability of commonly cited adverse effects and presenting this against the risk of contracting the infection is an important first step. The next step is to listen without judgement to the patient’s concerns. The perceptions that the person will not be affected by the illness or that the vaccine is ineffective should be explored. Coupling statistics of absolute risk reduction for vaccinated individuals with real-life experiences of the positive outcomes associated with vaccination enhances patient understanding and improves acceptance rates. If the patient is left unconvinced after an initial conversation, keeping the door open and providing additional sources for the patient to investigate builds the therapeutic relationship. Specifically, patient decision aids for influenza, SARS-CoV-2, and VZV vaccination exist, and their use would empower patients to feel confident in their decisions. Practical steps, such as having reminders on the electronic medical record and facilitating the co-administration of multiple vaccines in the same visit, would improve the tracking and convenience of the process, respectively. Providers should not only educate patients about the benefits and safety of vaccines but also serve as role models by maintaining up-to-date immunizations themselves.
At the community level, partnerships with community leaders to raise awareness about vaccines and improve health literacy would be quite effective. Designing culturally sensitive outreach programs would provide a sense of inclusion for marginalized groups, which is especially important in populations with historical mistrust or language barriers that may hinder engagement with the healthcare system. Community-based efforts foster an environment in which immunization is viewed as a collective norm. On a broader scale, public health initiatives such as national immunization schedules are crucial. Public health campaigns tailored to people with CVD and emphasizing the association between infection and MACE should be made clearer with consistent messaging. Improving funding for vaccines and ensuring that recommended vaccines are offered through free and universal access would increase vaccination adherence. Vaccines for these common infections are easily accessible in all Canadian provinces and territories through local pharmacies and public health centres, without the need for physician prescription, a point that many Canadians may not know. Finally, policies that mandate vaccination against certain preventable illnesses for healthcare providers or community workers who are constantly exposed to individuals with increased vulnerability are crucial. As the population ages and the burden of chronic disease increases, strengthening vaccine confidence and infrastructure for delivery should be a priority. Investing in this effort can prevent thousands of hospitalizations and deaths annually and ultimately enhance the quality of life for high-risk populations, especially people with CVD.

Conclusion
In Canada, vaccine-preventable illnesses, such as influenza and pneumococcal disease, continue to cause significant morbidity and mortality, particularly among older adults and individuals with chronic diseases. Despite widespread access to a public healthcare system, a significant number of hospitalizations and deaths are attributable to influenza, SARS-CoV-2, RSV, VZV, and pneumonia each year, with a disproportionate impact on those with preexisting CVD. AMI, HF, myocarditis, arrhythmias, and stroke are commonly recognized complications of these illnesses. Vaccination remains a powerful tool in reducing both the burden and CV sequelae of the infection. The best available evidence for this positive impact is reported in RCTs focusing on influenza. For other infections, data from cohort and observational studies support the positive impact of vaccination. The NACI guidelines strongly recommend vaccination for children, older adults, people with chronic conditions, and immunocompromised individuals, or people providing care for any of these groups. Vaccine hesitancy—fueled by misinformation or a lack of information, healthcare access barriers, and mistrust—continues to undermine public health efforts. People with chronic diseases and preexisting CVD who experience socioeconomic disadvantages are most vulnerable and less likely to be vaccinated. Healthcare providers play a pivotal role in addressing these gaps, by providing clear and evidence-based recommendations. Recognizing the social determinants of health and integrating care as part of a multidisciplinary team can allow for improved access. The same recommendations also should continue to be reiterated on a community level and in public health immunization programs.

References
Up to 650 000 people die of respiratory diseases linked to seasonal flu each year
Table 13-10-0392-01: Deaths and mortality rate, by selected grouped causes
Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019
The relationship between herpes zoster and stroke
Recommended immunization schedules: Canadian immunization guide
COVID-19 vaccine uptake in southeastern Ontario, Canada: monitoring and addressing health inequities
Barriers to adult vaccination in Canada: a qualitative systematic review
Health inequities related to vaccination: an evidence map of potentially influential factors and systematic review of interventions
State of public health in Canada 2024: The Chief Public Health Officer of Canada’s report on the state of public health in Canada 2024
Contribution of vaccination to improved survival and health: modelling 50 years of the expanded programme on immunization
COVID-19 outcome trends by vaccination status in Canada, December 2020–January 2022
The value of vaccination: a global perspective
Cumulative incidence and mortality rate of cardiovascular complications due to laboratory-confirmed influenza virus infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Annual influenza reports
Excess mortality and hospitalizations associated with seasonal influenza in patients with heart failure
Seasonal influenza infections and cardiovascular disease mortality
Global, regional and national estimates of influenza-attributable ischemic heart disease mortality
COVID-19 epidemiology update: current situation
Cardiovascular consequences of viral infections: from COVID to other viral diseases
Prevalence and impact of cardiac injury on COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Impact of COVID-19 on cardiovascular disease
Impact of SARS-CoV-2 positivity on clinical outcome among STEMI patients undergoing mechanical reperfusion: insights from the ISACS STEMI COVID 19 registry
Outcomes of COVID-19-positive acute coronary syndrome patients: a multisource electronic healthcare records study from England
Factors associated with hospital admission and critical illness among 5279 people with coronavirus disease 2019 in New York City: prospective cohort study
Heart failure as a complication of COVID-19 infection: systematic review and meta-analysis
Systematic review of COVID-19 related myocarditis: insights on management and outcome
Cardiac magnetic resonance characterization of myocarditis-like acute cardiac syndrome in COVID-19
Long-term cardiovascular outcomes of COVID-19
Acute cardiac events in hospitalized older adults with respiratory syncytial virus infection
Respiratory syncytial virus and incidence of cardiovascular events: a nationwide self-controlled case series analysis
Cardiac events in adults hospitalized for respiratory syncytial virus vs COVID-19 or influenza
Rates of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)-associated hospitalization among adults with congestive heart failure—United States, 2015–2017
Severe morbidity and short-and mid-to long-term mortality in older adults hospitalized with respiratory syncytial virus infection
A systematic review and meta-analysis on herpes zoster and the risk of cardiac and cerebrovascular events
Increased myocardial infarction risk following herpes zoster infection
Increased stroke risk following herpes zoster infection and protection with zoster vaccine
Herpes zoster and long-term risk of cardiovascular disease
Does herpes zoster increase the risk of stroke and myocardial infarction? A comprehensive review
Postherpetic neuralgia: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and pain management pharmacology
Herpes zoster ophthalmicus: a review for the internist
Recommendations on the use of pneumococcal vaccines in adults, including PNEU-C-21
Pneumococcal vaccines: Canadian immunization guide: Part 4. immunizing agents
Public health level recommendations on the use of pneumococcal vaccines in adults, including the use of 15-valent and 20-valent conjugate vaccines
Estimating population-based incidence of community-acquired pneumonia and acute otitis media in children and adults in Ontario and British Columbia using health administrative data, 2005–2018: a Canadian Immunisation Research Network (CIRN) study
Gil-de-Miguel Á. Incidence, mortality, and lethality of hospitalizations for community-acquired pneumonia with comorbid cardiovascular disease in Spain
Cardiovascular complications and short-term mortality risk in community-acquired pneumonia
Cardiovascular events after community-acquired pneumonia: a global perspective with systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies
Acute cardiovascular events in patients with community acquired pneumonia: results from the observational prospective FADOI-ICECAP study
Association between hospitalization for pneumonia and subsequent risk of cardiovascular disease
Risk of cardiovascular events leading to hospitalisation after Streptococcus pneumoniae infection: a retrospective cohort LIFE study
Canadian immunization guide: part 3—vaccination of specific populations—immunization of adults
Vaccination as a new form of cardiovascular prevention: a European Society of Cardiology clinical consensus statement: With the contribution of the European Association of Preventive Cardiology (EAPC), the Association for Acute CardioVascular Care (ACVC), and the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the ESC
Shingrix: a new herpes zoster vaccine
Influenza vaccination in secondary prevention from coronary ischaemic events in coronary artery disease: FLUCAD study
Association of respiratory infections and the impact of vaccinations on cardiovascular diseases
Effects of influenza vaccine on mortality and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Influenza vaccination and cardiovascular events in patients with ischaemic heart disease and heart failure: a meta-analysis
Influenza vaccination after myocardial infarction: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial
Flu vaccination in acute coronary syndromes and planned percutaneous coronary interventions (FLUVACS) study
Influenza vaccination reduces cardiovascular events in patients with acute coronary syndrome
The efficacy of influenza vaccination in reducing cardiovascular events in patients with coronary artery diseases: IVCAD study
Influenza vaccine to reduce adverse vascular events in patients with heart failure: a multinational randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
Influenza vaccination in patients with chronic heart failure: the PARADIGM-HF trial
Influenza vaccination and mortality among adults with heart failure in an integrated healthcare delivery system, 2009–2018
Influenza vaccination and outcome in heart failure
Influenza vaccine and survival in acute heart failure
Influenza vaccination in patients with heart failure: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies
Impact of vaccination on major adverse cardiovascular events in patients with COVID-19 infection
Association between vaccination and acute myocardial infarction and ischemic stroke after COVID-19 infection
Myocarditis after BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine against Covid-19 in Israel
Myocarditis following immunization with mRNA COVID-19 vaccines in members of the US military
Thrombosis and thrombocytopenia after ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccination
Thrombotic thrombocytopenia after ChAdOx1 nCov-19 vaccination
Association of receipt of the Ad26. COV2. S COVID-19 vaccine with presumptive Guillain-Barré syndrome, February-July 2021
Reports of anaphylaxis after receipt of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines in the US—December 14, 2020-January 18, 2021
Respiratory syncytial virus prefusion F protein vaccine in older adults
Safety and immunogenicity of a revaccination with a respiratory syncytial virus prefusion F vaccine in older adults: a phase 2b study
Efficacy and safety of a bivalent RSV prefusion F vaccine in older adults
Efficacy of an adjuvanted herpes zoster subunit vaccine in older adults
Efficacy of the herpes zoster subunit vaccine in adults 70 years of age or older
Association of herpes zoster vaccination and cardiovascular risk in patients with diabetes: long-term insights from a retrospective cohort study
An association between herpes zoster vaccination and stroke reduction among elderly individuals
Effects of herpes zoster vaccination and antiviral treatment on the risk of stroke: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Impact of influenza, herpes zoster, and pneumococcal vaccinations on the incidence of cardiovascular events in subjects aged over 65 years: a systematic review
The protective effect of pneumococcal vaccination on cardiovascular disease in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Prevention of acute myocardial infarction and stroke among elderly persons by dual pneumococcal and influenza vaccination: a prospective cohort study
Association between pneumococcal vaccination and cardiovascular outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies
Prevalence and factors related to COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy and unwillingness in Canada: a systematic review and meta-analysis
A to Z Inventory of Patient Decision Aids
COVID-19 vaccine options
See page 1385 for disclosure information.