Report of the AI Pathology Task Force, Non-clinical Evaluation Expert Committee, Japan Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association: an overview of recent publications about AI pathology
The use of artificial intelligence (AI) in non-clinical pathology is rapidly expanding. In this study, we conducted a literature survey of articles published after 2017 that used AI to analyze the histopathological images of experimental animals. We identified 44 articles that used AI for various purposes, including the detection of abnormal sites, determination and quantification of normal tissues, and classification of normal/abnormal images. AI systems or applications were either custom-built, commercially available, or a combination of both. Rats and mice were mainly used, and the liver was the most frequently analyzed organ. Our findings suggest that AI can be useful in non-clinical pathology and that collaboration between pharmaceutical companies or cooperation with IT experts can be a potential approach to further advance the utilization of AI in this field.

Introduction
Histopathological examination is critical for the safety assessment of drugs and chemicals in toxicological research. Histopathological examination in non-clinical toxicity studies is conducted in accordance with standardized guidelines and recommendations, , . The detection of drug-induced histopathologic changes and the interpretation of lesions based on toxicology not only characterize the adverse and non-adverse effects of drugs and chemicals but also contribute to understanding the causes and estimating their toxic potential in humans. The detection of histologic lesions is an essential skill for personnel to perform histopathological examinations, as oversight of drug-induced changes in toxicological evaluations may cause harmful effects in humans. Therefore, pathologists engaged in toxicity studies play a key role in performing the safety assessment, requiring careful histology slide examination and continuous effort in detection and interpretation. Occasionally, the diagnosis is peer-reviewed by another expert pathologist(s) before finalization. Microscopic observation is time-consuming because pathologists examine a large number of histological slides, most of which lack lesions. Some tissues have incidental lesions, such as age-related or normal backgrounds, which are influenced by species or strains, and recognizing the findings and distinguishing them from drug-induced lesions is a time-consuming process. Therefore, histopathological examination is labor-intensive for both researchers and reviewing pathologists. Reducing the routine and microscopic observation times not only accelerates the drug development timelines of toxicity studies but also provides extra time for pathologists to focus on interpreting toxicologically significant findings.
Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) have influenced various fields, including pathological diagnosis and risk assessment of drugs and chemicals, , . Furthermore, AI is suitable for analyzing large datasets and has advantages in data-rich research fields. Currently, toxicological pathology is gradually shifting from analog to digital methods, such as whole-slide imaging and storage of large image files. Enhancing these digital tools accelerates the management and sharing of histological slides and provides the opportunity to apply AI by analyzing a certain amount of digitalized histological slide images. In these situations, AI applications in the pathology field are widely adopted and may assist pathologists by reducing routine work, allowing them to focus on complicated interpretations and diagnoses.
In 2023, the Japan Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association (JPMA) launched a special task force on AI pathology to explore its potential applications. This review aims to facilitate awareness and application of AI in pathological evaluation within the field of toxicology. In this review, we summarize recent AI-applied histopathology research articles to understand the latest trends in AI utilization and future directions in the field of non-clinical histopathology.

Materials and Methods

Data collection
We reviewed articles published between 2017 and 2023 in which AI was applied to analyze histopathological images of experimental animals, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , . Of these, 32 were cited in previous review articles, and the remainder were identified through additional research conducted by the authors. The search engines utilized included PubMed, Google Scholar, and Scopus. We used keywords such as “artificial intelligence”, “histopathology”, “experimental animals”, “non-clinical”, “deep learning”, “machine learning”, “segmentation”, “classification”, and “image analysis”. Articles were included regardless of their review status. The search was conducted between July and August 2023. The purpose of AI use was categorized for each article. The animal species and organs used in the investigations, origins of the AI models, use of public or original databases, number of images used for AI development, and the first author’s affiliations were also specified and summarized.

Results
This survey identified 44 articles published between 2017 and 2023 that used AI for the histopathological evaluation of experimental animals, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , . The 44 articles are summarized as follows:

Purpose of AI utilization
Purpose of Artificial Intelligence (AI) Construction and Its Proportion in the
Surveyed Literature
(Table 1)
AI has been used for various purposes, including the classification of normal and abnormal images, the determination and quantification of normal tissues, extraction of abnormal sites, presentation of candidate findings, quantitative or semi-quantitative grading of these findings, overall analysis of information other than pathological images, and others (organ/tissue classification). The most common purpose is to extract abnormal sites. Most studies on the extraction of abnormal sites specifically predicted or quantified expected findings in specific tissues using animal models, primarily for pharmacological testing rather than toxicity testing. Typical examples of abnormal site extraction include segmentation and quantification of fibrotic regions in fibrosis models, , , , .
The second most common purpose is the determination and quantification of normal tissues, with typical examples including the determination of testicular stages, ,  and counting of follicles and corpora lutea in the ovaries, , . The evaluation of normal tissues tends to vary among pathologists and can be a tedious process. The Computerized Staging System of Spermatogenesis outperforms both ResNet and pathologists in terms of accuracy. Additionally, the Faster Region-Based Convolutional Neural Network model surpasses ResNet and is believed to outperform human observers in terms of accuracy.
The presentation of candidate findings, quantitative or semi-quantitative grading of these findings, and overall analysis—including information other than pathological images—require complex analysis, resulting in a limited number of articles. Typical examples of these AI applications include the identification of lesions in five key rat organs (the liver, kidney, heart, lung, and brain) and the differentiation of liver necrosis (spontaneous/treatment-related, slight/minimal), which exemplifies the utility of AI in expected toxicity testing.

Animal species in AI model construction
Q How many and what types of animal species were used for AI model construction?
(Q1)
In the construction of AI models, a single species was used in 40 of 44 reports, predominantly in rats and mice. However, there were also cases where larger animals, such as dogs, monkeys, and pigs, were used. In addition, there have been reports of AI models initially built with one species and later adjusted for another species, , , , . In a few cases, AI models have been adapted for human tissues, rather than solely for animal tissues, .

Organ in AI construction
How many and what types of organs/tissues were used for AI model
construction?
(Q2)
Regarding organ usage for constructing AI models, a single organ was used in 41 of the 44 articles reviewed. The liver was the most frequently used organ; however, several studies also used the kidneys, eyes, testes, lungs, ovaries, and bone marrow, demonstrating the diverse application of various organs in AI model construction. Three to eight organs were used in cases where multiple organs were used, except for one article that aimed to classify organ and tissue names. These results suggest that AI models tend to be constructed using specific animal species and organs.

First author’s affiliation
What are the affiliations of the first authors of these literatures?
(Q3)
In the analyzed articles, pharmaceutical companies were most frequently cited as the affiliation of the first author, followed by academic institutions, including hospitals. Interestingly, an IT vendor was the first author in one article and a coauthor in 16 of the 44 articles. Public institutions such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Korea Institute of Toxicology were also included as authors, contributing to nine of the 44 articles. This diversity highlights the active involvement of not only pharmaceutical companies but also IT vendors and public institutions in the field of AI pathology.

Origin of AI model in publications
What is the AI model origin used and its relationship to the affiliation of the
first authors?
(Q4)
AI systems and applications were classified into three groups: in-house developed, commercially available, or a combination of both. “In-house” refers to building a proprietary AI program or integrating a public program into the organization for use without referencing any pre-existing software in the publication. “Commercial” indicates the use of pre-existing software as detailed in the publication. “Combination” describes cases where commercial software was adapted or modified, such as reference No. 45, which is presumed to have used commercial software with custom adjustments. The survey revealed that in-house models accounted for over half of the articles (27 out of 44). Upon re-evaluating the platforms based on the affiliation of the first author, it was observed that pharmaceutical companies tended to use commercial platforms, whereas academics predominantly used in-house development. Of the 16 articles categorized, as commercial, four, , ,  had IT vendors who developed the cited commercial software listed as coauthors. One commercial article out of 16 utilized an open-source freeware AI model as is, whereas the rest utilized proprietary software. Interestingly, 28 of the 44 articles mentioned the name of the company or product of IT vendors, representing 12 distinct IT vendors covering both commercial and in-house models. Notably, all 16 commercial articles used AI to extract abnormal sites.

Data source
What data sources and how many images were used for AI model construction?
(Q5)
For the pathological image data used to construct the AI model, we categorized the images as “In-house” if they were proprietary and/or originated from the author’s affiliated institutions, and as “public” if they were downloaded from public databases (Open TG Gates), . In-house accounted for the majority, comprising 41 of 44 articles. Within the In-house category, some articles collected pathological image data from multiple facilities with different specimen preparation protocols and scanners and examined inter-facility differences, .

Number of images for AI construction
(Q5)
We created a histogram of the number of images used for AI model construction. In principle, we used the number of images employed in this process. In cases where a specific number of images was not specified, we excluded articles, , , , , . Additionally, for both field-of-view and whole-slide images, we used the original number of images before they were converted into patch images. For organs such as the eyes, which have two sides, we counted two images if both sides were used and one image if only one side was used. The most frequent number of images was 100 or fewer. Conversely, five out of the 44 articles analyzed used 1,000 or more images. The purposes of AI usage in these studies were the determination and quantification of normal tissues, organ/tissue name classification, and presentation of candidate findings, indicating that these studies involved more complex analyses.

Discussion
This literature survey revealed the latest trends in AI applications in non-clinical histopathology. The primary purposes of AI utilization are the extraction of abnormal sites and the determination and quantification of normal tissues. Specifically, AI models focusing on identifying and measuring certain lesion areas in disease-specific animal models are widely used. These focused AI models are useful for assessing the efficacy of candidate compounds objectively and quantitatively in pharmacological studies and are easier to build using readily available in-house data. Regarding the determination and quantification of normal tissues, AI models provide accurate and rapid support for pathologists who are classifying structures that are variable, complex, and time-consuming. Because these applications typically include AI models for the testis and ovary, they are expected to be used in both general toxicity studies and reproductive and developmental toxicity studies, , .
The purposes of AI use also showed its potential for meeting the multiple needs identified as expected functions of AI pathology in the survey results. For example, the presentation of candidate findings and the overall analysis, including information other than pathological images, can reduce the burden on pathologists and improve diagnostic accuracy and consistency. Interestingly, there are AI models that not only detect pathological findings in accordance with established guidelines but also explore the toxicological interpretation and understanding of histopathological changes. The use of AI in histopathology for pharmacological and toxicological studies has the potential to contribute to the efficiency and quality improvement of drug development.
Most studies have constructed AI models for a single animal species and organ, often utilizing fewer than 100 images. This finding suggests that building AI models becomes increasingly challenging as the number of animal species and organs increases. Some studies involving multiple animal species or organs have used transfer learning to reduce the workload of model construction, , , .
AI models can be built in-house to meet specific needs or purchased from vendors. Commercial AI models are useful for identifying abnormal regions; however, users often need to build specific models for other purposes. When creating AI models in-house, using transfer learning from previous literature or existing AI models, such as AlexNet or ResNet—both of which are pre-trained on large datasets such as ImageNet—can save time, reduce costs, and minimize technical difficulties. In-house model creation is a common practice in academia. Of the 44 articles reviewed, 28 mentioned IT vendor names or products from 12 different companies. This shows that IT vendors are actively entering the non-clinical pathology field, and new products that better meet pathologists’ needs are anticipated.
Currently, the utility of AI depends on its intended purposes and it can be created by focusing on specific animal species or organs. However, for toxicity and carcinogenicity studies, it is essential to consider multiple organs, findings, and animal species. In this survey, only one article focused on tumorigenic lesions. More complex analyses, such as identifying the organs and tissues name and presenting candidate findings, require more than 1,000 images. This suggests that a larger number of pathological images is required for full-scale implementation in general toxicity and carcinogenicity studies.
Annotation work conducted by pathologists is extensive. In particular, when data from multiple facilities are combined, a peer review of the metadata may be necessary to ensure quality in addition to the annotation work. Therefore, collaborating with pathologists to annotate numerous samples and verify the analysis results is essential for developing AI models that meet specific requirements. To further advance the utilization of AI in toxicological pathology, it would be beneficial for pathologists to collaborate with IT experts, such as IT vendors, as well as with other pathologists.
Of the 44 articles, nine had authors from public institutions, such as the FDA and the Korea Institute of Toxicology, , ,  indicating that national efforts towards the integration of AI in pathology have begun. In Europe, a consortium project called Big Picture has built a large-scale pathological image database for both clinical and non-clinical pathology. In Japan, although the Japanese Society of Pathology has created a digital image database for clinical pathology (JP-AID), there is currently no database for non-clinical pathology. It is believed that creating and sharing a non-clinical pathological image database in Japan is necessary, and collaboration with public institutions may facilitate this effort.
In conclusion, AI pathology is advancing in non-clinical fields and is proving useful in certain applications. It can improve the efficiency and sophistication of detecting histopathological changes in pharmacological and toxicological studies. By using AI pathology, pathologists can focus on interpreting and understanding toxicologically significant findings of drugs and compounds. However, several challenges remain in building and using AI models, including ensuring the quality and quantity of pathological images and metadata and the cooperation of pathologists and IT experts. Addressing these challenges may require efforts at the national level. The JPMA is actively identifying the challenges to implementing AI pathology in non-clinical pathology. By analyzing the current situation and related issues, we aim to facilitate the full implementation of AI pathology in Japan.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization, Literature collection and review, Data analysis, Wrighting review & editing: E.T, S.S., Y.Y., Y.Kangawa., Y.Kagawa., Y.Kato., K.K., A.I, I.M., G.S., M.S.; Writing original draft: E.T, S.S., Y.Y., Y.Kagawa., Y.Kato., K.K.; Supervision: M.S.

Disclosure of Potential Conflict of interest
The authors (Emi Tomikawa, Satoshi Sakai, Yoshinori Yamagiwa, Yumi Kangawa, Yusuke Kagawa, Yuki Kato, Kensuke Kojima, Akira Inomata, Izumi Matsumoto, Gen Sato, and Mutsumi Suzuki) are employees of companies (Toray Industries, Inc., Asahi Kasei Pharma Corporation, Senju Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co., Ltd., Novartis Pharma K.K., Shionogi & Co., Ltd., Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd., FUJIFILM Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd., Sumitomo Pharma Co., Ltd., Eisai Co., Ltd., and Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd., respectively) that are funding the research.

References
Best practices guideline: toxicologic histopathology
Artificial intelligence in diagnostic pathology
Digital pathology and artificial intelligence in translational medicine and clinical practice
Artificial intelligence as the new frontier in chemical risk assessment
Classification of diabetic rat histopathology images using convolutional neural networks
A new lightweight convolutional neural network for radiation-induced liver disease classification
Segmentation algorithm can be used for detecting hepatic fibrosis in SD rat
Computerized spermatogenesis staging (CSS) of mouse testis sections via quantitative histomorphological analysis
Deep learning-based spermatogenic staging assessment for hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections of rat testes
Morphologic features and deep learning-based analysis of canine spermatogenic stages
Region-based convolutional neural nets for localization of glomeruli in trichrome-stained whole kidney sections
A workflow for the performance of the differential ovarian follicle count using deep neuronal networks
Ovarian toxicity assessment in histopathological images using deep learning
High-throughput ovarian follicle counting by an innovative deep learning approach
Microscope-based automated quantification of liver fibrosis in mice using a deep learning algorithm
Implementation and practice of deep learning-based instance segmentation algorithm for quantification of hepatic fibrosis at whole slide level in Sprague-Dawley rats
A fully automated image analysis method to quantify lung fibrosis in the bleomycin-induced rat model
Preparing pathological data to develop an artificial intelligence model in the nonclinical study
Digital image analysis of picrosirius red staining: a robust method for multi-organ fibrosis quantification and characterization
Automated recognition of glomerular lesions in the kidneys of mice by using deep learning
Digital image analysis of heterogeneous tuberculosis pulmonary pathology in non-clinical animal models using deep convolutional neural networks
Artificial intelligence-assisted image analysis of acetaminophen-induced acute hepatic injury in Sprague-Dawley rats
Artificial intelligence in toxicological pathology: quantitative evaluation of compound-induced follicular cell hypertrophy in rat thyroid gland using deep learning models
Proof of concept for a deep learning algorithm for identification and quantification of key microscopic features in the murine model of DSS-induced colitis
Deep learning-based segmentation and quantification in experimental kidney histopathology
Digital image analyses on whole-lung slides in mouse models of acute pneumonia
Quantification of hepatocellular mitoses in a toxicological study in rats using a convolutional neural network
Artificial intelligence-based quantification of epithelial proliferation in mammary glands of rats and oviducts of Göttingen minipigs
Quantitative analysis of histopathological findings using image processing software
Quantification of histopathological findings using a novel image analysis platform
An automated image analysis method to quantify veterinary bone marrow cellularity on H&E sections
Monosodium glutamate-induced mouse model with unique diabetic retinal neuropathy features and artificial intelligence techniques for quantitative evaluation
Deep learning in toxicologic pathology: a new approach to evaluate rodent retinal atrophy
Artificial intelligence in toxicologic pathology: quantitative evaluation of compound-induced hepatocellular hypertrophy in rats
Utilization of a deep learning algorithm for microscope-based fatty vacuole quantification in a fatty liver model in mice
Using deep learning artificial intelligence algorithms to verify N-nitroso-N-methylurea and urethane positive control proliferative changes in Tg-RasH2 mouse carcinogenicity studies
Deep learning-based image-analysis algorithm for classification and quantification of multiple histopathological lesions in rat liver
Screening for bone marrow cellularity changes in cynomolgus macaques in toxicology safety studies using artificial intelligence models
Using artificial intelligence to detect, classify, and objectively score severity of rodent cardiomyopathy
Deep learning-based segmentation of morphologically distinct rat hippocampal reactive astrocytes after trimethyltin exposure
An innovative method for screening and evaluating the degree of diabetic retinopathy and drug treatment based on artificial intelligence algorithms
Deep learning-based detection of endothelial tip cells in the oxygen-induced retinopathy model
Evaluation of the use of single- and multi-magnification convolutional neural networks for the determination and quantitation of lesions in nonclinical pathology studies
Deep learning enables automated scoring of liver fibrosis stages
A weakly supervised deep learning framework for whole slide classification to facilitate digital pathology in animal study
Deep learning enables pathologist-like scoring of NASH models
Biomarker-based classification and localization of renal lesions using learned representations of histology—a machine learning approach to histopathology
HistoNet: a deep learning-based model of normal histology
Deep learning approaches and applications in toxicologic histopathology: current status and future perspectives
Japan Society of Pathology. Japan Society of Pathology Digital Image Database (in Japanese). https://jpaid.jp/.