Dilated cardiomyopathy evaluation with Imagenomics: combining multimodal cardiovascular imaging and genetics
Abstract
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a clinical diagnosis characterized by the presence of left ventricular dilatation and systolic dysfunction unexplained by abnormal loading conditions or coronary artery disease. However, a broad range of phenotypic manifestations, encompassing isolated scar, DCM with preserved ejection fraction, and overt DCM, should be regarded as a diagnostic classification representing a broad spectrum of underlying aetiologies, including both inherited and acquired heart muscle disorders. A multimodal non‐invasive imaging approach is essential for accurate morpho‐functional assessment of cardiac chambers and is key to establish the cardiac phenotype and to rule out an underlying ischaemic aetiology. Furthermore, advanced imaging techniques enable deep cardiovascular phenotyping and non‐invasive tissue characterization. The aim of this review is to propose a systematic approach to the diagnosis of DCM, emphasizing the importance of genetics and clinical findings for a precise and practical clinical approach. Also, we strive to qualify the role of cardiac imaging in the diagnosis of DCM, particularly on the relevance of novel techniques and clinical utility of actionable parameters to improve current diagnostic schemes and risk stratification algorithms. We further elaborate on the role of cardiac imaging to deliver optimal guidance to aetiology‐based therapeutic approaches, verification of treatment response and disease progression monitoring.
Systematic approach to dilated cardiomyopathy diagnosis. Dilated cardiomyopathy is a clinical diagnosis characterized by the presence of left ventricular dilatation and systolic disfunction unexplained by abnormal loading conditions or coronary artery disease. A multimodal non‐invasive imaging approach is essential for accurate morpho‐functional assessment of cardiac chambers and is key to establish the dilated cardiac phenotype and to rule‐out an underlying ischaemic aetiology. Furthermore, advanced imaging techniques enable deep cardiovascular phenotyping and non‐invasive tissue characterization.

Introduction
Dilated cardiomyopathies (DCM) represent a prevalent phenotype within heart failure (HF) populations, manifesting a broad range of underlying causes, encompassing both inherited and acquired disorders. This spectrum includes various aetiologies, ranging from overt DCM to intermediate phenotypes within the DCM spectrum that do not meet definitive diagnostic criteria. Notably, these aetiologies are not mutually exclusive and may coexist, further complicating a strict dichotomous classification. Intermediate phenotypes may present as early arrhythmic disorders without structural diseases, isolated ventricular dilation, and/or hypokinetic non‐dilated cardiomyopathy. While DCM is defined as the presence of left ventricular (LV) dilatation and global or regional systolic dysfunction unexplained solely by abnormal loading conditions or coronary artery disease (CAD), hypertension, valvular heart disease, and ischaemia frequently coexist with the underlying primary myocardial disorder, influencing disease progression and phenotype expression, particularly in genetically predisposed individuals. In recent years, the increased availability of high‐throughput genetic sequencing to both researchers and clinicians has led to greater recognition of the significance of genetic causes in DCM, with simple Mendelian inheritance accounting for between one‐third and half of the cases. Early detection and detailed characterization of DCM are crucial for aetiology‐oriented therapeutic approaches. It is noteworthy that some forms of DCM are associated with poor prognosis even at a stage where there are few or no symptoms and/or only relatively minor cardiac abnormalities. These individuals, alongside those with a pre‐clinical phase where preventive strategies may be most effective, often exhibit imaging findings that fall outside current diagnostic definitions for DCM, emphasizing the need for clinicians to acknowledge potential limitations in conventional diagnostic imaging thresholds. This review delves into the current evidence regarding the role of genetic investigation and the diagnostic role of non‐invasive multimodality imaging techniques in DCM, underscoring the importance of an aetiology‐oriented treatment and prognosis stratification.

Definition
The term DCM, although widely adopted, has carried varying interpretations depending on the context. Initially perceived as an idiopathic condition among cardiomyopathy specialists, the classification of cardiomyopathies has expanded over time to include acquired and systemic causes. Conversely, for HF clinical trialists, DCM is typically categorized into ischaemic and non‐ischaemic subtypes. The term non‐ischaemic cardiomyopathy (NICM), particularly prevalent in North America, serves to differentiate this condition from ischaemic aetiologies and may encompass a spectrum of disease stages, from covert to overt DCM. The European Society of Cardiology (ESC) defines DCM as a heart muscle disease featuring LV dilatation and global or regional systolic dysfunction that are otherwise unexplained by abnormal loading conditions (e.g. hypertension, valvular or congenital heart disease) or coronary artery disease. A more precise echocardiography‐based definition is LV end‐diastolic diameter (LVEDD) or volume (LVEDV) > 2 Z‐score above population mean values, adjusted for body size, sex, and/or age; meanwhile, LV dysfunction is defined by LV ejection fraction (EF) < 50%. In 2016, Pinto et al. proposed a revised definition, acknowledging the spectrum of DCM phenotype observed, considering that a long asymptomatic phase can frequently occur in the disease process, in conditions of normal LVEF and/or sometimes dilated LV cavity dimensions. Right ventricular (RV) dilatation and/or dysfunction may not be present and are not required for diagnosis. No phenotypic expression and fully expressed DCM can show different intermediate categories: isolated left ventricular dilatation (ILVD) without impairment of EF, early arrhythmic abnormalities without structural disease, and hypokinetic non‐dilated cardiomyopathy. In the 2023 ESC guidelines, a new term, non‐dilated left ventricular cardiomyopathy (NDLVC), was introduced, characterized by the presence of non‐ischaemic LV scarring or fatty replacement, regardless of the presence of wall motion abnormalities. For the purposes of this review, the term DCM used henceforth refers to the spectrum of NDLVC and over DCM.

Epidemiology
Reclassifications and evolving definitions of DCM over recent decades have led to variability in data regarding its accurate epidemiology. Although previously perceived as a rare or orphan disease, estimates of DCM incidence, typically manifesting between the third and fourth decades of life, range from 1 in 2500 to 1 in 250 individuals, often exhibiting a male predominance (1.4:1 male‐to‐female ratio). Recent reviews suggest that DCM prevalence may range from 1 in 250 to 1 in 400 individuals within the population. Furthermore, familial DCM represents 30–50% of DCM cases, with approximately 30–40% of these cases attributable to identifiable genetic causes.

The role of genetics
The causes of DCM can be divided into genetic and non‐genetic (Figure  1 ), with the genetic yield of DCM encompassing about 30–40% of the cases and approximately 40% of the genetic causes being linked to rare variants in over 60 genes (Figure  2 ). Various patterns of inheritance have been recognized, including the most common autosomal dominant, as well as X‐linked, autosomal recessive and matrilinear transmission. Also, putative pathogenic variants can be identified in some cases of sporadic DCM. Given the growing importance of genetics in the characterization of patients with DCM, the role of multidisciplinary teaming becomes pivotal. Such a team should include specialists with expertise in genetic testing methodology, variant interpretation, and clinical application, ideally operating within a specialized inherited cardiovascular disease service or a cardiomyopathy service or an equivalent network.
Principal aetiologies of DCM. This figure endeavours to delineate the broad spectrum of aetiologies underlying DCM, primarily categorized into genetic and non‐genetic factors. The understanding of DCM's aetiology and natural progression has significantly advanced in recent decades. Various underlying causes leading to left ventricular dysfunction can ultimately manifest as DCM. BAG3, BAG Cochaperone 3; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; RBM20, RNA binding motif protein 20; TTN, titin gene; VTs, ventricular tachycardias.
Genetic burden of DCM. The genetic contribution to DCM accounts for approximately 30–40% of cases, with around 40% of these cases attributed to rare variants in over 60 genes that these figure aim to summarize. Different inheritance patterns have been identified, ranging from the prevalent autosomal dominant to fewer common patterns, such as X‐linked, autosomal recessive, and matrilinear transmission [adapted from Jordan et al.].

Genetic causes
Genetic testing was previously recommended only if there was a history of at least two affected family members. However, falling costs and greater accessibility have led to this being a class I recommendation where non‐ischaemic DCM is diagnosed. In fact, as expressed in the Expert Consensus Statement on the State of Genetic Testing for Cardiac Diseases, genetic testing is useful in all DCM patients, recommended in patients with the highest yield of pathogenic variant screening and should be considered even in the absence of familial context or associated clinical features (<60 years of age). Even though there are still difficulties related to variants of uncertain significance (VUS), high‐throughput sequencing with targeted sequencing panels of genes is the most cost‐effective approach and recommended technique. VUS are often segregates into the investigated family, presenting significant challenges in interpretation; however, this uncertainty can be mitigated through in silico prediction tools, co‐segregation analysis, high‐throughput in vitro functional validation, and specialized web‐based models that utilize amino acid‐level signal‐to‐noise analysis to aid in differential diagnosis. Collaboration with the Cardiogenetic Team will be key to determine, through consultation with specific databases (e.g. ClinVar, Franklin Genoox, VarSome), whether the specific mutation has undergone reclassification as pathogenic or not. The most widely used classification system of genetic variants is that of the American Council of Medical genetics and Genomics (ACMG) although others (such as the ABC system) exist. While the ACMG classification is a lab‐based classification, clinical interpretation and classification may be different. Clinicians are encouraged to work with the laboratories to provide new information, which may lead to reclassification of the VUS into benign or pathogenic categories. Decision‐making is on benign or pathogenic and not VUSs. The most prevalent variants in autosomal dominant DCM are located within genes encoding for sarcomeric proteins and the nuclear envelope protein lamin A/C. Truncating variants in the TTN (TTNtv) gene are identified in 20–25% of DCM patients. Variants in genes encoding for other sarcomeric proteins [e.g. myosin heavy chain (MYH7), cardiac troponin T (TNNT2), α‐tropomyosin (TPM1), cardiac troponin C (TNNC1), cardiac troponin I (TNNI3)], are considered to be disease‐causing in up to 10% of patients with DCM. For this reason, panels should include validated genes in DCM, with most recurrent genes such as those aforementioned. Also, genetic testing can be oriented by the presence of a particular extra‐cardiac phenotype as for example neuromuscular diseases, mitochondrial diseases, or congenital syndromes. This recommendation for diagnostic genetic testing extends to children at higher risk of DCM due to syndromes associated with cardiomyopathy. Children often present with recessive disease or compound heterozygosity, and certain inborn errors of metabolism, exhibiting aggressive phenotypes and limited treatment options not applicable to adult DCM, such as enzyme replacement therapy in Pompe disease.

Genetic testing: Definitions and timing
Three primary recommendations guide the evaluation of a patient with primary cardiomyopathy: (I) obtaining a comprehensive family history spanning at least three generations; (II) advising clinical screening for cardiomyopathy in at‐risk first‐degree relatives; and (III) referring patients with genetic, familial, or other unexplained forms of cardiomyopathy to expert centers. Consequently, a minimum three generational family tree undergoing genetic testing should be considered, as this offers an opportunity for cascade family screening and preventive measurements that might otherwise be missed. Familial DCM typically follows autosomal dominant inheritance, although recessive and X‐linked inheritance patterns have been documented. The familial risk of DCM among relatives of affected individuals depends on the degree of relationship, being highest in full siblings, but still notable in second‐degree and third‐degree relatives. Diagnostic or confirmatory testing is performed in individuals with suspected cardiomyopathy, while cascade or predictive testing is conducted in clinically unaffected relatives of the proband. Genetic testing holds potential benefits for all patients with DCM, irrespective of age or underlying causes. In cases where probands test negative for genetic variants, echocardiography and ECG screenings are recommended in all first‐degree relatives around the age of 10, with subsequent screenings scheduled every 2–3 years if cardiovascular tests yield normal results, annually if minor abnormalities are detected and every 6 months during periods of rapid growth, such as adolescence. For genotype positive probands, cascade testing is performed, and only genotype‐positive patients will undergo follow‐up. It is important to note that genetic surveillance in children should begin either upon confirmation of genotype positivity through familial cascade testing or at the time of proband's diagnosis if genotype negativity is confirmed or if cascade testing for the child is not pursued or declined. There are currently no definitive indications on when to conclude screening programmes, though a suggested upper age of 65 years has been proposed. Screening intervals may also be adjusted based on the specific course of DCM subtypes. Genetic panels result for cardiomyopathies typically ranges from 4 to 6 weeks, depending on the scope of the panel, the complexity of variant interpretation, and the prioritization protocols of the testing laboratory. Notably, patients with LMNA warrant particular attention due to the propensity for early‐onset atrioventricular block, supraventricular or ventricular arrhythmias, and progressive DCM. Additionally, other genes assume significance in patients without overt DCM phenotypes, including TTNtv, DSP, FLNC, and RNA binding motif protein 20 (RBM20).

Clinical features

Diagnostic work‐up
A systematic approach is essential for the comprehensive evaluation, aetiological determination, management, and prognostication of DCM. Initial assessment requires detailed personal and familial history, age‐specific considerations, physical examination, 12‐lead and Holter‐ECG monitoring, laboratory investigations, and first‐line cardiac imaging. Recognition of ‘red flags’ (Table S1) guides subsequent diagnostic and prognostic steps, prompting advanced assessments including CMR, endomyocardial biopsy (EMB), and genetic analysis. Laboratory assessment include comprehensive blood analyses, thyroid function tests, serological screenings, natriuretic peptides, and novel biomarkers reflecting heart strain, myocyte injury, and oxidative stress. Specialized metabolic testing may be warranted in paediatric cases, evaluating lactate, pyruvate, and metabolic profiles. ECG abnormalities can be noticed in up to 80% of patients with DCM and may offer insights into specific genetic or acquired aetiologies (Figure  3 ). Also, considering that cardiovascular structures adapt to metabolic demands, cardiopulmonary exercise test aids in differentiating physiological from pathological cardiac enlargement. Genetic testing is important for both early disease identification and prognostic stratification, guiding interventions, including ICD therapy in high‐risk individuals harbouring pathogenic variants (e.g. TTNtv, LMNA, and RBM20; Figure  4  and Figures  S2  –  S27 ). Besides, innovative tools, such as the Madrid Genotype Score, improve the efficiency of genetic testing selection, thereby optimizing patient management [https://madriddcmscore.com/]. Figure  S28  describes the cardiac genetic service specialists involved in this management. When non‐invasive techniques fail to establish an aetiological diagnosis, EMB plays a crucial role in identifying myocardial inflammation and infiltrative or storage diseases, thereby guiding targeted therapy and refining prognostic stratification.
ECG red flags and abnormalities in genetic and acquired forms of DCM. ECG constitutes a central investigative modality in the diagnostic work‐up of DCM, alongside personal and family history, age, physical examination, and laboratory parameters. This figure highlights specific electrocardiographic ‘red flags’ that may prove beneficial in the diagnostic direction of DCM. AC, arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy; AF, atrial fibrillation; ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; DES, desmin gene; DMD, dystrophin gene; DSP, desmoplakin gene; EMD, Emery–Dreifuss; FLNC, filamin C gene; LBBB, left bundle branch block; LMNA, lamina A/C gene; PLN, phospholamban gene; RBBB, right bundle branch block; SCN5A, sodium voltage‐gated channel alpha subunit 5; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; TIC, tachycardia‐induced cardiomyopathy.
DCM in patient with permanent pacemaker and LMNA mutation. Permanent pacemaker in DCM with LVEF 45%. CMR shows mid myocardial LGE involving the basal anteroseptal and posterior wall, FDG+, paroxysmal AF. Genetics: LMNA c.381_383delins14 (p.Ile128Glyfs*11). (A) CMR LGE short axis. (B) CMR LGE 3ch. (C) CMR LGE 4ch. (D) CT‐PET active myocardial inflammation involving the basal septum, max SUV 4.7. (E) ECG electronic atrial/ventricular pacemaker (due to complete heart block) with occasional PVC fusion. AF, atrial fibrillation; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; PVC, premature ventricular contraction.

Differential diagnosis
The interplay between genetic predisposition and environmental factors is central to DCM pathogenesis. Given its heterogeneity—encompassing both acquired and genetic aetiologies—rigorous exclusion of secondary causes is essential before diagnosing idiopathic DCM. This includes ruling out ischaemic aetiology, where advanced imaging modalities such as cardiac computed tomography (CCT), nuclear imaging, and cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) are invaluable tools. A registry study of 3023 consecutive CAD patients undergoing contrast‐enhanced CMR for the assessment of ventricular function and scar identified coexisting NICM in one out of six cases, highlighting its under‐recognition. Notably, patients with CAD and concurrent NICM had worse long‐term outcomes compared to those with isolated ischaemic cardiomyopathy. Coincidental NICM in patients with CAD was associated with worse long‐term outcomes, compared to patients manifesting solely ischaemic cardiomyopathy. Additionally, conditions predisposing to DCM must be considered, including arrhythmia‐induced cardiomyopathy (AiCM), peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM), cardiotoxic effects of cancer treatments, myocarditis, iron overload, and exposure to toxins, like alcohol and cocaine. Notably, the presence of alternative causes does not preclude the identification of pathogenic mutations, given the marked genetic and allelic heterogeneity of cardiomyopathies, characterized by incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. Consequently, individuals with putative genetic variants may either develop DCM or remain unaffected throughout their lives, with genetic predisposition contributing to disease manifestation. For instance, TTNtv are associated with alcoholic cardiomyopathy and with worse LVEF in DCM patients who excess alcohol consumption. Early detection of DCM is possible, particularly in asymptomatic individuals, by assessing risk factors such as familial recurrence and uncontrolled cardiovascular risk factors. Detailed evaluation of LV size, diastolic function, and global longitudinal strain (GLS) aids in defining the preventive and therapeutic strategies, facilitating lifestyle modifications or medical interventions that can significantly alter disease trajectory and reduce morbidity and mortality. An expert consensus document proposed by the ESC recommend comprehensive diagnostic criteria for relatives of familial DCM patients, integrating multiple imaging methods and 12‐lead ECG. Specific imaging criteria, including LVEF and LV dilatation, are considered as major criteria, whereas others, as an abnormal regional wall motion in the absence of conduction defects and non‐ischaemic late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) identified by CMR, are considered minor ones (Table  S2 ).

Inflammatory‐mediated myocardial injury
Myocarditis, a differential diagnosis in DCM patients, exhibits a broad clinical spectrum, from meeting revised Pinto criteria to potentially progressing to a DCM‐like phenotype or arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy. While often resolving spontaneously, it poses a significant risk of SCD in young individuals, with inflammation‐induced scarring contributing to extensive LV remodelling. The condition presents in two main forms: acute myocarditis (AM), characterized by a short duration from symptom onset to diagnosis (generally less than 1 month), and chronic inflammatory cardiomyopathy (infl‐CMP), where myocardial inflammation is established alongside DCM or NDLVC. Anamnestic clues, such as recurrent myocarditis or hypersensitivity conditions, subtle electrocardiographic abnormalities (e.g. low voltage or fragmentation of QRS in peripheral leads, minor conduction disturbances, and non‐specific ST‐T abnormalities), low‐grade persistent elevation of troponin, and unresponsiveness to standard HF treatment should prompt investigation for an inflammatory aetiology (Table  S3 ). Notably, the boundary between inflammatory and genetic cardiomyopathy is blurred, as they can coexist: An early pathological series of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) showed lymphocytic myocarditis in almost 2/3 of hearts, and a case series documented patients with acute chest pain, troponin elevations, and imaging typical of myocarditis who were found to have desmoplakin (DSP) cardiomyopathy. Also, a recent clinical report by Peretto et al. regarding the overlap between myocarditis and genetic cardiomyopathies shows that multimodal imaging can help in discriminating specific genotypes and identifying myocardial inflammation, proven using endomyocardial biopsy. An evaluation and management approach incorporating multimodality imaging is crucial for immune‐mediated systemic inflammatory diseases. Early diagnosis and non‐invasive monitoring of cardiac involvement, facilitated by novel technologies, can enhance patient selection, provide surrogate endpoints, and thereby improve clinical outcomes.

Arrhythmia‐induced cardiomyopathy
‘Arrhythmia‐induced cardiomyopathy’ is increasingly replacing ‘tachycardia‐induced or ‐mediated cardiomyopathy’, because of the growing recognition that a tachycardia, atrial fibrillation or PVCs, can induce a sometimes reversible cardiomyopathy. Part of the challenge in assessing morphological phenotypes lies in discerning between AiCM and DCM with arrhythmias as part of the clinical spectrum. AiCM can occur in the setting of AF with rapid ventricular response (RVR), high PVC burden, left bundle branch block (LBBB), and even high premature atrial contraction (PAC) burden. Presentation can vary widely from asymptomatic to decompensated HF. Mechanisms contributing to AiCM include dyssynchrony, altered myocardial blood flow, AV dissociation, sympathetic dysregulation, calcium overload, and impairment of excitation–contraction coupling, resulting in tissue, myocyte, and electrical remodelling. Reversibility is the hallmark of AiCM, distinguishing it from DCM with arrhythmias, and thus suppression of the arrhythmia can help distinguish this. It should be noted that MMI can help identify underlying non‐reversible causes. Additionally, there are some imaging features that may help distinguishing PVC‐mediated cardiomyopathy from DCM with PVCs using imaging features (Table  S4 ).

Role of non‐invasive multimodality imaging
Cardiovascular imaging is key for diagnosis, guiding treatment and monitoring DCM. Its appropriateness depends on presentation urgency, disease stage, symptoms, and screening needs. A multimodal imaging strategy offers comprehensive insights, from detecting preclinical signs to tailoring aetiology‐based therapy (Figure  5 ).
The importance of multimodality cardiovascular imaging for DCM. Multimodal cardiovascular imaging can be used for the diagnosis, as guidance to treatment (e.g. ICD, CRT, LVAD) and for follow‐up of DCM. The appropriateness of use for each technique may be dependent on the mode of presentation, the stage of the DCM, the symptomatic status, and the need to perform a screening. A multimodal imaging approach is key to confer a broader point of view on this condition, from revealing preclinical signs of the disease to the definition of an aetiology‐based therapeutic management. CRT, cardiac resynchronization therapy; CT, computed tomography; HFrEF, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; ICD, implantable cardioverter defibrillator; LGE, late gadolinium enhancement; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PET/SPECT, positron emission tomography/single‐photon emission computed tomography.

Echocardiography
Two‐dimensional (2D) transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) with Doppler is the first‐line imaging method for diagnosing, monitoring, and screening familial cases of DCM, offering comprehensive data on chamber dimensions, systolic and diastolic function, and valvulopathies, in a broadly available, non‐invasive, and cost‐effective manner. DCM is echo‐defined by LVEDD or LVEDV exceeding 2 Z‐score beyond population mean values, corrected for body size, sex, and/or age, with concomitant LV dysfunction defined by LVEF < 50%. A value of predicted LVEDD > 112% (>2SD) is a diagnostic criterion for DCM, and a value > 117% (2SD + 5%) increases specificity. Accurate quantification of LV function is key to guide therapeutic decisions, including ICD, resynchronization therapy, or chemotherapy discontinuation. Despite its variability, the apical biplane method of discs remains the preferred technique for LV volumes and EF assessment, although consideration of alternative methods such as three‐dimensional (3D)‐EF is warranted for more reliable and improved reproducibility. Notably, 3D‐TTE may overcome the limitations related to 2D‐TTE with respect to LV volumes and EF estimates but requires good quality images. DCM typically manifests with diffuse LV hypokinesia, but regional wall motion abnormalities may be present and should be distinguished from CAD‐related wall motion abnormalities. Also, LV eccentric hypertrophy and LV diastolic dysfunction along with secondary mitral regurgitation (MR) may be present as a result of the apical tethering of leaflets, annular dilatation, and/or ventricular dyssynchrony. Early DCM detection is facilitated by tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) and GLS analysis by 2D speckle tracking echocardiography, which is the most commonly studied parameter for the detection of preclinical disease. Abnormal circumferential and radial deformation parameters, as well as abnormal torsion, have also been described in preclinical DCM patients. Differential diagnosis with myocarditis, especially in cases with preserved LVEF, entails recognizing specific echocardiographic findings indicative of AM: increased wall thickness, mild segmental hypokinesia, in particular in the inferior and infero‐lateral walls, diastolic dysfunction, abnormal TDI, mild RV dysfunction, pericardial effusion, pericardial thickening, effuse‐constrictive physiology, and abnormal myocardial echogenicity. Long‐term follow‐up echocardiography aids in prognostic stratification, focusing on the left or right ventricular reverse remodelling, eventual MR, and/or LV restrictive filling pattern improvements. Despite its utility, TTE limitations include image quality issues and tissue characterization deficiencies. Further details on echocardiographic assessment and follow‐up protocols for DCM are available in Table  S5 .

Nuclear imaging
Nuclear imaging techniques are valuable adjuncts in diagnosing DCM, offering insights into myocardial perfusion defects, viability, inducible ischaemia, inflammation, and cardiac innervation through radio‐labelled compounds. Single‐photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) is crucial for excluding ischaemia and providing prognostic information. Positron emission tomography (PET), alone or combined with computed tomography (CT), is a valid but expensive alternative for detecting myocardial ischaemia and evaluating sympathetic nerve terminal activity, offering prognostic value in both ischaemic and non‐ischaemic cardiomyopathy. Nuclear imaging complements other imaging modalities in identifying uncommon DCM aetiologies, including sarcoidosis or amyloidosis. Radionuclide imaging serves a unique role in diagnosing cardiac amyloidosis, with 99mTc‐labelled diphosphonate and pyrophosphate (bone‐avid) compounds demonstrating high sensitivity and specificity, aiding in early ATTR cardiac amyloidosis detection. Radionuclide ventriculography assesses LV function without any geometrical assumptions but suffers from high intra‐ and inter‐observer variability. In the context of AM or infl‐CMP, PET is not standard, but it may be considered for stable patients unable to undergo CMR or those with suspected systemic autoimmune diseases. PET is particularly useful in diagnosing and monitoring cardiac sarcoidosis, revealing hypermetabolic mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes, differentiating sarcoidosis from other autoimmune disease with cardiac involvement (e.g. vasculitis). This technique provides a tool to monitor the progression of damage and its regression in response to immunosuppressive therapy. In this context, 18F‐FDG CT‐PET improves quality in the diagnostic pathway: CMR is commonly done first so that certain pathologies as sarcoidosis can be excluded and, if other abnormalities are encountered, progressing to 18F‐FDG CT‐PET is appropriate. If CMR cannot be performed, direct 18F‐FDG CT‐PET is helpful in suspected cases of infl‐CMP and has a role in surveillance and response assessment to therapy. Serum beta‐hydroxybutyrate levels help assess LV suppression during PET studies. Also, while PET enhances diagnostic pathways, its role in evaluating microvascular dysfunction remains largely investigational, with H2 15O or 13NH3 dipyridamole (or regadenoson) use still mainly confined to research purposes. Various radionuclide tracers are employed for heart pathologies, detailed in Table  S6 , although their direct diagnostic role in DCM is still limited.

Cardiac computed tomography
Cardiac CT (CCT) has emerged as a promising adjunct to CMR for assessing both functional and tissue characteristics, expanding its utility beyond coronary anatomy and plaque phenotyping evaluations. While invasive coronary angiography (ICA) remains the gold standard for DCM patients with intermediate‐to‐high pre‐test CAD probability, CCT serves as a valuable non‐invasive alternative, particularly in subjects with low‐to‐intermediate CAD likelihood or when constrictive pericarditis or congenital anomalies in children and adolescents are suspected. CCT effectively rules out CAD in patients with LV systolic dysfunction, given its high negative predictive value, and ability to detect myocardial inflammation. Emerging techniques like stress perfusion CT and CT‐derived fractional flow reserve (CT‐FFR) offer promising avenues for ischaemia assessment. CCT demonstrates high diagnostic accuracy for severe coronary stenosis identification in patients with reduced LVEF, possibly due to optimal heart rate control and reduced cardiac motion obtained with targeted medical therapy. The ESC recognizes the role of CCT in excluding significant CAD in newly diagnosed DCM patients. Despite its potential, technical limitations hinder CCT non‐coronary application, including (I) non‐negligible radiation dose, (II) contrast medium requirements, and (III) limited post hoc analysis for biventricular volumes and function. Dual‐energy CT and photon‐counting CT represent promising advancements, enabling myocardial fibrosis identification with reduced contrast and improving dose efficiency and spatial resolution, respectively. Further research is warranted to delineate photon‐counting CT role in cardiovascular disease, underscoring the need for ongoing investigation into CCT evolving applications.

Cardiovascular magnetic resonance
The recent advancements in CMR imaging have revolutionized the non‐invasive characterization of cardiomyopathies, establishing it as the reference standard for cardiac morphology, function, and tissue characterization. CMR enables accurate quantification of biventricular parameters, intra‐ and extra‐cardiac flows, detection of myocardial oedema, fibrosis, and intracellular/extracellular substances accumulation (such as fat, iron, and amyloid), offering invaluable insights into disease aetiology and prognosis. It is now a fundamental tool for diagnosing and stratifying patients with LV dysfunction, with contrast‐enhanced CMR reaching class I—level of evidence B recommendation for the initial evaluation of patients with cardiomyopathy. Overcoming limitations of other imaging modalities, CMR is particularly helpful in patients with non‐diagnostic or suboptimal 2D‐echo imaging and should be considered in high‐risk families where DCM diagnosis remains uncertain, significantly influencing patients' management. Despite concerns about gadolinium contrast agents, their safety profile, with negligible risk of complications such as nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, has been affirmed by regulatory authorities. The approval of newer agents, such as gadopiclenol, underscores the continued advancements and safety of CMR imaging in clinical practice. Despite the increasing demand and availability, access to CMR remains geographically variable. Therefore, in such cases, the integration of multiple imaging modalities is pivotal, with echocardiography playing a key role as the first‐line tool.

CMR: Tissue characterization and deep phenotyping
CMR plays a pivotal role in assessing myocardial longitudinal strain and tissue characterization using various sequences, including early gadolinium enhancement, T2‐ and T1‐weighted imaging, or mapping and LGE. Its safety profile, absence of radiation exposure, and ability to provide serial scans in adults and children make CMR the preferred modality for serial scans. The LGE technique is currently the non‐invasive gold standard for identifying and quantifying myocardial scar, aiding in aetiological classification (e.g., ischaemic vs. NICM) and prognostication (Figure  6 ). Ischaemic heart disease typically exhibits subendocardial/transmural LGE in coronary artery vascular territories (ischaemic pattern), whereas non‐ischaemic cases can present with diverse non‐ischaemic LGE patterns (e.g., mid‐wall, sub‐epicardial, or patchy distribution). LGE presence, patterns, and quantification inform risk stratification for malignant VAs and predict LV reverse remodelling (LVRR). Stress perfusion CMR complements LGE, distinguishing ischaemic from NICM with high diagnostic accuracy. Mapping techniques enable myocardial tissue characterization beyond LGE and, together with the assessment of native T1, T2, and T2*, offers insights into tissue properties. Pre‐ (or native) and post‐contrast T1 mapping, coupled with actual or synthetic haematocrit, enables extracellular volume (ECV) quantification. Native T1 mapping and ECV have been employed to quantify cardiac amyloid burden both in ATTR and in AL amyloidosis: without known causes to expand the cardiac interstitium, such as oedema or amyloid deposits, ECV is a valuable biomarker of interstitial fibrosis. T2 short‐tau inversion recovery (STIR) mapping identifies myocardial oedema, indicative of active inflammation, while T2* mapping is a method of choice for the non‐invasive assessment and quantification of cardiac iron. For this reason, T2* values can be useful in DCM differential diagnosis pathway: a T2* value of the myocardium ≤10 ms is associated with severe iron overload, and 98% of thalassemic patients with a T2* in this range developed overt HF at 1‐year follow‐up. CMR is indispensable in detecting cardiac sarcoidosis, characterized by variable patterns of LGE but typically: basal mid‐wall and/or epicardial enhancement, septum and the lateral wall involvement and nodular mid‐wall hyperintense foci on oedema‐sensitive sequences, as well as areas of focal myocardial thickening.
The pivotal connection between genetics and imaging: the role of the LGE. The LGE technique is currently the non‐invasive gold standard for the identification and the quantification of myocardial scar and is used to evaluate replacement fibrosis, providing key information with respect to aetiology and clinical outcome. Here is a summary on the most relevant genetic disorders and their CMR phenotype.

CMR: Inflammation‐related and arrhythmogenic DCM phenotypes
In individuals presenting with de novo DCM, or unexplained VAs, CMR imaging can offer insights into prior myocardial inflammation based on the distribution of LGE. Notably, the presence and localization of mid‐layer septal (mid‐wall strip) LGE, coupled with low baseline LVEF, serve as robust negative prognostic indicators. While oedema often resolves during follow‐up (up to 84% of cases), LGE typically persists in up to 89% of patients. The extent of LGE reflects a dynamic process in AM, with tissue oedema predominating in the acute phase and gradually diminishing over time, while late‐phase LGE primarily reflects post‐inflammatory replacement fibrosis. Additionally, CMR feature‐tracking (FT) strain analysis in ACM patients demonstrated layer‐specific diagnostic utility, particularly with mid‐myocardial global circumferential strain (GCS) and subepicardial GLS providing superior results (Figure  7  and Videos  S1  –  S4 ). Moreover, the presence of LGE serves as a reliable indicator of myocardial disease severity and potential substrate for scar‐related arrhythmias, aiding in risk stratification for VAs/SCD. Novel imaging programmes like inHEART or ADAS (Figure  8  and Figure  S29 ) are increasingly used for guiding ventricular tachycardias (VT) mapping and ablations, as, for example, was demonstrated by Piers et al., where contrast‐enhanced CMR can be used to identify critical isthmus site for VT in ischaemic and non‐ischaemic heart disease. The extent and patterns of LGE also correlate with the risk of VAs/SCD in DCM with specific LGE patterns associated with specific genotypes. CMR thus plays a central role in the genotype–phenotype diagnosis pathway, as described by Augusto et al.: the subepicardial ring‐like scar pattern in DSP/FLNC can be considered as a possible diagnostic criterion for the definition of arrhythmogenic left ventricular cardiomyopathy (ALVC). Early CMR incorporation into the initial diagnostic work‐up of NICM enable both diagnostic accuracy and early prognostic stratification. CMR can be equally repeated during follow‐up assessment, providing valuable data on changes in LV volumes and function. Additional details on diagnostic and prognostic CMR findings in DCM are outlined in Table  S7 , with CMR indicators associated with DCM phenotypes summarized in Table  S8 .
CMR feature‐tracking strain analysis in DCM patient with complete LBBB. (A) LV focused Cine 4Ch‐View strain analysis. (B–D) LV focused Short Axis Cine strain analysis. (E) Long Axis Cine Peak Longitudinal Strain. (F) Short Axis Cine Peak Circumferential Strain. (G) Short Axis Cine LV Strain. CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; LBBB, left bundle branch block; LV, left ventricle.
An inHEART image focus for electroanatomical modelling and ablation planning. LGE is a relatively reliable marker of myocardial disease and a potential substrate for scar‐related arrhythmias. Emerging imaging platforms, such as inHEART or ADAS, are increasingly recognized for their pivotal role in facilitating ventricular tachycardia mapping and ablation procedures guided by CMR. (A) PVC and VT morphologies identified in ablation case. (B) CT and MRI imported on inHEART, transverse section. (C) inHEART 3D reconstructed models showing CT wall thickness (thicker yellow to thinner red) and LGE (blue) on the left ventricle. (D) Electroanatomical map showing ablation sites (red spheres) and merged inHEART model on Carto. CT, computed tomography; LGE, late gadolinium enhancement; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PVC, premature ventricular contraction; VT, ventricular tachycardia.

Prognosis
Despite advancements in DCM treatments, 10‐year survival rates hover around 60%, with frequent HF exacerbations preceding death, underscoring the challenge of individual risk assessment. Notably, emerging evidence underscores the persistence of SCD vulnerability (2–4% annually), and refractory HF necessitating heart transplant or mechanical circulatory support in select patients. Approximately 40% of newly diagnosed DCM cases exhibit LVRR within 2 years under optimal medical therapy, portending favourable long‐term outcomes. These evidences challenge (I) the timing of device implantation following at least 3 months of OMT initiation in newly diagnosed DCM patients and (II) the LVEF threshold (≤35%) for primary prevention ICD implantation in symptomatic DCM patients (NYHA class II and III). While LVEF ≤ 35% alone modestly identifies high‐risk SCD patients, other factors like specific disease‐causing variants (e.g., LMNA, PLN, DSP, FLNC, RBM20) and myocardial scar are crucial in guiding ICD implantation. Progressive LV dilatation independently predicts cardiovascular death and hospitalization, contrasting with reverse remodelling indicative of enhanced survival. Other imaging parameters useful for risk stratification are described in Table  S9 . Additional parameters such as myocardial fibrosis and specific genetic substrate related to an arrhythmic phenotype further refine risk stratification. For instance, Jones et al. demonstrated that advanced LGE characterization in ischaemic heart disease patients, consisting of scar microstructure analysis, quantification of core infarction, and peri‐infarct zone, independently predicts SCD risk beyond conventional predictors. Genotype–phenotype studies revealed the benefit of primary prevention ICD in patients with specific genotypes, even without severe LV dysfunction (Table  S10 ). For example, patients carrying malignant LMNA variants were firstly recognized as a distinct group with a higher SCD risk; therefore, risk assessment for primary ICD implantation in LMNA patients should include calculation of the absolute 5‐year risk of malignant arrhythmias using LMNA‐risk Ventricular Tachyarrhythmias Score [https://lmna‐risk‐vta.fr/]; additionally, in the case of the PLN p.Arg14del variant, there is a variant‐specific risk‐prediction score [https://plnriskcalculator.shinyapps.io/final_shiny/]. However, the efficacy of primary prevention ICD in non‐ischaemic DCM remains contentious, with limited evidence supporting its total mortality reduction compared to ischaemic heart disease. The DANISH Study underscores the need to improve primary prevention ICD recommendations in non‐ischaemic DCM. Comprehensive details on multimodal parameters for ventricular arrhythmias prediction are provided in Table  S11 .

Multimodality imaging tools for risk stratification
LVRR, defined as an increased LVEF > 10% or a LVEF > 50% with a decrease in indexed LVEDD of >10% or indexed LVEDD > 33 mm/m2 at 24 months, emerges as a robust indicator in DCM. Additionally, RV dilatation and dysfunction correlate with worsened functional status and advanced LV failure. GLS shows promise in predicting mortality in symptomatic DCM patients and detecting early ventricular dysfunction in asymptomatic variant carriers. CMR aids in predicting DCM trajectory, with mid‐wall fibrosis evaluated via LGE being particularly impactful for risk stratification. Also, native T1 and ECV fraction reflect interstitial fibrosis degree, offering potential for improved risk assessment. FT myocardial strain analysis obtained from cine imaging emerges as another promising tool for improving DCM risk stratification. RV systolic function assessment via RVEF ≤ 45% measured by CMR enhances risk stratification for all‐cause mortality or cardiac transplantation. Global LV strain parameters showed an additive prognostic value: GLS surpassed standard clinical parameters in prognostication, with GLS and GCS providing additional prognostic insights, even in LVEF ≤ 35%. CMR‐FT, offering fast and reproducible strain assessment, holds promise for routine clinical application. Parametric mapping sequences, evaluating myocardial T1 and T2 relaxation times, as well as ECV, consistently report higher values in DCM patients compared to controls, reflecting diffuse interstitial fibrosis. Higher native T1 values of myocardium independently predict all‐cause mortality and HF events in DCM patients. Further details on overall prognostication and outcomes prediction can be found in Tables  S12  and  S13 .

Future perspectives
The introduction of new‐generation CT scanners, such as dual‐source scanners with wide detectors enabling the entire heart volume to be covered in one beat, offers a promising avenue to overcome previous limitations of CCT. Moreover, new‐generation CT scans are characterized by a reduction in gantry rotation time, enhancing temporal resolution for better end‐systolic/end‐diastolic phase identification. Meanwhile, diffusion tensor CMR emerges as a novel technique enabling in‐depth phenotyping through non‐invasive interrogation of the 3D heart microarchitecture. It assesses cardiomyocyte and sheetlet orientation through helix angle and absolute angulation of the second eigenvector (E2A), respectively. While healthy subjects exhibit diastolic wall‐parallel sheetlet alignment transitioning to wall‐perpendicular in systole, DCM patients show altered systolic conformation and reduced mobility, with E2A reduction suggesting sheetlet orientation abnormalities. Additionally, four‐dimensional (4D) flow CMR is an emerging technology enabling visualization and quantification of intra‐cardiac blood flow, revealing heterogeneous LV haemodynamic forces and diastolic flow routes in DCM patients, potentially serving as subclinical markers of LV dysfunction. Furthermore, the left atrium (LA) has emerged as a significant predictor of cardiovascular events, reflecting LV diastolic filling pressures and contributing to myocardial disease progression. Raafs et al. demonstrated the prognostic value of CMR‐derived LA conduit strain in DCM, highlighting its independent association with SCD, HF hospitalization or life‐threatening arrhythmias, incremental to myocardial fibrosis presence and NYHA class >2. Furthermore, the use of hyperpolarized 13C magnetic resonance imaging, with the analysis of oxidized pyruvate levels, could prove valuable in differentiating metabolic changes during heart failure progression, potentially serving as a starting point for identifying DCM. Similarly, another frontier in personalized diagnosis and therapy lies in the utilization of extracellular‐based liquid biopsy. When combined with CMR, this approach holds promise for analysing cardiac remodelling, from its earliest stages to more advanced phases.

Conclusions
DCM can be considered as a wide clinical entity embodying diverse aetiologies and gene–environment interactions, demanding personalized diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic strategies. Integrated multimodality imaging approach, with CMR as a robust tool for tissue characterization, alongside genetic testing, enhances DCM phenotype evaluation with the aim of advancing increasingly personalized medicine, even as we await the widespread availability of gene‐specific therapies.

Conflict of interest
Nothing to disclose.

Funding
F.R. was supported by the European Union—Next Generation EU, under the National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), Mission 4 Component 2—M4C2, Investment 1.5—Call No. 3277 of 30.12.2021—The Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR), Award Number: ECS00000041, project title: ‘Innovation, digitalisation and sustainability for the diffused economy in Central Italy’, Concession Degree No. 1057 of 23.06.2022 adopted by the Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR). CUP: D73C22000840006.

Supporting information

References
The prevalence and prognostic significance of right ventricular systolic dysfunction in nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Proposal for a revised definition of dilated cardiomyopathy, hypokinetic non‐dilated cardiomyopathy, and its implications for clinical practice: a position statement of the ESC working group on myocardial and pericardial diseases
Diagnosis and management of myocardial involvement in systemic immune‐mediated diseases: a position statement of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Disease
Epidemiology of the inherited cardiomyopathies
2023 ESC guidelines for the management of cardiomyopathies
Cardiomyopathy in children: classification and diagnosis: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association
Epidemiology of dilated cardiomyopathy. A prospective post‐mortem study of 5252 necropsies
Dilated cardiomyopathy: the complexity of a diverse genetic architecture
Genetics and genomics for the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disease: update a scientific statement from the american heart association
The frequency of familial dilated cardiomyopathy in a series of patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
Evidence‐based assessment of genes in dilated cardiomyopathy
Classification of the cardiomyopathies: a position statement from the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases
Genetics of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
Frequency and phenotypes of familial dilated cardiomyopathy
Diagnosis and management of dilated cardiomyopathy: a systematic review of clinical practice guidelines and recommendations
European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA)/Heart Rhythm Society (HRS)/Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS)/Latin American Heart Rhythm Society (LAHRS) expert consensus statement on the state of genetic testing for cardiac diseases
Predicting the development of dilated cardiomyopathy in kindred with genetic risk
DiscoVari: a web‐based precision medicine tool for predicting variant pathogenicity in cardiomyopathy‐ and channelopathy‐associated genes
Stepwise ABC system for classification of any type of genetic variant
Comparison of the ABC and ACMG systems for variant classification
Genetic evaluation of cardiomyopathy—a Heart Failure Society of America practice guideline
Genetic testing for inherited cardiovascular diseases: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association
The clinical utility of pediatric cardiomyopathy genetic testing: from diagnosis to a precision medicine‐based approach to care
Familial dilated cardiomyopathy
Familial risk of dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a national family study in Sweden
Genetic counselling and testing in cardiomyopathies: a position statement of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases
State of the art review on genetics and precision medicine in arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy: the role of genetics, highlighted in a family with filamin C (FLNC) variant
Diagnostic work‐up in cardiomyopathies: bridging the gap between clinical phenotypes and final diagnosis. A position statement from the ESC Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases
ECG characteristics of dilated cardiomyopathy
ECG in dilated cardiomyopathy: specific findings and long‐term prognostic significance
Indexing cardiac volumes for peak oxygen uptake to improve differentiation of physiological and pathological remodeling: from elite athletes to heart failure patients
Clinical risk score to predict pathogenic genotypes in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy
Evolving concepts in dilated cardiomyopathy
Nonischemic or dual cardiomyopathy in patients with coronary artery disease
Early‐onset atrial fibrillation and the prevalence of rare variants in cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia genes
Shared genetic predisposition in peripartum and dilated cardiomyopathies
Genetic etiology for alcohol‐induced cardiac toxicity
Arrhythmia‐induced cardiomyopathy: JACC state‐of‐the‐art review
Evaluation of left ventricular enlargement as a marker of early disease in familial dilated cardiomyopathy
The diagnosis and evaluation of dilated cardiomyopathy
Multimodality imaging in the diagnosis, risk stratification, and management of patients with dilated cardiomyopathies: an expert consensus document from the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging
2024 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on strategies and criteria for the diagnosis and management of myocarditis
Inflammation and immune response in Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy: state‐of‐the‐art review
Incidence, causes, and outcomes of dilated cardiomyopathy in children
Management of acute myocarditis and chronic inflammatory cardiomyopathy: an expert consensus document
Acute and fulminant myocarditis: a pragmatic clinical approach to diagnosis and treatment
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy: dysplasia, dystrophy, or myocarditis?
Multimodal detection and targeting of biopsy‐proven myocardial inflammation in genetic cardiomyopathies: a pilot report
Novel imaging approaches to cardiac manifestations of systemic inflammatory diseases
Arrhythmia‐induced cardiomyopathy
Current diagnostic and treatment strategies for specific dilated cardiomyopathies: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association
Clinical recognition of pure premature ventricular complex‐induced cardiomyopathy at presentation
The role of echocardiography in guiding management in dilated cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy in the era of precision medicine: latest concepts and developments
Recommendations for cardiac chamber quantification by echocardiography in adults: an update from the American Society of Echocardiography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging
Interchangeability in left ventricular ejection fraction measured by echocardiography and cardiovascular magnetic resonance: not a perfect match in the real world
Mitral regurgitation in dilated cardiomyopathy: value of both regional left ventricular contractility and dyssynchrony
Multi‐modality imaging in dilated cardiomyopathy: with a focus on the role of cardiac magnetic resonance
Echocardiographic reference ranges for normal cardiac Doppler data: results from the NORRE study
Echocardiographic reference ranges for normal left ventricular 2D strain: results from the EACVI NORRE study
Head‐to‐head comparison of global longitudinal strain measurements among nine different vendors: the EACVI/ASE inter‐vendor comparison study
Relationships between left ventricular sympathetic innervation and diastolic dysfunction: the role of myocardial innervation/perfusion mismatch
Quantification of coronary flow reserve in patients with ischaemic and non‐ischaemic cardiomyopathy and its association with clinical outcomes
Review of cardiomyopathy imaging
Correspondence of left ventricular ejection fraction determinations from two‐dimensional echocardiography, radionuclide angiography and contrast cineangiography
Myocarditis in systemic lupus erythematosus diagnosed by 18 F‐fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
Cardiac sarcoidosis
Joint SNMMI–ASNC expert consensus document on the role of 18 F‐FDG PET/CT in cardiac sarcoid detection and therapy monitoring
The utility of beta‐hydroxybutyrate in detecting myocardial glucose uptake suppression in patients undergoing inflammatory [18F]‐FDG PET studies
The potential role of cardiac CT in the evaluation of patients with known or suspected cardiomyopathy: from traditional indications to novel clinical applications
Case 13‐2022: a 56‐year‐old man with Myalgias, fever, and bradycardia
Diagnosis of ischemia‐causing coronary stenoses by noninvasive fractional flow reserve computed from coronary computed tomographic angiograms: results from the prospective multicenter DISCOVER‐FLOW (diagnosis of ischemia‐causing stenoses obtained via noninvasive fractional flow reserve) study
Myocardial CT perfusion imaging and SPECT for the diagnosis of coronary artery disease: a head‐to‐head comparison from the CORE320 multicenter diagnostic performance study
2019 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of chronic coronary syndromes
Coronary CT angiography with photon‐counting CT: first‐in‐human results
Spectral photon‐counting CT in cardiovascular imaging
Clinical contributions of 64‐slice computed tomography in the evaluation of cardiomyopathy of unknown origin
Clinical application of CMR in cardiomyopathies: evolving concepts and techniques: a position paper of myocardial and pericardial diseases and cardiac magnetic resonance working groups of Italian society of cardiology
Multimodality imaging and the emerging role of cardiac magnetic resonance in autoimmune myocarditis
Risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis in patients with stage 4 or 5 chronic kidney disease receiving a group II gadolinium‐based contrast agent: a systematic review and meta‐analysis
Challenges and opportunities for early career medical professionals in cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging: a white paper from the Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance
Emerging cardiac imaging modalities for the early detection of cardiotoxicity due to anticancer therapies
Late gadolinium enhancement and the risk for ventricular arrhythmias or sudden death in dilated cardiomyopathy: systematic review and meta‐analysis
Myocardial fibrosis as a key determinant of left ventricular remodeling in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy: a contrast‐enhanced cardiovascular magnetic study
Native T1 mapping in transthyretin amyloidosis
Equilibrium contrast cardiovascular magnetic resonance for the measurement of diffuse myocardial fibrosis: preliminary validation in humans
Cardiac T2* magnetic resonance for prediction of cardiac complications in thalassemia major
Diagnostic and prognostic value of cardiac magnetic resonance in acute myocarditis: a systematic review and meta‐analysis
Prognostic value of cardiac magnetic resonance tissue characterization in risk stratifying patients with suspected myocarditis
Quantitative changes in late gadolinium enhancement at cardiac magnetic resonance in the early phase of acute myocarditis
Layer‐specific strain analysis with cardiac MRI feature tracking in acute myocarditis
COVID‐19 myocardial pathology evaluation in athletes with cardiac magnetic resonance (COMPETE CMR)
Extensive myocardial scarring in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy: implications for management and prognosis
Systematic assessment in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy phenotype
Extrapolation of ventricular activation times from sparse electroanatomical data using graph convolutional neural networks
Myocardial scar predicts monomorphic ventricular tachycardia but not polymorphic ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation in nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Risk stratification of patients with apparently idiopathic premature ventricular contractions: a multicenter international CMR registry
Prognostic value of late gadolinium enhancement for the prediction of cardiovascular outcomes in dilated cardiomyopathy: an international, multi‐institutional study of the MINICOR group
Dilated cardiomyopathy and arrhythmogenic left ventricular cardiomyopathy: a comprehensive genotype‐imaging phenotype study
Long‐term prognostic impact of therapeutic strategies in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy: changing mortality over the last 30 years
Sudden cardiac death risk stratification in patients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
How can optimization of medical treatment avoid unnecessary implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator implantations in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy presenting with “sCD‐HeFT criteria?”
Role of imaging techniques for diagnosis, prognosis and management of heart failure patients: cardiac magnetic resonance
Prevalence and prognostic significance of left ventricular reverse remodeling in dilated cardiomyopathy receiving tailored medical treatment
Association of fibrosis with mortality and sudden cardiac death in patients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Comprehensive phenotypic characterization of late gadolinium enhancement predicts sudden cardiac death in coronary artery disease
Development and validation of a new risk prediction score for life‐threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias in laminopathies
Prediction of ventricular arrhythmia in phospholamban p.Arg14del mutation carriers–reaching the frontiers of individual risk prediction
Non‐ischaemic cardiomyopathy, sudden death and implantable defibrillators: a review and meta‐analysis
Defibrillator implantation in patients with nonischemic systolic heart failure
Prophylactic defibrillator implantation in patients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Primary prevention of sudden cardiac death in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy: the cardiomyopathy trial (CAT)
Right ventricular function in patients with preserved and reduced ejection fraction heart failure
Value of speckle tracking–based deformation analysis in screening relatives of patients with asymptomatic dilated cardiomyopathy
Feature‐tracking global longitudinal strain predicts death in a multicenter population of patients with ischemic and nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy incremental to ejection fraction and late gadolinium enhancement
T1 mapping in dilated cardiomyopathy with cardiac magnetic resonance: quantification of diffuse myocardial fibrosis and comparison with endomyocardial biopsy
Myocardial mechanics in dilated cardiomyopathy: prognostic value of left ventricular torsion and strain
Cardiac MR with late gadolinium enhancement in acute myocarditis with preserved systolic function: ITAMY study
Myocardial tissue characterization using magnetic resonance noncontrast T1 mapping in hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy
T1‐mapping and outcome in nonischemic cardiomyopathy all‐cause mortality and heart failure
Inferring microstructural features and the physiological state of tissues from diffusion‐weighted images
Assessment of left ventricular hemodynamic forces in healthy subjects and patients with dilated cardiomyopathy using 4D flow MRI
Left atrial strain has superior prognostic value to ventricular function and delayed‐enhancement in dilated cardiomyopathy
Methodological challenges in utilizing miRNAs as circulating biomarkers
Hyperpolarized 13C magnetic resonance reveals early‐ and late‐onset changes to in vivo pyruvate metabolism in the failing heart
Assessment of real‐time myocardial uptake and enzymatic conversion of hyperpolarized [1‐13C]pyruvate in pigs using slice selective magnetic resonance spectroscopy
Extracellular vesicles in diagnostics and therapy of the ischaemic heart: position paper from the Working Group on Cellular Biology of the Heart of the European Society of Cardiology
Applications of gene therapy in cardiomyopathies