Health action process approach in oral health behaviour: Target interventions, constructs and groups—A systematic review
Abstract
Objective
The aim of this study was to systematically map the Health Action Process Approach (HAPA)‐based interventions in dentistry in relation to the type of intervention, the target groups and the constructs of the HAPA model that are used in the study and to assess the clinical relevance of the studies.
Methods
A search in the databases of the National Library of Medicine (MEDLINE‐PubMed), PsychINFO and Cochrane‐CENTRAL was conducted. A quality assessment to estimate the risk of bias and a qualitative descriptive analysis were performed. The overall gathered evidence was graded.
Results
Ten randomized controlled trials and three observational studies thus in total 13 studies were included. Flossing was the targeted behaviour in ten studies. The target groups consisted of students, adolescents and dental patients. Overall, all nine HAPA constructs were used, but only one study used all HAPA constructs. Six studies presented the used behavioural change techniques according to the BCT taxonomy. Based on the number of the used constructs, only two studies were classified as HAPA intervention studies. The most frequently used constructs were action control as an intervention and behaviour as an outcome measure. The overall evidence was graded with moderate certainty.
Conclusion
In the majority of the studies, the targeted intervention was flossing and the population consisted of students, adolescents and dental patients. All studies used only a selection of the HAPA constructs. Therefore, only a minority of the studies can be considered real HAPA intervention studies.

INTRODUCTION
In dentistry, dental caries and periodontal disease are the most common diseases, according to the World Health Organization. An indispensable factor to reduce the development and progression of dental caries and periodontal diseases is controlling the dental plaque on the tooth surface through proper oral hygiene. Proper, self‐performed oral hygiene includes efficient twice‐daily tooth brushing with a fluoride‐containing toothpaste complemented by efficient interdental cleaning for at‐risk individuals. The patient's knowledge of how and why to maintain oral health as well as understanding the initiation and progression of dental caries and periodontal diseases is an essential factor to comply to preventive strategies to improve oral health. Nevertheless, this knowledge does not necessary lead to active performance of desired behaviour. Dental care professionals (DCPs) should be able to provide knowledge, individual instruction and coaching to practice proper dental plaque control, to use fluoride and to reduce sugar intake. This enables patients to learn adequate oral hygiene skills from a DCP. Studies have proven that oral hygiene instructions are more effective if they are supplemented with motivational approaches.
Applying new or adjusted oral hygiene skills often requires a behavioural change, which can be difficult to achieve since patients may need to adjust their daily routines. For the change to be successful, first, an intention to change is necessary, and second, this intention must be translated into active performance of the new behaviour. Often, the behavioural change is not immediate but needs time and active repetition to be internalized and to become routine behaviour. To establish behavioural change in oral health education, a variety of theories and models have been used.
One of the promising models is the Health Action Process Approach (HAPA), which is aimed to overcome the ‘intention‐behaviour gap’. It consists of two phases: the motivational phase (pre‐intentional phase) in which an intention to change behaviour is formed and the volition phase (post‐intentional phase) in which the patient is supported by a healthcare professional to implement and maintain the intended behaviour. In the two phases of HAPA, being the motivational phase and the volitional phase, several constructs can be identified. The motivation phase comprises three social cognitive constructs that form the behavioural intention: ‘action self‐efficacy’ (people assess their belief in themselves to perform the behavioural change), ‘outcome expectancies’ (people consider which results to expect from the behavioural change) and ‘risk perceptions’ (people consider any negative consequences of the current behaviour). The volitional phase comprises four constructs: ‘action planning’ (people make detailed plans on ‘when, where and how’ they will implement the change), ‘coping planning’ (people consider possible barriers and plan how to anticipate these events), ‘coping self‐efficacy’ and ‘recovery self‐efficacy’ (people assess their own abilities to maintain or restart the new behaviour if a relapse occurs). The outcome of the HAPA model is a health behaviour. In oral health, behaviour is often also part of the intervention. For instance, 2 min of tooth brushing twice‐daily is the outcome behaviour, but training this behaviour is also an essential part of the intervention. This complexity indicates an urgent need to clearly define behaviour as an outcome of health or as a training behaviour as a part of the intervention.
The HAPA model has been used in several dentistry studies. A systematic overview of the application of the HAPA model in dentistry has not yet been published. The aim of this study is to systematically review the HAPA‐based studies in dentistry regarding the interventions (i.e. targeted oral health behaviours), the targeted group and the social cognitive constructs of the HAPA model used to change oral health behaviour or used as outcome measurements as well as to assess the clinical relevance of these studies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
This systematic review was prepared in accordance with the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions  and in line with the ‘Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses: the PRISMA statement' (PRISMA), ‘Meta‐analysis of Observational Studies in Epidemiology’ (MOOSE) and the ‘Synthesis without Meta‐Analysis’ (SWiM) reporting guidelines. The study protocol was approved by the ethics commission of the Academic Centre for Dentistry in Amsterdam (ACTA) for systematic reviews; the protocol number is 2021‐1‐4‐375. The researched protocol was registered at the international prospective register of systematic reviews (PROSPERO) under code CRD42022307982.

Focussed question
In dentistry, in order to change oral health behaviour what are the HAPA‐based target groups, what are the interventions and which constructs of the HAPA model are used?
The domain, determinant and outcome (DDO) strategy was used: studies in dentistry that used the HAPA model for an intervention (domain), by the use of the HAPA constructs, the group of participants as well as the targeted oral health behaviour (determinant) on the change oral health behaviour (outcomes).

Eligibility criteria
Randomized clinical trial or observational study
Within dentistry (intervention or outcome measurement)
Participants were humans of all ages
Participants were a group
Intervention was a HAPA‐based instruction focussed on oral health behaviour with at least one social cognitive construct of the HAPA model
Outcome measurements were clinical oral health parameters, self‐reported behaviour or at least one social cognitive construct of the HAPA model
English‐language studies were eligible for inclusion if they met the following criteria:

Search and selection strategy
A structured search was conducted in three electronic databases (the National Library of Medicine [MEDLINE‐PubMed], PsychINFO and Cochrane CENTRAL) from the study's inception through June 2022 to retrieve appropriate papers that answered the focussed question. Additionally, hand searching was conducted to screen the reference list of included studies. For details regarding the search terms, see Table 1. The retrieved studies were uploaded into Rayyan software to check for duplicates and to screen and select the studies. The titles and abstracts were screened for inclusion criteria by two independent reviewers (ML and KvN). Titles and abstracts were categorized as ‘definitely eligible’, ‘definitely not eligible’ or ‘questionable’. If the abstract did not contain sufficient information to determine inclusion or exclusion, then the article or methodology was read in full. After the individual screening process, the search was unblinded and conflicts that were identified by Rayyan were resolved by two reviewers (ML and KvN), who discussed the studies. Full texts were retrieved and screened for suitability. After reading the full‐text papers, two reviewers (ML and KvN) discussed the eligibility of the studies based on the selection criteria. When the discussions on search and selection were inconclusive, a third independent reviewer (CvL) settled the disagreements. The studies that met all inclusion criteria were processed for data extraction.
Search string
((Schwarzer) OR ((HAPA) OR ([health action process approach]))) AND (((dentistry[MeSH Terms]) OR (dental)) OR (dent*)).
Note: The asterisk (*) was used as a truncation symbol.

Assessment of heterogeneity
Clinical heterogeneity was assessed for the diversity of the participants, the interventions (targeted oral health behaviour) and the social cognitive constructs used as outcome measurements. The methodological heterogeneity was assessed for the study designs, the social cognitive constructs used as interventions and the durations of the studies.

Data extraction analysis
Data from the papers that fulfilled all of the inclusion criteria were extracted in specially designed forms by two reviewers (ML and KvN). Additional disagreements were resolved by discussion to reach consensus. When these discussions were inconclusive, a third independent reviewer (CvL) settled the disagreements. Data were collected regarding the study design (publication year, study type, study duration, study setting and country), intervention (targeted oral health behaviour, control group and HAPA constructs), population characteristics (oral disease, sample size, gender and age), outcome characteristics (clinical parameters, self‐reported behaviour and HAPA constructs) and authors' conclusions. The outcome measurement behaviour was defined as the oral health behaviour performance in participants' daily lives, such as brushing and flossing. Additional data extraction included further outcome measurements and details regarding intervention delivery and identification of outcomes, as well as behavioural change techniques (BCTs) used. BCTs are defined as ‘an observable, replicable, and irreducible component of an intervention designed to alter or redirect causal processes that regulate behaviour; that is, a technique is proposed to be an “active ingredient” (e.g. feedback, self‐monitoring and reinforcement)’.. If confusion regarding data existed, then authors were contacted to request additional information.

Strategy for quality and risk‐of‐bias assessments
The methodological qualities of the studies were scored using the quality assessment from the Cochrane Handbook and following the judgements of the algorithms. To assess the risk of bias in randomized controlled trial (RCT) studies, the RoB2 tool was used, and for the observational studies, the ROBINS‐I tool was used. These evaluations were performed independently by two of the three reviewers (ML, KvN and CvL) with the focus on the effect of assignment to the intervention at baseline. After the assessment, the two reviewers discussed their findings to reach agreements regarding conflicting assessments. The third reviewer was consulted when conflicts were not resolved.

Data synthesis
A quantitative data analysis was conducted based on the total number of occurrences, using a form that was specially designed for this purpose. The target group, target intervention and HAPA constructs were analysed quantitatively. A summary was performed to determine the percentage by which HAPA constructs were included separately for the interventions and the outcomes. An additional analysis was performed to determine whether a study could be considered a real HAPA study, based on Schwarzer and Hamilton's requirement of the presence of self‐efficacy and planning in the intervention as well as intention and behaviour as outcome measurements. A descriptive qualitative data analysis was planned as a meta‐analysis does not suit the research question addressed.

Grading the quality of evidence
A modified method of grading, based on the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) criteria, was used to rank the overall quality of evidence. Two reviewers (ML and KvN) rated the following aspects: risk of bias, inconsistency of results, indirectness of evidence, imprecision of data and publication bias regarding the different outcomes. Any disagreement between the reviewers was resolved after discussing their findings, and a third reviewer (DES) was consulted when necessary. The overall body of evidence is presented in Table 5.

RESULTS

Study selection
The search revealed, after removing duplicates, 267 unique studies (Figure 1). First, 16 studies were selected for full‐text eligibility screening, whereafter seven studies were excluded, of which three studies were not an intervention study and four studies did not use any HAPA construct in the intervention. Consequently, 9 studies were preliminary included in this review (I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, XI and XII). After screening the reference lists of the included studies, four additional studies could be included (VIII, IX, X and XIII). Consequently, the final selection included 13 studies presenting 14 intervention groups, as Study VI presented two intervention groups. Table 2 presents an overview of the included studies and Table S2 presents an overview of the excluded studies.
Overview of the selection procedure of the articles
Characteristics of the included studies
Author, year; Design; Duration of the study; Risk of bias (for details, see Table S4 and S5)	Study setting, country; Group characteristics; N, gender (F/M); Age: Mean (SD) years, range	Targeted behaviour; Intervention	HAPA constructsa used in the intervention, per phase (for details, see Table S3 and S7)	Control	HAPA constructsa as outcome measures, (for details see Table S3 and S7) Other outcome measures	Conclusion of the original Authors	 	I30Lhakhang et al. (2016)RCT3weeksRoB: Some concerns	Dental college and hospitals, IndiaPatients >18 years clinically diagnosed with periodontal diseaseN = 112 F/M: NIAgeb: 27.1Range: NIGroup intervention:N = 55, F/M = 34/21Age: 31.6 (14.1)Range: NIGroup control:N = 58, F/M = 42/16Age: 22.8 (9.8)Range: NI	Dental flossingIntervention package with self‐management cues and incentives (free dental care)	Motivational phase: aSEVolitional phase:AP, ACBCT's:♦1.1; 1.4; 2.3; 4.1; 5.1; 5.7; 15.1♦All BCTs were not in the article but given by author upon request	Questionnaire only	Self‐reported questionnaire:BEH, INT, aSEc, cSEc	Sign increase in flossingIndirect effect on flossing via self‐efficacy and intentionThe effect on flossing was higher in women than in men	 	II31Scheerman et al. (2020)Cluster RCT3‐arm: 1:1:16 months (1& 6 months after baseline)RoB: Some concerns	30 high schools, IranAdolescentsN = 791, F/M = 332/45Age: 15.5 (1.3)Range: 12–17Group intervention:Group A: adolescentsN = 253 F/M:101/152Age:15.2 (1.0)Range: NIGroup controlPositive controlAdolescents & motherN = 260, F/M:112/148Age:15.3 (1.6)Range: NINegative controlN = 278, F/M:119/159Age: 15.4 (1.3)Range: NI	Tooth brushingGroup AOnline platform to deliver information, making plans, register behaviour and sending reinforcements	Motivational phase:OE, RPVolitional phase:AP, CP, ACBCT: NI	1.A&M: Same as group A + online platform to coach mothers to encourage their child2. Questionnaire only	Self‐reported questionnaire:BEH, INT, OE, RP, aSEAP, CP, ACdPerceived social support, OHRQoLClinical examination by two trained dental professionals:Parameters for dental plaque and periodontal disease	Short‐ and long‐term effects on outcome measures in the intervention groups.Online social media platform involving mothers, in addition to adolescents, further improve the effectiveness of tooth brushing	 	III32Gholami et al. (2015)Cluster RCT4weeksRoB: Some concerns	Schools, IranGirls attending grade 5–8N = 166, F/M:100/0Age: 12.5 (1.1)Range:11–15Group intervention (N = 69)Age & range: NIGroup control (N = 97)Age & range: NI	Dental flossingIntervention package, with exercising flossing and planning	Motivational phase:aSEVolitional phase:AP, CPBCT:6.2, 1.4,15.4,1.2	Questionnaire only	Self‐reported questionnaire:BEH, INT, aSEcAP, CP	Increase in dental flossing in the intervention group.Intention and self‐efficacy mediate between the intervention and dental flossing	 	IV33Lhakhang et al. (2015)ClusterCross‐over RCTSequential34 (17+17) daysRoB: Low	Student's residence, IndiaUniversity studentsN = 205, F/M: 106/99Age: 20.7 (1.59)Range: 18–26 yearsGroup sequence 1N = 94, F/M = 49/45Age:19.8 (1.3)Range: NIGroup sequence 2N = 111, F/M = 57/54Age: 21.5 (1.4)Range: NI	Dental flossingMotivational intervention package with outcome perspectives and goal setting+Self‐regulatory intervention package with planning in monitoring behaviour	Motivational phase:INT, OE, RP, aSEVolitional phase:cSE, AP, CP, ACBCT:1,2,4,5,8,10,11	Self‐regulatory + motivational intervention	Self‐reported questionnaire:BEH, aSEc,ecSEc, APf, CPf, AC	Both sequences increased dental flossing behaviour, ‘self‐efficacy’, ‘action control’The increase is higher in the group that received SR‐MI than in the group that received MI‐SROnly motivational intervention is not enough, a combination with self‐regulation is better	 	V34Zhou et al. (2015)RCT1 monthRoB: Some concerns	University, ChinaUniversity studentsN = 215 (N = 284, F/Mb: 37/178minus n = 69 drop out)Age: NIRange: 18–29 yearsGroup: self‐regulation (incl. educational)N = 127Age & range: NIGroup: educationalN = 88Age & Range: NI	Dental flossingEducational intervention package with outcome perspectives and goal setting+Self‐regulatory intervention with planning and monitoring	Motivational phase:INT, OE, RPVolitional phase:AP, CP, ACBCT's:1.1, 1.2,1,4,2.3, 4.1,5.1	Educational intervention with outcome perspectives and goal setting	Self‐reported questionnaire:BEH, aSEeAPf, CPf, AC	Increase in oral self‐care in the self‐regulation group with higher levels of planning and AC than in the educational group	 	VI35Schwarzer et al. (2015)RCT3 arm1:1:0,53 weeksRoB: Some concerns	University, PolandUniversity studentsN = 287, F/M = 183/104Age: 21.4 (1.6)Range: 19–26 yearsGroup interventionN = 106Age & range: NIGroup controlN = 114Age & range: NIGroup questionnaire onlyN = 67Age & range: NI	Dental flossingIntervention package with information planning and monitoring	Motivational phase:OE, RP, aSEVolitional phase:cSE, AP, CP, ACBCT:1.4, 2.3,15	1.Intervention package with information and outcome perspectives2. Questionnaire only	BEHcSE, ACd	A short intervention can change the mindset of the participants. The interval was too short for a change is the floss frequentation	 	VII36Wu et al. (2022)RCT12 weeksRoB Some concerns	Orthodontic department of Stomatological university hospital, ChinaAdults 17–29 years with fixed orthodontic appliancesN = 44Age:17–44, range: 18–29Group interventionN = 22, F/M:12/10Range: 18–29Group ControlN = 22, F/M:11/11Range: 18–28	Oral hygiene behaviour(Primary: brushing, using mouthwash and dental floss. Secondary: interdental brushes, oral irrigator or dental floss in combination and mouthwash)Online mini‐program positive reinforcement using photographs and personalised notification	Motivational phase:Volitional phase: ACd	Questionnaire only	Self‐reported questionnaire:BEH, OE, RP, INT, aSE, cSEh, AP, CP, ACSocial influencesClinical examination by two trained and calibrated clinical examiners:Parameters for dental plaque and periodontal disease	In both groups, the dental plaque reduced. The mini‐program, more than care as usual, reduced dental plaque and increased OE, AC and social influences	 	VIII39Scheerman et al. (2020)2RCT12weeksRoB: Some concerns	Orthodontic clinics, the NetherlandsAdolescents 12–16 years with fixed orthodontic appliancesN = 132, F/M:73/59Age: NI, Range: NIGroup interventionN = 67, F/M:41/26Age:13.2 (1.0)Range: NIGroup controlN = 65, F/m:32/33Age:13.5 (1,0)Range: NI	Oral health performanceApp using selfies and positive reinforcements	Motivational phase:INTVolitional phase: AP, CP, ACBCT: i	Questionnaire only	Self‐reported questionnaire:OE, RP, aSE, INT, cSEh,j, AP,CP,AC, BEHClinical examination by two trained and calibrated clinical examiners:Parameters for dental plaque and periodontal disease	The White Teeth app was associated with significant reduction in gingival bleeding at 6wks and dental plaque at 12 weeks. Although the app was not effective in changing tooth brushing frequency and duration, the decrease in dental plaque reflects a change in brushing pattern. At both follow‐ups, the app was also effective in changing CP regarding tooth brushing	 	IX40Pakpour et al. (2016)Cluster RCT6 monthsRoB: High	48 secondary schools, Iran,AdolescentsN = 1158, FRange: NI	Tooth brushingTraining tooth brushing and using calendarImplementation group: planning if‐then format	Motivational phase:Volitional phase: AP, AC	General planning: planning when, where, after what	Self‐reported questionnaire:BEH, INT, AP, ACdPerceived behavioural controlQoLClinical examination by two trained dentists:Parameters for dental plaque and periodontal disease	Although planning and implementation intention are effective in increasing the target behaviour (compared to active control), additional intervention components might be needed in order to achieve the recommended level of behaviour performance.Implementation intervention (if‐then format) is more effective than general planning	 	X41Schüz et al. (2009)1RCT8 weeksBoB:High	University, GermanyVisitors at open day university, >18 yearsN = 194, F/M:132/62Age: 33.6 (13.5)Range: 18–71	Dental flossingTraining behaviour and dental floss samples.Making action plans	Motivational phase:Volitional phase: AP	Questionnaire and dental floss samples	Self‐reported questionnaire:BEHAcceptance (adherence)Mindset	Action planning improved dental flossing compared with only flossing instructions and dental floss samples.The effects of planning are stronger in individuals with an implemental mindset (compared with deliberative mindset)	 	XI37Schüz et al. (2007)observational6 weeksRoB: Serious	University, GermanyUndergraduate psychology and educational science studentsN = 151, F/M:122/29Age: 25.2 (7.0)Range: NI	Dental flossingIntervention package with training behaviour and monitoring	Motivational phase:Volitional phase:AC	NA	Self‐reported questionnaire:BEH, INTACgBehavioural stageBEH: Amount of unused dental floss	Changes in action control enhance flossing behaviour in volitional participants. These changes, intentions and behavioural stage at T1 are predictors of Time 3 flossing	 	XII38Araújo et al. (2020)Observational4 months (2 weeks & 4months)RoB: Serious	Two private dental clinics, PortugalPatients >18 years, ≥20 teeth, ≥5 teeth per quadrant, with gingivitisN = 201, F/M: 114/87Age: 38.6 (12.5)Range: 18–75 years	Dental flossing or using interdental brushesTraining behaviour	Motivational phase:INT	NA	Self‐reported questionnaire:BEH = brushing, BEH = flossing, aSE, INT, cSEh,j, CP, AC	Intention alone was not sufficient to predict oral health behaviours.Intention proved to be a predictor for coping planning and action control	 	XIII42Suresh et al. (2012)Observational4 weeksRoB: Serious	Dental clinic, IraqDental patients, >18 years, with at least 20 standing teethN = 53Motivational stageN = 21, F/M:13/18Age:32.7 (8.1)Range: NIVolitional stageN = 32, F/M:20/22Age:34.4 (6.3)Range: NI	Dental flossingDental flossing calendarTraining behaviour	Motivational phase:Volitional phase: AC	NA	Self‐reported questionnaire:BEHBehavioural stageClinical examinationsParameters for dental plaque and periodontal diseaseResidual floss	A simple self‐monitoring intervention improves dental flossing and reduced plaque and bleeding scores, regardless of the behavioural stage of change
Abbreviations: AC, action control; AP, action planning; aSE, action self‐efficacy; BCT, Behavioural change technique17 (BCT); BEH, behaviour; CP, coping planning; cSE, coping self‐efficacy; F, female; HAPA, health action process approach; INT, Intention; M, male; NA, Not applicable; NI, unknown/unclear; OE, outcome expectancies; OHRQoL, oral health related quality of life; RP, risk perception.
HAPA constructs defined by the authors of this review.
Calculated by the authors of this review.
Defined by the original author as ‘self‐ efficacy’.
Defined by the original author as ‘self‐monitoring’.
Defined by the original author as ‘task self‐efficacy’.
Defined by the original author as ‘planning’.
Defined by the original authors as items on ‘self‐monitoring’, ‘awareness of standards’ and ‘self‐regulation’.
Defined by the original authors as ‘maintaining self‐efficacy’.
Providing information on oral health consequences and demonstrating the desired behaviour, goal setting, implementation intentions, behavioural goal reminders, self‐monitoring of behaviour, practical support, self‐monitoring of behavioural outcomes, coping planning.
Defined by the original authors as ‘recovery self‐efficacy’.

Heterogeneity

Study characteristics
The designs of the included studies were RCT (n = 10, I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX and X) and observational (n = 3, XI, XII and XIII). It comprises details on the study design, participant demographics and HAPA constructs and authors conclusions. An overview of the questions sent to authors to request additional information is presented in Online Supplementary Table S1.

Methods of outcome measurements
All studies used questionnaires with Likert scale answering options to measure the HAPA constructs and open‐ended questions to measure the targeted oral health behaviour (e.g. ‘During the last week, I have flossed my teeth… times per day’). These 13 studies used eight differently framed open‐ended questions regarding the targeted oral health behaviour. Likewise, the questions used to measure the HAPA constructs differed between the studies in the number of questions per construct (from one to seven items), the range of the Likert scales (4‐ to 7‐point scales) and the formulation and sentence structures, for details see Table S3. In nine studies, details regarding the origin of the questions were included (II, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI and XII), and nine studies (II, III, V, VI, VIII, IX, X, XI and XII) mentioned the validity of some of the questions they used. Five studies (II, VII, VIII, IX and XIII) used clinical parameters to assess behaviour.

Risk‐of‐bias assessments
The results of the risk‐of‐bias analysis are presented in Table 2 (for details, see Table S4 for RCTs and Table S5 for observational studies). Overall, one RCT study had a low risk of bias (IV), seven RCT studies had some concerns (I, II, III, V, VI, VII and VIII), and two RCTs had high risk of bias (IX and X). The three observational studies (XI, XII and XIII) had a serious risk of bias.

Study outcome results

The intervention: Targeted oral health behaviour
Overall, eight studies targeted only dental flossing as the oral health behaviour (I, III, IV, V, VI, X, XI and XIII). Two studies concentrated on tooth brushing (II and IX), one study focussed on tooth brushing or dental flossing (XII), one study focussed on tooth brushing, using a mouth wash and using floss, interdental brushes or an oral irrigator (VII), and one study centred on non‐specified oral hygiene measures (VIII). See Table 2 for more details.

The target groups
The participants were non‐dental students recruited at universities (IV, V, VI and XI), adolescents recruited at high schools (II, III and IX), adolescents recruited at orthodontic clinics (VII, and VIII), and patients recruited at dental practices (I, XII and XIII) and visitors at an open day at a university (X). In some studies, the patients were diagnosed with periodontal disease (I) or gingivitis (XII); see Table 2.

The HAPA constructs as interventions and outcome measurements
The studies used a variety of HAPA constructs in their interventions as well as outcome measurements. The number of HAPA constructs used ranged from one to nine. One of the studies included all nine constructs from the HAPA model in the intervention. The reasons for using a set of specific HAPA constructs could be retrieved from the rationale for each study.
Action control (n = 10; I, II, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, XI and XIII) was the most frequently used construct in the intervention. Action planning was used in nine studies (I, II, III, IV, V, VIII VIII, IX and X), and coping planning was used in six studies (II, III, IV, V, VI and VIII). Four studies (I, III, IV and VI) used action self‐efficacy, and two studies (IV and VI) used coping self‐efficacy. Four studies used intention (IV, V, VIII and XII). Four studies (II, IV, V and VI) used outcome expectancies and risk perceptions in one of their intervention groups. Six studies (I, III, IV, V, VI and VIII) presented BCTs to formulate the behavioural change technique they used in their intervention. An overview of the HAPA constructs and BCTs used in the interventions is presented in Table 3. An overview of the BCTs per construct is presented in Table S6.
Overview of the HAPA constructs used in the intervention
Motivational phase	Volitional phase	 		Study/Construct	Intervention groups	INT	OE	RP	aSE	cSE	AP	CP	AC	Original Authors	BCT	Total	Includes SE and Planning	 	I	Lhakhang et al. (2016)					x*		x		x	SR	♦1.1/1.4/2.3/4.1/5.1/5.7/15.1	3	+	 	II	Scheerman et al. (2020)	1 and 2		x	x			x	x	x		NI	5	−	 	III	Gholami et al. (2015)					x		x	x			6.2/1.4/15.4/1.2/	3	+	 	IV	Lhakhang et al. (2015)	1 and 2	x	x	x	x	x	x	x	x		8/1/2/4/10/5/11	8	+	 	V	Zhou et al. (2015)	1 and 2	x	x	x			x	x	x		1.1/4.1/5.1/1.2/1.4/2.3	6	−	 												SM				 	VI	Schwarzer et al. (2015)	1				x	x	x	x	x		15/1.4/2.3	4	+	 			2		x	x								1		 	VII	Wu et al. (2022)									x			1	−	 	VIII	Scheerman et al. (2020)		x					x	x	x		BCT:a	4	−	 	IX	Pakpour et al. (2016)							x		x			2	−	 	X	Schüz et al. (2009)							x					1	−	 	XI	Schüz et al. (2007)			x	SM		1	−	 	XII	Araújo et al. (2020)		x										2	−	 	XIII	Suresh et al. (2012)									x			1	−	 		TOTAL		4 (31%)	4 (31%)	4 (31%)	4 (31%)	2 (15%)	9 (69%)	6 (46%)	10 (77%)				4
Note: ♦information obtained from the authors upon request.
Abbreviations: TRN BEH, trained behaviour; INT, intention; OE, outcome expectancies; RP, risk perceptions; aSE, action self‐efficacy; cSE, coping self‐efficacy; AP, action planning; CP, coping planning; AC, action control.
1 = intervention group, 2 = positive control group.
Providing information on oral health consequences and demonstrating the desired behaviour, goal setting, implementation intentions, behavioural goal reminders, self‐monitoring of behaviour, practical support, self‐monitoring of behavioural outcomes and coping planning.
the authors mention SE, but it is not clear whether it is aSE, cSe.
An overview of the HAPA constructs used as outcome measurements is presented in Table 4. Behaviour was the most assessed construct (I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII and XIII). Action control was assessed in nine studies (II, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, XI and XII). Nine studies assessed at least one type of self‐efficacy (I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII and XII). More specifically, eight studies assessed action self‐efficacy (I, II, III, IV, V, VII, VIII and XII) and six studies assessed coping self‐efficacy (I, IV, VI, VII, VIII and XII). Eight studies assessed intention (I, II, III, VII, VIII, IX, XI and XII). Action planning was assessed in seven studies (II, III, IV, V, VII, VIII and IX). Coping planning was assessed in seven studies (II, III, IV, V, VII, VIII and XII). Three studies (II, VII and VIII) assessed outcome expectancies and risk perceptions.
Overview of the HAPA constructs used as outcome measures
Study/Construct	INT	OE	RP	aSE	cSE	AP	CP	AC	BEH	Authors	Total	Included INT and BEH	 	I	Lhakhang et al. (2016)	x			x	x				x		4	+	 	II	Scheerman et al. (2020)	x	x	x	x		x	x	x	x	SE	8	+	 	III	Gholami et al. (2015)	x			x		x	x		x		5	+	 	IV	Lhakhang et al. (2015)				x	x	x	x	x	x	SE(=tSE + cSE)Planning (AP + CP)	6	−	 	V	Zhou et al. (2015)				x		x	x	x	x	SE(=tSE)Planning (AP + CP)	5	−	 	VI	Schwarzer et al. (2015)					x			x	x		3	−	 	VII	Wu et al. (2022)	x	x	x	x	x	x	x	x	x		9	+	 	VIII	Scheerman et al. (2020)	x	x	x	x	x	x	x	x	x	mSE, rSE	9	+	 	IX	Pakpour et al. (2016)	x					x		x	x		4	+	 	X	Schüz et al. (2009)									x		1	−	 	XI	Schüz et al. (2007)	x							x	x		3	−	 	XII	Araújo et al. (2020)	x			x	x		x	x	x		6	+	 	XIII	Suresh et al. (2012)									x			−	 		TOTAL	8(62%)	3(23%)	3(23%)	8(62%)	6(46%)	7(54%)	7(54%)	9(69%)	13(100%)			7
Abbreviations: BEH, behaviour; INT, intention; OE, outcome expectancies; RP, risk perceptions; aSE, action self‐efficacy; cSE, coping self‐efficacy; AP, action planning; CP, coping planning; AC, action control.
Two studies (I and III) used a combination of one type of self‐efficacy and one type of planning to mediate between intention and behavioural outcomes; as described previously, they could therefore be regarded as real HAPA studies as defined by Schwarzer and Hamilton; see Table S7.

Grading the body of evidence
Table 5 summarizes the findings of the body of evidence and estimating and grading of the included studies. It summarizes the strength and direction of the recommendation based on the quality, body and certainty of evidence. Overall, with moderate certainty HAPA‐based interventions in dentistry are evaluated mainly by the use of floss in students, adolescents and dental patients. All constructs in the HAPA model were evaluated, but not all constructs were used as a full set to define the intervention or studied as an outcome measurement.
Summary of findings of the body of evidence and estimating and grading the evidence profile
Determinants of quality	Results	 	Study design (Table 2, Figure 1)	RCT, observational and qualitative	 	Number of studies (Table 2, Figure 1)	16 (RCT: 9, observational: 6, qualitative 1)	 	Number of included participants	3709	 	Risk of Bias (Table S4 and Table S5)	RCT: Low‐High, observational: Moderate‐Serious, qualitative: moderate	 	Consistency	Rather inconsistent	 	Directness	Rather not generalizable	 	Precision	Imprecise	 	Reporting Bias	Possible	 	Certainty/ quality of evidence	Moderate	 	Strength and direction of the recommendation based on the quality, body and certainty of evidence	With moderate certainty HAPA‐based interventions in dentistry are evaluated mainly by the use of floss in students, adolescents and dental patients. All constructs of the HAPA model are evaluated, but not all constructs are used as a full set for defining the intervention nor studied as outcome measurement

DISCUSSION
The aim of this study was to systematically review the HAPA‐based dentistry studies regarding targeted oral health behaviours (interventions), targeted groups and the social cognitive constructs of the HAPA model that were targeted in the interventions or measured as outcomes. The majority of the studies used flossing as the targeted intervention. In all 13 included studies, the targeted population were students, adolescents or adults, 3709 in total. All HAPA constructs were used, but only one of the studies used all of the constructs. In the intervention phase, action control was the focus, and as an outcome measurement, behaviour was mostly studied.

HAPA constructs in oral health research
From a behavioural scientific point of view, ‘oral health behaviour’ is a very broad and complex concept. Optimal self‐care is not simply a matter of daily removal of dental plaque by ‘just tooth brushing and flossing’, as tooth brushing by itself is often not done effectively on a daily base. Determinants of and promoting oral hygiene behaviour are described in the scientific literature, as oral hygiene is a collection of unique behaviours. The Stages of Change model by DiClemente and Prochaska is one of the most widely adopted models for behavioural change. This is also called the Transtheoretical Model (TTM), and there is an overlap with HAPA. Key for HAPA over other theories is that HAPA contains action planning and coping planning.
Schwarzer and Hamilton state that a study is considered a HAPA study if it reports a combination of one type of self‐efficacy and one type of planning that mediates between intentions and behavioural outcomes. Using this definition, only two of the included studies could be defined as real HAPA studies. The present study challenges this statement to use any construct in the intervention and the outcome, as several studies are considered as HAPA while using other constructs.
The HAPA model is an open‐architecture framework that allows the use of only a part of the model's constructs. The HAPA intervention can be delivered in a stage‐matched format, meaning that participants can receive the intervention that fits their degree of self‐efficacy, planning and action control. One of the included studies showed that a volitional intervention using action control increased behaviour regardless of a person's stage. In the present review, the interventions mainly focussed on action control, action planning, coping planning as volitional constructs, and on intention, outcome expectancies, risk perceptions and action self‐efficacy, each of which was targeted in four studies, as motivational constructs. Four studies targeted one of the self‐efficacy constructs and one of the planning constructs in the intervention, a prerequisite to be a real HAPA intervention. For outcomes measurements, behaviour was the most commonly used outcome measurement, followed by action control, intention and action self‐efficacy. Eight studies used both intention and behaviour as outcome measurements. According to the original Schwarzer and Hamilton definition, one type of self‐efficacy and one type of planning to mediate between intention and behavioural outcomes are needed to consider a study a real HAPA study. Only two of the 13 included studies met these criteria.

Behavioural change techniques
The HAPA interventions can be designed using BCTs, which were developed to specify, evaluate and implement behavioural change interventions and to facilitate the comparison of the interventions. BCTs are usually selected on the basis of the theoretical constructs they are intended to target. Only six of the included studies reported which BCTs were used. These were all RCTs. In these studies, the use of BCTs eases comparison of the designs of the interventions between the treatment groups. Probably as a result of using BCTs, the HAPA constructs were more explicitly designed in the included RCTs than in the observational studies. BCTs may not have been reported in the observational studies because these studies have targeted fewer HAPA constructs in the intervention. Specifically, only two observational studies used action control, and only one study used intention.
In the present review, various BCTs were used in the interventions. All authors but one linked a BCT to a construct. The HAPA constructs and BCTs are, however, not synonymous, which indicates that a direct translation or transition of the BCT taxonomy to the HAPA constructs or vice versa is difficult. Nevertheless, reporting both HAPA constructs and BCTs can easily reveal the differences and similarities in study designs. Therefore, the recommendation for further studies is to report both HAPA constructs and BCTs and to evaluate the HAPA constructs as well as the BCT taxonomy. Additionally, there seems to be room for a systematic evaluation of BCTs in dentistry. In the present review, BCTs were not an initial parameter that was considered as an inclusion criterion.

Study designs and methodology
The populations of the included studies varied, from students to adolescents, adults, dental practice patients, dentally sound patients and patients who were diagnosed with periodontitis. Each targeted intervention should be aligned with the population. Patients who are diagnosed with an oral disease are an appropriate target group for behavioural change interventions, because their health is expected to improve as a result of behavioural changes. These patients are expected to have a higher risk perception and to be more focussed on the positive outcome expectancies of the new behaviour. Consequently, they may be more motivated towards behavioural change than healthy participants. The majority of the included studies, however, engaged healthy patients—often students—with an insignificant need for behavioural change. Furthermore, new health behaviour is generally more easily adopted by people who have advanced educations. Therefore, it is questionable whether healthy students are an appropriate target group.
Dental flossing was the most commonly targeted oral health behaviour. However, floss as a targeted intervention is questionable, as the use of floss is not proven to be effective in improving oral health. In addition to tooth brushing, other interdental cleaning tools, such as interdental brushes, woodsticks, oral irrigators and rubber interdental bristle cleaners, can have a positive effect on oral health. It is important that a targeted intervention by itself is effective, and HAPA studies using dental floss may not generate an improvement in oral health, which may interfere with HAPA constructs, such as outcome expectancies, risk perceptions and self‐efficacy. Notably, in contrast to the scientific evidence, flossing is still believed by the public to be effective in improving oral health. This positive framing of flossing can increase outcome expactancies, which are, according to the HAPA model, reflected in patients' intentions and thereby their behaviour. Furthermore, it is a waste that money is invested in studies where dental floss is an intervention while it is generally known for its limited clinical relevance and scientific evidence. Dental care professionals should follow the rules of evidence‐based practice and should advise other tools than dental floss.
Normally, the intervention needs ample time to turn into a long‐lasting behavioural change. In addition, the follow‐up must be as long as needed to evaluate any effect of the behavioural change. For instance, to evaluate the gum‐bleeding tendency only a few weeks are needed, while evaluating the reduction in caries is a matter of years. Little is known about the substantivity of and adherence to the new habit over time in particular after the 10 weeks. Nine out of the thirteen included studies had a follow‐up period that was less than the 10 weeks which may be needed for habit formation. Therefore, the clinical relevance of the included studies can be doubted. Thus, there is a need for studies regarding the time needed for a behavioural change to become a habit, specifically in dental care. Thus, longer follow‐up studies are a direction for further research. There is a need for minimal 10 weeks in order to establish the behaviour change. An effect on the oral health outcome follow‐up time differs per targeted outcome.

Limitations and recommendations
‐Studies may have been missed if they used HAPA constructs but had not labelled them as such in the original papers.
‐For systematic reviews that lack data amenable to meta‐analysis, alternative synthesis methods are commonly used. The SWiM guideline has been developed to guide clear reporting in reviews in which alternative synthesis methods are used. This applied to the present manuscript.
‐The original HAPA model consists of seven constructs; later, Schwarzer and Hamilton stated that only four constructs are enough to be considered as real HAPA. The Schwarzer & Hamilton statement lacks a psychological and behavioural scientific fundament. There is a need for further research on this important aspect. The present review found in majority flossing as parameter for oral healht behaviour. Aspects such as dental visits, dental fear, smoking cessation and diet can, however, also be considered for future studies.

CONCLUSION
Based on 13 studies, the HAPA model was evaluated to assess behavioural changes in oral health. With moderate certainty, HAPA‐based interventions in dentistry are evaluated mainly by the use of floss in students, adolescents and dental patients. All constructs of the HAPA model were evaluated, but only one study used all constructs as a full set to define the intervention, while no study used all constructs to measure outcomes. There is an urgent need to align the target population, the targeted intervention, the targeted outcome and the HAPA constructs to be used. Additionally, the BCT taxonomy should be combined with the HAPA intervention. Lastly, the follow‐up time of interventions could be extended to 10 weeks at least to create a behavioural change and often longer to assess its effects on oral health outcomes.

CLINICAL RELEVANCE

Scientific rationale for the study
The HAPA model is used to evaluate changes in oral health behaviour.

Principal findings
HAPA interventions in dentistry are mainly evaluated by the use of floss in students, adolescents and dental patients. All constructs of the HAPA model are evaluated, but not all constructs are used as a full set to define the intervention or studied as an outcome measurement.

Practical implications and suggestions for future studies
There is an urgent need to align the target population, the targeted intervention, the targeted outcome and the HAPA constructs to be used. Additionally, the BCT taxonomy should be combined with the HAPA intervention.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION
All authors gave final approval and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work ensuring integrity and accuracy. KAVN contributed to the conception and design, search and selection, analysis and interpretation, and drafted the final manuscript. CVL contributed to the conception and design, study selection, analysis and interpretation, and critically revised the manuscript. MFL contributed to the design, search and selection, analysis and interpretation, and drafted the preliminary manuscript. DES contributed to the conception and design, analysis and interpretation, and critically revised manuscript.

FUNDING INFORMATION
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not‐for‐profit sectors. For this study, no funding was accepted, except for support from the listed institution.
This study was in part prepared as obligation of third author Luteijn to fulfil the requirements of the ACTA master programme of Dentistry.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.

ETHICS STATEMENT
Ethics approval was not required, and the protocol was registered at ACTA IRB by protocol number 2021‐1‐4‐375. The researched protocol was registered at the international prospective register of systematic reviews (PROSPERO) under ceode CRD42022307982.

Supporting information

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data derived from public domain resources. The data (the 13 included studies) that support the findings of this study are available from search databases the National Library of Medicine (MEDLINE‐PubMed), PsychINFO and Cochrane‐CENTRAL. These data were derived from resources available in original papers that are published in the public domain.

REFERENCES
ESPGHAN's 2008 recommendation for early introduction of complementary foods: how good is the evidence?
Prevention and control of dental caries and periodontal diseases at individual and population level: consensus report of group 3 of joint EFP/ORCA workshop on the boundaries between caries and periodontal diseases
Role of microbial biofilms in the maintenance of oral health and in the development of dental caries and periodontal diseases. Consensus report of group 1 of the Joint EFP/ORCA workshop on the boundaries between caries and periodontal disease
Dental flossing and automaticity: a longitudinal moderated mediation analysis
Managing oral hygiene as a risk factor for periodontal disease: A systematic review of psychological approaches to behaviour change for improved plaque control in periodontal management
Behavioral Sciences in the Promotion of Oral Health
How to overcome health‐compromising behaviors: The health action process approach
Intention—Behavior Relations: A Conceptual and Empirical Review
A Meta‐Analysis of the Health Action Process Approach
WHO expert consultation on public health intervention against early childhood caries: report of a meeting, Bangkok, Thailand, 26–28. Rep A Meet – Bangkok, Thailand, 26–28 January 2016. 2016;(January):hal 26–28
Interaction of lifestyle, behaviour or systemic diseases with dental caries and periodontal diseases: consensus report of group 2 of the joint EFP/ORCA workshop on the boundaries between caries and periodontal diseases
Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. Version 6. Cochrane
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta‐analyses: The PRISMA statement
Meta‐analysis of observational studies in epidemiology a proposal for reporting. Meta‐analysis Of Observational Studies in Epidemiology
Synthesis without meta‐analysis (SWiM) in systematic reviews: Reporting guideline
Rayyan‐a web and mobile app for systematic reviews
The behavior change technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 hierarchically clustered techniques: Building an international consensus for the reporting of behavior change interventions
RoB 2: a revised tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials
Risk Of Bias In Non‐randomized Studies of Interventions (ROBINS‐I): detailed guidance
GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations
Adoption and maintenance of four health behaviors: theory‐guided longitudinal studies on dental flossing, seat belt use, dietary behavior, and physical activity
An application of the Health Action Process Approach model to oral hygiene behaviour and dental plaque in adolescents with fixed orthodontic appliances
Disentangling the relation between intentions, planning, and behaviour: a moderated mediation analysis
Adherence to a daily flossing regimen in university students: Effects of planning when, where, how and what to do in the face of barriers
Predicting transitions from preintentional, intentional and actional stages of change
Exploring changes in oral hygiene behaviour in patients with diabetes and periodontal disease: A feasibility study
Combining self‐management cues with incentives to promote interdental cleaning among Indian periodontal disease outpatients
A theory‐based intervention delivered by an online social media platform to promote oral health among Iranian adolescents: a cluster randomized controlled trial
A Brief Self‐Regulatory Intervention Increases Dental Flossing in Adolescent Girls
Comparing a motivational and a self‐regulatory intervention to adopt an oral self‐care regimen: a two‐sequential randomized crossover trial
Self‐efficacy, planning and action control in an oral self‐care intervention
A brief intervention changing oral self‐care, self‐efficacy, and self‐monitoring
Effectiveness of an online application of the health action process approach (HAPA) theory on oral hygiene intervention in young adults with fixed orthodontic appliances: a randomized controlled trial
Stage‐specific effects of an action control intervention on dental flossing
Self‐regulation in oral hygiene behaviours in adults with gingivitis: The mediating role of coping planning and action control
The effect of using a mobile application (“WhiteTeeth”) on improving oral hygiene: a randomized controlled trial
The Effects of Two Planning Interventions on the Oral Health Behavior of Iranian Adolescents: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial
Effects of a short behavioural intervention for dental flossing: Randomized‐controlled trial on planning when, where and how
An exploratory study into whether self‐monitoring improves adherence to daily flossing among dental patients
Efficacy of homecare regimens for mechanical plaque removal in managing gingivitis a meta review
Determinants of oral hygiene behavior: A study based on the theory of planned behavior
Promoting oral hygiene behavior in recruits in the Dutch Armytle
Using the Theory of Planned Behavior to Identify Predictors of Oral Hygiene: A Collection of Unique Behaviors
Health Action Process Approach (HAPA) as a Theoretical Framework to Understand Behavior Change
Behavior Change Techniques and Their Mechanisms of Action: A Synthesis of Links Described in Published Intervention Literature
Stage‐specific adoption and maintenance of physical activity: Testing a three‐stage model
Dental Flossing and Interproximal Caries: a Systematic Review
The efficacy of dental floss in addition to a toothbrush on plaque and parameters of gingival inflammation: a systematic review
Efficacy of inter‐dental mechanical plaque control in managing gingivitis ‐ A meta‐review
Flossing for the management of periodontal diseases and dental caries in adults
Home use of interdental cleaning devices, in addition to toothbrushing, for preventing and controlling periodontal diseases and dental caries
A network meta‐analysis of interproximal oral hygiene methods in the reduction of clinical indices of inflammation
Mechanical plaque removal of periodontal maintenance patients: A systematic review and network meta‐analysis
The efficacy of woodsticks on plaque and gingival inflammation: a systematic review
The efficacy of oral irrigation in addition to a toothbrush on plaque and the clinical parameters of periodontal inflammation: a systematic review
The efficacy of a rubber bristles interdental cleaner on parameters of oral soft tissue health‐a systematic review
How are habits formed: Modelling habit formation in the real worldy
Developing habit‐based health behaviour change interventions: twenty‐one questions to guide future research