Structural and functional prediction, evaluation, and validation in the post-sequencing era
The surge of genome sequencing data has underlined substantial genetic variants of uncertain significance (VUS). The decryption of VUS discovered by sequencing poses a major challenge in the post-sequencing era. Although experimental assays have progressed in classifying VUS, only a tiny fraction of the human genes have been explored experimentally. Thus, it is urgently needed to generate state-of-the-art functional predictors of VUS in silico. Artificial intelligence (AI) is an invaluable tool to assist in the identification of VUS with high efficiency and accuracy. An increasing number of studies indicate that AI has brought an exciting acceleration in the interpretation of VUS, and our group has already used AI to develop protein structure-based prediction models. In this review, we provide an overview of the previous research on AI-based prediction of missense variants, and elucidate the challenges and opportunities for protein structure-based variant prediction in the post-sequencing era.

Introduction
With the surge of high-throughput sequencing technologies, a number of large-scale genetic projects have been launched by several countries. The exponentially increasing genome sequencing data have revealed that there are extensive genetic variations within human populations. The vast majority of these variants are defined as variants of uncertain significance (VUS) because their phenotypic consequences and clinical significance are unknown. Therefore, in the post-sequencing era, the main task of genomic research has changed to converting the rich genetic data into useful information. This is a particularly acute problem for missense single-nucleotide variants (SNVs), which account for the majority of VUS. In Clinvar, one of the most widely used genetic databases, there are about 5% variants with category or clinical significance conflicts (e.g. benign versus pathogenic) among the variants with at least 2 submissions. According to the commonly sequenced genes, the proportions of variants with uncertain significance or conflicting information are even higher (e.g. BRCA1 52% uncertain and 3% conflicting, as of September 2023).
Various technologies that can assess the functional effects of mutations have emerged, but only a tiny fraction of the human disease-related genes have been explored. Experimental approaches can be quite expensive and time-consuming when applied to all the remaining VUS, which limits the clinical application of genetic information and the realization of a more efficient discovery tool. Therefore, generating state-of-the-art computational functional predictors for VUS remains crucial.
Evidence suggests that in silico analysis can accelerate the clinical interpretation of VUS. State-of-the-art missense variant functional predictors have been developed by artificial intelligence (AI). Notably, breakthroughs in protein structure prediction based on deep learning, such as AlphaFold2 and RoseTTAFold, have improved AI variant predictors by adding information of protein tertiary structures. Here, we review the recent advances in AI prediction for missense variants, particularly protein structure-based methods, and elucidate the challenges and opportunities for this promising direction.

Recent developments in the determination of protein tertiary structures
Proteins are polymers of amino acids linked by peptide bonds that fold into specific spatial configurations. The functions of proteins are closely associated with their atoms and amino acid coordinates (tertiary structure), particularly the active domains. Protein structures have been recommended as a strong source of information in the Guidelines for Variant Classification. Researchers have developed several experimental techniques to determine protein structures, such as X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, and cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM). While the number of structures stored in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) has steadily increased to 210,000 (as of September 2023), it covers only about 17% of all human protein residues.
Since there are a large number of homologous sequences for the proteins that actually exist in nature, the relationship between the amino acid sequence and the structure of a protein follows a certain regularity. Therefore, various computational tools have been developed to predict 3D protein structures. Protein structure prediction methods commonly fall into two categories: theoretical analysis and statistical analysis. While the traditional prediction techniques, such as homology modeling (HM), are relatively mature, recent advances in AI have initiated new concepts to enhance the quality and proteomic coverage of protein structure models.
In 2020, the AlphaFold2 project stood out in the challenging 14th Critical Assessment of Protein Structure Prediction (CASP14), followed by RoseTTAFold and ESMFold. On this basis, several multiple sequence alignment (MSA)-free protein structure prediction methods (e.g. OmegaFold and HelixFold-Single), filled the gap in structure prediction using evolutionary information. Compared with the widespread techniques (e.g. HM), these AI-based algorithms exhibit higher availability for several reasons: (i) there is no need for a close homolog solved experimentally; (ii) the whole-protein structure can be obtained; and (iii) the AI algorithms provide unlimited potential for refining the structures. This breakthrough addressed the significant economic and temporal costs in determining protein structures, thus obtaining enough variant protein structures for structural analyses. Moreover, some human proteins possess intrinsically disordered regions that are not conducive to structural analysis. Therefore, the quality of models predicting protein structure varies across different structural domains. AlphaFold is considered to be particularly advantageous in such situations as it provides the predicted local-distance difference test (pLDDT) to reflect the confidence level of each atomic coordinate. It is preferable to use high-confidence regions to develop structure-based variant prediction models. Alternatively, visual inspection algorithms, such as phenix.process_predicted_model and ISOLDE may also be utilized.

Missense variant prediction using AI
State-of-the-art computational methods for variant interpretation.
Table 1
Predictor	Structure accepted	Predicted structure accepted	△△G accepted	Website	 	DEOGEN2	N	N	N	http://deogen2.mutaframe.com/	 	PERCH	N	N	N	http://BJFengLab.org/	 	REVEL	N	N	N	https://sites.google.com/site/revelgenomics/	 	CADD	N	N	N	https://cadd.gs.washington.edu/	 	EVE	N	N	N	https://evemodel.org/	 	EVmutation	N	N	N	http://evmutation.org/	 	SIFT	N	N	N	http://sift-dna.org/sift4g	 	AUTO-MUTE	Y	Y	Y	http://binf.gmu.edu/automute/	 	CUPSAT	Y	Y	Y	http://cupsat.tu-bs.de/	 	DDGun3D	Y	Y	Y	https://folding.biofold.org/ddgun/	 	Dynamut2.0	Y	Y	Y	https://biosig.lab.uq.edu.au/dynamut2/	 	I-Mutant2.0	Y	Y	Y	https://folding.biofold.org/i-mutant/i-mutant2.0.html/	 	MutPred2	Y	N	N	http://mutpred.mutdb.org/	 	PMut	Y	N	N	http://mmb2.pcb.ub.es:8080/PMut/	 	VIPUR	Y	N	N	https://osf.io/bd2h4/	 	gMVP	Y	N	N	https://github.com/ShenLab/gMVP/	 	PolyPhen-2	Y	N	N	http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/	 	SNAP2	Y	N	N	https://rostlab.org/services/snap2web/	 	AlphScore	Y	Y	N	https://github.com/Ax-Sch/AlphScore/	 	Missense3D	Y	Y	N	http://missense3d.bc.ic.ac.uk/	 	SNPMuSiC	Y	Y	N	https://soft.dezyme.com/	 	SNPs&GO3d	Y	Y	N	https://snps.biofold.org/snps-and-go/snps-and-go-3d.html/	 	vERnet-B	Y	Y	N	https://ai-lab.bjrz.org.cn/vERnet/	 	AlphaMissense	Y	Y	N	https://console.cloud.google.com/storage/browser/dm_alphamissense/
Table 1 presents various state-of-the-art computational methods, many of which can be accessed through a web server. AI-based variant effect predictors based on primary amino acid sequences have emerged in the past few years. There are two main computational approaches. The first approach, supervised training, relies on clinical labels of pathogenic versus benign variants. Given the influencing factors including label bias, label sparsity, label noise, and data leakage, this approach causes inflated prediction accuracy in the specific testing scenarios. The second approach, which involves unsupervised models of evolutionary sequences, has significantly contributed to the advancement of predicting the functional effects of variants. These unsupervised generative models predict variant effects directly from MSA without relying on labels, which grants its theoretical generalizability. However, these sequence-based models have been limited in their ability to address clinical variant interpretation due to the lack of understanding of the protein structures that are more related to function.
Diversity of approaches adopted by structure-based variant prediction. The figure illustrates the main sources of information and multiple strategies that were used to develop variant effect predictors.
Fig. 1
Due to the non-negligible contribution of 3D structure to protein function, the local structural properties have been widely used to be combined with sequence features. The combination of structural features showed significant improvement in the performance of variant prediction. Protein structure-based learning models can be classified into feature-based machine learning and graph-based deep learning. Classical machine learning methods rely on features that are manually designed by experts, such as transmembrane helices signal peptides or other motifs. Deep learning methods usually consider structural data as graphs or images and extract task-specific features directly using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) or graph convolutional networks (GCNs). Structure-based algorithms for predicting the functional effect of one amino acid substitution (Fig. 1) can be divided into two categories of methods based on their utilization of free energy. Energy-based methods utilize experimentally-measured differences in free energy (ΔΔG) between wild-type (WT) and variant structures to train prediction models, whereas non-energy-based methods directly use structural features such as hydrophobicity and surface accessibility.
Building upon the increased structural coverage achieved by incorporating AlphaFold models, our group successfully applied the predicted structure models to identify pathogenic missense SNVs. This work demonstrated the potential of utilizing AlphaFold2-predicted protein tertiary structures for rich feature learning, although they had been considered to fall short in predicting the effect of point mutations. Furthermore, AlphaMissense introduced an additional approach derived from AlphaFold2, enabling the development of a proteome-wide variant effect prediction method by leveraging the structural information. AlphaMissense demonstrated an innovative approach to variant effect prediction by incorporating protein structural information which enabled the inclusion of the two key capabilities of AlphaFold2: the high-precision protein structure model and the ability to learn evolutionary constraints based on Evoformer block.

Construction of datasets for machine learning
For supervised AI prediction, benchmark datasets are used as information sources for training and testing models. The supervised variant prediction methods follow two broad strategies according to the type of training labels. The first class of methods directly leverage the variant interpretation on human-curated variation databases, which are generated by experimental assays or clinical evidence. As per the basis of classification, these variation benchmark databases can be further divided into effect-specific databases and disease-specific databases. Variants are classified in effect-specific databases according to the protein's specific function, such as stability, solubility, and binding free energy. Disease-specific databases represented by Clinvar, collect disease-associated phenotypes of variants by clinical data sharing or functional assessments related to pathogenic mechanisms.
Widely used variation benchmark databases for developing variant effect predictors.
Table 2
Database	Description	Category	Website	 	ProTherm	Thermodynamics of protein mutants	Effect-specific	https://web.iitm.ac.in/bioinfo2/prothermdb/	 	SKEMPI2.0	Protein-protein binding energy, thermodynamics, and kinetics of protein mutations	Effect-specific	https://life.bsc.es/pid/skempi2/	 	MPTherm	Thermodynamics of membrane protein mutants	Effect-specific	https://www.iitm.ac.in/bioinfo/mptherm/index.php/	 	Dataset used for PON-SOL	Solubility of amino acid substitution	Effect-specific	http://structure.bmc.lu.se/VariBench/solubility.php/	 	PROXiMATE	Thermodynamics of protein-protein complex mutations	Effect-specific	http://www.iitm.ac.in/bioinfo/PROXiMATE/	 	Dataset used for WALTZ-DB	Amyloid forming for variants of hexapeptides	Effect-specific	http://structure.bmc.lu.se/VariBench/amyload1.php/	 	Nabe	Binding energy of protein-nucleic acid complex	Effect-specific	http://nabe.denglab.org/	 	Clinvar	Clinical significance of disease-related gene variants	Disease-specific	https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/	 	UMD	Mutational landscape and significance across 12 major cancer types	Disease-specific	http://www.umd.be/VHL/	 	IARC TP53	Phenotypes of TP53 mutants in different human tumors	Disease-specific	http://p53.iarc.fr/	 	DoCM	Validated cancer-causing mutations	Disease-specific	http://www.docm.info/	 	OMIM	Overviews of genetic phenotypes for disorders	Disease-specific	https://omim.org/	 	HGMD	Published gene lesions responsible for human inherited disease	Disease-specific	https://www.hgmd.cf.ac.uk/ac/index.php/	 	BRCA Exchange	A global resource for variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2	Disease-specific	https://brcaexchange.org/	 	gnomAD	Allele frequencies of variants among human populations	Frequency	https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/	 	Great ape genome sequencing project	Genetic diversity among great ape populations	Frequency	http://biologiaevolutiva.org/greatape/
The second class of methods avoid using human classification and train with weak labels instead. In this strategy, variants are defined based on their frequencies observed in human or other primate species. These approaches mitigate the impact of biases introduced by human annotation and prevent data leaks between training and testing sets. Specifically, it is supported by the assertion that most of the common variants in primate species are clinically benign in human. Notably, as a result of the incorporation of numerous false labels, these methods still necessitate the use of known labels to assess their actual performance. Table 2 lists the databases widely used in protein effect prediction tasks.

Challenges in the development of structure-based variant prediction
Several studies, including ours, have observed significant variations in the accuracy of a particular method when being applied to different datasets. The training datasets used in this context are typically derived from experimental or clinical databases. Since these databases are regarded as benchmarks, the potential error labels in the benchmark databases arise the first challenge. This is evident through the inconsistent interpretations of several variants across different databases, indicating a need for caution during data interpretation. Besides the basic approach of deleting ambiguous data, our work has carried out a cross-training solution to eliminate the influence of the remaining unfaithful samples. Another commonly used method is to train with weak labels instead of human-curated classification.
Another challenge is the class imbalance of variants in nature, especially between the pathogenic and benign ones. Due to their specific functional roles, some proteins are enriched in benign variants whereas others are enriched in pathogenic variants. However, the skewed datasets can lead to a selection bias toward positive or negative samples. It is therefore essential to incorporate more efficient methods, such as EasyEnsemble, SMOTE, AdaCost, and RUSBoost, to address the imbalance by effectively using samples from the majority class. Class imbalance problems can be addressed at the data level, algorithm level, or through hybrid approaches. These methods can be further grouped into the following techniques: re-sampling (under/over-sampling), cost-sensitive learning, and ensemble learning.
Inevitable conflict exists between precision and generalization ability, as highlighted by previous studies. Compared to gene-specific techniques such as vERnet-B, generalizable methods like AlphaMissense do not necessitate the training of a separate recognition model for every protein. However, it may result in imprecision in identifying the effects of minor structural alterations caused by the substitution of a single amino acid. Furthermore, conformational changes caused by a mutation can potentially affect protein function via a variety of mechanisms, indicating that the same structural alteration may lead to completely opposite phenotypic consequences for different proteins. Therefore, further investigations on these methods are warranted to achieve a better balance between precision and generalization.
Representations of protein structure for deep learning. Molecular graph (a graph whose nodes are atoms and edges are bonds), 3D projection (a 3D array reflecting the shapes measured in three directions), AAN (an undirected weighted network whose nodes are amino acids and edges are their non-covalent interactions), and AlphaFold Context (a structural context generated by AlphaFold, with MSA and Pair representations).
Fig. 2
A challenge in implementing the structure-based deep learning is the representation of protein structures. These structures consist of polypeptide chains that can be hierarchically organized into primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structures. Due to such complexity, various protein representations can be used for deep learning, including molecular graph and 3D projection based on the protein’s original 3D shape (Fig. 2). AlphaFold-derived methods can utilize the AlphaFold context, which is AlphaFold’s intrinsic understanding of structure, to further learn its relationship with function. Constructing the amino acid networks (AANs) is another mean to provide more detailed structural information, thus enabling the presentation of protein structures for deep learning purposes.
Another limitation of the structure-based approaches is that the existing structure prediction algorithms only provide an optimal static structure, which may not account for conformational changes in proteins resulting from compound binding, complexes, or condensates with various quaternary structures. Although the molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is theoretically appealing, this method remains a huge challenge even for moderately sized proteins. Traditional MD simulations are limited by the computational intractability of algorithms as well as the context dependence of protein stability. Recent studies have demonstrated that more sampling can enhance the prediction of multiple conformational states. However, further evidence is needed to establish the reliability and usability of these methods in revealing the conformational landscape. Nevertheless, the combination of AlphaFold2 with molecular dynamics simulation holds great promise for optimizing structure-based variant predictors.

Future direction and concluding remarks
Deep learning for structural and functional prediction is becoming a popular direction, as evidenced by the increasing number of related publications over the last few years. Despite posing challenges and presenting a range of perspectives, previous studies have shown the feasibility of this approach and provided insights for generating even more precise variant effect learning models. The remarkable advances in protein structure prediction not only highlight the potential value of AI in structural biology but also pave the way for future genetic information research with AI. Structural AI prediction promises to tackle the crucial problems in the post-sequencing era and to enrich the toolbox of precision treatment.
In addition, using well-trained models to predict a batch of random mutations can specify the evolutionary tendency of a protein’s function, thereby creating novel variants with the expected function. This approach can expedite drug discovery by reducing the number of wet experiments that validate the function of the selected variants, implying a favorable application of AI-based structure prediction for protein function. Therefore, the ongoing studies are developing novel algorithms specifically for modeling protein structures to enhance the precision of functional prediction, coupled with reliable validation for the newly predicted functional proteins.

Funding
This work was supported by the  (Grant BJ-2023-077), the  (Grant 82372314).

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Fei Xiao: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing. Lihui Zou: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing. Chang Li: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Yixuan Luo: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Yibo Xie: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Zaifeng Zhang: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Visualization. Ye Liu: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Visualization.

Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that there are no known competing financial interests.

References
Human genome project: twenty-five years of big biology
Addendum: the mutational constraint spectrum quantified from variation in 141,456 humans
Systematic single-variant and gene-based association testing of thousands of phenotypes in 394,841 UK Biobank exomes
ClinVar miner: demonstrating utility of a Web-based tool for viewing and filtering ClinVar data
ClinVar: improvements to accessing data
Accurate classification of BRCA1 variants with saturation genome editing
An atlas of variant effects to understand the genome at nucleotide resolution
Identification of breast tumor mutations in BRCA1 that abolish its function in homologous DNA recombination
Predicting functional effects of synonymous variants: a systematic review and perspectives
Predicting the stability of mutant proteins by computational approaches: an overview
Interpreting protein variant effects with computational predictors and deep mutational scanning
Disease variant prediction with deep generative models of evolutionary data
Inferring the molecular and phenotypic impact of amino acid variants with MutPred2
Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold
Accurate prediction of protein structures and interactions using a three-track neural network
Artificial intelligence-based recognition for variant pathogenicity of BRCA1 using AlphaFold2-predicted structures
Update of the EMQN/ACGS best practice guidelines for molecular analysis of Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes
3-dimensional model of the myoglobin molecule obtained by X-ray analysis
Recent progress in structural biology: lessons from our research history
Cryo-electron microscopy for structural analysis of dynamic biological macromolecules
The protein data bank
The structural coverage of the human proteome before and after AlphaFold
Homology modeling in the time of collective and artificial intelligence
Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level protein structure with a language model
High-resolution de novo structure prediction from primary sequence
A method for multiple-sequence-alignment-free protein structure prediction using a protein language model
Putting AlphaFold models to work with phenix.process_predicted_model and ISOLDE
DEOGEN2: prediction and interactive visualization of single amino acid variant deleteriousness in human proteins
PERCH: a unified framework for disease gene prioritization
REVEL: an ensemble method for predicting the pathogenicity of rare missense variants
CADD: predicting the deleteriousness of variants throughout the human genome
Mutation effects predicted from sequence co-variation
SIFT missense predictions for genomes
Predicting pathogenic protein variants
FFPred 3: feature-based function prediction for all gene ontology domains
Predicting the pathogenicity of missense variants using features derived from AlphaFold2
DeepSite: protein-binding site predictor using 3D-convolutional neural networks
EnzyNet: enzyme classification using 3D convolutional neural networks on spatial representation
Convolutional embedding of attributed molecular graphs for physical property prediction
Structure-based protein function prediction using graph convolutional networks
AUTO-MUTE 2.0: a portable framework with enhanced capabilities for predicting protein functional consequences upon mutation
CUPSAT: prediction of protein stability upon point mutations
DDGun: an untrained predictor of protein stability changes upon amino acid variants
DynaMut2: assessing changes in stability and flexibility upon single and multiple point missense mutations
I-Mutant2.0: predicting stability changes upon mutation from the protein sequence or structure
PMut: a web-based tool for the annotation of pathological variants on proteins, 2017 update
Robust classification of protein variation using structural modelling and large-scale data integration
Predicting functional effect of missense variants using graph attention neural networks
A method and server for predicting damaging missense mutations
Better prediction of functional effects for sequence variants
Can AlphaFold2 predict the impact of missense mutations on structure?
Accurate proteome-wide missense variant effect prediction with AlphaMissense
ProTherm and ProNIT: thermodynamic databases for proteins and protein-nucleic acid interactions
SKEMPI: a structural kinetic and energetic database of mutant protein interactions and its use in empirical models
MPTherm: database for membrane protein thermodynamics for understanding folding and stability
PON-Sol: prediction of effects of amino acid substitutions on protein solubility
PROXiMATE: a database of mutant protein-protein complex thermodynamics and kinetics
Chen S., Francioli L.C., Goodrich J.K., Collins R.L., Kanai M., Wang Q., et al. A genome-wide mutational constraint map quantified from variation in 76,156 human genomes. bioRxiv. 2022: 2022.03.20.485034.
Predicting the clinical impact of human mutation with deep neural networks
A general framework for estimating the relative pathogenicity of human genetic variants
Properties of human genes guided by their enrichment in rare and common variants
Exploratory undersampling for class-imbalance learning
SMOTE: synthetic minority over-sampling technique
AdaCost: misclassification cost-sensitive boosting
RUSBoost: a hybrid approach to alleviating class imbalance
Bias and class imbalance in oncologic data-towards inclusive and transferrable AI in large scale oncology data sets
Multiplex assessment of protein variant abundance by massively parallel sequencing
Hierarchical structure of protein sequence
PotentialNet for molecular property prediction
Tavanaei A., Maida A.S., Kaniymattam A., Loganantharaj R. Towards Recognition of Protein Function based on its Structure using Deep Convolutional Networks. Ieee Int C Bioinform. 2016: 145–9.
Predicting multiple conformations via sequence clustering and AlphaFold2
AFsample: improving multimer prediction with AlphaFold using massive sampling
ColabFold: making protein folding accessible to all
Towards predicting equilibrium distributions for molecular systems with deep learning
Can predicted protein 3D structures provide reliable insights into whether missense variants are disease associated
Prediction and interpretation of deleterious coding variants in terms of protein structural stability
WS-SNPs&GO: a web server for predicting the deleterious effect of human protein variants using functional annotation
WALTZ-DB: a benchmark database of amyloidogenic hexapeptides
Nabe: an energetic database of amino acid mutations in protein-nucleic acid binding interfaces
UMD (Universal mutation database): a generic software to build and analyze locus-specific databases
Impact of mutant p53 functional properties on TP53 mutation patterns and tumor phenotype: lessons from recent developments in the IARC TP53 database
DoCM: a database of curated mutations in cancer
Mendelian inheritance in man and its online version, OMIM
The human gene mutation database: building a comprehensive mutation repository for clinical and molecular genetics, diagnostic testing and personalized genomic medicine
Cline M.S., Liao R.G., Parsons M.T., Paten B., Alquaddoomi F., Antoniou A., et al. BRCA Challenge: BRCA Exchange as a global resource for variants in and. Plos Genet. 2018; 14.