Integrating and retrieving learning analytics data from heterogeneous platforms using ontology alignment: Graph-based approach
Review Highlights
Ideal for graph-based LA to facilitate data integration and retrieval from heterogenous systems.
Proposed a query strategy or competency questions to facilitate comprehensive analysis and reporting relating to monitoring the academic student performance and managing the faculty recourse allocation.
This study explores the possibility of integrating and retrieving heterogenous data across platforms by using ontology graph databases to enhance educational insights and enabling advanced data-driven decision-making. Motivated by some of the well-known universities and other Higher Education Institutions ontology, this study improvises the existing entities and introduces new entities in order to tackle a new topic identified from the preliminary interview conducted in the study to cover the study objective. The paper also proposes an innovative ontology, referred to as Student Performance and Course, to enhance resource management and evaluation mechanisms on course, students, and MOOC performance by the faculty. The model solves the issues of data accumulation and their heterogeneity, including the problem of having data in different formats and various semantic similarities, and is suitable for processing large amounts of data in terms of scalability. Thus, it also offers a way to confirm the process of data retrieval that is based on performance assessment with the help of an evaluation matrix.
Graphical abstract
Subject area:	Computer Science	 	More specific subject area:	Educational Technology, Learning Analytics	 	Name of your method:	Graph-Based Data Retrieval Model for Integrating Learning Analytics from Heterogeneous Platforms by Ontology Design	 	Name and reference of original method:	G. Ashour, A. Al-Dubai, I. Romdhani, and N. Aljohani, “An ontological model for courses and academic profiles representation: A case study of King Abdulaziz University,” Proceedings - 2020 International Conference Engineering Technologies and Computer Science, EnT 2020, pp. 123–126, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.1109/EnT48576.2020.00030.L. Zemmouchi-Ghomari and A. R. Ghomari, “Process of building reference ontology for higher education,” Conference: International Conference of Data Mining and Knowledge Engineering (ICDMKE’13), Jul. 2013.	 	Resource availability:	Software: 1) Protégéhttps://protege.stanford.edu/, 2) OpenRefine https://openrefine.org/, 3) GraphDB https://graphdb.ontotext.com/.Data: The authors can make the data available upon a reasonable request.
Specifications table

Background
Due to the daily increasing data usage, big data is an emerging trend and a need in industries, sciences, and engineering. This is not neglected in the education sector. Big data is robust enough to handle large datasets and unstructured data types compared to traditional Relational Database Management Systems (RDBMS). In the present day, this scenario has changed because data size is increasing. The data is generated from millions of computers, and billions of applications such as media data, sensors, and smartphone data, and each application storage can pile up to terabytes and exabyte data size,.
According to, big data or not only SQL (NoSQL) databases can be categorised into four distinct types: key-value stores, column-based stores, graph-based stores, and document-based stores. The key-value model operates by forming associations between pairs of values and keys. On the other hand, document-based repositories utilise a document processing unit that is specifically designed for handling log files and text datasets. Columnar databases employ a data processing unit that specifically operates on columns, while graph databases function by analysing the relationships between items. Each of these models has its own unique advantages and disadvantages.
The main drawback is that big data lacks Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability (ACID) compliance. Meanwhile, the RDMS is reported to ensure compliance with the ACID criteria by the incorporation of primary keys and foreign keys in the relational database. This motivating aspect drives specific developers to revert to using the RDBMS. Of the four types of database techniques that are available, only the graph-based or the graph database can support the ACID transaction. This is the main reason why the graph database was used for this study instead of another kind of big data that was available. The graph database can also support the semantic web in building a knowledge graph structure consisting of nodes (entities), edges (relationships), and properties (attributes).
Through a preliminary analysis conducted earlier, it is common for a single institution or higher education institution to utilise heterogeneous learning management platforms for storing student academic performance data. Given this limitation, instructors will face challenges in analysing the data as they must manage and access data from several platforms such as the Learning Management System (LMS), Student Information System (SIS), student portal, and including a MOOC system. Hence, this study aims to establish an ontology called Student Performance and Course (SPC) for Higher Education Institutions that can assist faculty administrators in managing faculty resource allocation. This includes tasks such as assigning lecturers to courses and structuring student study plans. In addition, the ontology constructed in this research will have the capability to oversee and assess student performance. This ontology can facilitate both traditional classroom-based teaching and learning as well as Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) learning in terms of student performance. The ontology will address three main themes: 1) faculty resource allocation management, 2) student and course performance monitoring, and 3) student MOOC performance monitoring.

Method details
Learning Analytics (LA) is a discipline and a research interest that was developed to understand and evaluate learning in massive volumes of data in the online learning environment. The study focuses on the measurement, collection, analysis, and presentation of data to gain a deeper understanding of educational processes and enhance them. It specifically focuses on gathering and interpreting data on learners' activities within educational settings, particularly in online learning environments. The data could be analysed by the different techniques by choosing statistical, machine learning and data mining approaches to find out the patterns, trends and characteristics from the collected data. As stated by and, the use of LA information can help the following faculties: The faculty coordinators and department heads to deploy their resources as well as address critical concerns, staff organization, and increase productivity in an educational facility.
Throughout this study, there is a few notable Higher Education institutions (HEI) and Institutions' ontologies that have provided justifications for studying learning analytics, including Higher Education Reference (HERO) Ontology, CURONTO ontology, Bologna ontology, Academic Institution Internal Structure (AIISO). Regarding ontologies that can analyse the connection between an individual and their characteristics, certain LA research employs the Friend of a Friend (FOAF) ontology. This ontology provides a logical and manageable way for the describing the structure of social networks and its relationships and to provide information about the individuals along with their relations to other individuals and systems. The use of the FOAF ontology is useful to identify relationships between persons and to enable the researcher to look at the thick descriptions of their characteristics.
In terms of MOOC, the ontology available in the field area also is equally impressive. Recent research carried out by found that through the design and creation of an ontology to be used for the analysis of data obtained from learning analytics in MOOCs. By applying the concept of the MOOC ontology, administrators, facilitators and students of MOOC can discover valuable information, monitor performance, improve the course, engage in knowledge-based decision-making processes. This brings us to the next point on our proposed ontology that is made up of eight fundamental classes. The classes are: “Person”, “Facilitator”, “Student”, “Institution”, “Subject”, “Assessment”, “Cohort”, and “Course.”
Graph-Based Data Retrieval Model for Integrating Learning Analytics from Heterogeneous Platforms by Ontology Design.
Fig 1
As suggested by existing research in HEI ontology, it is unnecessary to construct an ontology from scratch. By referencing and reusing certain classes from the relevant ontology, the development time can be reduced. This study also incorporates certain classes that are derived from a well-known existing ontology pertaining to the subject of higher education and student academic achievement. When developing the ontology, the researcher must have a clear understanding of the type of information they intend to acquire and gather. This is the crucial aspect where we must ensure that the data we obtain at the conclusion aligns with the expectations of the user or researcher. Furthermore, Competency Questions (CQs) are also important in this study since they serve as the foundation for constructing the ontology, and ensuring the ontology is a test-driven ontology for quality assurance that qualify the validity and reliability of the ontologies in the evaluation phase. The process of ontology development is constructed in 4 main phases: defining domain scope for heterogenous LA, creation of integrated ontology repository, ontology retrieval strategies, and evaluation of the integrated repository. Fig. 1 shows the proposed method that has been adapted from methods used by and.
Establish data retrieval goal
Phase 1: Defining domain scope for heterogenous LA
Considering the main themes of the Student Performance and Course (SPC) ontology, it can be characterized as designed to satisfy the following two types of goals: The monitoring of student performance and the management of faculty resources. As for the users, there are 3 types of users for this ontology: 1) the faculty administrators, to be specific the faculty head of the department or program coordinator, 2) lecturers, and 3) the MOOC instructors. In this case, the SPC ontology can be used by the faculty administrators to search for information on faculty resource management. Its nature can help them in finding specific details about the lecturers available in the faculty and the past records of the subjects they have taught. Concerning the faculty administrator, they also can apply the ontology to monitor the performance of students who are linked to the faculty.
Example of faculty administrator view (general view).
Fig 2
Example of lecturer view (individual view).
Fig 3
Similar to the faculty administrator, the lecturer can also retrieve data on the student performance; however, the access of the faculty administrator is more general to performance as seen by the course (general view: Fig. 2) while the access to the information of the lectures is detailed where the lectures can see all their student assessment marks under their supervision (individual view: Fig. 3). It will help the lecturer to identify the low-performance students who require their help the most. For the improvement of student monitoring, the data to be retrieved from this ontology will also include the attendance of the students during the ongoing lectures conducted to provide more information to the lecturers on the level of participation of students.
In addition, to monitor the student performance coming from the premier physical classes, this ontology also combines the data obtained from the MOOC platform that can be made available to the MOOC instructor to observe the student's MOOC performance towards supporting the MOOC learning method offered by the Institutions. With it the instructor can see the completion of the student in the MOOC course page offered. While this study was being conducted, Institution A was one of the institutions that allowed their students to transfer credit to waive a certain course that they have already completed through online MOOC courses.
Formation of the queries strategies
Furthermore, SPC ontology was created to support the heterogenous situation, which means that it can support data to be integrated from any institution. This means that a comparison of the syllabus and academic data can be implemented, if necessary, as long as data from the required institution has been entered into the repository.
Expert involvement in the interview session.
Table 1
Theme	Sub-goal	Expert code	Educator level	Expertise/position in faculty	Institution	Working experience	 	Resource allocation	Expert 1	Senior Lecturer	Faculty administrator	Institution A	15	 	Expert 2	Senior Lecturer	Faculty administrator	Institution B	22	 	Student performance	Course performance (group interpreted)	Expert 1	Senior Lecturer	Faculty administrator	Institution A	15	 	Expert 2	Senior Lecturer	Faculty administrator	Institution B	22	 	Student performance (individual interpreted)	Expert 1	Senior Lecturer	Faculty administrator	Institution A	15	 	Expert 2	Senior Lecturer	Faculty administrator	Institution B	22	 	Expert 3	Senior Lecturer	Multimedia lecturer	Institution A	22	 	Expert 4	Lecturer	Multimedia lecturer	Institution B	8	 	Student MOOC performance	Expert 5	Senior Lecturer	MOOC expert	Institution A	20	 	Expert 6	Senior Lecturer	MOOC expert	Institution A	20
In our preliminary study, an interview was done to ensure that the SPC ontology could provide the type of information that the user required for data retrieval via the LA operator. Each informant was asked what type of information they require to perform the job based on the purpose that was established during Phase1: A. A total of two faculty administrators and four lecturers were chosen from institutions A and B. Meanwhile, two MOOC experts have been selected to help us determine what type of information the MOOC instructor requires when monitoring student MOOC performance. Table 1 shows the information provided by the experts who participated in the interview for each goal.
Examples of common question extracted from the interview and grouped according to the goal.
Table 2
Goal	Sub-goal	Common questions	Supported expert	 	Resource allocation	How many students enrol in the specific course for this semester.	Obtained during interview with Expert 2.	 	What are the courses that offered for each of the semester.	Obtained during interview with Expert 1 and Expert 2.	 	Who are the lecturers that have experience in teaching the course before.	Obtained during interview with Expert 1 and Expert 2.	 	Student performance	Course performance (group interpreted)	How is the pattern distribution of the grades among students in all the offered courses.	Obtained during interview with Expert 1 and Expert 2.	 	How many students passed and failed in the courses.	Obtained during interview with Expert 1.	 	Student performance (individual interpreted)	How is the student assessment performance.	Obtained during interview with Expert 1, 2, 3 and 4.	 	Who is the student with the potential to fail the course.	Obtained during interview with Expert 4 and implemented in the study of.	 	Student MOOC performance	How is the student MOOC performance?	Obtained during an interview with Expert 5 and Expert 6.
After the interviews, all informants' comments were transcribed and analysed to determine the theme's pattern. In total, 25 common questions were gathered for this LA study. This collection is used as the common questions, and according to, common questions are defined as the requirement or questions that are needed by the stakeholders. It is a task for the researcher to fully understand the requirements because they need to illustrate the answer to this question in the form of SPARQL result at the end of the study. Table 2 provides an illustration of the common questions and the corresponding expert who supports the material to be included.
Examining the existing ontology
Phase 2: Creation of integrated ontology repository
As suggested by existing studies and, reusing existing classes and linkages is highly recommended as it can save time in development. This study also incorporates certain classes that are derived from a well-known existing ontology pertaining to the subject of higher education and student academic achievement. In addition, new classes are introduced in the SPC ontology, as supported by, who noted that universities may employ diverse standard formats to describe their data, resulting in variations in the ontology's structure. During this step, the researcher will notice that not all the classes used in the existing ontology are fully matched and can be applied in our study domain. There might be some unnecessary classes to be removed, and there might also be some new classes that need to be introduced to fulfil the intended aim.
Converting the common questions to CQs
Comparing institutions LA studies' core ontology terms.
Table 3
Ontologies	Core ontology terms used	 	Course	Syllabus	Faculty	Department	Teaching staff	Publication	Learning outcome or learning material	 	CSCO 	√	√		√	√			 	CURONTO 	√	√	√				√	 	Bowlogna 	√	√			√		√	 	OLOUD 	√	√			√			 	HERO 	√		√	√	√	√		 	MOOCs 	√				√		√	 	FOAF 	√		√		√		√
Table 3 outlines the primary categories utilised in several university and HEI ontologies. As some ontologies are unavailable online, this project will utilise existing classes while starting the design process from the beginning.
According to, CQs are recommended to validate ontologies by assessing their ability to address the common questions successfully, therefore confirming the ontology's commitments, and assuring its alignment with the intended aims. Competency questions are commonly used to assess ontologies using methods such as SPARQL queries. These queries enable the efficient representation of data from several sources and the extraction of important information. The study completed by provides a comprehensive description of the method for translating and extracting classes from CQs.
Several CQ instances used in the study.
Table 4
CQs themes	CQ examples	Expected answer	 	Resource allocation	2.1 How many students enrolled for the course?	A list of students who have enrolled in the course for the current semester.	 	3.1 Which courses are offered for both the current and the previous semesters?	A list of courses that have been offered for the current and previous semesters.	 	4.1 Which lecturer has taught this course before?	A list of lecturers that have been assigned to the course in the past.	 	Course performance monitoring	6.1 What is the pattern of the course grade distribution?	A list of students' grades by group distribution.	 	6.2 How many students passed the course?	Total the number of students who have passed the course.	 	6.3 How many students failed the course?	The total number of students who have failed the course.	 	Student performance monitoring	8.1 How is the student's current performance?	A list of the student's ongoing assessment marks.	 	9.1 Who is the student that currently needs help the most?	According to the list of students' ongoing assessments, if a student's cumulative score is still <40 %, they are classified as “at-risk students” because the minimum mark to pass is 40.	 	MOOC performance monitoring	12.1 How is the current student's MOOC performance?	A list of the student's ongoing MOOC assessment marks.
After the expert interview conducted earlier in Phase 1: B, the common questions that were gathered were translated into CQs and analyzed using the thematic analysis method to identify similar patterns of theme information required by the expert to fulfill the goal of the study. Some examples of the competency question and the expected answer are listed in Table 4.
Once all 25 CQs have been identified they are organised in a hierarchical form as underlined by. At the highest level, there are fundamental questions addressing the course, which are then followed by more specific and detailed questions related to distinct sub-topics. To establish a hierarchical framework of competency questions for a certain theme, we can arrange the questions in a progression from general, overarching inquiries to more focused ones.
Defining the classes and relationship properties
Hierarchical structure of CQs related to resource allocation.
Fig 4
Hierarchical structure of CQs related to course performance monitoring.
Fig 5
Hierarchical structure of CQs related to student performance monitoring.
Fig 6
Hierarchical structure of CQs related to student MOOC performance monitoring.
Fig 7
Figs. 4, 5, 6, and 7 depict the hierarchical structure for the themes of resource allocation, course performance monitoring, student performance monitoring, and MOOCs performance monitoring. The CQs for the theme of resource allocation, student performance, and course performance are categorised into three groups. In contrast, the CQs for course performance are categorised into a single group.
Entities extracted from the CQs and the expected answers.
Table 5
CQ examples	Expected answer	Entities or Classes extracted	 	2.1 How many students enroll for the course	…. students …. course …. semester.	Student, Course, and Semester	 	3.1 Which courses are offered for both the current and the previous semesters?	…. courses …. current and previous semesters.	Course and Semester	 	4.1 Which lecturer has taught this course before?	…. lecturers … assigned to the course …. past semesters.	Lecturer, Course, and Semester	 	6.1 What is the pattern of the course grade distribution?	…. students'…. grades …. group distribution.	Student, Gradecount, and Group	 	6.2 How many students passed the course?	…. number of students …. passed the course.	Student, Gradecount, and Course	 	6.3 How many students failed the course?	…. number of students …. failed the course.	Student, Gradecount, and Course	 	8.1 How is the student's current performance?	…. student's …. ongoing assessment marks.	Student, Assessment	 	9.1 Who is the student that currently needs help the most?	…. students' …. ongoing assessments, …. cumulative score …. <50 %.	Student, Assessment	 	12.1 How is the current student's MOOC performance?	…. student's …. ongoing MOOC assessment marks.	Student, MOOCassessment
The classes indicated in the CQs, and the expected answer will be manually retrieved, as advised by. The process is important to determine the properties of the relationship between the classes and ensure the SPARQL queries generated can meet the CQs request by the users to fulfill the theme in the study. An example of a class extraction procedure from the CQs and the expected response is shown in Table 5 below.
Creating the ontology instances
List of SPC entities and object properties.
Table 6
Object property	Domains	Ranges	 	is_a	Person	Lecturer	 	is_a	Person	Lecturer	 	belong_to	Lecturer	Faculty	 	belong_to	Student	Faculty	 	consist_of	Institution	Faculty	 	attached_to	Student	Group	 	enrols	Student	Course	 	offer	Faculty	Course	 	offered_in	Course	Group	 	has_academiccohort	Course	Cohort	 	has_assessment	Course	Assessment	 	has_programme	Course	Programme	 	has_cohort	Student	Cohort	 	has_engagementcount	Student	Post	 	has_cohort	MOOCcourse	Cohort	 	has_grade	Student	Grade	 	has_semester	Student	Semester	 	has_semester	Course	Semester	 	undergraduate_type	Student	Studylevel	 	undergraduate_type	Course	Studylevel	 	has_attendance	Student	Attendance	 	teach	Lecturer	Group	 	has_gradecount	Course	Gradecount	 	optional_to_have	Course	Prerequisite	 	enrols_mooc	Student	MOOCcourse	 	mooc_offer	Institution	MOOCcourse	 	has_detail	Student	Enrolmentdetail	 	has_count	MOOCcourse	Participationcount	 	has_moocassessment	MOOCcourse	MOOCassessment
To link between the classes, the properties are required to be set. In this study, some of the object properties are also set based on the expected corresponding answers that have been identified. However, under certain conditions, some identified classes can also be linked with other classes to facilitate more information from a single query. For example, for CQ 6.1, the current classes can be associated with either the class cohort or program, enabling data to be filtered by cohort or program. This will enhance the diversity and informativeness of the results produced. The complete object properties defined in the SPC ontology are illustrated in Table 6. The domains and ranges are entities used in the SPC ontology.
Overall SPC classes and hierarchy.
Fig 8
Once all the classes and the relationships of the RDF ontology structure have been finalised, this following step involves the construction of a file to store the ontology using the Web Ontology Language (OWL) format. The OWL ontologies are often created, modified and managed by the researchers with the help of the Protégé editor. Since its emergence, it has been one of the most dominant editors that are present in the market specifically for this aim. states that due to the good Graphical User Interface and powerful tools that can be provided to researchers, Protégé has been accepted by many researchers for the construction and editing of OWL ontologies. The ontology utilised in this study contain 21 classes, as shown in Fig. 8, which demonstrates the representation of the SPC classes and their hierarchical structure.
Ontology Validation
Comprehensive collection of SPC classes.
Fig 9
Meanwhile, Fig. 9 displays the comprehensive collection of all class sets utilised in the SPC model designed using the Protégé software.
To ensure that all the classes in the hierarchy are properly related, depending on the provided object properties, the structure and linkage of the classes in the ontology must be tested. At the time of this study, several software tools were available for ontology validation, including Oops! Ontology Pitfall Scanner and TDDonto2,. Oops! can be accessed at https://oops.linkeddata.es/, while the TDDonto2 plugin can be installed in Protégé. This study evaluates the effectiveness of the SPC ontology using the TDDonto2 tool. The methods employed in TDDonto2 can handle any OWL and OWL2 class expression for both TBox and ABox assertions. The TBox is responsible for defining the structure of the domain by specifying relationships between concepts, while the ABox describes concrete examples within the domain by asserting relationships between individuals and concepts.
Example of the “Entailed” state in the ontology validation test performed using the TDDonto2 tool.
Fig 10
Moreover, from Table 5, for query 2.1 as illustrated in the class diagram above, there are 3 classes extracted: 'Student,' 'Course,' and 'Semester.' As mentioned earlier, it should not present any difficulty in creating a relationship between the 'Semester' class and the 'Student' class since the 'Semester' class is beneath the 'Student' class in the taxonomy. In this scenario, the validation test conducted by TDDonto2 will provide an 'Entailed' state, as depicted in Fig. 10.
Repository creation and data loading
Example of the “Absent” state in the ontology validation test performed using the TDDonto2 tool.
Fig 11
However, the relationship between “Student” and “Course” is different because “Course” is not a subclass of “Student”. If we simulate the situation using the TDDonto2 tool, it will indicate the status to “Absent”. This indicates that it is possible to establish a relationship between a “Student” and a “Course” even if they belong to separate hierarchies as shows in Fig. 11.
Following the ontology validation, the raw data source will be mapped to the appropriate classes in the ontology. In this study, all data sources will be collected in Comma-Separated Values (CSV) format. The OpenRefine tool is utilised to map all the data, which is then published to the GraphDB repository. Marin and team's 2011 study recommends using the open-source OpenRefine data cleaning tool for data standardisation and transformation tasks because it is free and can handle Terse RDF Triple Language and other types of structured data. As for the repository, this study uses GraphDB as a platform to load all the heterogeneous data into a single repository. In order to manipulate the data, the enquiries are converted into SPARQL queries and then executed within the GraphDB platform, using a centralised SPC RDF ontology as the source of reference.
Converting the CQs to SPARQL queries
Phase 3: Ontology retrieval strategies
Example of CQs with their corresponding SPARQL queries.
Table 7
CQ examples	SPARQL queries	 	2.1 How many students enroll for the course?	SELECT ?Group ?Semester (COUNT(?Matricno) AS ?Numberofstudent)WHERE {?x SPC:Coursecode ?Coursecode.?x SPC:Group ?Group.?x SPC:Matricno ?Matricno.?x SPC:Semester ?Semester.FILTER (regex(?Coursecode, “CourseA”))FILTER (regex(?Semester, “SemesterID”))}GROUP BY ?Group ?Semester	 		 	3.1 Which courses are offered for both the current and the previous semesters?	SELECT ?Coursecode ?Semester ?Group (COUNT(?Matricno) AS ?Numberofstudent) ?LecturerID ?LecturenameWHERE {?x SPC:Coursecode ?Coursecode.?x SPC:Group ?Group.?x SPC:Matricno ?Matricno.?x SPC:Semester ?Semester.?x SPC: Institution ? Institution.?x SPC:LecturerID ?LecturerID.?x SPC:Lecturename ?Lecturename.FILTER (regex(?Institution, “InstitutionA”))FILTER (regex(?Semester, “SemesterIDnew”, “SemesterIDold”))}GROUP BY ?Coursecode ?Group ?Semester ?LecturerID ?LecturenameORDER BY ?Semester ?Coursecode	 		 	4.1 Which lecturer has taught this course before?	SELECT ?Coursecode ?Semester ?Group (COUNT(?Matricno) AS ?Numberofstudent) ?LecturerID ?LecturenameWHERE {?x SPC:Coursecode ?Coursecode.?x SPC:Group ?Group.?x SPC:Matricno ?Matricno.?x SPC:Semester ?Semester.?x SPC: Institution ? Institution.?x SPC:LecturerID ?LecturerID.?x SPC:Lecturename ?Lecturename.FILTER (regex(?Institution, “InstitutionA”))FILTER (regex(?Coursecode, “CourseA”))}GROUP BY ?Coursecode ?Group ?Semester ?LecturerID ?LecturenameORDER BY ?Semester ?Coursecode	 		 	6.1 What is the pattern of the course grade distribution?	SELECT ?x ?Coursecode ?Group ?A_plus ?A ?A_minus ?B_plus ?B ?B_minus ?C_plus ?C ?C_minus ?D_plus ?D ?E ?F ?LecturerID ?Lecturername where {?x SPC:Group ?Group.?x SPC:A_plus ?A_plus.?x SPC:A ?A.?x SPC:A_minus ?A_minus.?x SPC:B_plus ?B_plus.?x SPC:B ?B.?x SPC:B_minus ?B_minus.?x SPC:B_plus ?C_plus.?x SPC:B ?C.?x SPC:B_minus ?C_minus.?x SPC:D_plus ?D_plus.?x SPC:D ?D.?x SPC:E ?E.?x SPC:F ?F.?x SPC:LecturerID ?LecturerID.?x SPC:Lecturername ?Lecturername.?x SPC: Institution? Institution.?x SPC:Semester ?Semester.?x SPC:Coursecode ?Coursecode.FILTER (regex(?Coursecode, “CourseA”))FILTER (regex(?Institution, “InstitutionA”))FILTER regex(?Semester, “SemesterID”)}	 	6.2 How many students passed the course?	SELECT ?x ?Coursecode ?Group (?A_plus + ?A + ?A_minus + ?B_plus + ?B + ?B_minus + ?C_plus + ?C + ?C_minus + ?D_plus AS ?Total_of_pass) where {?x SPC:Group ?Group.?x SPC:A_plus ?A_plus.?x SPC:A ?A.?x SPC:A_minus ?A_minus.?x SPC:B_plus ?B_plus.?x SPC:B ?B.?x SPC:B_minus ?B_minus.?x SPC:B_plus ?C_plus.?x SPC:B ?C.?x SPC:B_minus ?C_minus.?x SPC:D_plus ?D_plus.?x SPC: Institution? Institution.?x SPC:Semester ?Semester.?x SPC:Coursecode ?Coursecode.FILTER (regex(?Coursecode, “CourseA”))FILTER (regex(?Institution, “InstitutionA”))FILTER regex(?Semester, “SemesterID”)}	 		 	6.3 How many students failed the course?	SELECT ?x ?Coursecode ?Group (?D + ?E + ?F AS ?Total_of_fail) where {?x SPC:Group ?Group.?x SPC:D ?D.?x SPC:E ?E.?x SPC:F ?F.?x SPC: Institution ? Institution.?x SPC:Semester ?Semester.?x SPC:Coursecode ?Coursecode.FILTER (regex(?Coursecode, “CourseA”))FILTER (regex(?Institution, “InstitutionA”))FILTER regex(?Semester, “SemesterID”)}	 		 	8.1 How is the student's current performance?	SELECT ?x ?Coursecode ?Group ?Semester ?Studentname ?Matricno ?Weightage1 ?Weightage2 ?Weightage3 ?totalcarrymarkWHERE {?x SPC:Coursecode ?Coursecode.?x SPC:Group ?Group.?x SPC:Semester ?Semester.?x SPC:Matricno ?Matricno.?x SPC:Studentname ?Studentname.?x SPC:Weightage1 ?Weightage1.?x SPC:Weightage2 ?Weightage2.?x SPC:Weightage3 ?Weightage3.?x SPC:Weightage4 ?Weightage4.BIND(xsd:decimal(?Weightage1) + xsd:decimal(?Weightage2) + xsd:decimal(?Weightage3) + xsd:decimal(?Weightage4) AS ?total)BIND((ROUND(?total * 10) / 10) AS ?roundedTotal)BIND(IF(CONTAINS(STR(?roundedTotal), “.”), ?roundedTotal, CONCAT(STR(?roundedTotal), “.0”)) AS ?totalcarrymark)FILTER (regex(?Group, “GroupA”))FILTER regex(?Semester, “SemesterID”)FILTER (regex(?Coursecode, “CourseA”))}	 		 	9.1 Who is the student that currently needs help the most?	SELECT ?x ?Coursecode ?Group ?Semester ?Studentname ?Matricno ?Weightage1 ?Weightage2 ?Weightage3 ?totalcarrymarkWHERE {?x SPC:Coursecode ?Coursecode.?x SPC:Group ?Group.?x SPC:Semester ?Semester.?x SPC:Matricno ?Matricno.?x SPC:Studentname ?Studentname.?x SPC:Weightage1 ?Weightage1.?x SPC:Weightage2 ?Weightage2.?x SPC:Weightage3 ?Weightage3.?x SPC:Weightage4 ?Weightage4.BIND(xsd:decimal(?Weightage1) + xsd:decimal(?Weightage2) + xsd:decimal(?Weightage3) + xsd:decimal(?Weightage4) AS ?total)	 		BIND((ROUND(?total * 10) / 10) AS ?roundedTotal)BIND(IF(CONTAINS(STR(?roundedTotal), “.”), ?roundedTotal, CONCAT(STR(?roundedTotal), “.0”)) AS ?totalcarrymark)FILTER (regex(?Group, “GroupA”))FILTER regex(?Semester, “SemesterID”)FILTER (regex(?Coursecode, “CourseA”))FILTER (xsd:decimal(?totalcarrymark) < 49)}
To test how good the information provided by an ontology is, several questions, called competency questions CQs, should be answered. The result of the SPARQL produced by the queries will be shown to the expert involved in the interview in the earlier phase of the study. This is important in ensuring the specific requirements and the needs of the users are fulfilled. This is agreed by the study conducted by and, in which the CQs are applied as an additional layer of evaluation after the ontology structure has already been validated by testing. The example of CQ and their corresponding SPARQL queries are stated as Table 7 below.
Evaluate the data retrieval result by using the performance evaluation matrix.
Phase 4: Evaluation of integrated repository
All of the results will be reviewed by the user of the LA in order to guarantee that the results that are produced by the queries are accurate. For the purpose of this investigation, the user was the one to verify the retrieval result because they are the ones who supplied the raw data source. In this particular scenario, they are expected to be familiar with the data, and they are the appropriate individuals to verify the conclusion of the retrieval process. It is the performance evaluation matrix that serves as the basis for the validation that is applied. The same performance evaluation matrix method was also applied by in testing the performance of their developed knowledge retrieval model.

Method validation
Laboratory experimental design for ontology performance evaluation setup.
Fig 12
To assess the performance of the Graph-Based Data Retrieval Model in this study, the model is tested through laboratory experiments using a performance evaluation matrix method. The results of these experiments are further used to calculate the accuracy, precision, recall as well as the F-1 measure of the SPARQL results obtained. All 25 queries proposed in the study are included in the test, which are tested together with the same domain experts who were interviewed at the beginning of the study. This ontology addresses four key objectives: 1) assisting faculty administrators in resource allocation and monitoring academic achievement regarding 2) course performance, 3) student performance, and 4) MOOC performance. In consequence, the laboratory experiments are also tested distinctly: Test 1, Test 2, Test 3, and Test 4, as illustrated in Fig. 12 below.
The terms and calculation as described as follows:
True Positive (TP): The case of a correct answer included by the query result.
False Negative (FN): The case of a correct answer that is not included by the query result.
False Positive (FP): The case of an incorrect answer included by the query result.
True Negative (TN): The case of an incorrect answer that is not included by the query result.
The accuracy is calculated by comparing the rate of correct answers predicted in the query result compared to the total result produced by the queries.
The precision is calculated based on the rate of correct answer predicted in the query result compared to the total number of the total correct answer produced by the query result.
The recall rate is calculated based on the rate of accurate correct prediction produced by the query result compared to the total correct prediction and incorrect prediction produced and by the query result.
Finally, the mean of the study's recall and precision rates are determined using the F1 score.
In this study, the academic data is generated from 2 different institutions, institution A and institution B. In order to assure the accuracy of the comparison of institutions' data, the pilot data is collected exclusively from students enrolled in multimedia degree programs, thus ensuring consistency in the sort of student performance data being analysed. This is important to fulfil the objective of heterogeneity that not only this SPC can integrate data from multiple platforms within the institution, it also can integrate data involving multiple institutions platforms. The results were based on the average, which means that the same test will be done again through the utilisation of a different data set of data pertaining to a different subject or at the very least a different cohort of student batch material.

Limitations
The foremost drawback of this method is related to the early stages of developing the dataset and defining the model. These phases involve significant domain knowledge and stakeholder engagement to determine the right sources of data; the competency questions that define the scope of the ontology; and the primary elements of that ontology. In obtaining the information needs, it is recommended in this study that a series of interviews should be conducted with the chosen domain expert to enhance the information collection exercise. This process may generally take a considerable amount of time and may even require several cycles of modification depending on the feedback received from the various stakeholders and in relation to the dynamic nature of data demands over time.
The process of converting the data into the Terse RDF Triple Language format before loading it into the repository is also important before the data can be loaded. It refers to the process whereby all the data must go through data cleaning and pre-processing in order to put the data to its own type, for instance whether the data is string or number before loading. Not only does this process take a lot of time, but it also needs to be done carefully.
In ensuring the data replication is not happening, the Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) setting must also be accurate. Here the URI will take most of the job so that no data redundancy can be experienced, especially for a column, which has its unique identity value. If not, we will encounter either data redundancy or, in the worst-case scenario, the data will be deleted resulting from the redundancy issue.

Conclusion
The method presented offers a structured approach to integrate and retrieve LA data from diverse heterogenous platforms that utilises a graph-based approach with the SPC ontology. There are four themes available in this LA study that focus on managing faculty resource allocation and assessing student success. As mentioned earlier, the informant's participation is crucial in determining the research's query strategies. The comments provided by the informant will be evaluated and organised into various categories based on their themes. A total of 25 CQs have been identified to provide the user with the necessary information to assist them in the decision-making process. Finally, to ensure the correctness and value of the data obtained from the proposed approach, a sample from the results will be checked using the confusion matrix to determine the accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score.

Ethics statements
Ethical approval was obtained from Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka [Ref. No: UTeM. 11 0.02/500–25/1/4 vol. 3(16)], and all participants provided informed consent. All names and identifying information have been anonymized to ensure privacy and confidentiality.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Methodology for development of a data and knowledge base for learning from existing nature-based solutions in Europe: the CONNECTING Nature project
Application of variation theory in STEM education: a comprehensive guideline for STEM teachers
Penetrating the fog: analytics in learning and education
The perceptions of the meaning and value of analytics in New Zealand higher education institutions
Learning Analytics The Emergence of a Discipline
B. Reinalda and E. Kulesza, “The Bologna Process – Harmonizing Europe's Higher Education,” 2006. doi: 10.2307/j.ctvbkk39v.
Implementation of FOAF, AIISO and DOAP ontologies for creating an academic community network using semantic frameworks
T. Finin, L. Ding, L. Zhou, and A. Joshi, “Social Networking on the Semantic Web,” 2005. doi: 10.1108/09696470510611384.
More effective ontology authoring with test-driven development and the TDDonto2 Tool
H. Kondylakis and V. Kostas, “Developing an Ontology for Curriculum & Syllabus,” 2018. [Online]. Available: www.bbc.co.uk/ontologies/curriculum
The bowlogna ontology: fostering open curricula and agile knowledge bases for europe's higher education landscape
OLOUD - an ontology for linked open university data
J.-S. Choi, M.J. Davis, A.F. Newman, and M.A. Ragan, “A Semantic Web Ontology for Small Molecules and Their Biological Targets,” 2010. doi: 10.1021/ci900461j.
N. Marín, C. Sáez-Árcija, and M.A. Vila, “Jar2ontology - A Tool for Automatic Extraction of Semantic Information From Java Object Code,” 2011. doi: 10.5220/0003510302670276.
K. Davies, C. Keet, and A. Ławrynowicz, “TDDonto2: a Test-Driven Development Plugin for Arbitrary TBox and ABox Axioms,” Aug. 2017, pp. 120–125. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-70407-4_23.
S. Tessaris and I. Horrocks, “Abox Satisfiability Reduced to Terminological Reasoning in Expressive Description Logics,” 2002. doi: 10.1007/3-540-36078-6_29.
L.K. McElfresh, “Creator Name Standardization Using Faceted Vocabularies in the BTAA Geoportal,” 2023. doi: 10.1080/01639374.2023.2200430.
Knowledge Retrieval Model Based on a Graph Database for Semantic Search in Equipment Purchase Order Specifications for Steel Plants

Supplementary materials

Data availability
The data that has been used is confidential.
Related research article: None.
For a published article: None.
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.mex.2024.103092.