The application of emerging technologies for the quality and safety evaluation of oilseeds and edible oils
Oilseeds and edible oils are an indispensable part for the human diet and provide nutritional support for the human health. It has been reported a total of above 170 million tons per annum of edible oils consumption were consumed worldwide. Safety and quality of oilseeds and edible oils cannot be ignored, which can pose risk to human health and cause agro-economic loss. Classical techniques widely used to detect the safety and quality attributes of oilseeds and edible oils often involve time-consuming and tedious operation; therefore, the development of low cost, rapid and non-destructive detection method is necessary. This review presents applications of four emerging spectroscopic techniques in recent ten years, such as Raman spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and near-infrared spectroscopy for determining the quality and safety of oilseeds and edible oils. Meanwhile, the technical challenges and future prospects of these non-destructive spectroscopic technologies are also discussed.
Highlights
Emerging technologies are used in quality and safety analysis of oilseeds and oils.
RS detects physicochemical components, mycotoxins, and residues in oilseeds and oils.
FS is effective in measuring tocopherol content and pesticide residues in edible oils.
FT-IR spectroscopy identifies anthocyanin of soybean.
NIR detects quality parameters in single seed and contaminants like AFB1 and Cd.

Introduction
Oilseeds and edible oils are an indispensable part for the human diet and provide nutritional support for the human health, which contains essential nutrients and provides with energy. Examples of common consumed oilseeds include rapeseed, soybean, peanut, and sesame, being also the major sources of edible oils in China. Oilseeds and edible oils contain various natural nutrients including fat, protein, fatty acids, chlorophyll, tocopherol, squalene and carotenoids, which have significant functions in anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer, anti-oxidation and preventing cardiovascular diseases. It has been reported a total of above 170 million tons per annum of edible oils consumption were consumed worldwide. However, oilseeds and edible oils are prone to be infected by fungi and mycotoxins during pre-harvest and post-harvest. Besides, pesticides are used to reduce diseases and insect pests of oilseeds, which can sometimes lead to the pesticide residues problem that need to be addressed. Moreover, the edible oils contain heavy metals with toxic properties such as arsenic with the range of 0.009–0.019μg/g. Meanwhile, the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are characteristics of carcinogenic and teratogenic, which can contaminate edible oil through various ways such as the oilseeds plants uptake PAHs by contaminated soil. Mycotoxins, pesticide residue, heavy metals and PAHs are the common hazard factors in oilseeds and edible oils, which can pose risk to human health and cause agro-economic loss. It is therefore critical to evaluate the quality and safety of oilseeds and edible oils to ensure the high-quality development of oil industry.
Generally, chromatography and its hyphenation with mass spectrometry are the conventional and classical detection methods for quality and safety of oilseeds and oils, such as gas chromatography (GC), liquid chromatography (LC), gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC–MS), liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Meanwhile, the enzyme linked immunosorbent assay and polymerase chain reaction are used to assess the contamination of aflatoxin and fungal. These technologies are widely used to detect safety and quality of oilseeds and oils. However, they are usually time-consuming, tedious operation and destructive, requiring some pretreatment or sample preparation. Therefore, evaluation trends of oilseeds and oils aim at developing advanced methods that are nondestructive, reliable, low cost, fast to measure. Emerging non-destructive spectroscopic technologies such as Raman spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy and near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy are considered as promising tools for the quality and safety assessment of oilseeds and oils. The review of quality analysis in oilseeds and edible oils using NIR have been reported. Raman spectroscopy has the narrow Raman band well resolved and the spatial resolutions, insensitive to water and temperature, lower sensitivity, high structural selectivity, provide qualitative, quantitative and structural analysis for food and agriculture nutritional components. Fluorescence spectroscopy has the ability to get 1 % accuracy and high sensitivity and selectivity for multiple potential analytes. FT-IR is a high energy throughput, multiplexing capability, a good signal-to-noise ratio and highly reproducible technique. It also can be used to determine the powdered, dehydrated, or aqueous samples. NIR with probe flexibility and has the capability to detect the multiple components simultaneously.
Non-destructive technologies combined with chemometrics were applied to screen the safety and quality attributes in many kinds of agricultural products such as fish (Cheng et al., 2014), fruits, staple foods (Su et al., 2017) and cereals. This review is intended to have a comprehensive introduction of emerging non-destructive spectroscopic techniques, along with an overview of the application of these spectroscopic techniques in safety and quality evaluation of oilseeds and edible oils. Moreover, the future trends of application in non-destructive spectroscopic techniques are discussed.
In this review, the selection of references follows a set of strict criteria. The search engine of Web of Science was used and the keywords include “Raman/Fluorescence/FT-IR/NIR spectroscopy and oilseeds” and “Raman/Fluorescence/FT-IR/NIR spectroscopy and edible oils” to identify relevant literature. Only studies published in English between 2015 and 2024 were considered, ensuring the inclusion of the most recent advances in this research field. During the selection process, irrelevant studies, duplicates, and articles of low quality were excluded. In order to provide readers with a comprehensive, systematic, and reliable literature base that supports the arguments and conclusions presented.

Non-destructive spectroscopic techniques and applications

Raman spectroscopy
Overview of application of Raman spectroscopy in the detection of nutrient components of oilseeds.
Table 1
Species	Spectral range (nm) (0()(()(s)11()()*()()(nm)	Model	Attribute(s)	Performance/Accuracy	Reference	 	Soybean	5128.2–25,000	Metric-MLR	Bulk protein, oil content	R2–0.87-0.87, RMSEP-1.15 ± 0.04–0.80 ± 0.02.		 	Edible oils	5000–20,000	–	PV	–		 	Edible oils	2500–125,000	–	Iodine values	R2–0.976		 	EVOO	3278.7–40,000	PLSR, PCR	PV, free acidity	R2–0.989-0.994RMSE-0.72 meq O2/kg −0.01 %		 	Edible oils	3703.7–23,257.0	PLS	PV, acid values, Total polar compounds	RMSEP-0.03-0.95-1.89, R2P-0.91-0.86-0.96RER-12.8-9.3-16.5, RPD-3.4-2.5-5.0		 	Flaxseed oil	2777.8–100,000	–	PV, acid value	R2–0.99179		 	Edible oils	3030.3–100,000	SVM	Acid value	R2P- 0.932RMSEP- 0.153		 	soybean oil, canola oil, palm oil	3125–100,000	LS-SVM	Acid value	RMSEP-0.016, RPD-11.351		 	Edible oils	4347.8–25,000	PLSR	Saponification value	R2–0.999, RMSEP-2.4		 	EVOO	3278.7–13,333.3	PLS	Oleic acid, palmitic acid, linoleic acid	R2–0.80-0.92,cross validation-nearly 0.68.		 	Olive oil	–	–	FFA	–		 	Edible oils	2941.2–200,000	SMLR	TFA	residual predictive deviation-4.639		 	EVOO	3225.8–100,000	PLS	SAFA, MUFA, PUFA	lower errors		 	Vegetable oils	3846.2–57,142.9	PLS	Total MUFA, PUFA	R2–0.9555-0.9963RMSEP-0.0207- 0.0054		 	Rapeseed and soybean oil	2857.1–50,000	SVR	MUFA, PUFA, SAFA	R2–0.9670-0.9568-0.9553,RMSE-0.0273-0.0326-0.0340R2–0.9414-0.9562-0.9422, RMSE-0.0460-0.0378-0.0548		 	Olive oil	3278.7–13,333.3	–	β-carotene	–
Note: Metric-MLR: metric-based multiple linear regression, R2: coefficient of determination, RMSEP: root mean square error of prediction, PV: peroxide value, PLSR: partial least squares regression, RMSE: root mean square error, PLS: partial least squares, R2p: determination coefficient of prediction, SVM: support vector machine, LS-SVM: least-squares support vector machine, FFA: free fatty acid, TFA: trans fatty acids, SAFA: saturated fatty acids, MUFA: monounsaturated fatty acids, PUFA: polyunsaturated fatty acids, SVR: support vector regression.
Raman spectroscopy was proposed by Raman and Krishnan, which is an inelastic scattering phenomenon that based on the exchange of light photon energy with molecules, and mainly causes the red shift of incident photon energy. The light source is monochromatic light with a certain frequency when analyzing the sample and monochromatic light incident into the medium leads to two different scattering processes. One is there is no energy exchange between the scattered photons and the sample molecules, the scattering frequency is the same as the excitation photons while the propagation direction of the scattered photons has changed. This elastic scattering is called Rayleigh scattering, which is the main part of scattering. The other is a minority of scattered photons exchange energy with the sample molecules. Not only has the direction of propagation changed, but also its frequency is different from the excitation photons. This inelastic scattering is called Raman scattering. Meanwhile, Raman scattering includes two types, one is Stokes scattering and the other is anti-Stokes scattering. With the rapid advancement of technology, Raman spectroscopy has various kinds of evaluation spectroscopy in order to meet different demands, including surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), fourier-transform Raman spectroscopy, micro-Raman spectroscopy, NIR Raman spectroscopy, and spatially offset Raman spectroscopy. Raman spectroscopy is a rapid and nondestructive vibration technique, it shows great potential to identify common and specific components in complex matrices combined with chemometrics. Furthermore, it has been applied to determine the quality and safety of the oilseeds and edible oils intensively. The overview of application of Raman spectroscopy in the detection of quality attributes of oilseeds and edible oils is shown in Table 1.
Protein, oil content, peroxide value (PV), iodine value, and fatty acids, are the important quality parameters for the oilseeds and edible oils, besides, carotenoids contributes to the oxidative stability for the edibles oil. These quality parameters have got progress with Raman spectroscopy. A model was established with different treatment of soybean, including ground bean, whole meal, and ground meal. Metric-based multiple linear regression (Metric-MLR) was the optimal method to measure bulk protein and oil content of whole meal soybean. As a result, coefficient of determination (R2) were both 0.87 and root mean square error of prediction (RMSEP) were 1.15 ± 0.04 and 0.80 ± 0.02. A surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy analyzer based on plasmonic metal liquid-like platform was developed to detect the PV in edible oils, which showed the relative deviation was less than 10 % compared to the national standard method. Similarly, Raman spectroscopy was proved to outperform in assessment of PV and free acidity in extra virgin olive oil (EVOO). Partial least squares regression (PLSR) and principal component regression (PCR) were used to establish the model. The best result showed R2 value of 0.989 and 0.994, low root mean square error (RMSE) value of 0.72 meq O2/kg and 0.01 % for PV and free acidity. Edible oils were used to detect the PV, acid values and total polar compounds under frying conditions at real time by Raman spectroscopy. The model of acid value and peroxide value in flaxseed oil during frying was established coupled with peak-area-ratio method. Iodine value of unsaturated edible oils was determined and obtained the R2 of 0.976. Variable combination population analysis (VCPA) combined with support vector machine (SVM) were used to detect the acid value of edible oils during storage and obtained the determination coefficient of prediction (R2P) and RMSEP were 0.932 and 0.153. The least-squares support vector machine (LS-SVM) was used to build the model for predicting acid value in soybean oil, canola oil, and palm oil. The model obtained an RMSEP of 0.016 and a ratio of prediction to deviation (RPD) of 11.351. PLSR was employed to build the model for saponification value of coconut-gingelly oil and coconut-sunflower oil systems, with the R2 and RMSEP were 0.999 and 2.4, respectively. Raman spectroscopy was a useful approach to monitor the fatty acid (FA) concentration of the vegetable oils. EVOO was used to detect the oleic acid, palmitic acid and linoleic acid, with R2 between 0.80 and 0.92, the cross validation was nearly 0.68. A novel approach was proposed that the free fatty acid (FFA) of olive oil was detected by the relative intensity ratio of I1525/I1655. In another study, a rapid method for determination of trans fatty acids (TFA) concentration in edible oils by stepwise multiple linear regression (SMLR) method and obtained residual predictive deviation was 4.639. The saturated fatty acids (SAFA), monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) in EVOO were determined by Raman spectroscopy. The result showed lower errors and all errors are close to 0. A study was investigated to evaluate total MUFA and PUFA in vegetable oils, which had the great result that R2 were 0.9555 and 0.9963, RMSEP were 0.0207 and 0.0054, respectively. The MUFA, PUFA and SAFA of rapeseed and soybean oil were obtained a higher correlation coefficient and lower RMSE value. Only one drop olive oil was used to detect the β-carotene, which can be used to detect olive fly attack.
Network structure of mid-level fusion technology.
Fig. 1
Raman spectroscopy was not only used for quality analysis but also for detecting mycotoxins, PAHs and pesticide residues in oilseeds and edible oils. Raman spectroscopy combined with synergy interval partial least squares (siPLS) were used to screen zearalenone-contaminated maize. Meanwhile, aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) in maize was detected with SERS. Detection of AFB1 in peanut oil was also investigated. Recurrent neural network (RNN) was used to detect the AFB1 in edible oils with the accuracy of 100 %, R2 and the ration of prediction to deviation were 0.95 and 4.86, respectively. Liquid-interfacial surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy was employed to detect the PAHs in edible oils within 3 min. Long short-term memory network (LSTM) combined with convolutional neural network (CNN) to detect the chlorpyrifos residues in corn oil, with the R2P and RPD were 0.90 and 3.2, respectively. Meanwhile, the use of a one-dimensional CNN (1D-CNN) to determine chlorpyrifos residues in corn oil obtained satisfactory results when combined with data fusion from Raman and NIR spectrometers. The network structure of mid-level fusion technology was shown in Fig. 1. Raman spectroscopy has been applied to determine the oil content, protein, PV, iodine value and FA in oilseeds and edible oils, it has the unique advantage to differentiate the cis or trans double bonds in unsaturated fatty acids. Furthermore, the application of Raman spectroscopy for minor components like tocopherol, phenolic compounds and squalane in edible oils has been reviewed (Hu et al., 2019). Meanwhile, the hazards factors in oilseeds and edible oils are also introduced.
In summary, CC, CN, C–NO2, C–X (X = F, Cl, Br or I), C—S and S—S have the strong Raman signals because the stronger change in polarization of these molecules, which showed satisfactory result for detection the quality parameters and the hazards factors of oilseeds and edible oils with these functional groups. Raman spectroscopy not only can obtain the information about the molecular fingerprinting but also acquire the bond structure changes compared to other spectroscopic technologies. However, fluorescence scattering light has much stronger intensity than Raman scattering light, some measures are required to restrict the fluorescence interference, such as fluorescence quenching method and the chemometrics. However, there are still some challenges for the removal methods, for example, the fluorescence removal effectiveness may change with the sample used, so exploring the reliable and efficient methods to eliminate the fluorescence is essential. Meanwhile, the food matrix is an important challenge, therefore, extraction, concentration and other basic preparation steps might be necessary prior to Raman spectroscopy used. Besides, the development of suitable signal enhancement substrates is essential for obtaining reliable results and improving the test sensitivity. Meanwhile, Raman spectroscopy coupled with mass spectroscopy or fluorescence spectroscopy has been used for bioanalytical applications recently. Therefore, Raman spectroscopy connect with other analytical technique to evaluate the quality and safety in oilseeds and edible oils can be used. Furthermore, the future trends of the Raman spectrometer will be automatic and miniaturized portable instruments.

Fluorescence spectroscopy
Overview of application of fluorescence spectroscopy in the detection of nutrient components of oilseeds.
Table 2
Species	Spectral range (nm)	Model	Attribute(s)	Performance/Accuracy	Reference	 	Soybean	200–600	PLSR	Protein, oil content	R2–0.86 - 0.74		 	Peanut oil	200–800	ANN	PV, acid value	MSEtrain-2.45-0.03, MSEtest-4.10-3.43,Rtrain-0.96-1.00, Rtest-1.00-1.00		 	Edible oils	200–800	MCR-ALS	PV	Rtrain-1, Rtest-0.96		 	Peanut oil	210–980	ANN, SVR	PV, acid value	R2v-0.873-0.854,RMSEV-2.896-0.154		 	EVOO	250–700	U-PLS	Peroxide index, K232, K270, Oxidative stability index	R2v-0.94-0.94-0.86-0.90,RMSEP-1.53-0.16-0.019-3.60mEqO2·kg−1REP(%)-14.98–9.22-12.25-8.12		 	EVOO	250–698.5	PLSR	Acidity, K232, total tocopherol, peroxide index	R2 close to 0.9,R2 close to 0.7(peroxide index)		 	Virgin olive oil	250–700	PLS	TPC	R2–0.951, relative predictive deviation-4.0.		 	Rapeseed oil	250–500	MLR, PLSR	Pheophytin, carotenoids, total tocopherol content	R2cal-0.903-0.861-0.984,R2cv-0.825-0.735-0.972,RMSECV-27.2-0.25-6.65		 	EVOO	250–730	PLS	Squalene	RMSEC-0.1500, RMSECV-0.1065,RMSEP-0.1310
Note: PLSR: partial least squares regression, R2: coefficient of determination, ANN: artificial neural network, PV: peroxide value, Rtrain: correlation coefficient for training set, Rtest: correlation coefficient for training set, MCR-ALS: multivariate curve resolution alternating least square, U-PLS: unfolded partial least squares, SVR: support vector regression, R2v: determination coefficient of validation, RMSEV: root mean square error of validation, RMSEP: root mean square error of prediction, REP: relative error of prediction, TPC: total polar compounds, RMSECV: root mean square error of cross-validation, MLR: multiple linear regression, R2cal: determination coefficient of calibration, R2cv: determination coefficient of cross-validation.
Fluorescence is a high-energy light source excites molecules or moieties to emit light and release energy, which is a form of luminescence. Fluorophores are organic compounds that absorb (chromophore) and re-emit light, they have a core position in the fluorescence spectroscopy, and the components produce fluorescence in the molecules. Fluorescence spectroscopy, also called fluorescence fingerprint, is used to measure the fluorescence characteristics of objects, and can detect organic components with fluorescence chromophores, offering information about the electronic structure of the objects. Generally, the fluorescence process includes the following steps: the molecules absorb light from the ground state to the excited state; then changing from the upper excited state to the lower electronic state without any radiation; and finally the electronic state returns to the ground state. Single fluorescence spectroscopy and synchronous fluorescence spectroscopy are suitable for fluorescence spectrometer. Meanwhile, fluorescence spectroscopy, with its high sensitivity and selectivity, is well-suited for assessing the quality and safety of oilseeds and edible oils. The overview of application of fluorescence spectroscopy in the detection of quality attributes of oilseeds and edible oils is listed in Table 2.
The model of protein and oil contents in soybeans were built with the R2 reached 0.86 and 0.74. The model was based on the artificial neural network (ANN) method for the prediction of PV, acid value in peanut oil, which presented satisfactory results with MSEtrain was 2.45, MSEtest was 4.10, correlation coefficient for training set (Rtrain) was 0.96 and correlation coefficient for test set (Rtest) was 1.00 for PV, MSEtrain was 0.03, MSEtest was 3.43, Rtrain was 1.00, and Rtest was 1.00 for acid value in high temperatures. Four edible oils were stored at different days to measure the PV, multivariate curve resolution alternating least square (MCR-ALS) and ANN were used to build the model, the result showed the Rtrain and Rtest were 1 and 0.96, respectively. The fuorescence intensity, reduced scattering coefficients and absorption of peanut oils were used to build the model for PV and acid value. ANN and support vector regression (SVR) revealed the optimal result of PV and acid value with the R2V were 0.873 and 0.854, and root mean square errors for validation set (RMSEV) 2.896 meq·kg−1 and 0.154 mg/g, respectively (Wang et al., 2024). Unfolded partial least squares (U-PLS) was performed to build the oxidation index model of the EVOO with four different kinds of containers. Fluorescence emission spectra of EVOO was obtained to determine the characteristics including acidity, peroxide index, K270, K232, total tocopherols, α-tocopherol, β-tocopherol and γ-tocopherol, the model showed R2 of acidity, K232 and total tocopherol content close to 0.9, while the peroxide index close to 0.7, and other characteristics had a bad performance. PLSR was employed to evaluate total tocopherol content of edible oils by fluorescence spectroscopy. The prediction accuracy presented regression coefficient (r) was 0.991 and root mean square error of cross-validation (RMSECV) was 36 mg/dm3. As a result, the model can be used for prediction total tocopherol content of edible oils (Sikorska et al., 2005). A rapid analytical method based on fluorescence spectroscopy was developed for the determination of total phenolic content (TPC) in virgin olive oil. Partial least squares (PLS) with accuracy values for R2 was 0.951, relative predictive deviation was 4.0. Cold-pressed rapeseed oil was used to determine the pheophytin, carotenoids and total tocopherol content. The result obtained determination coefficient of calibration (R2cal) were 0.903, 0.861 and 0.984, determination coefficient of validation (R2cv) were 0.825, 0.735 and 0.972, RMSECV were 27.2, 0.25 and 6.65 by using multiple linear regression (MLR) and PLSR. Therefore, fluorescence spectroscopy can be used to determine the pheophytin, carotenoids and total tocopherol content in cold-pressed rapeseed oil. The wavelength of 250–730 nm was chosen to detect the squalene content in extra virgin olive oils, which revealed the root mean square error of calibration (RMSEC), RMSEV and RMSEP were 0.1500, 0.1065 and 0.1310, respectively.
Fluorescence spectroscopy has developed rapidly and widely used in the detection of hazard factors of oilseeds and edible oils. The combination of multi-way method and fluorescence spectroscopy was employed to determine the aflatoxin B1 and aflatoxin B2 (AFB2) of peanuts. The carbendazim and metiram pesticides residues of rapeseed and peanut oils was detected by collecting fluorescence spectrum. The R2 between the fluorescence intensity and the pesticide concentration in the mixture was greater than 0.99. Limit of detection (LOD) were 7.07 × 10−4 mg/mL and 9.28 × 10−4 mg/mL for carbendazim and metiram pesticides residues. It was an efficient way to detect the pesticide residues in rapeseed and peanut oils. Fluorescence spectroscopy was used to determine the carbendazim and chlorothalonil pesticides residues of peanut oil. The carbendazim and chlorothalonil of peanut oil using excitation-emission matrix fluorescence coupled with alternating penalty trilinear decomposition (APTLD) can achieve high recoveries and sensitivity. It was verified that fluorescence spectroscopy can analysis the different pesticides residues of peanut oil. A study was investigated that the extraction with the generation of hydride or cold vapor combined with atomic fluorescence spectrometry can determine the As, Se and Hg in crude palm oil. The concentrations of As and Se was limit of quantification (LQ) < −1.6 and 1.3–2.4 μg/L. However, the concentration of Hg was below the LQ. It was proved atomic fluorescence spectrometry is reliable to determine As and Se in crude palm oil. Heavy PAHs in olive and sunflower oils were detected by fluorescence spectroscopy. The detection of PAHs obtained the satisfactory result though solid phase extraction with silica to remove the pigments and tocopherol. The PAHs of vegetable oils were successfully to detect using second-derivative nonlinear variable-angle-matrix isopotential synchronous fluorescence spectroscopy. The LOD of the chrysene (Chr), benzo(a)anthracene (BaA), benzo(a)pyren (BaP), and benzo(b)fluoranthene (BbF) were 13.0, 8.64, 0.16 and 7.68 μg/kg, respectively.
Generally, fluorescence spectroscopy was suitable for the determination of oil content, protein, PV, acid value, total tocopherol content, TPC and hazard factors in oilseeds. Fluorescence spectroscopy with rapidness and high sensitivity compared to other spectrophotometric techniques, it can be used to quantify fluorescent substances and monitor the molecular changes when it occurs during the food handling, processing and storage. However, fluorescence can be interfered by contaminants, which will lead to errors or no result. One photon induced fluorescence is the best option to detect the aflatoxin contaminants in solid foods, which can provide strong fluorescence signal to detect the low concentrations of contamination. Furthermore, on-line monitor quality of oilseeds is essential to use fiber optics connect with fluorescence spectrometer to make the real time detection of quality in oilseeds is possible.

Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
Overview of application of FT-IR in the detection of nutrient components of oilseeds.
Table 3
Species	Spectral range (nm)	Model	Attribute(s)	Performance/Accuracy	Reference	 	Edible oils	250–2500	BiPLS	Iodine value	R2–0.9885, RMSECV-2.68, RMSEP-2.73		 	Coconut, rapeseed, and linseed oil	200–2500	PLS	Iodine value, saponification number	RSD- 0.39 % -0.32 %		 	Edible oils	167–400	PLS	PV	R-0.9972, PRESS-66.46,RMSEP-0.579		 	Soybean, rapeseed, sunflower, peanut oils	526–1493	PLSR	PV, acid value	R2c-0.964-0.955, R2p-0.939-0.919,RMSEC-0.060-0.025，RMSEP-0.080-0.027		 	Canola, Corn, Sunflower, frying oil	250–1818	OSC-PLS	PV, FFA, FA	Rc > 0.99, Rv > 0.86	Mahboubifar et al. (2016)	 	Olive oil	250–1538	PLSR	FFA	R-0.99979, RMSEC-0.00441, RMSECV-0.0107		 	Rapeseed oil	2500–15,384.6	PLSR	FFA, PV, TBARS, TOTOX	R2p-0.99-0.99-0.99-0.87		 	Edible oils	250–1429	PLSR	TFA	R2–0.994-0.992, RMSECV-0.23-0.14.		 	Olive oil	250–1538	PLS	Oxidative stability, chlorophyll, palmitic, oleic, linoleic acids saturated, monounsaturated, polyunsaturated fatty acids, phenolic compound, TPC	R2 > 0.87		 	Corn, peanut, soybean, sunflower oil	250–1538	PLS	α-tocopherol	R-0.977, RMSEC-4.97		 	Virgin olive oil	250–1538	PLS	Phenolic compounds	R2–0.99, RMSEP-0.11		 	Amaranth seed oil	250–2500	PLS	Squalene	R2–0.9989, RMSEC-0.0930, RMSECV-0.1301		 	Soybean	250–1538	PLSR	Anthocyanin	R2–0.86-0.88,SEP-9.7-21.8 %
Note: BiPLS: backward interval partial least squares, R: regression coefficient, RMSECV: root mean square error of cross-validation, PLS: partial least squares, PLSR: partial least squares regression, RSD: relative standard deviations, PV: peroxide value, PRESS: prediction residual sums of squares, RMSEP: root mean square error of prediction, R2c: Determination coefficient of calibration, R2p: determination coefficient of prediction, OSC-PLS: orthogonal signal correction-partial least squares, FFA: free fatty acid, FA: fatty acid, TBARS: thiobarbituric acid reactive substances, TOTOX: total oxidation, Rc: correlation coefficients of calibration, Rv: correlation coefficients of validation, RMSEC: root mean square error of calibration, TFA: trans fatty acids, R2: coefficient of determination, SEP: standard error of prediction.
FT-IR spectroscopy is mainly the electromagnetic spectrum in the mid-infrared region with a wavenumber of 4000–400 cm−1, which measures the basic vibration of substances and records frequency or intensity into the infrared spectrum. It can be seen the wavelength of the light absorbed by the chemical bond in the spectrum. According to the characteristics of the sample and the required detection accuracy, precise and trustworthy data can be acquired by means of choosing appropriate accessories and sample preparation methods, thereby receiving chemical information about more samples. Both wet and dry samples can be analyzed using FT-IR, which can obtain high-quality spectra from a small number of samples. Additionally, FT-IR is widely used in oilseeds quality detection due to its distinct advantages. The overview of application of FT-IR in the detection of quality attributes of oilseeds is listed in Table 3.
Multivariate regression analysis was applied to predict the iodine value of edible oils based on FT-IR data. Backward interval PLS (BiPLS) algorithms revealed great predictive results that R2, RMSECV and RMSEP were 0.9885, 2.68 and 2.73, respectively. Disposable polyethylene films were selected to be the sample support to evaluate the iodine value and saponification number of edible oils. The method had a relative standard deviations (RSD) were 0.39 % and 0.32 % when compared to the standard methods, demonstrating its effectiveness in analyzing the iodine value and saponification number of edible oils. FT-IR was used to predict the PV in edible oils. It had the result of correlation coefficients (R) was 0.9972, prediction residual sums of squares (PRESS) and RMSEP were 66.46 and 0.579. FT-IR data fusion were applied to determine the PV and acid value in edible oils, which showed the great performance that R2c and R2p were 0.964 and 0.939, RMSEC and RMSEP were 0.060 and 0.080 for PV, Rc2 and Rp2 were 0.955 and 0.919, RMSEC and RMSEP were 0.025 and 0.027 for acid value. FTIR-attenuated total reflection (FTIR-ATR) was applied to detect the PV, FFA and FA in edible oils, with correlation coefficients of calibration (Rc) higher than 0.99 and correlation coefficients of validation (Rv) higher than 0.86 using orthogonal signal correction-PLS (OSC-PLS). Olive oil was studied to determine FFA with FT-IR. The accuracy obtained R, RMSEC and RMSECV were 0.9998, 0.0044 and 0.0107. FFA, PV, thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) and total oxidation (TOTOX) of the rapeseed oil in the process of storage were detected using FT-IR, the results showed that the R2p of the FFA, PV, TBARS were 0.99 while the R2p of TOTOX was 0.87. Quantitative model was developed for assessment TFA in edible oils by PLSR. The benchtop and portable attenuated total reflection-FTIR (ATR-FTIR) obtain the R2 were 0.994 and 0.992. RMSECV were 0.23 and 0.14. The method provided a rapidly alternative method to detect TFA. Different quality parameters of olive oils were estimated by means of FT-IR, with R2 more than 0.87 for oxidative stability, chlorophyll content, palmitic, oleic, linoleic acids, saturated, monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids, phenolic compound and TPC, which suggests FT-IR can be used to evaluate the quality of olive oil.
Meanwhile, FT-IR has made significant advances in detection of the specific nutrient components in oilseeds and oils. The study was analyzed to examine α-tocopherol of vegetable oils by PLS method, the result showed FT-IR have the potential to be utilized for the determination of α-tocopherol in vegetable oils. The wavenumber range 4000-600 cm−1 of FT-IR was used to measure the phenolic compounds of virgin olive oil. With R2 and RMSEP were 0.99 and 0.11, respectively. The findings revealed potential in detection sesamol in sesame seed oil. The determination of squalene in amaranth seed oil with the FT-IR, UV–visible and fluorescence techniques, which showed FT-IR obtained the great result with the RMSEC, RMSECV and R2 were 0.0930, 0.1301 and 0.9989, respectively. Besides, FT-IR detected the anthocyanin of single soybean seed successfully.
These studies have revealed the applicability of FT-IR for the quality evaluation in oilseeds due to its rapidness, better signal to noise ratio and quantitative and qualitative analysis. However, it is critical to improve spectral acquisition way and obtain the representative background to collect FT-IR spectra effectively. Usually, diffuse reflection accessory, ATR-FTIR and transmission mode are used to acquire the spectra. Meanwhile, selecting suitable chemometric methods to solve the spectral signal problems is an important way to realize effective calibrations.

Near infrared spectroscopy
The prediction results of four quality parameters in corn with different wavelength selection methods.
Fig. 2
NIR is a kind of high-energy vibrational spectroscopy covers the wavelength of 780-2500 nm, reflected or transmitted radiation is recorded when radiation the sample with NIR light, which provides low cost, rapid and greater penetrative power potential. NIR is the overtones and combinations of fundamental bands vibrations involves the functional groups of C—H, N—H and O—H and conforms to Lambert-Beer's law. In our previous work, the quality analysis of oilseeds and edible oils using NIR spectroscopy has been reviewed. Therefore, the process of quality and safety assessment in oilseeds and edible oils were introduced recently. Different wavelength selection methods were used to build the model of oil content, protein, moisture and starch in corn, as a result, eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) was used to extract the feature wavelengths and one-dimensional shallow CNN was applied to build the model of oil content, protein, moisture and starch in corn, the result revealed that the R2 of the main four parameters were higher than 0.99. The prediction results with different wavelength selection methods were revealed in Fig. 2. The moisture and protein in corn were detected using PLSR method. Single-kernel NIR was used to detect the oil content and protein in single flax seed, with the R2 were 0.82 and 0.62, standard error of prediction (SEP) were 1.72 and 0.96, respectively. Oil content in single kernel of maize was measured based on SVM pretreatment, which showed the R2 and RPD were 0.845 and 2.55, respectively. Also, the amylose content of single maize was measured. Portable NIR instrument was employed to detect the acidity index of peanut, the result showed great performance that RMSEP, R2P and RPD were 0.61 g/kg, 0.95 and 4.31, respectively. Protein, ether extract, crude fiber, ash, starch and moisture of maize and sorghum were determined successfully. Moreover, NIR applied as a fast method to detect the total flavonoids and phenolic content in peanut, the R2p were 0.9137 and 0.9042, and the external validation set showed satisfactory result with scores of 0.88 and 0.86 of total flavonoids and phenolic content.
Overview of applications of spectroscopic techniques in the detection of hazard factors of oilseeds and edible oils.
Table 4
Species	spectroscopy techniques	Spectral range (nm)	Model	Attribute(s)	Performance/Accuracy	Reference	 	Maize	RS	5555.6–200,000	SiPLS	Zearalenone	R2p-0.9260, RMSEP-87.9132 μg/kg	Guo et al. (2019)	 	Maize	SERS	3225.8–50,000	SVM	AFB1	R2p-0.9715, RMSEP-3.5377 μg/kg, RPD-5.8258		 	Peanut oil	SERS	190–1100	BP-AdaBoost	AFB1	5 ng/mL-100 ng/mL: RP-0.9283, RMSEP-10.1100 ng/mL-1000 ng/mL: RP-0.9332, RMSEP-90.4from 5 ngmL−1 to 100 ngmL−1		 	Peanut oil	RS	3030.3–100,000	PLS	AFB1	R2p-0.99, RMSEP-22.6 μg/kg		 	Edible oil	RS	2941.2–200,000	RNN	AFB1	R2p-0.95, ration of prediction to deviation −4.86		 	Edible oil	SERS	–	–	PAHs	R2–0.9959		 	Corn oil	RS	2202.7–119,047.6	LSTM-CNN	Chlorpyrifos	R2P-0.90, RPD-3.2		 	Corn oil	RS	2202.7–119,047.7	1D-CNN	Chlorpyrifos	RPD-11.6517, R2P- 0.9874.		 	Peanut	FS	300–550	PARAFAC	AFB1, AFB2	AFB1: R2–0.9856, RMSEC-0.06 ppbAFB2: R2–0.9822, RMSEC-0.06 ppb		 	Repeseed and peanut oils	FS	220–700	–	Carbendazim, metiram	R2>0.99, LOD: 7.07 × 10–4 mg/mL-9.28 × 10–4 mg/mL		 	Peanut oil	FS	200–900	APTLD	Carbendazim, chlorothalonil	R>0.96, LOD: 11 ng/mL-4.3 ng/mL		 	Palm oil	FS	–	–	As, Se and Hg	LQ < −1.6 and 1.3–2.4 μg/LHg: below LQ		 	Edible oil	FS	–	PLS, U-PLS	PAHs	R-0.9940-0.9946, LOD-2.6-0.8		 	Vegetable Oil	FS	350–600	–	Chr, BaA, BaP, and BbF	LOD: 13.0–8.64-0.16-7.68 μg/ kg		 	Peanuts	NIR	1000–2500	2D-CNN	AFB1	R2P-0.99, RMSEP-2.0 μg/kg, RPD-8.3		 	Peanuts	NIR	1111.1–2500	PLS	AFB1	R2C-0.984, RMSECV-2.2 %, RPD-7.91		 	Maize	NIR	901.8–1661.2	SVM	AFB1	R2P-0.9707, RMSEP-3.5967 μg/kg, RPD-5.7538		 	Peanut oil	NIR	833.3–2500	PLS	AFB1	R2–0.951, RMSEC-3.87 %, RPD-4.52		 	Corn oil	NIR	970–1700	1D-CNN	Chlorpyrifos	R2P-0.9492, RPD-4.4569		 	Rapeseed oil	NIR	950–1700	SVR	Procymidone	R2P-0.9939, RPD-2.3435		 	Peanut	NIR	800.1–2777.8	PLS	Cd	R2P-0.9539, RPD-0.0341		 	Peanut oil	NIR	1000–2500	PLSR	Cd	R2P-0.9675, RMSEP- 3.7753 mg/kg RPD-5.5485		 	Peanut oil	NIR	955.8–1702.6	PLSR	Cd	R2P-0.9666, RMSEP- 2.8207 mg/kg RPD-5.5705
Note: RS: raman spectroscopy, SiPLS: synergy interval partial least squares, R2p: determination coefficient of prediction, RMSEP: root mean square error of prediction, SERS: surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy, SVM: support vector machine, AFB1: aflatoxins B1, RP: correlation coefficients of prediction, PLS: partial least squares, RNN: recurrent neural network, R2: coefficient of determination, LSTM-CNN: long short-term memory network-convolutional neural network, RPD: ratio of prediction to deviation, 1D-CNN: one-dimensional convolutional neural network, AFB2: aflatoxins B2, RMSEC: root mean square error of calibration, R: regression coefficient, LOD: limit of detection, APTLD: excitation-emission matrix fluorescence coupled with alternating penalty trilinear decomposition, LQ: limit of quantification, U-PLS: unfolded partial least squares, PAHs: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, Chr: chrysene, BaA: benzo(a)anthracene, BaP: benzo(a)pyren, BbF:benzo(b)fluoranthene, 2D-CNN: two-dimensional convolutional neural network, R2c: determination coefficient of calibration, RMSECV: root mean square error of cross-validation, SVR: support vector regression, PLSR: partial least squares regression.
NIR showed great potential to detect AFB1 in peanuts and maize. Gramian angular summation field image coding combined with two-dimensional convolutional neural network (2D-CNN) to detect AFB1 in peanuts, RMSEP, R2P and RPD were 2.0 μg/kg, 0.99 and 8.3, respectively. Another study was that the PLS model was used to measure AFB1 in peanuts. Particle swarm optimization combined moving window were used to select the important variables to detect the AFB1 in maize, the SVM model showed RMSEP, R2P and RPD were 3.5967 μg /kg, 0.9707 and 5.7538, respectively. A PLS model for AFB1 in peanut oil was established. Moreover, chlorpyrifos residues in corn oil was detected with the 1D-CNN method. SVR was used to build the model for procymidone residues in rapeseed oil, the result showed the R2p was 0.9939 and RMSEP was 2.3435 mg/kg, respectively. Cadmium (Cd) in the peanut was detected and the R2p and RMSEP were 0.9539 and 0.0341, respectively. Meanwhile, NIR was used to detect Cd in peanut oil. In summary, the overview of application of spectroscopic techniques in the detection of hazard factors of oilseeds and edible oils was shown in Table 4.
The quality and safety assessment with emerging spectroscopic.
Fig. 3
NIR is a promising tool to detect the quality and safety in oilseeds and edible oils. However, it has weaker absorption overtones than mid-infrared spectra range. It is critical to develop NIR methods to measure more specific compounds in oilseeds and edible oils due to the weaker sensitivity. Moreover, decreasing the cost of instrument and improving the software and hardware are also important. On-line analysis is another direction in the future. The quality and safety assessment with emerging spectroscopic were shown in Fig. 3.

Limitations and future prospects
Spectroscopic techniques, including Raman spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, FT-IR spectroscopy and NIR spectroscopy are superior to be fast, sensitive, preprocessing-free and high efficiency, have been used to analyze the quality and safety of oilseeds and edible oils, which provide reliable quality and safety assessment for oilseeds and edible oils. However, it has some limitations of these technologies in oilseeds and edible oils. Concerning Raman spectroscopy, the interference with biological fluorescence is strong, it may influence the detection efficiency. Besides, the low Raman scattering cross-section, weak scattering signals of some materials, and the large degree of optical sampling variance for solid samples will affect the result. The drawback of fluorescence spectroscopy is not all elements and compounds show fluorescence, so the application range will be limited. FT-IR is a single beam and has the trouble to obtain representative background. Meanwhile, the instrument with high cost. In addition, Raman spectroscopy and FT-IR spectroscopy hardly offer the information about spatial distribution in the sample in terms of detection mycotoxins and toxigenic fungi of oilseeds. NIR as the classical spectral sensor, it has some limitations to detect the inhomogeneous contaminations due to its nature of “point” detection. NIR has requirements for sample thickness, homogeneity and dilution to avoid saturation (Lohumi et al., 2015). The application of non-destructive technologies in oilseeds and edible oils still have some challenges. We can avoid some limitations by means of choosing the available techniques according to different characteristics of quality parameters. Furthermore, the spectroscopic techniques combined with chemometrics in the agricultural product industry have a bright future. It is reported that Raman spectroscopy has been applied to determine the vitamins B2 and B12 in cereals, the determination of n-6 and n-3 fatty acid ratios in cereal grains by 1H NMR spectroscopy. The next direction is to explore the direction of vitamins B2 and B12, as well as the ratios of n-6 to n-3 fatty acids, in oilseeds using spectroscopic techniques. Meanwhile, it is hopeful that resolving issues related to instrumental and software limitations, along with effective data fusion, will improve the accuracy and precision of the detection results. Hyperspectral imaging, particularly multispectral imaging combined with deep learning and using a few important bands instead of full wavelengths to assess the food quality and safety. Additionally, developing new chemometric algorithms and the exploration of data are essential. There is also a need for portable, high-performance, and cost-effective instruments for real-time applications.

Conclusions
Spectroscopic techniques have been developed rapidly over the past few decades, which widely used in different fields of research due to its rapidness, short analysis time, noninvasive and simultaneous determination. This review summarized non-destructive technologies, including Raman spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, FT-IR and NIR spectroscopy along with their major applications in the quality and safety assessment of oilseeds and edible oils. Raman spectroscopy has the potential to detect physicochemical and specific nutrient components, as well as mycotoxins, pesticide residue, and PAHs in oilseeds and edibles oils, such as protein, oil content, fatty acids, tocopherol phenolic compounds, squalene, zearalenone, AFB1, chlorpyrifos and PAHs. Fluorescence spectroscopy provides information of quality and safety in oilseeds and edible oils, especially total tocopherol content and pesticide residue in edible oils. FT-IR spectroscopy revealed great performance in determining the anthocyanin of soybean. NIR spectroscopy is considered a classical and widely used technique for analyzing the quality and safety of oilseeds and edible oils. Recently, NIR has been used to detect quality parameters in single seed, such as oil content in single maize. Besides, it has been applied to detect contaminants like AFB1, chlorpyrifos, procymidone and Cd, providing new insights into its potential for safety assessments in oilseeds and edible oils. The applications of spectroscopic techniques in oilseeds and edible oils jointly guarantee the quality control of oilseeds and edible oils and promote the development of agricultural products.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Xue Li: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis. Wenwen Liu: Investigation, Formal analysis. Lu Xiao: Investigation, Formal analysis. Jie Zhao: Investigation, Formal analysis. Yan Chen: Investigation, Formal analysis. Liangxiao Zhang: Investigation, Conceptualization. Peiwu Li: Supervision, Conceptualization. Dolores Pérez-Marín: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Conceptualization. Xu Wang: Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Quick and reagent-free monitoring of edible oil saponification values using a handheld Raman device
Screening of edible oils for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons using microwave-assisted liquid-liquid and solid phase extraction coupled to one-to three-way fluorescence spectroscopy analysis
Nondestructive measurement of anthocyanin in intact soybean seed using Fourier transform near-infrared (FT-NIR) and Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy
One drop only. Easy and rapid Raman evaluation of β-carotene in olive oil and its relevance as an index of olive fly attack
Non-destructive prediction of internal and external quality attributes of fruit with thick rind: A review
Rapid single flax (Linum usitatissimum) seed phenotyping of oil and other quality traits using single kernel near infrared spectroscopy
Development of rapid extra virgin olive oil quality assessment procedures based on spectroscopic techniques
Rapid determination of unsaturated fatty acids in vegetable oil by Raman spectroscopy and chemometrics
Fluorescence spectroscopy and its applications: A review
The use of in-situ Raman spectroscopy to monitor at real time the quality of different types of edible oils under frying conditions
Determination of carbendazim and metiram pesticides residues in reapeseed and peanut oils by fluorescence spectrophotometry
Pre etched ag nanocluster as SERS substrate for the rapid quantification of AFB1 in peanut oil via DFT coupled multivariate calibration
Raman plus X: Biomedical applications of multimodal Raman spectroscopy
Applications of FT-IR spectrometry to plasma contents analysis and monitoring
Determination of aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) in maize based on a portable Raman spectroscopy system and multivariate analysis
Characteristic wavelengths optimization improved the predictive performance of near-infrared spectroscopy models for determination of aflatoxin B1 in maize
Feasibility study on Raman spectra-based deep learning models for monitoring the contamination degree and level of aflatoxin B1 in edible oil
Applicability of near infrared reflectance spectroscopy to predict amylose contents of single-grain maize
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy for biological studies
Quantitative determination of the iodine values of unsaturated plant oils using infrared and Raman spectroscopy methods
Fluorescence spectroscopy opens new windows into dissolved organic matter dynamics in freshwater ecosystems: A review
Food safety evaluation based on infrared spectroscopy and imaging: A review
Interaction and binding mechanism of cyanidin-3-O-glucoside to ovalbumin in varying pH conditions: A spectroscopic and molecular docking study
Near-infrared refectance spectroscopy model predictive of cadmium concentration in peanut kernels
Non-destructive and rapid evaluation of the potentiality of faba bean lipoxygenase to promote lipid oxidation of rapeseed oil by using mid-infrared and near-infrared spectroscopies
Quantification and monitoring the heat-induced formation of trans fatty acids in edible oils by Raman spectroscopy
Short wavelength Raman spectroscopy applied to the discrimination and characterization of three cultivars of extra virgin olive oils in different maturation stages
A feasibility study of the rapid evaluation of oil oxidation using synchronous fluorescence spectroscopy
A feasibility study for rapid evaluation of oil quality undergoing oven treatment using synchronous fuorescence spectrum
Quantitative assessment of zearalenone in maize using multivariate algorithms coupled to Raman spectroscopy
Prediction performance of NIR calibration models developed with different chemometric techniques to predict oil content in a single kernel of maize
Simultaneous quantification of total flavonoids and phenolic content in raw peanut seeds via NIR spectroscopy coupled with integrated algorithms
Prediction of polyphenol fraction in virgin olive oil using mid-infrared attenuated total reflectance attenuated total reflectance accessory-mid-infrared coupled with partial least squares regression
Rapid analysis of flaxseed oil quality during frying process based on Raman spectroscopy combined with peak-area-ratio method.Rapid analysis of flaxseed oil quality during frying process based on Raman spectroscopy combined with peak-area-ratio method. LWT-food
Integrated natural deep eutectic solvent and pulse-ultrasonication for efficient extraction of crocins from gardenia fruits (Gardenia jasminoides Ellis) and its bioactivities
Innovative nondestructive imaging techniques for ripening and maturity of fruits - a review of recent applications
Classical and emerging non-destructive technologies for safety and quality evaluation of cereals: A review of recent applications
Developing a Vis/NIR spectroscopic system for fast and non-destructive pesticide residue monitoring in agricultural product
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy for antioxidant capacity determination in colored glutinous rice
Quantitative analysis of aflatoxin B1 in moldy peanuts based on near-infrared spectra with two-dimensional convolutional neural network
Quantitative detection of acid value during edible oil storage by Raman spectroscopy: Comparison of the optimization effects of BOSS and VCPA algorithms on the characteristic Raman spectra of edible oils
Quantitative determination of peroxide value of edible oil by algorithm-assisted liquid interfacial surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy
An overview of near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) for the detection of insect pests in stored grains
Rapid prediction of low (<1%) trans fat content in edible oils and fast food lipid extracts by infrared spectroscopy and partial least squares regression
Optical techniques in non-destructive detection of wheat quality: A review
New advances in fluorescence excitation-emission matrix spectroscopy for the characterization of dissolved organic matter in drinking water treatment: A review
Application of fourier transform infrared spectroscopy for the quality and safety analysis of fats and oils: A review
Review of NIR spectroscopy methods for nondestructive quality analysis of oilseeds and edible oils
FT-IR and Raman spectroscopy data fusion with chemometrics for simultaneous determination of chemical quality indices of edible oils during thermal oxidation
Rapid determination of acidity index of peanut during storage by a portable near-infrared spectroscopy system
A simple fluorescence spectroscopic approach for simultaneous and rapid detection of four polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH4) in vegetable oils
Prediction of the acid value, peroxide value and the percentage of some fatty acids in edible oils during long heating time by chemometrics analysis of FTIR-ATR spectra
Fluorescence monitoring oxidation of extra virgin olive oil packed in different containers
Deep learning model based on molecular spectra to determine chlorpyrifos residues in corn oil
Iodine value determination of edible oils using ATR-FTIR and chemometric methods
Rapid screening of mixed edible oils and gutter oils by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry
Detection of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in commonly consumed edible oils and their likely intake in the Indian population
Rapid fatty acids detection of vegetable oils by Raman spectroscopy based on competitive adaptive reweighted sampling coupled with support vector regression
Cultivar discrimination, fatty acid profile and carotenoid characterization of monovarietal olive oils by Raman spectroscopy at a single glance
Rapid determination of n-6 and n-3 fatty acid ratios in cereal grains and forages by 1H NMR spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy analysis of free fatty acid in olive oil
Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) in food analytics: Detection of vitamins B2 and B12 in cereals
Comprehensive review on application of FTIR spectroscopy coupled with chemometrics for authentication analysis of fats and oils in the food products
Prediction of protein and oil contents in soybeans using fluorescence excitation emission matrix
Quantifying aflatoxins in peanuts using fluorescence spectroscopy coupled with multi-way methods: Resurrecting second-order advantage in excitation–emission matrices with rank overlap problem
Chemometric study of Andalusian extra virgin olive oils Raman spectra: Qualitative and quantitative information
Applications of fluorescence spectroscopy in dairy processing: A review
A simple and practical method to determine peroxide values in edible oils via infrared quartz cuvette-based Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
Optics, Laesrs, and molecules: A study of Raman spectroscopy
Front-face fluorescence spectroscopy and chemometrics for quality control of cold-pressed rapeseed oil during storage
Rapid determination of α-tocopherol in vegetable oils by fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
Portable near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy and multivariate calibration for reliable quality control of maize and sorghum grain chemical composition
Bulk protein and oil prediction in soybeans using transmission Raman spectroscopy: A comparison of approaches to optimize accuracy
Evaluation of total phenolic content in virgin olive oil using fluorescence excitation–emission spectroscopy coupled with chemometrics
Quality alert from direct discrimination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in edible oil by liquid-interfacial surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
Extraction methods of virgin coconut oil and palm-pressed mesocarp oil and their phytonutrients
Recent progress in rapid analyses of vitamins, phenolic, and volatile compounds in foods using vibrational spectroscopy combined with chemometrics: A review
Recent development of optical methods in rapid and non-destructive detection of aflatoxin and fungal contamination in agricultural products
Quantitative determination of free fatty acids in extra virgin olive oils by multivariate methods and fourier transform infrared spectroscopy considering different absorption modes
A comparative study of ATR-FTIR, UV-visible and fluorescence spectroscopy combined with chemometrics for quantification of squalene in extra virgin olive oils
A new and rapid analysis method for the most important herbal squalene source: Comparison of UV-visible, fluorescence, and FTIR techniques for the quantification of squalene in amaranth seed oil
Bioactive compounds in cashew nut (Anacardium occidentale L.) kernels: Effect of different shelling methods
Prediction of various chemical parameters of olive oils with Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
Extraction induced by emulsion breaking for as, se and hg determination in crude palm oil by vapor generation-AFS
Spectroscopic studies on thermal degradation and quantitative prediction on acid value of edible oil during frying by Raman spectroscopy
Insights into chemometric algorithms for quality attributes and hazards detection in foodstuffs using Raman/surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy
Review on the processing characteristics of cereals and oilseeds and their processing suitability evaluation technology
Disentangling fluorescence of endogenous fluorescent substances from absorption and scattering effects for quantitative prediction for oxidation degree of peanut oils
Comparison of optimization algorithms for variable selection to enhance the predictive performance of PLS regression model in determining the concentration of heavy metal cd in peanut oil
Quantification of heavy metal cd in peanut oil using near-infrared spectroscopy combined with chemometrics: Analysis and comparison of variable selection methods
Review on contaminants in edible oil and analytical technologies
Recent developments and applications of hyperspectral imaging for rapid detection of mycotoxins and mycotoxigenic fungi in food products
Rapid and simultaneous determination of the iodine value and saponification number of edible oils by FTIR spectroscopy
Monitoring of chlorpyrifos residues in corn oil based on Raman spectral deep-learning model
Comparison of the performance of different one-dimensional convolutional neural network models-based near-infrared spectra for determination of chlorpyrifos residues in corn oil
A review of chemical composition and nutritional properties of minor vegetable oils in China
Rapid determination of aflatoxin B1 contamination in peanut oil by fourier transform near-infrared spectroscopy
Detecting aflatoxin B1 in peanuts by fourier transform near-infrared transmission and diffuse reflection spectroscopy
Raman imaging for food quality and safety evaluation: Fundamentals and applications
Study on isolation and raman spectroscopy of glycinin in soybean protein
Simultaneous determination of carbendazim and chlorothalonil pesticide residues in peanut oil using excitation-emission matrix fluorescence coupled with three-way calibration method
Determination of residual levels of procymidone in rapeseed oil using near-infrared spectroscopy combined with multivariate analysis
Optimizing feature selection with gradient boosting machines in PLS regression for predicting moisture and protein in multi-country corn kernels via NIR spectroscopy
Research progress on the origin traceability of edible oils
High precisive prediction of aflatoxin B1 in pressing peanut oil using Raman spectra combined with multivariate data analysis
Health risk assessment of eight heavy metals in nine varieties of edible vegetable oils consumed in China
Fusion of convolutional neural network with XGBoost feature extraction for predicting multi-constituents in corn using near infrared spectroscopy

Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.