Infectious Causes of Cholesteatoma and Treatment of Infected Ossicles prior to Reimplantation by Hydrostatic High-Pressure Inactivation
Chronic inflammation, which is caused by recurrent infections, is one of the factors contributing to the pathogenesis of cholesteatoma. If reimplantation of autologous ossicles after a surgical intervention is intended, inactivation of planktonic bacteria and biofilms is desirable. High hydrostatic pressure treatment is a procedure, which has been used to inactivate cholesteatoma cells on ossicles. Here we discuss the potential inactivating effect of high hydrostatic pressure on microbial pathogens including biofilms. Recent experimental data suggest an incomplete inactivation at a pressure level, which is tolerable for the bone substance of ossicles and results at least in a considerable reduction of pathogen load. Further studies are necessary to access how far this quantitative reduction of pathogens is sufficient to prevent ongoing chronic infections, for example, due to forming of biofilms.

1. Introduction
Cholesteatoma is a noncancerous condition that is characterized by abnormal growth of squamous epithelial cells in the middle ear and mastoid destroying the ossicles resulting in loss of hearing. This condition affects children more aggressively than adults. There are two types of cholesteatoma, namely, congenital and acquired cholesteatoma. General symptoms include release of smelly fluid from infected ear, loss of hearing, and pain on the infected ear. Treatment is a combination of surgery and the administration of antimicrobials. However, sometimes recovery is complicated by postsurgery infections.
The etiology of cholesteatoma is not yet completely understood, but various studies have revealed that a number of factors cooperate in a synergistic way to cause the forming of this nonneoplastic keratinizing lesion, which is characterized by enhanced proliferation of epithelial cells with aberrant morphologic characteristics. These factors include persistent microbial infection resulting in chronic inflammation, consecutive invasion by cells of the immune system, Eustachian tube dysfunction, aggregation of cellular debris, and increased viscosity of middle ear effusions, in-growth of blood vessels, auditory ossicle resorption, and epithelial hyperplasia.
During surgical treatment of cholesteatoma, affected parts of the ossicular chain must be removed. Because of best recovery of hearing autologous retransplantation of ossicles is still the therapy of choice. Therefore, devitalization of cholesteatoma-affected parts of the ossicular chain and their reimplantation would be beneficial. The hydrostatic high-pressure technology (HHD) is a promising method that can remove the cellular components during ongoing surgery. In the food industry, high pressure is already used as a substitute for pasteurization. Microorganisms are inactivated by high-pressure, but the required pressure level depends on the respective germ. The mechanism of action of hydrostatic high-pressure is essentially based on the changes taking place at the phase boundary of water to other molecules, in particular, the epithelial or bacterial cell surface. Under increasing pressure water molecules penetrate into the cavities of complex macromolecules and blow up the quaternary and tertiary structure of complex macromolecules. Covalent bonds are unaffected since the primary structure is not changed by high-hydrostatic pressure.
This paper will give a detailed overview on persistent microbial infections associated with cholesteatoma and their elimination by hydrostatic high pressure (HHP) during surgery to minimize the possibility of postsurgery infection.

2. Persistence of Microbial Pathogens in spite of Surgical Therapy of Cholesteatoma
Colonization by bacteria leads to biofilm formation on the ossicles of the middle ear. These biofilms lead to impaired clearance and consecutive chronic middle ear infection, which triggers chronic inflammation. Mediators expressed during inflammation like IL-1, PAF, and TNF-alpha induce mucin hypersecretion, hyperproliferation of epithelial cells and keratinocytes and bone resorption by activation of collagenases and osteoclasts.
Quite a number of Gram-positive, Gram-negative, and fungal pathogens have been isolated from cholesteatoma tissues (please see Table 1). Biofilm formation is believed to play an important role in persistence of these pathogens in the middle ear hence maintaining chronic inflammation eventually leading to the establishment of cholesteatoma. A recent in vitro study revealed that biofilm was responsible for the persistence of more than 50% of isolates of microbial pathogens in ossicles that were obtained from a cholesteatoma tissue. The great variety of suspected relevant pathogens suggests that the general inflammatory stimulus due to bacterial infections seems to be more important than the causing bacterial species itself. Further, as the bacterial flora of the upper respiratory tract physiologically colonizes the middle ear cavity, it is difficult to discriminate relevant pathogens from harmless colonizers.
As we stated in the introduction, treatment of cholesteatoma is usually based on surgery, including the surgical removal of chronically inflamed ossicles. Relapses are frequent with recurrence rates <10% already being considered as therapeutic success. Incomplete removal of pathogens or their biofilms, in particular, is a proven risk factor for recurrence.
For the treatment of middle ear cholesteatoma, reimplantation of autologous ossicles is frequently applied because optimal recovery of hearing is hardly achieved by allogeneic implants despite good biocompatibility and stability. The implantation of fixated homologue ossicles from an “ossicle bank” bears the potential risk of slow-virus or prion transmission and is, therefore, critically discussed.
Cholesteatoma cells on autologous ossicles should be thoroughly inactivated prior to any reimplantation approaches. The surgeon should abstain from immediate reimplantation if a readily removable coat of cholesteatoma cells or an infiltration by cholesteatoma-matrix into the bone is observed during surgery.
Next to cholesteatoma cells and difficult to identify, microbial biofilms that have contributed to chronic inflammation finally leading to cholesteatoma formation may persist on explanted ossicles as well.

3. Hydrostatic High-Pressure (HHP) to Devitalize Human Cells on Explanted Ossicles
Hydrostatic high-pressure technology (HHP), which can effectively disturb or even completely destroy eukaryotic cell membranes, elements of the cytoskeleton, and enzyme systems, allows for the inactivation of cholesteatoma cells on the ossicles. Previous studies have demonstrated successful devitalizing of bone tissue with intact bone matrix by HHP. Bone and tendon materials are resistant to pressure up to 600 MPa without measurable alteration of their biomechanical properties. HHP efficiently destroys vital human cells without affecting rigid structures of bone tissue. For explanted ossicles, a thorough eradication of vital cholesteatoma cells by pressure of 400 MPa has previously been demonstrated. The cellular damage was mainly caused by extensive membrane disruption. Accordingly, HHP allows the surgeon to destroy any harmful vital human cellular components of ossicle interponates within the surgical procedure.
Infectious complications and persistence of inflammation-inducing biofilms are, however, other risks of reimplantation of ossicles during cholesteatoma surgery. Inactivation of respective microorganisms is, therefore, another point of concern.

4. Hydrostatic High-Pressure (HHP) to Devitalize Microbial Pathogens
Several studies analyzed the inactivation of microorganisms by HHP application comprising both bacteria and viruses in food samples. By doing so, the procedure can replace pasteurization which is commonly applied in food industry. The target species defines the required pressure, which is necessary for a thorough inactivation within the sample. In contrast, data on the effects of HHP on colonizing or infecting pathogens in human samples are still rather scarce.
In a recently published study, a moderate inactivating effect of HHP of 350 MPa about 10 minutes, which had been shown to eradicate cholesteatoma cell growth on explanted human ossicles without harming the ossicle itself, was shown for colonizing microbes (scheme of experimental setup in Figure 1). In this study, those HHP conditions allowed for a complete inactivation of bacteria in about half of the tested clinical samples and a thorough eradication of vital cholesteatoma cells. The result was not unexpected as different bacterial species show varying susceptibilities to HHP. Furthermore, nonhomogenously inactivating effects have been observed even within defined species, namely, Corynebacterium pseudodiphtheriticum, Propionibacterium acnes, Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus hominis, Staphylococcus simulans, Staphylococcus caprae, and Turicella otidis. For these bacterial species 350 MPa for 10 minutes are close to the their inactivation threshold, therefor semi-quantification of bacterial load after pressure treatment yields equal or even higher amount compared to untreated specimen. Marked differences upon susceptibility against HHP within a species have been described so far with varying numbers of resistant subpopulations within a given strain. As expected due to the protective effects of the thicker cell wall, Gram-positive strains demonstrate a higher HHP resistance than Gram-negative ones. But there are differences within the Gram-negative bacteria as well. While P. aeruginosa is readily inactivated by HHP treatment as shown in various prior studies, the nonfermenting Gram-negative, rod-shaped Acinetobacter spp. resist in a similarly efficient way as staphylococci.

5. Known Effects of High Hydrostatic Pressure on Microorganisms
Few of the obviously complex mechanisms of bacterial adaption to pressure are analyzed on molecular level, usually for model organisms like lactic acid bacteria. Mesophile bacteria like lactic acid bacteria can be inactivated at 200–600 MPa about 5–60 minutes. If pressure between 200 and 300 MPa is applied, the sigmoid killing curves usually lead to plateaus indicating resistant fractions within the populations. However, adaptive strategies may vary between individual species. Genetic variability was shown to be a factor affecting HHP susceptibility. The pathways of stress response to high pressure are a partial composition of stress response reactions to other stress qualities and show measurable effects on expression or hydratization levels of molecules. High pressure especially alters many macromolecules while small molecules usually remain unchanged. Especially the cellular membrane is altered by the thermodynamic effects of high pressure including decreases of fluidity and integrity as well as changes of secondary and tertiary structure of membrane proteins. Thus deep-sea bacteria like Photobacterium profundum require alternative flagellar and porin system for their existence under high-pressure conditions. But also macromolecular associations, that are necessary for cellular division, dissociate under high-pressure conditions due to changes in hydratization. Translation and transcription are affected as well leading to the production of dysfunctional proteins within the cell. In addition, HHP efficiency could be affected by factors such as microbial growth phase, prior exposure to sublethal stress conditions, as well as environment composition and conditions.

6. Resistance of Bacterial Pathogens against High Hydrostatic Pressure
Bacteria are able to recover in spite of drastically decreased viability due to HHP under favourable conditions. It is further known that prior exposure towards sublethal stresses may dramatically increase resistance against HHP even in stress-sensitive microorganisms like Campylobacter jejuni. HHP-resistant variants of Listeria monocytogenes were described to be 10 to 600,000 times more resistant than the wild-type when exposed to 350 MPa. The population diversity of stress resistant Listeria monocytogenes variants suggests a high degree of genetic flexibility. Previously observed lacking inactivation of P. aeruginosa and S. epidermidis in higher concentrations (about MacFarland 0.5) is not surprising, for pressures about 900 MPa about 5 minutes are required for a 8-9 decadic log units reduction as demonstrated for Staphylococcus, Listeria, and Salmonella. Various conditions affect the inactivating effect of HHP treatment, including medium composition, pH value, temperature, ion concentrations (especially magnesium and calcium), sucrose concentration within the medium, growth phase of the microorganisms, and number of compression cycles. The analyses of all these interfering factors will require more and larger studies if adequate models for ossicle tissue are available.

7. Experience of Other Medical Disciples regarding High Hydrostatic Pressure Application for the Inactivation of Microbes on Biological Material
Allogeneic bone transplantation comprises a risk of infection. Previously described experiments with high hydrostatic pressure application about 600 MPa to human bone samples led to a complete disinfection in no more than 2 of 37 bone samples from patients with chronic osteomyelitis. Even in artificially infected bone specimens complete disinfection was achieved in no more than 66% for Staphylococcus aureus, 60% for P. aeruginosa, and 0% for Enterococcus faecium. Interestingly, blood and adherence to metal implants did not significantly alter the inactivating effect of HHP treatment, so quantitative reductions of vital bacteria about 5 decadic log units were achieved for S. aureus and P. aeruginosa. Nevertheless, the baroprotective effect on osteoarthritic bone was nonhomogeneous. Microorganisms on individual bone samples showed resistance against treatment resulting in unaltered bacterial growth. In a further study, destruction of cell-wall integrity of Gram-negative strains was observed by electron microscopy, but only 71% of bone biopsies from patients with chronic bone infections were culture-negative after high hydrostatic pressure up to 600 MPa compared with 38% negative samples without any treatment.

8. Combined Effects of High Hydrostatic Pressure and Antibiotic Drugs on the Inactivation of Bacteria
An increase in the inactivating effect of HHP on bacterial organisms in combination with different antibiotic mixtures could be confirmed for ossicle material. In the respective study, the addition of antibiotics suppressed bacterial growth in culture media as might have been expected. The used antibiotic combinations in combination with HHP led to convincingly better inactivating effects than HHP alone.
Nevertheless, there is most certainly no combination of antibiotic agents that could guarantee antimicrobial effects on each possible bacterial species that could colonize the clinical material. In the mentioned study, the combination of vancomycin, clindamycin, and imipenem failed to inactivate a Leuconostoc mesenteroides ssp. cremoris isolate due to its intrinsic resistance to vancomycin. However, considering the fact that this isolate grew no earlier than after 7 days in an enrichment broth after HHP treatment combined with antibiotics while there was no growth from the same ossicle after HHP treatment alone (personal communication with the authors of), a secondary contamination cannot completely be excluded as well.
However, such laboratory results are difficult to interpret. Transport time from the pressure device to the microbiological laboratory that would be absent in case of an immediate reimplantation after pressure treatment might have an effect due to a prolonged exposure time to the antibiotic drugs. During transport, antibiotic substances can act much longer than the pressure itself. Further, exposure to subletal pressure is known to alter susceptibility to antibiotics, especially to substances acting at the ribosomal subunits.

9. Effects of High Hydrostatic Pressure on Biofilms
The efficiency of HHP treatment on bacterial pathogens is known to be affected by biofilm formation. Biofilm growth in per se nonsterile compartments like the middle ear cavity has to be expected. Both ossicles and ossicular prostheses can harbour biofilms formed by typical colonizing bacteria of the middle ear cavity in chronically infected or colonized patients. Respective in vivo experiments are difficult to design, because in vivo ability of biofilm formation is only poorly reproducible in vitro on a cover-slide. So in vitro growth in biofilms does not per se guarantee biofilm formation in vivo as well. In a recent study on biofilm-forming isolates from human ossicles, indeed biofilms were less susceptible to HHP treatment than planktonic bacteria as could have been suspected. At least doubling of pressure settings was necessary to eradicate similar bacterial cell quantities in biofilms as in the planktonic state for both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Interestingly, the biofilm formed by the Gram-negative pathogen was more HHP-resistant than the biofilm of the Gram-positive bacterium, thus neglecting the importance of cell wall thickness in the biofilm state.
One might speculate whether an ultrasound treatment of ossicles prior to HHP treatment might strengthen the inactivating pressure effects. To the authors' knowledge, no respective studies are currently available. However, the practicability of a multistep-procedure including an ultrasound pretreatment in the clinical setting during a middle ear operation has to be doubted.

10. Conclusions
Biofilms play a major role in the development of cholesteatoma. In addition, biofilms on reimplanted ossicles maintain chronic infectious stimuli, which may finally contribute to recurrence of cholesteatoma. According to current state of science, HHP fails to demonstrate reliable inactivation of colonizing microorganisms on ossicles by pressure conditions that have proved to be sufficient to inactivate cholesteatoma cells. However, a reduction of colony forming units due to moderate HHP about several decadic logarithmic units for both planctonic bacteria and biofilms have been described for colonizers of the upper respiratory tract. It remains unclear whether such a reduction of colony forming units may be sufficient in the per se nonsterile middle ear compartment to prevent severe infections or biofilm forming, other than in situations when sterile work is required like in bone and joint operations.
The inactivating effects of HHP may be facilitated by the presence of antimicrobial agents. However, no composition of antibiotic drugs may cover the whole spectrum of potential resistance patterns, so surviving colonies cannot be excluded. Further studies on HHP combined with antibiotic drugs are desirable to identify optimal combinations in the future.
At present, it remains unclear whether ossicle tissue would tolerate relevant increases of pressure to levels that might allow for a more complete eradication of microbial agents. Moderate HHP treatment is suitable to reduce the number of microorganisms that colonize ossicles but fails to ensure a reliable sterilization.

Conflict of Interests
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests as demanded by the guidelines of the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors.
Childhood cholesteatoma
Imaging of postoperative middle ear cholesteatoma
Middle ear cholesteatoma surgery
Congenital cholesteatoma
Evidence-based review of aetiopathogenic theories of congenital and acquired cholesteatoma
Animal models of middle ear cholesteatoma
Cholesteatoma—a potential consequence of chronic middle ear inflammation
Adenotonsillar disease
Autologous tissue in initial type I and type III tympanoplasty operations in chronic suppurative otitis media
Results after rebuilding the ossicular chain using the autogenous incus, ionomer-cement- and titanium implants (tympanoplasty type III)
Review: high-pressure, microbial inactivation and food preservation [Revisión: alta-presión, inactivación microbiológica y conservación de alimentos]
Variation in resistance to hydrostatic pressure among strains of food-borne pathogens
Effects of high hydrostatic pressures on living cells: a consequence of the properties of macromolecules and macromolecule-associated water
High-pressure biotechnology in medicine and pharmaceutical science
The role of anaerobic bacteria in otitis media: microbiology, pathogenesis, and implications on therapy
Role of anaerobic bacteria in chronic otitis media and cholesteatoma
Evidence for microbial biofilms in cholesteatomas
The role of inflammatory mediators in the pathogenesis of otitis media and sequelae
The role of biofilms in otolaryngologic infections
The role of biofilms in otolaryngologic infections: update 2007
Biofilms and their role in otorhinolaryngological disease
Notes on the microbiology of cholesteatoma: clinical findings and treatment
Effects of high hydrostatic pressure on bacterial growth on human ossicles explanted from cholesteatoma patients
Cholesteatomatous otitis media
Audiometric results of 81 ossiculoplasties after tympanoplasty with closed technique in chronic cholesteatomatous otitis
Endocranial complications of cholesteatoma: apropos of 8 cases
Chronic inflammatory ear disease and cholesteatoma: creation of auxiliary attic aeration pathways by microdissection
Principles of cholesteatoma surgery
The pathogenesis and treatment of cholesteatoma
Pathogenesis and prevention of recurrent cholesteatoma following closed tympanoplasty
Predictive risk factors of residual cholesteatoma in children: a study of 256 cases
Ear ossicle transplants for reconstruction of sound transmission in the middle ear. A histologic long-term study
Can acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease be transmitted via otologic homografts?
Animal tests and cell culture examinations on stapes reconstruction with diverse bio-materials
Pitfalls in ossicular chain reconstruction
Proteins under pressure. The influence of high hydrostatic pressure on structure, function and assembly of proteins and protein complexes
Hydrostatic pressure has different effects on the assembly of tubulin, actin, myosin II, vinculin, talin, vimentin, and cytokeratin in mammalian tissue cells
High pressure effects on biological macromolecules: from structural changes to alteration of cellular processes
Effect of high hydrostatic pressure on biological properties of extracellular bone matrix proteins
Growth promoting in vitro effect of synthetic cyclic RGD-peptides on human osteoblast-like cells attached to cancellous bone
Biomechanical and immunohistochemical analysis of high hydrostatic pressure-treated Achilles tendons
Biomechanical investigation of the effect of high hydrostatic pressure treatment on the mechanical properties of human bone
Induction of tumor cell death by high hydrostatic pressure as a novel supporting technique in orthopedic surgery
Devitalization of cholesteatoma on human ossicles by hydrostatic high pressure treatment
Germination and inactivation of Bacillus coagulans and Alicyclobacillus acidoterrestris spores by high hydrostatic pressure treatment in buffer and tomato sauce
Inactivation of hepatitis A virus by high-pressure processing: the role of temperature and pressure oscillation
Escherichia coli mutants resistant to inactivation by high hydrostatic pressure
Inactivation kinetics of three Listeria monocytogenes strains under high hydrostatic pressure
Biological approach to modeling of Staphylococcus aureus high-hydrostatic-pressure inactivation kinetics
Effects of pressure on lactic acid bacteria
High hydrostatic pressure for disinfection of bone grafts and biomaterials: an experimental study
Population diversity of Listeria monocytogenes LO28: phenotypic and genotypic characterization of variants resistant to high hydrostatic pressure
Comparative proteome approach to characterize the high-pressure stress response of Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis DSM 20451T
The deep-sea bacterium Photobacterium profundum SS9 utilizes separate flagellar systems for swimming and swarming under high-pressure conditions
Transcriptional response reveals translation machinery as target for high pressure in Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis
Effects of minerals on resistance of Bacillus subtilis spores to heat and hydrostatic pressure
pH and solute concentration of suspension media affect the outcome of high hydrostatic pressure treatment of Listeria monocytogenes
Impacts of treatment parameters on the inactivation of Campylobacter jejuni by high pressure: a statistical study of main effects and interactions
Inactivation of Staphylococcus aureus in calcium phosphate biomaterials via isostatic compression
Inactivation and recovery of Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella enterica and Staphylococcus aureus after high hydrostatic pressure treatments up to 900 MPa
High sucrose concentration protects E. coli against high pressure inactivation but not against high pressure sensitization to the lactoperoxidase system
Changes in barotolerance, thermotolerance, and cellular morphology throughout the life cycle of Listeria monocytogenes
High hydrostatic pressure resistance of Campylobacter jejuni after different sublethal stresses
Extracorporeal high hydrostatic pressure as a new technology for the disinfection of infected bone specimens
Intrinsically vancomycin-resistant Gram-positive organisms: clinical relevance and implications for infection control
Direct detection of bacterial biofilms on the middle-ear mucosa of children with chronic otitis media
Biofilm formation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa on ossicular reconstruction prostheses
Effect of ossicular prosthesis biofilms on middle ear scarring and hearing outcomes
Flow chart of the experimental setup for high hydrostatic pressure treatment on human ossicles. After surgical explanation of human ossicles the bones were cut into two equally sized pieces but in case of additionally antibiotic treatment the bones were cut into six equally sized pieces. Piece(s) A was/were HHP-treated at 350 MPa for 10 min, while Piece(s) B was/were kept in a sterile humid chamber. Optionally, the pieces were treated with either cefuroxime 11.1 mg/mL, gentamicin 44.4 mg/mL, and imipenem 3.7 mg/mL or vancomycin 11.1 mg/mL, clindamycin 0.75 mg/mL, and imipenem 3.7 mg/mL. After treatment, microbial colonization was assessed by electron microscopy and microbial culture. Prior microbial culture bacterial biofilms were mobilized by ultrasound treatment. Microbial species identification was performed using MALDI-TOF MS (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), VITEC 2 identification (bioMérieux, Nürtingen, Germany), and 16S/18S rDNA sequencing. For in-depth reading, see.
Bacterial and fungal species isolated from cholesteatoma material according to.
Subgroup	Species	 	Gram-positive aerobic cocci	Kocuria  rosea 	 	Leuconostoc  mesenteroides ssp. cremoris 	 	Micrococcus  luteus 	 	Staphylococcus  aureus 	 	Staphylococcus  auricularis 	 	Staphylococcus  capitis 	 	Staphylococcus  epidermidis 	 	Staphylococcus  hominis 	 	Staphylococcus  simulans 	 	Streptococcus  mitis 	 	Streptococcus  sanguinis 	 		 	Gram-positive aerobic rods	Bacillus  licheniformis 	 	Corynebacterium  pseudodiphtheriticum 	 	Turicella  otitidis 	 		 	Gram-positive anaerobic cocci	Peptostreptococcus spp.	 		 	Gram-positive anaerobic rods	Clostridium  bifermentans 	 	Eubacterium  limosum 	 	Fusobacterium spp.	 	Propionibacterium  acnes 	 	Propionibacterium  granulosum 	 		 	Gram-negative aerobic cocci 	Neisseria  sicca 	 	Neisseria  subflava 	 		 	Gram-negative aerobic rods	Aeromonas  salmonicida 	 	Acinetobacter  baumannii 	 	Burkholderia  cenocepacia 	 	Brevundimonas  diminuta 	 	Histophilus  somni 	 	Pseudomonas  aeruginosa 	 	Pseudomonas  fluorescence 	 	Ralstonia  pickettii 	 	Sphingomonas  paucimobilis 	 		 	Gram-negative anaerobic cocci	Veillonella  parvula 	 		 	Gram-negative anaerobic rods	Bacteroides  ureolyticus 	 	Porphyromonas spp.	 	Prevotella spp.	 		 	Yeasts	Candida  albicans