Ensuring best practice in genomics education: A theory- and empirically informed evaluation framework
Summary
Implementation of genomic medicine into healthcare requires a workforce educated through effective educational approaches. However, ascertaining the impact of genomics education activities or resources is limited by a lack of evaluation and inconsistent descriptions in the literature. We aim to support those developing genomics education to consider how best to capture evaluation data that demonstrate program outcomes and effectiveness within scope. Here, we present an evaluation framework that is adaptable to multiple settings for use by genomics educators with or without education or evaluation backgrounds. The framework was developed as part of a broader program supporting genomic research translation coordinated by the Australian Genomics consortium. We detail our mixed-methods approach involving an expert workshop, literature review and iterative expert input to reach consensus and synthesis of a new evaluation framework for genomics education. The resulting theory-informed and evidence-based framework encompasses evaluation across all stages of education program development, implementation and reporting, and acknowledges the critical role of stakeholders and the effects of external influences.
We developed an evaluation framework for genomics education adaptable to multiple settings. Mixed methods were used (literature reviews and expert input). The theory-informed and evidence-based framework encompasses evaluation across all stages of program development, implementation and reporting, and acknowledges the critical role of stakeholders and the effects of external influences.

Introduction
Quality, evidence-based education on a large scale is required to build a healthcare workforce that can competently practice genomic medicine. However, descriptions in the literature of genomics education activities or resources (“interventions”) and their impact are inconsistent in quality and breadth. Few genomics education interventions are based on formal needs assessments or education theories or are rigorously evaluated to determine what strategies are most effective and in which settings (see web resources). This may be due to funding or timing limitations or lack of familiarity with evaluation as a discipline by those who develop and deliver genomics education. To address these gaps, we have developed a suite of tools to support genomics education providers to plan, navigate, and execute effective education. These include a survey to assess physicians’ genomic practice, attitudes and educational needs, a program logic model to support planning, design, and development of genomics education interventions in any setting, and reporting standards to provide consistent descriptions of these interventions and their evaluation to build an evidence base for effective genomics education.
Here, we present the final tool, which is designed to support those providing genomics education to evaluate their interventions: an evaluation framework for genomics education. Evaluation frameworks are logical descriptions of a program or intervention that enable more rigorous evaluation by clearly identifying outcomes, how to measure those outcomes, and also identifying factors that may influence how well those outcomes are achieved. They can be particularly helpful to those who are not familiar with program evaluation by providing prompts to consider across all stages of an intervention, from planning, development, and delivery through to immediate, intermediate, and long-term outcomes.
Our aim was not to replicate the well-established evaluation literature nor to describe all forms of evaluation or prescribe any particular approach. We instead aim to interpret this literature with the goal of applying evaluation principles to genomics education in a way that is understandable and immediately relevant to a genetic/genomic audience. To further assist those developing genomics education, the evaluation framework is accompanied by a scoping review of evaluation questions and measures reported in needs assessments for, and evaluations of, genetics or genomics education interventions across numerous professions and settings.

Methods
Staged, mixed methods approach to develop an evaluation framework for genomics education
We convened an expert workshop (1) to develop a program logic model for genomics education interventions and to identify questions that may arise at different stages of the model. Those questions guided a literature review (2) and discussion by the Project Working Group to identify, compare, and reach consensus (3) on which framework was most relevant to health or education program evaluation and adoption of new technologies. We then drafted an evaluation framework for genomics education, which was iteratively reviewed and refined through Project Working Group discussion (4). We examined utility of draft frameworks by referencing a companion scoping review.
A staged, mixed-methods approach was used to develop the evaluation framework for genomics education (Figure 1).

Expert workshop
We began by convening a workshop with 24 international experts in evaluation, genetics/genomics education, and implementation science to develop a program logic model for genomics education interventions (described previously). During the workshop, experts also outlined questions that may arise for education providers at each stage of the program logic model.

Literature review of relevant frameworks
The questions identified during the expert workshop then guided a literature review of evaluation theory and frameworks particularly relevant to health and/or education program evaluation and adoption of new technologies. Publications were identified by searching MEDLINE and PubMed using variations of a string of terms: [gene∗ or genom∗] OR [educat∗] OR [evaluat∗] OR [framework∗ or theor∗]. N.K. and A.N. then reviewed publications to select those appropriate for detailed review based on applicability to healthcare, emerging technologies, and/or education; relevance or alignment with stages of the program logic model; and use of key words or phrases related to questions suggested by workshop experts, e.g., stakeholder, purpose/need, audience, reach/engagement, satisfaction/value, or outcome/impact.

Comparison to, and consensus on, relevant frameworks
The Project Working Group—including experts in program evaluation and/or genetics/genomics education and evaluation (H.J., M.M., C.G., S.M., and A.N.)—met twice to compare the frameworks with the program logic model and the questions raised during the expert workshop. Their collective knowledge and experience were applied to reach consensus on which framework would best form the basis of a new evaluation framework for genomics education.

Development of an evaluation framework for genomics education
An evaluation framework was then drafted by A.N. and M.K. and iteratively reviewed, modified, and refined by the Project Working Group at 10 meetings over the course of nine months. Each meeting involved group discussion in which the components of the draft evaluation framework and their placement within the framework were reviewed and tested against the program logic model, workshop questions, other relevant frameworks identified in the literature review, and the Project Working Group’s collective experience.
To examine the utility of the framework, we also drew on a scoping review of needs assessments and evaluations of health professional genetics/genomics education. Select insights from that review are included here to illustrate key aspects of the evaluation framework.

Results

Expert workshop: Questions relating to program logic model

Evaluation questions suggested by workshop experts

Planninga
What change is needed?
Who is the target audience?
Who are the key stakeholders? What are their needs/expectations?
What is the appropriate educational theory and strategy?
What resources do I have in place? Can anything be repurposed?
How am I going to evaluate this? For what purpose?

Developmenta
What delivery mode best matches my audience needs, preferences, and objectives?
What is the minimum content (curriculum) required to match learning objectives/competencies?
Is there quality documentation for the planning process?
Who will do final expert review and approval?
How will I pilot this reusability/user experience?
How will I promote/disseminate this?
Can this be accredited (certificate/endorse) and by whom?
What is my engagement/communication strategy (with stakeholders and beyond)?

Deliveryb
Are we reaching the target audience? Is the target audience right?
How did I ensure “user/learner” engagement?
Does the activity work as intended?

Outcomes
Did the evaluation measure what we wanted to measure? Did we achieve/show change?
Are the stakeholders satisfied?
What did we achieve vs. show evidence of (short, medium, long term)?
Were there unintended consequences?
How and with whom do I want to share the evaluation report?
How can I build on the outcomes to inform future educational activity (i.e., cycles back to planning)?
The questions are grouped according to the stages of the program logic model for genomics education.
a Equivalent to the stages of (a) pre-implementation
b Implementation in the evaluation framework.
Questions that may arise for education providers across the different stages of the program logic model are shown in Box 1. Most relate to evaluation, plus pragmatic questions, such as identifying content experts or appropriate accreditation bodies when developing an intervention.

Relevant evaluation frameworks
Evaluation frameworks reviewed and their relevance to evaluation of genomics education interventions
Description	Relevance to evaluation	 	Framework to evaluate long-term outcomes of education on patients and communities	incorporates both health professional and patient and population health outcomesdoes not include external influences or stakeholders	 	Framework to map genetic counseling outcomes and hypothesize relationships between communications and outcomes	aligns with program logic model for genomics educationfocused on patient and family outcomesless generalizable beyond genetic counseling	 	Process map to guide development of education programs in newborn screening	a program logic model for selecting appropriate approaches to newborn screening education	 	Framework to predict and evaluate impact of a new technology-assisted program	whole-of-system change framework with education as only one componentemphasizes external influences	 	Framework to inform genomics research and integration of genomics into practice	whole-of-system change framework with education as only one type of intervention in a program logic modelemphasizes external influences	 	Framework to evaluate the knowledge into action model used by NHS Scotland	aligns with program logic model for genomics education, including outcomes chainincludes external influences and stakeholders defined across stages of the program logic
Six evaluation frameworks were identified from the literature review; three were relevant to genetics/genomics, but none were specific to genetics/genomics education (Table 1). While all frameworks reviewed informed our thinking, Morton and colleagues’ framework was considered most relevant. It centers on a program logic, including an outcomes chain, similar to the program logic model for genomics education, and was developed to support implementation of a model in a health care system. The framework also includes external influences and stakeholders across stages, corresponding to questions raised by workshop experts (Box 1). It was therefore chosen as the basis of our evaluation framework, which we modified for evaluation of genomics education designed to support implementing genomic medicine into routine healthcare. The other frameworks contain relevant elements or structures but are either presented more as program logic models or focus on patient behavior or whole-of-system change.

An evaluation framework for genomics education
An evaluation framework for genomics education interventions
The framework is influenced by Morton’s Knowledge to Action framework and a program logic model for genomics education. The boxes across the top show the shifting focus of evaluation over the course of an education program. The dark blue boxes represent the output of each stage. The gray background reflects the different stakeholders involved at each stage, which may include sponsors/funding agencies, professional/accrediting bodies, consumer/advocacy groups, learners and those they may impact (e.g., colleagues, broader workforce), and those ultimately impacted by the intervention (e.g., patients, families, publics). The triangles at the bottom represent the diminishing influence of a genomics education intervention across the program cycle and increasing influence of external factors.
The resulting evaluation framework for genomics education is shown in Figure 2 (narrated version available as Video S1 with transcript in supplemental information). The framework describes the shifting focus of evaluation across the progression of a genomics education intervention, from informing planning (pre-implementation) through evaluating implementation and then immediate, intermediate, and long-term outcomes. We define the long-term outcome of genomics education as improved health. The dark boxes represent the outputs of each stage, their relationship, and potential influences. In keeping with the Knowledge to Action framework, the gray background reflects the stakeholders involved across each stage. The triangles represent the inverse relationship between the influence of a genomics education intervention and external influences across the program cycle.
Example concepts, evaluation questions, and measures relating to pre-implementation (planning) and implementation (development and delivery) stages of the framework
Concepts/outcomes	Evaluation questions	Measures	 	Pre-implementation (planning)	 		 	Needs assessments	How do I know there is a need?In which profession or region?In which areas of competence (knowledge, skills, and/or attitude) or confidence?What topics or mode of delivery are accessed or preferred?	overarching landscape of existing educationrelevant experience with clinical specialty and genetics/genomicsknowledgeskillsattitudesconfidence, comfort or preparednesseducational experiences and preferences	 		 	Implementation (development and delivery)	 		 	Overall	Was the intervention delivered as intended?Did the intervention reach and engage the target audience?	reachengagement	 	Program improvement	How can the program be improved?	meeting target audience needseducational strategylearning design, structure, formatcontentoverall experience, satisfaction, value
These were informed by a companion scoping review of the literature.
Example outcomes, evaluation questions, and measures relating to immediate and intermediate outcomes
Outcomes	Evaluation questions	Measures	 	Immediate	 		 	Overall	Were learning objectives or participants’ educational needs met?	learning objectives for the intervention	 	Knowledge	Were there changes to genomic knowledge as a result of the intervention?	fundamental genetics/genomicsclinical genetics/genomics relevant to specialtygenetic/genomic technologies and servicesrisk assessmenttesting options, how to request and apply of resultsservice delivery modelsgenetic counseling aspectsethical, legal, and (psycho)social implications	 	Skills	Were there changes to the ability/potential to perform genomics-related activities as a result of the intervention, but not necessarily applying it in practice yet (e.g., in hypothetical or simulated environments rather than in practice)?	 	Attitudes (including awareness of others’ attitudes)	Were there changes in attitudes to genomics as a result of the intervention?	role, e.g., in multidisciplinary service modelsfeasibility, intent to change practicerelevance, utility to specialty	 	Confidence	Were there changes in confidence practicing genomics as a result of the intervention?	(Self-)confidence, comfort, preparedness, self-efficacy	 		 	Intermediate	 		 	Building individual competence	 		 	Competent genomics workforce	Did participants undertake any new education activities as a result of the intervention?	activities that reveal change in genetic/genomic competency at an individual level	 	Use of educational resources (where applicable)	Were the genomics education resources used?	use of resources	 		 	Appropriate use of genomic medicine	 		 	Changes to individual behavior/practice	Were there changes to professional practice by applying new knowledge and/or skills?	use of intervention resource(s) to provide care for patients in practicechange in practiceappropriate referral for genomic testsappropriate ordering of genomic testsappropriate application of test results in patient care	 		 	Building genomic competence and fostering appropriate use in others	 		 	Change in practice that impacted others’ genetic/genomic competency	Did participants develop and/or deliver any genomics education for others?	activities by the individual that reveal benefit to others	 	Changes to professional practice beyond the individual	Were there changes to others’ genomics practice as a result of the intervention?	impact on professional networks (new and/or strengthened)
These were informed by a companion scoping review of the literature.
Example concepts, outcomes, evaluation questions, and measures relating to long-term outcomes and external influences
Concept/outcome	Evaluation questions	Measures	 	Long-term outcomes	 		 	Improved health outcomes	Was there reduced time to diagnosis or better health outcomes as a result of appropriate use of genomic medicine?Were there changes in patient behavior or population health outcomes after the education intervention?	activities of patients or their families following changes in practice of health professionals who completed an educational intervention	 		 	External influences	 		 	Other factors	What other factors may have influenced the outcomes?	work environmentorganization, cultural, or government structurespatient or population factors
These were informed by a companion scoping review of the literature.
Each element of the evaluation framework is described in more detail below, with example evaluation questions and domains from the companion scoping review summarized in Tables 2, 3, and 4.

Pre-implementation (planning)
Evaluation should inform planning of an intervention. There may be an overarching understanding of the need to develop a workforce (see Manolio et al. and Johnson et al.), but a needs assessment can confirm and define the need for genomics education locally (Table 2). For example, in what topic areas (basic or advanced genetics, pharmacogenomics, etc.), for which target audiences (specialty physicians, general practitioners [GPs], laboratory professionals, multidisciplinary teams, etc.), for what purpose (awareness, change in practice, etc.), and what type of program is best suited to meet the identified need (online resources, in-service training, etc.)? Needs assessments can take many forms, including literature reviews, online searches, qualitative, quantitative, or mixed approaches, or consensus methods.

Implementation
Implementation spans the development and delivery stages of the program; thus, evaluation at this stage is more operational (Table 2), e.g., was the intervention delivered as intended? Implementation data can inform program improvement to achieve the desired goals. For example, low uptake of a genomics resource may be because content did not meet the target audience’s educational needs, or it may simply be the result of inadequate marketing. Implementation evaluation can also provide baseline data for context when interpreting outcomes of a genomics education intervention, e.g., any difference in immediate outcomes for different cohorts.

Immediate outcomes
Evaluation of the immediate outcomes of a genomics education intervention aims to identify the immediate impact on an individual (Table 3), focusing on whether learning objectives were achieved (e.g., change in knowledge, skills, attitude, and/or confidence). The immediate outcome relating to change in “knowledge” is measured in the genetics/genomics education literature on a spectrum that spans awareness, understanding, and anticipated application of new procedural knowledge. We define the immediate outcome of genomic “skills” as procedural knowledge (i.e., knowing when or how to apply new knowledge in response to a scenario). This could also be considered capability to practice genomics, which we differentiate from the intermediate outcome of actually applying genomics in practice. Attitudes may influence an individual’s motivation to both learn genetics/genomics and incorporate new knowledge and skills into practice. They can include perceptions of clinical utility of tests and feasibility of incorporating genetics/genomics into professional practice or an individual’s role in delivering genetic/genomic medicine. Confidence describes an individual’s perceptions of their own level of knowledge or skills, or the confidence to apply these in practice, with many different terms used in the genetics/genomics education literature.
Immediate outcomes may be measured at some point in time after the intervention, for example, to determine retention of learning outcomes over time. We also characterize intended, or planned, behavior as an immediate outcome. Intended behavior may include intent to continue using a resource or intent to change practice, but this may not lead to actual change. They may demonstrate positive, immediate outcomes such as the capability and intent to apply genomics but not then encounter patients who could benefit from genomic testing in the months following the education intervention. Confidence to practice genomic medicine may also diminish over time. For this reason, we place intended behavior in our framework as the last immediate outcome, preceding the first intermediate outcome and stress the importance of evaluating both.

Intermediate outcomes
Intermediate outcomes focus on whether learning is actually applied in practice, that is, there is a change in actual behavior. This may be evaluated at any time after the intervention, even several months later. Intermediate outcomes may be at both the individual level and collectively, reflected in the broadening of the gray background shape in the framework as stakeholders shift from the narrow target audience to include the broader genomic workforce for intermediate outcomes (Figure 2). For example, immersion training programs—where physicians with little or no genetics training are funded to spend time in genomics-rich environments—may have the explicit goal of effecting change in an organization beyond the individual. Evaluation of intermediate outcomes should therefore include measures for both individual and organizational change (Table 3). We characterize the intermediate outcome genomic competency as related to appropriate use of genomic medicine. This is defined by the Australian National Health Genomics Policy Framework as referencing clinical practice guidelines on cultural acceptability of genomic services, referrals that prioritize individual patients’ welfare/needs, and avoiding unnecessary testing (see web resources).

Long-term outcomes
Genomics education interventions ultimately aim to improve health through appropriate use of genomic medicine by a competent genomics workforce (Table 4). Rather than being defined by the time point at which evaluation is conducted, long-term outcomes include reduced time to diagnosis, delayed progression of disease, more effective targeted treatments or increased survival rates, or improved screening behavior and outcomes.

Stakeholders
For the purposes of evaluation, stakeholders are defined here as individuals or organizations who may potentially have a vested interest in, or experience impact from, a genomics education intervention. The breadth of stakeholder categories is reflected across each stage (Figure 2) rather than numbers of people involved. In addition to the target audience (potential participants), these may include those concerned with incorporating genomic medicine into healthcare (e.g., policy makers), genomics educators, the genomic workforce more broadly, and/or patients and families. The shape in Figure 2 is narrower for implementation and measurement of immediate outcomes as education participants are the most relevant stakeholders for those stages. It then expands across the outcomes to include colleagues, thereby broadening the workforce impact. The benefits may extend further, impacting system influencers and policy makers. Finally, stakeholders in the long-term outcomes are patients and their families, consumer/advocacy groups and the broader population, who receive the personal and societal benefits of improved practice as a result of the education intervention.

External influences
Education occurs in a complex environment. The influence of a genomics education intervention diminishes across the program cycle, while that of the external factors increases. These begin when the intervention is delivered and may include workplace readiness for genomics, workforce capacity or workload, the policy environment, and/or the quality, throughput, efficiency and effectiveness of the health system (Table 4). For example, if funded genomic tests are not available, motivation to learn about genomic medicine may lessen, opportunities to apply new knowledge and skills to professional practice and use genomic medicine appropriately may reduce, which may mean improved health outcomes are not clear.
External influences on outcomes are outside the control of genomics education providers and may make it difficult to attribute long-term outcomes, such as health benefits, predominantly to the education intervention. They are nonetheless important in evaluation to ascertain the contribution of an education intervention to intermediate and long-term outcomes.
Often, external influences are measured in the form of barriers or enablers at the implementation or outcome level. Potential or realized barriers and enablers to successful implementation can be measured during or following implementation of the educational intervention, for example, by asking about motivation for attending/using an intervention. Hybrid study designs such as randomized control trials may also identify external influences and control for their effects to ascertain the impact of the education intervention.

Discussion
Genomics education is a pillar of many national approaches to implementing genomic medicine. Yet the effectiveness of education programs across varied international settings is not clear, and the evidence is lacking on how education contributes to implementation of genomic medicine. As a first step to address this gap we propose a framework to support genomics educators—who may or may not have education qualifications or evaluation expertise—to thoughtfully plan how they will examine delivery of their intervention and whether intended goals were achieved. The framework focuses on education within a whole-of-system model. Unlike other models, it considers stakeholders across planning, delivery, and evaluation, as well as external factors that may affect outcomes. The framework provides a comprehensive structure with curated concepts specific to genomics education of health professionals. We hope that use of our framework will enable more robust evaluations of genomics education and over time build an evidence base of what works and what contributes to success.
All the tools developed by Australian Genomics to support best practice in genetics/genomics education are designed to be sufficiently flexible to apply to a range of settings, programs, or goals. This evaluation framework, informed by Morton’s Knowledge to Action framework, can also be adapted to a variety of settings, including undergraduate through continuing medical education. While we defined the goal of health professional genomics education as changing professional practice to incorporate genomics for improved health outcomes, others might focus on different long-term outcomes, such as health system change, or patient/public health behavior change as a precursor to improved health benefits. We encourage educators to define the long-term outcomes that best suit the goal of their intervention. We look forward to receiving feedback on the application of the evaluation framework to different contexts, such as evaluating education interventions for delivery of multidisciplinary genomic medicine or patient/public education interventions as part of screening programs. The tool has already been used to inform the design of evaluation of Australian genomics education interventions across topics as diverse as rare disease diagnosis, variant interpretation, and providing reasonable adjustment in genetic health care for people with disability (B. Terrill, MEd, email, and in-person communications, 2022–2024). In each case, the framework was useful in designing pragmatic evaluation that was fit for purpose. For example, a website created to host resources also collects analytics on real-time reach and engagement to help procure ongoing project funding.
Some educators may have sufficient funding and time to plan needs assessments and longitudinal evaluation studies, while others will need to work within a limited budget or time frame. Evaluators may choose whether to use existing measures to assess outcomes or create their own. Numerous tools and guidelines exist to support design of validated measures.
It is not necessary to use all components of the evaluation framework, nor use it in a linear fashion. Depending on the type of intervention and audience, evaluators may choose different components or outcomes that are more relevant to reporting at different stages of an initiative.
The framework is intended to support evaluators to reflect on the logic and link multiple outcomes in an “outcomes chain.” This thinking can inform the very early stages of planning an intervention and can be embedded into funding applications to help highlight the intended impact of the intervention. Evaluation is described here by the level of inquiry (i.e., what outcome is being measured) and the relationship between education and other outcomes, rather than defining outcomes by their temporal relationship to the education intervention (i.e., when they were measured). We define intermediate outcomes in terms of genomic competency and appropriate use of genomic medicine rather than using an arbitrary time point of, for example, six months post-intervention. Similarly, long-term outcomes do not equate to outcomes measured after a defined period of time. When Laberge and colleagues conducted what they defined as a long-term, three-year evaluation of their Genetics in Primary Care intervention in the US, they measured awareness and changes to practice, which would be defined as immediate and intermediate outcomes in our framework. The framework acknowledges the diminishing influence of an education program over time. As more time passes after an intervention, there is a greater effect of external influences, as demonstrated by several studies.
Measuring and linking multiple outcome levels becomes particularly informative when measuring long-term outcomes related to health benefits to attempt to attribute long-term outcomes to the specific education intervention in the context of a possibly complex external environment. Emery and colleagues provide an exemplar of the approach we advocate with this framework. Their report of the impact their computer-based decision tool, aimed at improving management of familial cancer risk by British GPs (family physicians), includes four of the five stages of the evaluation framework (Figure S1). They used a longitudinal, cluster randomized control trial design to compare outcomes from training with their Genetic Risk Assessment on the Internet with Decision Support (GRAIDS) software compared with usual training workshops and hardcopy guidelines. By collecting data from the GPs, their clinics, and patients, they showed the GRAIDS software was accessed with minimal technical issues (implementation), increased GP confidence to manage familial cancer risk (immediate outcome), increased the number and quality of referrals to the regional genetics clinic (intermediate outcome), and reduced cancer worry in patients without compromising their knowledge (long-term outcome).
The paucity of evaluations of the long-term outcomes from genomics education interventions likely reflects the challenges of defining measurable long-term outcomes. Education may be one part of a larger complex intervention, but educators should be encouraged (and funded) to demonstrate that their program contributed to an observed and measurable change. Professional competencies—where they exist—may be used during planning to not only inform curriculum and content but also define outcome measures. This may also help address the current inconsistency in terminology used to evaluate and report impact of genomics education interventions. Collectively, knowledge, skills, and attitudes are sometimes characterized as "competence," but here, we keep these measures separate. Instead, we ascribe confidence to be an immediate outcome, competency to be an intermediate outcome, and previously ascribed "preparedness" to be a combination of both.

Strengths and limitations
This framework was developed with input from local and international experts in program evaluation, genetics/genomics education, and evaluation of genomics education. Testing the utility of the framework across different contexts would allow it to be modified to be more broadly applicable or, at minimum, allow companion documents on how education providers may adapt it for different settings, such as medical school programs or preventative or public health initiatives. Collectively, our expert group provided knowledge, experiences, and context from Australia, New Zealand, North America, and England; African, Asian, and European perspectives were not directly included. The impact of this potential bias is minimal when considering the aim of this project: to distil evaluation theory and frameworks for genomics educators.

Conclusion
The need for robust evaluation of genomics education has been affirmed during the development of this evaluation framework. A preliminary version of the framework is already assisting Australian educators and members of the Genomics Education Network Australasia (GENA) to design evaluation programs that provide evidence of the effectiveness of their interventions. To further assist adoption of the framework, we have developed an interactive tool with templates to guide educators by highlighting concepts and measures most relevant to their program goal and setting (available at www.australiangenomics.org.au/categories/workforce-education/). We hope that wider use of the framework will not only support the design and implementation of pragmatic, useful evaluation, but also help funders and policymakers recognize the benefits and challenges of evaluating educational impact in real-world settings. Ultimately, we believe a global evidence base can be built to support best practice in genomics education and evaluation, as well as document the contribution of health professional education to the implementation of genomics and improvements in health.

Data and code availability
The published article and supplemental information include all datasets generated or analyzed during this study.

References
Genetics/genomics education for nongenetic health professionals: a systematic literature review
Ensuring best practice in genomics education and evaluation: reporting item standards for education and its evaluation in genomics (RISE2 Genomics)
A systematic review of interventions to provide genetics education for primary care
Association between funding and quality of published medical education research
Ensuring best practice in genomic education and evaluation: a program logic approach
Australian Genomics: A federated model for integrating genomics into healthcare
Development of an evidence-based, theory-informed national survey of physician preparedness for genomic medicine and preferences for genomics continuing education
Developing a framework to evaluate knowledge into action interventions
Evaluating the impact of educational interventions on patients and communities: A conceptual framework
Development of FOCUS-GC: Framework for Outcomes of Clinical Communication Services in Genetic Counseling
A newborn screening education best practices framework: Development and adoption
Beyond adoption: A new framework for theorizing and evaluating nonadoption, abandonment, and challenges to the scale-up, spread, and sustainability of health and care technologies
The Genomic Medicine Integrative Research Framework: A conceptual framework for conducting genomic medicine research
Global implementation of genomic medicine: We are not alone
An international genomics health workforce education priorities assessment
The introduction of genetic counseling in Ethiopia: Results of a training workshop and lessons learned
Cluster randomized trial of a multifaceted primary care decision-support intervention for inherited breast cancer risk
Systematic development of a training program for healthcare professionals to improve communication about breast cancer genetic counseling with low health literate patients
The Genetic Counseling Outcome Scale: a new patient-reported outcome measure for clinical genetics services
A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy: an overview
Mainstreaming genetics and genomics: a systematic review of the barriers and facilitators for nurses and physicians in secondary and tertiary care
Genetic education for primary care providers: Improving attitudes, knowledge, and confidence
The theory of planned behavior
Effect of comprehensive oncogenetics training interventions for general practitioners, evaluated at multiple performance levels
What works in genomics education: outcomes of an evidenced-based instructional model for community-based physicians
Mentoring nurses in familial cancer risk assessment and counseling: Lessons learned from a formative evaluation
“It’s something I’ve committed to longer term”: the impact of an immersion program for physicians on adoption of genomic medicine
Progressing research impact assessment: A ‘contributions’ approach
Effectiveness-implementation hybrid designs: combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public health impact
Challenges in global genomics education
Hospital nursing leadership-led interventions increased genomic awareness and educational intent in Magnet settings
Innovation sustainability in challenging health-care contexts: Embedding clinically led change in routine practice
Hereditary colorectal cancer screening: A 10-year longitudinal cohort study following an educational intervention
Development and evaluation of a genomics training program for community health workers in Texas
Development of a questionnaire for evaluating genetics education in general practice
Long-term outcomes of the "Genetics in Primary Care" faculty development initiative
Cancer genetics education in a low- to middle-income country: Evaluation of an interactive workshop for clinicians in Kenya
Sustained effects of online genetics education: a randomized controlled trial on oncogenetics
Educating general practitioners about prenatal testing: Approaches and challenges
The GRAIDS Trial: a cluster randomised controlled trial of computer decision support for the management of familial cancer risk in primary care
Development of Competency-based Online Genomic Medicine Training (COGENT)
Developing competencies in genetics nursing: Education intervention for perinatal and pediatric nurses
Genetic education and the challenge of genomic medicine: development of core competences to support preparation of health professionals in Europe
Are physicians prepared for whole genome sequencing? A qualitative analysis
Framework for development of physician competencies in genomic medicine: Report of the Competencies Working Group of the Inter-Society Coordinating Committee for Physician Education in Genomics
The first competency based framework in genetics/genomics specifically for midwifery education and practice
Integrating genomics into oncology practice
Using the findings of a national survey to inform the work of England's Genomics Education Programme
Preparing medical specialists to practice genomic medicine: education an essential part of a broader strategy

Web resources
National Health Genomics Policy Framework 2018–2021 (Department of Health, Commonwealth of Australia), www.health.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/2022/03/national-health-genomics-policy-framework-2018-2021.pdf.
NHGRI Genomic Literacy, Education, and Engagement (GLEE) Initiative Healthcare Provider Working Group Report, www.genome.gov/Pages/About/OD/ECIB/GLEE/GLEE_white_paper_ProviderEducation.pdf.

Supplemental information
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.06.004.