Gendered interpretations of the causes of breast cancer: a structured review of migrant studies
Background
Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women worldwide. Despite it having an etiology that has fixed, genetic as well as modifiable, environmental risk factors, the narrative around breast cancer prevention emphasizes gendered interpretations of the etiology, such as “reproductive factors cause breast cancer” and women should change their behaviors to reduce their risk. Since migrant studies can distinguish environmental from genetic risk factors, we conducted a structured review of migrant studies and assessed prominent cancer website resources to determine evidence of gender bias between breast and prostate cancer.
Methods
We searched ten online databases for articles with migration as the exposure and breast cancer mortality and/or incidence as the outcome. We also searched using prostate cancer as the outcome to generate a comparison group. We developed rubrics to categorize the studies by study design (single, double, and time dimensional), convergence (a change in incidence or mortality for the migrant population), and concordance (consistency between results and author-attributed etiology). We used chi-square tests to test for differences by cancer type. We web-scraped four notable cancer websites to extract website layouts, risk factor information, and language describing breast cancer etiology and compared it to the content used for prostate cancer.
Findings
Of all 140 studies and 220 comparisons, breast (n = 131) outnumbered prostate cancer studies (n = 89; p-value = 0·005). For both cancers, studies that compared all three populations (the non-migrant, origin, and destination population outcomes) or measured length of stay demonstrated that cancer rates converged with migration. Most authors attributed breast cancer etiology to genetic and environmental factors. Yet, the migrant study results were inconsistent with public health messaging; all four websites framed breast cancer as more modifiable than prostate cancer.
Conclusion
Research efforts and public health messaging for breast cancer should consider gendered barriers to changing individual-level risk factors and develop more prevention strategies at the health systems level.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12905-025-03677-4.

Background
Breast cancer incidence and mortality rates are rising worldwide to become the most common malignancy in women. Breast cancer relies on several sex hormones for development and progression. The development and differentiation of mammary cells react to estrogen, progesterone, and androgens and active mediators like human epidermal growth receptor 2 (HER2) and androgen receptors (AR), which are expressed in 60–70% of tumors. Hormone receptor signaling and hormones regulate the majority of breast cancers (70–90%). However, most breast cancer studies primarily focus on estrogens or “female hormones,” and focus less on androgens or “male hormones.” This gender bias has the potential to misguide both prevention research and treatment discovery.
Gender bias also extends to how researchers assess non-modifiable (genetic) versus modifiable (environmental) drivers of breast cancer. Breast cancer has non-modifiable risk factors like genetic aberrations (hereditable and spontaneous), which can encode for receptors that regulate the division of cells in the development of cancer, and modifiable (environmental) risk factors, that influence endogenous hormones, that contribute to cancer progression and growth. For example, each year, 10–15% of breast cancer incident cases are from individuals with familial-based genetic mutations (e.g., BRCA1 and BRCA2). Hereditable genetic mutations explain about 48% of susceptibility for breast cancer, leaving the remaining 52% attributable to environmental influences. Therefore, even in instances where high penetrant genes are implicated, environmental factors still play a major role in the development of breast cancer. When researchers attribute etiology to genetics, they take the responsibility of acquiring a disease away from the person because that person cannot change their wild-type genetics, whereas authors attributing etiology to the environment, namely lifestyle factors, have the opposite effect—they put the responsibility and sometimes “blame” on the individual. This responsibility often falls onto women and women’s bodies disproportionately.
Given that a combination of environmental and genetic factors influence cancer, it is essential to employ study designs, such as migrant studies, that effectively differentiate between environmental and genetic risk factors. Migrant studies track a migratory group with shared ancestry, comparing disease rates within this group before and after migration, as well as in comparison to the new population they have joined. If the origin population differs from the migrant population, and the migrant rates converge across time/generation toward those of the destination population, then the environment is important. On the other hand, if rates of cancer between the origin and migrant population are similar and differ from the destination population, then genetic factors predominate. Authors are concordant when they correctly attribute the results of migrant studies to environmental or genetic factors following this rationale. For example, Hemminki et al. found that the standardized incidence ratio of breast cancer for immigrants to Sweden increased with length of stay, from 0.55 for a stay between 0 and 10 years and to 0.59 for 20-plus years. When compared to native Swedes, the rate of immigrants was similar to Swedes of half a century before. They attributed environmental factors to the increase in breast cancer for migratory groups. Unlike Hemminki et al., studies most often only compare the health outcomes of migratory populations with the destination population but do not consider if their results are consistent with their attributed etiology. Furthermore, migration history and status are a determinant of health outcomes and disparities, yet researchers often lump migrants together in crude ways based on ethnicity (ignoring place of birth) and place of origin, sometimes including large regions of the world consisting of many different countries. These measures often ignore age at migration and the contextual drivers pushing and pulling migrants to move.
Translating migrant study results to public health messaging may also be susceptible to gender bias. Public health messaging is a form of communication that uses social media, websites, events, and providers to disseminate health-promoting information. The scientific literature informs the content of these sources of health promotion. If there is gender bias within the scientific literature, then there will be gender bias in its translation to the public. Alternatively, if evidence of risk factors is available but not accessible or communicated in biased ways, then this poor communication hampers action and knowledge about cancer prevention among the public.
While breast and prostate cancer have similar hormonal etiology and are jointly influenced by the interaction between environmental and genetic factors, gender-based differences in breast cancer research compared with prostate cancer research may bias the interpretation of observational studies and the translation of those results through public health messaging. Our study compares the convergence of breast cancer incidence and mortality rates between origin, migrant, and destination populations to those in prostate cancer, along with the concordance between results and the interpretation, and the translation of the results to public health messaging. We designed this structured review to illuminate inconsistencies and biases in the preexisting literature and uncover discrepancies in breast health messaging when compared to prostate cancer messaging.

Methods

Literature search
Our search followed the standards set in the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. We conducted a literature search in 2022 and updated it on May 6, 2024, utilizing ten electronic databases, PubMed, Web of Science Core Collection, BIOSIS Citation Index, Current Contents Connect, Data Citation Index, Derwent Innovations Index, KCI-Korean Journal Database, MEDLINE, Russian Science Citation Index, and EMBASE. We evaluated the contents of published articles that investigated the relationship between migration and female breast cancer incidence and/or mortality and how authors hypothesized, framed, and attributed their findings. As a comparison group we conducted a separate search for prostate cancer with similar search terms. Search terms and all associated derivatives are in Supplementary Table 1. There were no constraints on publication year or geographical region on study eligibility.
After the initial search, we removed duplicate articles. Two reviewers (SS and ML) independently reviewed abstracts, titles, and full-text articles based on eligibility criteria. Throughout the review process, when there was a lack of agreement between the two reviewers, the two reviewers met to discuss and reach a consensus or a third reviewer (LH) examined the classifications and acted as an arbitrator.

Eligibility criteria
We aimed to include all publications up to the date of the search that fit the following criteria: (1) original empirical human subject research, (2) inclusion of at least one measure of migration (i.e., immigration) as an independent variable (or exposure), (3) examination of incidence and/or mortality as measures of effect, and (4) breast and/or prostate cancer modeled as a dependent variable (i.e., outcome). We also permitted the evaluation of both breast and prostate cancer within the same study where applicable. Studies from all countries were included in our review, provided they were translated into English and published with full-text availability. Migration could have occurred at any point in the life course. We excluded secondary articles and studies that defined migration based on race, surname, or ethnicity without confirmation of immigration status, either through immigration documentation or self-report.

Data extraction
Two reviewers (SS and ML) independently extracted data from each study. Each reviewer extracted an overlapping half of the studies so that the two reviewers together extracted all studies. For studies meeting the inclusion criteria, we collected the following determinants from eligible studies: article, first author, year published, study populations, country of origin, migrant population(s), attributed etiology, and outcome measures. In addition, we noted strengths, limitations, and biases for each of the articles, and we supported these notes with quotations from the text.

Rubrics
We developed three rubrics to classify (1) study design, (2) convergence, and (3) concordance to evaluate various aspects of each study. The study design classifications characterized the common types of comparisons made in migrant studies and their capabilities in highlighting trends in migrant breast and prostate cancer incidence and mortality. For the study design rubric, we categorized each study into one of three types, in order of strength and rigor from lowest to highest, (1) a single comparison which occurs when the outcome of the migrant population is compared to only either the origin population or the destination population outcome (i.e., one comparison is made), (2) a double comparison which occurs when the outcome of the migrant population is compared to both the origin and the destination population outcomes (i.e., two comparisons are made), (3) a time-dimensional study which can either be a single or double comparison but must also include a time component comparison (e.g., duration of stay (years, decades, or generations)). For a study to be considered time-dimensional, the study must have followed a migrant population through time (i.e., years and decades) or their descendants over generations. To ascertain which populations were included and compared in a study, we referenced labels in tables, figures, and descriptions in the text.
Convergence summarized the changes in outcome trends for the migrant population within a study. We assessed the direction of each outcome using the overall outcome trend or statistical significance in the tables, figures, and text for each migrant population and cancer type. We only considered changes in outcome trends if the study presented the original empirical data in their results. Merely mentioning the possibility of a change in their text was insufficient; we required empirical evidence to confirm that a change had occurred. We classified studies into five categories, (1) convergent included any change in the outcome for the migrant population away from the origin population and toward the destination population outcome, (2) divergent included any change in outcome for the migrant population away from both the origin and the destination population outcome, (3) stable included the lack of any change in outcome for the migrant population, (4) unknown represented the inability to determine the direction of the change across the migrant populations included in a study, either due to inconsistent fluctuations in outcome trends, or lack of information (e.g., single comparison study)), and (5) N/A classified when the referred cancer type was not examined within the study evaluated, such as, if the paper was on prostate cancer but we examined the convergence of breast cancer in a study. We were only able to assess changes for studies that included a reference group, which were either the origin population or the migrant population with a time component and a comparison to destination population (i.e., double comparison or time-dimensional study design). Simply stating the outcomes for a migrant and the destination populations did not allow for the evaluation of changes. Thus, single-component studies lacked the means to evaluate the changes in outcomes for the migrant population due to the absence of the initial effect measures, a reference group, and the ability to track changes from those initial measures over time. Consequently, we categorized all single-component studies as unknown convergence. If a study looked at more than one migrant population, then all migrant population outcomes from the same cancer type needed to show the same trend; otherwise, we concluded that convergence was unknown.
Finally, we defined concordance as consistency between study convergence type and how the author attributed the results to etiology to either the environment and/or genetics, or did not attribute their results to any specific etiology. We included all explanations unrelated to genetics as environmental. We separately assessed concordance for each cancer type. We placed studies into four concordance groups, (1) those that had concordance between attributed etiology and results (yes), (2) those that had no concordance (no), (3) those we were unable to classify (unknown), and (4) not applicable (N/A) for either breast or prostate cancer concordancy when a study did not examine the concordance of the applicable cancer type in their study. We considered the study to have concordance (yes) when the results had convergent or divergent trends, and the authors attributed the etiology to either only the environment or both the environment and genetics. Concordance was also defined as yes for studies with a stable convergence but where the author’s attributed etiology was genetics. We considered a study to have no concordance when the convergence was convergent or divergent, but the authors attributed etiology to genetics. In addition, we identified no concordance when the convergence was stable, but the attributed etiology was the environment or both genetics and the environment. Finally, all studies with either unknown convergence or unknown etiology had an unknown concordance.

Web scraping
To compare translation of research findings to public health messaging about causes, risk factors, and prevention for breast cancer compared to prostate cancer, the three reviewers (SS, ML, and LCH) scraped data in December 2022 from four notable cancer-focused web resources (the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), the National Institute of Health (NIH), the American Cancer Society (ACS), and the Center for Disease Control (CDC)). The process included acquiring web resources that serviced many users and focused on both breast and prostate cancer, and systematically reviewing and compiling website layouts and risk factor information, characterization, and language.

Statistical methods
We used crosstabulation and chi-square tests to examine the differences in study type, convergence, and concordance between breast and prostate cancer studies. To evaluate convergence, we compared the initial incidence or mortality rates of the migratory population either with rates of the origin population (migrant outcomes prior to immigration) or the initial rates of the migrant population upon arrival in the destination location, with the current migration population and the destination population rates. For example, if the pre-immigration (i.e., origin population) outcome rates were lower than the migrant population rates, and the migrant population rates were lower than the destination rates, then convergence occurred. We defined these changes as an increase towards the destination population from the pre-immigration rates. We considered whether the migration occurred from low to high incident countries or high to low incident countries to confirm if convergence was in the correct direction. Some studies assessed incidence and/or mortality for multiple cancer types; for those studies, we evaluated breast and prostate cancer convergence independently. As for concordance, we reviewed what the authors attributed their findings to, either within their text, figures, or tables, and compared it with the category of convergence for that cancer type. We used SAS v·9·4 software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) for all analyses. Significance was a p-value < 0·05 or non-overlapping 95% confidence limits.

Results
Flow chart of systematic review
Structured Review Article Characteristics (N = 140), 1965–2024
Author(s)	Outcome	Type of Cancer	Author Attributed Etiology: Breast	Author Attributed Etiology: Prostate	Study Type	Convergence: Breast	Convergence: Prostate	Concordance: Breast	Concordance: Prostate	 	Abdoli et al. 2014 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Comorbidity	Testing	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Abdoli et al. 2017 	Incidence and Mortality	Breast	Comorbid diseases, physical inactivity, and educational level	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Adelstein et al. 1979 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Environmental factors	Environmental factors	Double	Convergent	Unknown	Yes	Unknown	 	Anikeeva et al. 2012 	Mortality	Breast	Diet, lifestyle, screening, and reproductive behaviors	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Arnold et al. 2013 	Incidence	Breast	Reproductive and lifestyle patterns	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Balzi et al. 1995 	Mortality	Breast	Integration into the social and cultural environment and genetic factors	N/A	Time dimensional	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Barbone et al. 1996 	Incidence	Breast	Reproductive, menstrual characteristics, dietary habits, and early life exposures	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Beiki et al. 2009 	Incidence	Prostate	N/A	Environmental and genetic factors	Time dimensional	N/A	Convergent	N/A	Yes	 	Beiki et al. 2012 	Incidence and Mortality	Breast	Environmental and behavioral factors, acculturation, and health care utilization	N/A	Time dimensional	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Blesch et al. 1999 	Incidence	Breast	Hormonal factors, diet, and BMI	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Bouchardy et al. 1993 	Incidence and Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Local habits	Local habits	Double	Convergent	Stable	Yes	No	 	Bouchardy et al. 1994 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle	Lifestyle	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Bouchardy et al. 1995 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Western lifestyle and diet	Western lifestyle and diet	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Bouchardy et al. 1996 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Reproductive behavior, traditional habits, and cultural factors	Traditional habits and cultural factors	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Boysen et al. 2008 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Genetic and environmental factors (westernization)	Genetic and environmental factors (diet)	Time dimensional	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Chen et al. 2022 	Incidence	Breast	Western lifestyle, menstrual characteristics, obesity, physical activity, and diet	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Chen et al. 2022 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Acculturation, nongenetic factors, screening, and access to health care	Acculturation, nongenetic factors, screening, and access to health care	Time dimensional	Divergent	Unknown	Yes	Unknown	 	Cheung et al. 2017 	Incidence and Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle, sociocultural factors, quality of care and use, of health services	Lifestyle, sociocultural factors, quality of care and use, of health services	Time dimensional	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Chie et al. 1995 	Incidence and Mortality	Breast	Diet, reproductive behavior, degree of westernization, genetic and hereditary factors	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Chopra et al. 1975 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle (reproductive) factors and living habits	Environment and lifestyle changes	Double	Divergent	Divergent	Yes	Yes	 	Chopra et al. 1977 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Did not discuss	Did not discuss	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Collatuzzo et al. 2023 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Oral contraceptives and lifestyle	Lifestyle, environmental, diet, and genetic factors	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Dassen et al. 2023 	Incidence	Breast	Lifestyle, environmental and genetic factors	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	De Stefani et al. 1990 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Dietary exposures	Dietary exposures	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Fang et al. 1996 	Mortality	Breast	Environment and genetics	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Fascioli et al. 1995 	Mortality	Breast	Environment and maintaining genetic identities	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Feletto et al. 2015 	Incidence and Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle	Testing, and follow-up services	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Fruchter et al. 1990 	Incidence	Breast	Limited exposure to breast examinations	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Ghumare et al. 2007 	Incidence	Breast	Lifestyle changes (delayed marriage, childbearing, fewer children, age at menarche, age at menopause, diet, physical activity, and screening)	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Gleize et al. 2000 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle (diet) and inherited factors	Lifestyle and inherited factors	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Goggins et al. 2009 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Screening and diet	Screening and diet	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Gomez et al. 2010 	Incidence	Breast	Environmental and nongenetic factors (diet, diet, age at menarche, age at first birth, breastfeeding, and other lifestyle and reproductive factors)	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Gross et al. 1977 	Incidence	Breast	Hormonal factors	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Grulich et al. 1992 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Genetic and environmental factors	Genetic and environmental factors	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Grulich et al. 1995 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Genetic and environmental factors	Genetic and environmental factors	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Harding et al. 1999 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Screening and environmental (diet), behavioral changes, and hereditary factors	Screening and environmental (diet), behavioral changes, and hereditary factors	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Harding et al. 2009 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Environment (access to screening and comorbidity)	Environment	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Hemminki et al. 2002 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Environment and genes	Environment and genes	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Hemminki et al. 2002 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Environmental and heritable factors	Environmental and heritable factors	Time dimensional	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Hemminki et al. 2002 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Environmental effects and genetic factors	Environmental effects and genetic factors	Time dimensional	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Hemminki et al. 2011 	Incidence	Breast	Environmental (lifestyle) factors	N/A	Time dimensional	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Hemminki et al. 2013 	Incidence	Prostate	N/A	Androgenic hormonal host environment	Time dimensional	N/A	Convergent	N/A	Yes	 	Hemelrijck et al. 2017 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle, diet, urbanization, and reproductive behavior	Lifestyle, diet, urbanization, and reproductive behavior	Time dimensional	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Hjerkind et al. 2017 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle, SES, and acculturation	Lifestyle, SES, and acculturation	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Hjerkind et al. 2022 	Incidence	Breast	Social factors, lifestyle, health care seeking practices, reproductive patterns, alcohol consumption, obesity, and genetic factors	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Howe et al. 1997 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Genetics and early exposures	Current environment	Double	Divergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Iscovich et al. 1998 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Screening and reproductive risk factors	Lifestyle	Time dimensional	Convergent	Stable	Yes	No	 	Iwasaki et al. 2004 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle and dietary habits	Lifestyle and dietary habits	Time dimensional	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Iwasaki et al. 2008 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Environmental and lifestyle influences	Environmental and lifestyle influences	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Jain et al. 2005 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Age of first parity, number of children, oral contraceptives, hormone replacement therapy (HRT), obesity and alcohol	PSA testing, androgens, oxidative stress, race, aging, diet, environmental agents, and family history	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	John et al. 2005 	Incidence	Breast	Acculturation	N/A	Time dimensional	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	John et al. 2023 	Incidence	Breast	Reproductive patterns, lifestyle factors, and environmental exposures (urbanization or westernization)	N/A	Time dimensional	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Keegan et al. 2010 	Incidence	Breast	Screening rates, nulliparity, late age of first birth, early menarche, alcohol consumption, use of hormone replacement therapy (HRT), acculturation, lifestyle, and reproductive risk factors	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Khlat, 1995 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Diet, late age at first birth, and low parity	Diet	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	King et al. 1985 	Mortality	Breast	Environment	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Kliewer et al. 1995 	Mortality	Breast	Environment, lifestyle, and diet	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Lamminmäki et al. 2023 	Incidence and Mortality	Breast	Lifestyle, hormonal risk factors, alcohol intake, obesity, diet, and physical inactivity	N/A	Time dimensional	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Liu et al. 2019 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Genetic and environmental factors	Genetic and environmental factors	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Loeb et al. 2013 	Incidence	Prostate	N/A	Genetic differences and environmental exposures (PSA testing)	Time dimensional	N/A	Convergent	N/A	Yes	 	Lofterød et al. 2022 	Incidence and Mortality	Breast	Lifestyle	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Lofters et al. 2022 	Incidence	Prostate	N/A	Testing and genetic differences	Single	N/A	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	 	Lofters et al. 2024 	Incidence and Mortality	Prostate	N/A	Social factors and genetic predisposition	Time dimensional	N/A	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	 	Lundberg et al. 2023 	Incidence	Breast	Lifestyle factors, childbearing patterns, legislation of pregnancy termination, screening routines, and skin type	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Luo et al. 2004 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Screening, early lifetime events, physical activity, and diet	Screening, early lifetime events, physical activity, and diet	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Malagon et al. 2023 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Tobacco consumption, alcohol drinking, and early life infections	Lifestyle, obesity, diet, and occupational exposures	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Mallin et al. 1988 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Environment (adult exposures)	Environment (adult exposures)	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Mancuso et al. 1974 	Mortality	Breast	Interrelationships of the host with the environment	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Maringe et al. 2013 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Reproductive risk factors, access to diagnostic testing, and diet	Access to diagnostic testing and diet	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Matos et al. 1991 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Dietary exposures	Dietary exposures	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	McCredie et al. 1990 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Diet	Diet	Double	Divergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	McCredie et al. 1990 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Diet	Diet	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	McCredie et al. 1990 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Diet and lifestyle	Diet and lifestyle	Double	Divergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	McCredie et al. 1994 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Diet and fertility rate	Diet	Double	Unknown	Convergent	Unknown	Yes	 	McCredie et al. 1999 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle, environment, and diet	Environment, diet, and genetics	Time dimensional	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	McCredie et al. 1999 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Environment, lifestyle, genetics, and socio-economic factors	Environmental and cultural factors	Time dimensional	Convergent	Stable	Yes	No	 	McDermott et al. 2011 	Incidence	Breast	Screening	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	McDonald et al. 2017 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Screening frequency	Screening frequency	Time dimensional	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Medhanie et al. 2017 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Economic development, reproductive risk factors, prevalence of obesity, increased awareness, and shared genetic risk factors	Genetic risk	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Mignozzi et al. 2024 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Patterns of healthcare and therapy	Patterns of healthcare and therapy	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Minami et al. 1993 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Environment and genetic differences	Environmental and dietary influences on hormones	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Morey et al. 2019 	Incidence	Breast	Screening, lower parity, delayed childbirth, decreased breastfeeding, and sedentary lifestyles	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Mousavi et al. 2010 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Reproductive factors, habits, family history, and environmental exposures	Western lifestyle and screening	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Mousavi et al. 2012 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Environment and biological factors	Host environment, access to health care, and diagnostic facilities	Time dimensional	Stable	Convergent	No	Yes	 	Mousavi et al. 2013 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Reproductive factors, lifestyles, a positive family history, and diagnostic facilities	Exposures to a new environment, changes in lifestyles, food habits, and screening	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Mousavi et al. 2013 	Incidence	Breast	Did not discuss	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Nasca et al. 1981 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Environmental factors	Did not discuss	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Unknown	 	Nasseri et al. 2011 	Mortality	Breast	Genetic makeup and early environmental exposures	N/A	Time dimensional	Stable	N/A	No	N/A	 	Newman et al. 1984 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Diet, genetic, and hormonal factors	Endogenous factors	Double	Stable	Stable	No	Yes	 	Nilsson et al. 1993 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Dietary factors and screening	Dietary factors and screening	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Norredam et al. 2007 	Incidence	Breast	Diet	N/A	Time dimensional	Convergent Stable	N/A	Yes No	N/A	 	Norredam et al. 2014 	Mortality	Breast	Informal barriers to hospital care and cultural factors	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Norredam et al. 2014 	Incidence	Breast	Healthy migrant effect	N/A	Time dimensional	Convergent	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Ott et al. 2009 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Reproductive and cultural factors and screening	Did not discuss	Double	Divergent	Stable	Yes	Unknown	 	Parkin et al. 1997 	Incidence	Breast	Environmental exposures	N/A	Time dimensional	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Pike et al. 2002 	Incidence	Breast	Estrogen levels, polymorphisms, and dietary factors	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Pinheiro et al. 2016 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Fertility rates, breastfeeding patterns, dietary patterns, and screening rates	Western lifestyle and screening	Double	Unknown	Divergent	Unknown	Yes	 	Pinheiro et al. 2018 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Interaction between genetics and environmental exposures to carcinogens	Screening, detection, and treatment	Double	Divergent	Divergent	Yes	Yes	 	Pinheiro et al. 2020 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Environmental risk factors and genetic factors	Genetic vulnerability and environmental factors	Double	Divergent	Divergent	Yes	Yes	 	Pruitt et al. 2016 	Mortality	Breast	Suboptimal diagnosis and treatment experiences	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Richard et al. 2014 	Mortality	Prostate	N/A	Lifestyle	Double	N/A	Convergent	N/A	Yes	 	Roder et al. 2021 	Incidence	Breast	Socioeconomic disadvantage	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Rosenwaike, 1984 	Incidence and Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Diet and lifestyle patterns	Diet and lifestyle patterns	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Rosenwaike et al. 1986 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle patterns	Environmental and lifestyle factors	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Rosenwaike, 1988 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Reproductive history and diet	Diet	Time dimensional	Unknown	Convergent	Unknown	Yes	 	Santucci et al. 2022 	Mortatlity	Breast and Prostate	Screening and effective treatments	Screening and effective treatments	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Shai, 1991 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle, diet, occupation, and access to medical services, and environment	Healthy migrant effect	Double	Convergent	Divergent	Yes	Yes	 	Shuldiner et al. 2018 	Incidence	Breast	Acculturation, smoking, diet, and alcohol consumption	N/A	Time dimensional	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Singh et al. 2001 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Behavioral, lifestyle, cultural, and psychosocial characteristics	Behavioral, lifestyle, cultural, and psychosocial characteristics	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Singh et al. 2004 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Migration selectivity, social support, socio-economic and behavior	Screening, healthcare, and treatment	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Spallek et al. 2009 	Incidence	Breast	Reproductive behavior, number of children, and age at first birth	N/A	Time dimensional	Divergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Spallek et al. 2012 	Mortality	Breast	Access barriers to health services and socio-cultural environments	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Stanford et al. 1995 	Incidence	Breast	Reproductive history	N/A	Time dimensional	Convergent	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Staszewski et al. 1965 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Migration selection, socio-economic class, and changes in physical environment	Migration selection, socio-economic class, and changes in physical environment	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Staszewski et al. 1971 	Mortality	Breast	Length of residence, environment, habits, and customs	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Stellman et al. 1994 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Environment, diet, and lifestyle	Diet	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Stellman, 1996 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Environmental changes	Environmental changes	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Stirbu et al. 2006 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Environment, behavior, higher parity, lower age at birth, and breastfeeding practices	Environment and behavior	Time dimensional	Convergent	Divergent	Yes	Yes	 	Swerdlow, 1991 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Did not discuss	Did not discuss	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Swerdlow et al. 1995 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Reproductive risk factors	Environmental factor	Double	Divergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Terracini et al. 1990 	Incidence	Prostate	N/A	Genetics, early environmental exposures, social and cultural practices	Double	N/A	Convergent	N/A	Yes	 	Tsugane et al. 1990 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Diet and lifestyle	High fat diet	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Tsugane, 1996 	Incidence and Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Dietary habits	Dietary habits	Double	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Yes	 	Tyczynski et al. 1994 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle	Did not discuss	Time dimensional	Convergent	Convergent	Yes	Unknown	 	van der Wal et al. 2019 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Screening	Environment	Time dimensional	Divergent	Divergent	Yes	Yes	 	Van Hemelrijck et al. 2020 	Incidence	Breast	Breastfeeding, age at menarche, screening attendance, physical activity, tobacco use, obesity, HRT, hormonal contraceptive use, and genetic exposures	N/A	Time dimensional	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	van Leeuwaarde et al. 2011 	Incidence	Breast	Environment	N/A	Double	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Visser et al. 2004 	Incidence	Breast	Reproduction risk factors	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Visser et al. 2007 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Lifestyle	Lifestyle and genetics	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Wang et al. 1989 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Environmental, racial-genetic, and lifestyle factors	Environmental, racial-genetic, and lifestyle factors	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Wild et al. 1997 	Mortality	Breast	Socioeconomic inequalities	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Wild et al. 2006 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Genetics, environment, and diagnostic delay	Diagnostic delay	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Winkler et al. 2009 	Incidence and Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Birth rates	Health-seeking behavior	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Winkler et al. 2012 	Incidence and Mortality	Prostate	N/A	Lifestyle, diet, screening, genetic and environmental factors	Time dimensional	N/A	Divergent	N/A	Yes	 	Woods et al. 2019 	Incidence	Breast	Reproductive risk factors and breast screening utilization	N/A	Time dimensional	Stable	N/A	No	N/A	 	Woods et al. 2023 	Incidence	Breast	Did not discuss	N/A	Single	Unknown	N/A	Unknown	N/A	 	Yu et al. 2023 	Incidence	Breast and Prostate	Acculturation, diet, reproductive practices, environmental exposures, alcohol consumption, hormone therapy use, BMI, and genetic factors	Testing	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Yu et al. 2024 	Mortality	Breast and Prostate	Diet, obesity, and alcohol consumption	Smoking, obesity, screenings, treatments, and genetics	Single	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	 	Zhao et al. 2023 	Mortality	Prostate	N/A	Social history and lifestyle	Time dimensional	N/A	Convergent	N/A	Yes	 	Zhao et al. 2019 	Mortality	Breast	Early-life exposures and reproductive factors	N/A	Double	Divergent	N/A	Yes	N/A	 	Ziegler et al. 1993 	Incidence	Breast	Western lifestyle	N/A	Time dimensional	Convergent	N/A	Yes	N/A
The PRISMA flow diagram indicates that the initial search identified 2,704 articles, and we removed 1,180 duplicate articles (Fig. 1). Then we reviewed 1,524 titles and abstracts and excluded 1,276. In the abstract and title screening phase, 10% (n = 156) of studies needed consensus due to differences in votes between the two reviewers. Next, we assessed the remaining 248 articles for eligibility with a full-text review. During the full-text review, the reviewers needed arbitration for 16% (n = 39) of the studies. Further, we excluded 108 for the following reasons: duplicate study (n = 8), full-text not available (n = 41), secondary article (n = 2), wrong exposure or outcome (n = 57). Finally, this search resulted in the selection of 140 original research studies published between August 1965 and March 2024. Of the 140 eligible studies, 51 exclusively examined breast cancer outcomes, nine solely investigated prostate cancer outcomes, and 80 reported on both breast and prostate cancer outcomes. We assessed each cancer's convergence and concordance separately for the studies that examined both breast and prostate cancer outcomes, resulting in 220 comparisons across 140 studies. All included study characteristics are in Table 1.

Study design
Of the 140 studies in our review, 40% (n = 56) compared only two populations (single comparison), 33% (n = 46) compared three populations (double comparison), and 27% (n = 38) compared two or more populations and had a time-based element (time-dimensional study) (Supplementary Table 2). The studies that exclusively examined breast cancer (43%, n = 22 of 51) and both cancer types (41%, n = 33 of 80) predominately compared only two populations at once (single comparison). In contrast, studies solely examining prostate cancer were often time-dimensional (67%, n = 6 of 9). Though we observed proportional differences between breast and prostate cancer studies by study design, those differences were not statistically significant (p-value = 0.83; data not shown).

Convergence
Convergence by Study Design by Cancer Type (N = 220 comparisons from 140 studies)
Study Design	 	Breast	Prostate	 		Total	Total	Singlea	Double	Time Dimensional	Total	Singlea	Double	Time Dimensional	 	N	Col %	N	Col %	N	Col %	Row %	N	Col %	Row %	N	Col %	Row %	N	Col %	N	Col %	Row %	N	Col %	Row %	N	Col %	Row %	 	Convergence	 	 Total	220	100	131	100	55	100	42	44	100	34	32	100	24	89	100	34	100	39	33	100	37	22	100	24	 	 Convergent	89	40	52	40	 − 	 − 	 − 	32	76	62	20	63	38	37	42	 − 	 − 	 − 	24	73	65	13	59	35	 	 Divergent	20	9	12	9	 − 	 − 	 − 	9	21	75	3	9	25	8	9	 − 	 − 	 − 	5	15	63	3	14	38	 	 Stable	10	4	5	4	 − 	 − 	 − 	1	2	20	4	13	80	5	6	 − 	 − 	 − 	3	9	60	2	9	40	 	 Unknown	101	46	62	47	55	100	89	2	5	3	5	16	8	39	44	34	100	87	1	3	3	4	18	10
aAll single comparison study designs have an unknown convergence
We determined that most migrant populations in our review had incidence or mortality outcomes that converged towards the destination population outcomes (40%, n = 89 of 220) (Table 2). We detected convergence in similar proportions for both breast (40%, n = 52 of 131) and prostate cancer (42%, n = 37 of 89) (p-value = 0·9; data not shown), and those convergent studies often compared all three populations. Subgroup analyses revealed that 20% (n = 16 of 80) of studies that examined both breast and prostate cancer outcomes in the same study had different convergences between breast and prostate cancer (Supplementary Table 3). For instance, Iscovich et al. looked at the time since migration and found “no evidence for any systematic change in proportions for prostate cancer.” For breast cancer, they observed “a small but statistically significant increase in breast cancer proportions” (Supplementary Fig. 1).

Concordance
Concordance by Study Design by Cancer Type (N = 220 comparisons from 140 studies
Study Design	 	Breast	Prostate	 		Total	Total	Singlea	Double	Time Dimensional	Total	Singlea	Double	Time Dimensional	 	N	Col %	N	Col %	N	Col %	Row %	N	Col %	Row %	N	Col %	Row %	N	Col %	N	Col %	Row %	N	Col %	Row %	N	Col %	Row %	 	Total	220	100	131	100	55	100	43	44	100	33	32	100	24	92	100	34	100	39	34	100	37	22	100	24	 	Yes	106	48	62	47	 − 	 − 	 − 	41	93	66	21	66	34	44	48	 − 	 − 	 − 	29	85	66	15	68	34	 	No	9	4	5	4	 − 	 − 	 − 	1	2	20	4	13	80	3	3	 − 	 − 	 − 	1	3	33	2	9	67	 	Unknown	106	48	64	49	55	100	86	2	5	3	7	22	11	42	46	34	100	81	3	9	7	5	23	12
aAll single comparison study designs have an unknown concordance
We found that authors were frequently concordant by consistently attributing results with the consistent etiology (47%, n = 106 of 220) and that almost all findings were fully or partially attributed to the environment (Table 3). We found concordance was in similar proportions for both breast (47%, n = 62 of 131) and prostate cancer (49%, n = 44 of 89) (p-value = 0·95; data not shown), and most studies with concordance compared all three populations (origin, migrants, and destination populations). In addition, we found that some authors attributed different etiologies for breast and prostate cancer outcomes in some cases despite the results being the same.
Subgroup analyses showed that the studies that examined both breast and prostate cancer outcomes had different concordances between breast and prostate cancer 16% (n = 13 of 80) of the time (Supplementary Table 3). Different concordances within the same studies were primarily due to authors attributing both convergent breast cancer rates and stable prostate cancer rates to environmental factors. However, there were exceptions, like Newman et al., who attributed stable breast cancer outcomes to environmental and genetic factors but stable prostate cancer rates to only “endogenous factors.”.

Double and time-dimensional studies
We further examined the double and time-dimensional study designs since including all three populations or a time component helped authors interpret and attribute their findings more appropriately. For instance, for double and time-dimensional studies, we determined that migrant populations converged towards the destination population in 59–76% (range = 13–32) of studies (Table 2). Concordance also occurred often (66–93%, range = 15–41) for double and time-dimensional studies (Table 3). Also, we observed unknown concordance and convergence for double and time-dimensional studies for 5–23% (range = 2–7) of studies.

Translation
Given the results of our review of migrant studies, public health messaging should emphasize modifiable risk factors for preventing both breast and prostate cancer. However, all four websites framed breast cancer as more modifiable than prostate cancer. The breast cancer webpages described established risk factors, including unmodifiable and modifiable factors such as alcohol, overweight/obese, physical activity, not having children, not breastfeeding, birth control, and menopausal hormone therapy. In contrast, all four prostate websites described unmodifiable and modifiable factors, but in the few instances where prostate cancer webpages described modifiable factors, they were under headings such as “Factors with less clear effects on prostate cancer risk,” indicating that environmental factors such as diet, obesity, and smoking had less supporting evidence.
Website flow of four cancer websites, web scrape conducted in December 2022
Breast	Prostate	 	ASCO	Breast Cancer: Risk Factors and Prevention 1. The following factors may raise a persons risk of developing breast cancer 2. Prevention  a. Lifestyle choices to lower cancer risk  b. Surgery to lower cancer risk  c. Drugs to lower cancer risk	Prostate Cancer: Risk Factors and Prevention 1. The following factors may raise a person’s risk of developing prostate cancer 2. Prevention  a. Chemoprevention  b. Dietary choices	 	NIH	Breast Cancer Prevention (PDQ)-Patient Version 1. Breast Cancer Prevention  a. The following are protective factors for breast cancer  b. It is not clear whether the following affect the risk of breast cancer  c. The following are risk factors for breast cancer  d. Avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer 2. General information About Breast Cancer 3. What is prevention?	Prostate Cancer Prevention (PDQ)-Patient Version 1. Prostate Cancer Prevention  a. General information about  b. The following risk factors may increase the risk of prostate cancer  c. The following protective factors may decrease the risk of prostate cancer  d. The following have been proven not to affect the risk of prostate cancer or their effects on prostate cancer risk is not known	 	CDC	 1. What Is Breast Cancer? 2. What Are the Symptoms? 3. What Are the Risk Factors for Breast Cancer?  a. Risk Factors You Cannot Change  b. Risk Factors You Can Change 4. What Can I Do to Reduce My Risk? 5. What Is Breast Cancer Screening? 6. How Is Breast Cancer Diagnosed? 7. How Is Breast Cancer Treated? 8. Triple-Negative Breast Cancer 9. Breast Cancer in Young Women plus icon 10. Breast Cancer in Men 11. Statistics 12. What CDC Is Doing 13. Resources to Share plus icon 14. Stay Informed	Prostate Cancer 1. Who Is at Risk for Prostate Cancer? 2. What Are the Symptoms? 3. What Is Screening for Prostate Cancer? 4. Should I Get Screened? 5. What Are the Benefits and Harms of Screening? 6. How Is Prostate Cancer Diagnosed? 7. How Is Prostate Cancer Treated? 8. Talk to Nathan 9. Prostate Cancer Health Tips 10. Statistics 11. What CDC Is Doing 12. Resources to Share	 	ACS	Breast cancer 1. Breast Cancer Risk and Prevention—Learn about breast cancer risk factors, both genetic and lifestyle-related, as well as ways to prevent breast cancer   i. Lifestyle-related Breast Cancer Risk Factors   ii. Breast Cancer Risk Factors You Cannot Change   iii. Factors with Unclear Effects on Breast Cancer Risk   iv. Disproven or Controversial Breast Cancer Risk Factors  a. Can Breast Cancer Be Prevented?   v. Can I Lower My Risk of Breast Cancer?   vi. Genetic Counseling and Testing for Breast Cancer Risk   vii. Deciding Whether to Use Medicine to Reduce Breast Cancer Risk   viii. Tamoxifen and Raloxifene for Lowering Breast Cancer Risk   ix. Aromatase Inhibitors for Lowering Breast Cancer Risk   x. Preventive Surgery to Reduce Breast Cancer Risk  b. Breast Cancer Early Detection and Diagnosis	Prostate Cancer 1. About Prostate Cancer 2. Causes, Risk Factors, and Prevention   i. Prostate Cancer Risk Factors 1. Researchers have found several factors that might affect a man’s risk of getting prostate cancer 2. Factors with less clear effects on prostate cancer risk   ii. What Causes Prostate Cancer? 1. Inherited gene mutations 2. Acquired gene mutations  a. Prevention   iii. Can Prostate Cancer Be Prevented? 3. Early Detection, Diagnosis, and Staging 4. Treating Prostate Cancer 5. After Treatment	 	ASCO American Society of Cancer Oncology, NIH National Institutes of Health, CDC The Center for Disease Control, ACS American Cancer Society
Messaging around cancer prevention also differed between breast and prostate cancer on the CDC, ACS, and ASCO websites. On the ACS website, the prostate cancer webpage had one subsection called, “Can Prostate Cancer Be Prevented?”; the equivalent breast cancer page was more extensive, including six subsections (Table 4). The CDC breast cancer webpage included a section, “What can I do to reduce my risk?”; the prostate cancer webpage did not mention modifiable risk factors or ways to reduce risk. Both breast and prostate CDC webpages gave information about screening, but given the absence of other modifiable risk factors for prostate cancer, the message implied that only secondary prevention was available for prostate cancer. In contrast, there were many recommendations for women at the individual level for reducing their risk through primary and secondary prevention on the CDC website, such as “being physically active can help lower your risk of getting breast cancer.”
Only the ACS website discussed etiology directly for both prostate and breast cancer. Under the tab “What causes prostate cancer?”, the language was rather technical and biological, mentioning only genetic factors, further characterized as inherited and acquired gene changes. The latter included hormones, radiation, inflammation, and cancer-causing chemicals but only as sources of DNA damage, connotating impact at the cellular level. For breast cancer, the information regarding inherited gene changes was located under the prevention tab in a subsection called “Genetic Counseling and Testing for Breast Cancer risk”. There was no language about acquired gene changes for breast cancer.

Discussion
Our structured review of migrant studies found that both breast cancer incidence and mortality rates converged to rates found in the destination population. Though most studies made single comparisons between migrant and destination populations, these studies had the weakest study design. In contrast, double comparison and time-dimensional studies that compared three populations, enabled researchers to detect convergence and be concordant in their interpretations. Most authors attributed this convergence to environmental or modifiable factors. However, study design, convergence, and concordance did not differ statistically between breast and prostate cancer, indicating that breast cancer was no more modifiable than prostate cancer.
We explored whether the results of migrant studies support gendered assumptions perpetuated through the existing breast and prostate cancer literature, as previously suggested for the Developmental Origins of Disease and Health (DOHaD) literature. We did not see substantial bias in the study design, convergence, and concordance of breast compared with prostate cancer studies. The results of our structured review point to the equal role environmental factors play in both prostate and breast cancer, but the public health messaging seems misaligned, particularly for breast cancer. The public health messaging implied that the environment is more important than genetic factors for breast cancer. The sheer amount of breast cancer comparisons compared to prostate cancer may indicate that researchers may not consider prostate cancer to have modifiable risk factors since migrant studies help expose environmental contributors. Prevention messages for breast cancer focused on primary prevention for individual women, yet failed to acknowledge the systemic and often gendered barriers to implementing these risk reducing behaviors. However, prevention for prostate cancer focused on secondary prevention, such as screening, shifting the onus from individuals to a health system strategy. Given similar etiology for both cancers, the public health messaging of breast cancer seems subject to gender bias.
The intent of migrant studies is to control for genetics while helping to uncover environmental risk factors, but investigating gene-environment interactions is also possible. For instance, most studies acknowledged the potential contribution of both genetics and the environment in the incidence and mortality of breast and prostate cancer. Still, they rarely set out to examine that connection through migrant studies. The public health messaging did not mention gene-environment interactions either. Thus, a much-needed step for migrant studies is to investigate the interplay between genes and the environment and how this can more precisely guide prevention for not only migrant populations but for everyone at risk.
A limitation of our structured review was our inability to determine why migrants moved. It hindered us from looking at the healthy immigrant effect, which hypothesizes that when migrants enter a new place (e.g., country), they bring their healthier habits, lifestyle, or genetics, leading to better health outcomes than the destination population. Migrant populations have changed their environment through geographical movement, either by choice or necessity. Migrant health studies often do not make the distinction between choice and the necessity of migration. We found that very few studies we reviewed indicated which factor resulted in migration. However, understanding more sophisticated metrics of population remodeling could offer insight into the differences we observe between people.
A strength of our structured review was the distinction we made between migrant populations and race and ethnicity. Some studies did not confirm immigration status and instead used surnames to determine immigration. We felt that that perpetuated the idea that a specific ethnicity equaled foreignness, while Whiteness equaled native-born, which may not be the case. For instance, Chie et al. compared the breast cancer incidence and mortality rates of Asian women from various countries with White women. They did not indicate that they checked the immigration status of the White women in their study but assumed, based on race, that they were born in the United States. Thus, to overcome this limitation, we excluded studies that did not confirm immigration status. Additionally, intersectionality between gender and race can affect how researchers and the public interpret and perpetuate the biases we observed. For both cancers, the results of some single comparison African migrant studies have been used to support the claim that genetics explain the higher incidence and more severe cancers in African Americans than White Americans. Therefore, intersections of racism and sexism may play a role in biased interpretations of migrant studies.

Conclusion
Results of migrant studies and their attributed etiology to either environmental factors alone or both genetic and environmental factors suggests that breast cancer is no more modifiable than prostate cancer. In contrast, public health messaging across four prominent websites framed breast cancer as more modifiable than prostate cancer. Future research should explore more complex study designs (i.e., double comparison or time-dimensional) to get conclusive incidence and mortality trend comparisons for breast and prostate cancer. In addition, future studies might consider examining gene-environment interactions for migrant populations and explore how research funding priorities and public health messaging might better reflect health system-level prevention strategies for both breast and prostate cancer, rather than overly focusing on individual-level factors for women only.

Supplementary Information
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Authors’ contributions
SS designed and planned out the structured review. SS performed the structured review search. SS, ML, and LCH did the screening and data extraction. SS did the formal analysis. SS and LH wrote the manuscript and SS designed the figures with support from ML and LH. LH supervised the project and conceived the original idea.

Funding
The US National Cancer Institute grant funded this research: K07CA218166 to Lauren Houghton.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Sung H, Ferlay J, Siegel RL, Laversanne M, Soerjomataram I, Jemal A, Bray F. Global cancer statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J Clin. 2021;71(3):209–249. 10.3322/caac.21660. Epub 2021 Feb 4.
BMJ. Prostate cancer now kills more people than breast cancer: cause for alarm? BMJ EBM spotlight. 2018. https://blogs.bmj.com/bmjebmspotlight/2018/03/09/prostate-cancer-now-kills-more-people-than-breast-cancer-cause-for-alarm/. Accessed 2 Mar 2021.
High prevalence of screen detected prostate cancer in West Africans: implications for racial disparity of prostate cancer
Prostate cancer epidemiology
Di Zazzo E, Galasso G, Giovannelli P, Di Donato M, Castoria G. Estrogens and their receptors in prostate cancer: therapeutic implications. Front Oncol. 2018;8. 10.3389/fonc.2018.00002.
Effects of estrogen on breast cancer development: role of estrogen receptor independent mechanisms
Role of hormonal and other factors in human prostate cancer
A basic review on estrogen receptor signaling pathways in breast cancer
Targeting androgen receptor in estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer
Androgen receptor in breast cancer: expression in estrogen receptor-positive tumors and in estrogen receptor-negative tumors with apocrine differentiation
The steroid metabolome and breast cancer risk in women with a family history of breast cancer: the novel role of adrenal androgens and glucocorticoids
Hormone-dependent cancers: molecular mechanisms and therapeutical implications
Heterogeneity in hormone-dependent breast cancer and therapy: steroid hormones, HER2, melanoma antigens, and cannabinoid receptors
The other side of the coin: may androgens have a role in breast cancer risk?
Breast cancer epidemiology and risk factors
Gene-environment interactions relevant to estrogen and risk of breast cancer: can gene-environment interactions be detected only among candidate SNPs from genome-wide association studies?
The influence of modifiable factors on breast and prostate cancer risk and disease progression
BRCA mutations in prostate cancer: prognostic and predictive implications
Genetic risk prediction for prostate cancer: implications for early detection and prevention
Hereditary breast cancer; genetic penetrance and current status with BRCA
Han SA, Kim SW. BRCA and breast cancer-related high-penetrance genes. In: Noh DY, Han W, Toi M, editors. Translational research in breast cancer. Springer; 2021. p. 473–490. 10.1007/978-981-32-9620-6_25.
Prevalence and penetrance of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a population-based series of breast cancer cases. Br J Cancer. 2000;83(10):1301–1308. 10.1054/bjoc.2000.1407.
The risk factors of prostate cancer and its prevention: a literature review
The incidence, mortality, and risk factors of prostate cancer in Asian men
It’s the mother!: how assumptions about the causal primacy of maternal effects influence research on the developmental origins of health and disease
The origins of mother blaming: historical perspectives on childhood and motherhood
MIgration patterns and breast-cancer risk in Asian-American women
Cancer in immigrants as a pointer to the causes of cancer
Studies of cancer in migrants: rationale and methodology
The fallacy of the ecological fallacy: the potential misuse of a concept and the consequences
Immigration, acculturation, and adaptation
Cancer mortality of Chinese in New York City 1988–1992
Preventable breast cancer is postmenopausal
Jefferson T, Di Pietrantonj C, Debalini MG, Rivetti A, Demicheli V. Relation of study quality, concordance, take home message, funding, and impact in studies of influenza vaccines: systematic review. BMJ. 2009;338. 10.1136/bmj.b354.
Migration and health in the world: a global public health perspective
Immigration as a social determinant of health
Ensuring effective public health communication: insights and modeling efforts from theories of behavioral economics, heuristics, and behavioral analysis for decision making under risk
A call for more rigor in science and health communication
Public health messaging in an era of social media
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement
The American Society of Clinical Oncology. Breast cancer. Cancer.Net; 2014. https://www.cancer.net/cancer-types/breast-cancer. Accessed 20 Apr 2023.
The American Society of Clinical Oncology. Prostate cancer. Cancer.Net; 2014. https://www.cancer.net/cancer-t%C3%BDpes/prostate-cancer. Accessed 20 Apr 2023.
The National Institute of Health. Breast cancer—patient version - NCI. https://www.cancer.gov/types/breast. Accessed 20 Apr 2023.
The National Institute of Health. Prostate cancer—patient version - NCI. https://www.cancer.gov/types/prostate. Accessed 20 Apr 2023.
The American Cancer Society. Breast cancer | Breast cancer information & overview. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer.html. Accessed 20 Apr 2023.
The American Cancer Society. Prostate cancer | Prostate cancer information and overview. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/prostate-cancer.html. Accessed 20 Apr 2023.
The Center for Disease Control. Breast cancer. CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/breast/index.htm. Accessed 20 Apr 2023.
The Center for Disease Control. Prostate cancer. CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/prostate/index.htm. Accessed 20 Apr 2023.
Cancer mortality by country of birth, sex, and socioeconomic position in Sweden, 1961–2009
Breast cancer diagnosis and mortality by tumor stage and migration background in a nationwide cohort study in Sweden
Cancer mortality in 1970–1972 among Polish-born migrants to England and Wales
Trends in cancer mortality rates among migrants in Australia: 1981–2007
Diverging breast and stomach cancer incidence and survival in migrants in the Netherlands, 1996–2009
Cancer mortality in Italian migrants and their offspring in Canada
Socioeconomic status, migration and the risk of breast cancer in Italy
Risk of prostate cancer among Swedish-born and foreign-born men in Sweden, 1961–2004
Breast cancer incidence and case fatality among 4.7 million women in relation to social and ethnic background: a population-based cohort study
A comparison of breast and colon cancer incidence rates among native Asian Indians, US immigrant Asian Indians, and whites
Cancer risks among European migrants in Sáo Paulo, Brazil
Cancer mortality among Chinese and South-East Asian migrants in France
Cancer mortality among sub-Saharan African migrants in France
Cancer mortality among north African migrants in France
The Inuit cancer pattern—the influence of migration
Birth cohort effects in breast cancer incidence: global patterns and trends
Cancer mortality patterns by birthplace and generation status of Mexican Latinos: the multiethnic cohort
Impact of immigration status on cancer outcomes in Ontario, Canada
Geographic variation of breast cancer in Taiwan: International and migrant comparison
Cancer of Asians in Kenya
Cancer in the Africans and Arabs of Zanzibar
Cancer in migrants: a population-based study in Italy
The effect of attendance in the Dutch breast cancer screening program on breast tumor characteristics among migrant women
Cancer in migrants to Uruguay
Cancer mortality in migrant populations within Italy
Quantifying disparities in cancer incidence and mortality of Australian residents of New South Wales (NSW) by place of birth: an ecological study
Cervix and breast cancer incidence in immigrant Caribbean women
Breast cancer trends in Indian residents and emigrants portend an emerging epidemic for India
Cancer registry of French Polynesia: results for the 1990–1995 period among native and immigrant population
Cancer among Asian Indians/Pakistanis living in the United States: low incidence and generally above average survival
Hidden breast cancer disparities in Asian women: disaggregating incidence rates by ethnicity and migrant status
Relationship between steroid excretion patterns and breast-cancer incidence in Israeli women of various origins
Cancer mortality in African and Caribbean migrants to England and Wales
Cancer incidence in Asian migrants to New South Wales, Australia
Cancer incidence among first generation Scottish, Irish, West Indian and South Asian migrants living in England and Wales
Trends in cancer mortality among migrants in England and Wales, 1979–2003
Cancer risks in first-generation immigrants to Sweden
Cancer risks in Nordic immigrants and their offspring in Sweden
Cancer risks in second-generation immigrants to Sweden
Prostate cancer incidence and survival in immigrants to Sweden
Cancer mortality by migrant background in Belgium during the 2000s: patterns and social determinants
Ethnic differences in the incidence of cancer in Norway
Incidence of breast cancer subtypes in immigrant and non-immigrant women in Norway
Cancer incidence and age at northern migration of African Americans in Illinois, 1986–1991
Cancer incidence patterns (1972–91) among migrants from the Soviet Union to Israel
Cancer mortality among Japanese immigrants and their descendants in the state of Sao Paulo, Brazil, 1999–2001
Secular trends in cancer mortality among Japanese immigrants in the state of São Paulo, Brazil, 1979–2001
Cancer incidence in the south Asian population of California, 1988–2000
Migration history, acculturation, and breast cancer risk in Hispanic women
Changes in breast cancer risk and risk factor profiles among U.S.-born and immigrant Asian American women residing in the San Francisco Bay Area
Breast cancer incidence patterns among California Hispanic women: differences by nativity and residence in an enclave
Cancer in Mediterranean migrants–based on studies in France and Australia
Patterns of site-specific displacement in cancer mortality among migrants: the Chinese in the United States - PubMed. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3976947/. Accessed 13 Oct 2021.
Breast-cancer mortality among immigrants in Australia and Canada
A population-based cohort study on changes in breast, lung and colorectal cancer incidence and mortality among non-Western immigrant women
Disparities in cancer incidence among Chinese population versus migrants to developed regions: a population-based comparative study
Risk of localized and advanced prostate cancer among immigrants versus native-born Swedish men: a nation-wide population-based study
The influence of metabolic factors and ethnicity on breast cancer risk, treatment and survival: the Oslo ethnic breast cancer study
Prostate cancer incidence among immigrant men in Ontario, Canada: a population-based retrospective cohort study
Stage of diagnosis and survival for prostate cancer among immigrant men in Ontario
Risk factors for the increasing incidence of pregnancy-associated cancer in Sweden – a population-based study
Cancer incidence patterns among Chinese immigrant populations in Alberta
Site-specific cancer incidence by race and immigration status in Canada 2006–2015: a population-based data linkage study
Cancer mortality in Illinois Mexican and Puerto Rican immigrants, 1979–1984
Relation of place of birth and migration in cancer mortality in the U.S.–a study of Ohio residents (1959–1967)
Maringe C, Mangtani P, Rachet B, Leon DA, Coleman MP, Silva I dos S. Cancer incidence in South Asian migrants to England, 1986–2004: unraveling ethnic from socioeconomic differentials. Int J Cancer. 2013;132(8):1886–1894. 10.1002/ijc.27826.
Cancer in migrants to Argentina
Cancer incidence in European migrants to New South Wales
Cancer incidence in migrants to New South Wales
Cancer incidence in migrants to New South Wales from England, Wales, Scotland and Ireland
Cancer incidence in migrants to New-South-Wales (Australia) from the middle-east, 1972–91
Cancer mortality in east and southeast Asian migrants to New South Wales, Australia, 1975–1995
Cancer mortality in migrants from the British Isles and continental Europe to New South Wales, Australia, 1975–1995
Cancer incidence among Canadian immigrants, 1980–1998: results from a national cohort study
Cancer and the healthy immigrant effect: a statistical analysis of cancer diagnosis using a linked census-cancer registry administrative database
Cancer incidence profile in sub-Saharan African-born blacks in the United States: similarities and differences with US-born non-Hispanic blacks
Cancer mortality in Germany-born Americans and Germans
The incidence of colon, breast and prostate cancer in Italian migrants to Victoria, Australia
Higher breast cancer risk among immigrant Asian American women than among US-born Asian American women
Cancer incidence among Iranian immigrants in Sweden and Iranian residents compared to the native Swedish population
Age- and time-dependent changes in cancer incidence among immigrants to Sweden: colorectal, lung, breast and prostate cancers
Cancer incidence among Turkish, Chilean, and North African first-generation immigrants in Sweden compared with residents in the countries of origin and native Swedes
Ethnic differences in breast cancer risk and survival: a study on immigrants in Sweden
Cancer among the foreign-born in New York State
Patterns of death in the first and second generation immigrants from selected Middle Eastern countries in California
Cancer mortality among immigrant populations in Ontario, 1969 through 1973
Cancer incidence in Estonian migrants to Sweden
Cancer incidence among 1st generation migrants compared to native Danes–a retrospective cohort study
Cancer mortality does not differ between migrants and Danish-born patients
Duration of residence and disease occurrence among refugees and family reunited immigrants: test of the “healthy migrant effect” hypothesis
Noncommunicable disease mortality and life expectancy in immigrants to Israel from the former Soviet Union: country of origin compared with host country
Parkin DM, Iscovich J. Risk of cancer in migrants and their descendants in Israel: II. Carcinomas and germ-cell tumours. Int J Cancer. 1997;70(6):654–660. 10.1002/(sici)1097-0215(19970317)70:6<654::aid-ijc5>3.0.co;2-u.
Breast cancer in a multiethnic cohort in Hawaii and Los Angeles: risk factor-adjusted incidence in Japanese equals and in Hawaiians exceeds that in whites
Black heterogeneity in cancer mortality: US-Blacks, Haitians, and Jamaicans
Migration from Mexico to the United States: a high-speed cancer transition
Cancer mortality among US blacks: variability between African Americans, Afro-Caribbeans, and Africans
Pruitt SL, Tiro JA, Xuan L, Lee SJC. Hispanic and immigrant paradoxes in U.S. breast cancer mortality: impact of neighborhood poverty and hispanic density. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2016;13(12). 10.3390/ijerph13121238.
Italianity is associated with lower risk of prostate cancer mortality in Switzerland
Female breast cancer in New South Wales, Australia, by country of birth: implications for health-service delivery
Cancer mortality among Puerto Rican-born residents in New York City
Trends in cancer mortality among Puerto Rican-born migrants to New York City
Cancer mortality among Mexican immigrants in the United States
Cancer mortality in Italian populations: differences between Italy and the USA
Cancer mortality in Cuba and among the Cuban-born in the United States: 1979–81
Incidence of breast and colorectal cancer among immigrants in Ontario, Canada: a retrospective cohort study from 2004–2014
All-cause and cause-specific mortality of immigrants and native born in the United States
Health, life expectancy, and mortality patterns among immigrant populations in the United States
Cancer incidence rate ratios of Turkish immigrants in Hamburg, Germany: a registry based study
Cancer mortality patterns among Turkish immigrants in four European countries and in Turkey
Breast cancer incidence in Asian migrants to the United States and their descendants
Cancer mortality among the Polish-born in the United States
Cancer mortality in 1962–66 among Polish migrants to Australia
Cancer mortality in Chinese immigrants to New York City. Comparison with Chinese in Tianjin and with United States-born whites
Proportional mortality ratios among Korean immigrants to New York City, 1986–1990
Cancer mortality rates among first and second generation migrants in the Netherlands: convergence toward the rates of the native Dutch population
Mortality and cancer incidence in Vietnamese refugees in England and Wales: a follow-up study
Cancer incidence in England and Wales and New-Zealand and in migrants between the 2 countries
Cancer incidence and risk factors among Montreal residents of Italian origin
Cancer incidence rates among Japanese immigrants in the city of São Paulo, Brazil, 1969–78
Cancer patterns and lifestyle among Japanese Brazilian in Sao Paulo
Cancer mortality among Polish migrants to Australia
A population-based retrospective study comparing cancer mortality between Moluccan migrants and the general Dutch population: equal risk 65 years after immigration?
Breast cancer by migrant background in Belgium: lower risk, but worse survival in women of non-European origin
A nationwide analysis of incidence and outcome of breast cancer in the country of Surinam, during 1994–2003
Breast cancer risk among first-generation migrants in the Netherlands
Cancer risk in first generation migrants in North-Holland/Flevoland, The Netherlands, 1995–2004
Cancer mortality of Chinese in Canada
Cross sectional analysis of mortality by country of birth in England and Wales, 1970–92
Mortality from all cancers and lung, colorectal, breast and prostate cancer by country of birth in England and Wales, 2001–2003
Cancer profile of migrants from the Former Soviet Union in Germany: incidence and mortality
Prostate cancer in Germany among migrants from the Former Soviet Union
Breast cancer incidence by country of birth among immigrant women in British Columbia, Canada
Stage-specific risk of breast cancer among Canadian immigrant and non-immigrant women
Incidence profile of four major cancers among migrants in Australia, 2005–2014
Yu M, Liu L, Gibson JT, et al. Assessing racial, ethnic, and nativity disparities in US cancer mortality using a new integrated platform. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2024:djae052. 10.1093/jnci/djae052.
Age-period-cohort analysis and projection of cancer mortality in Hong Kong, 1998–2030
Breast cancer mortality in Chinese women: does migrant status play a role?
Rios A, Joshi R, Shin H. Quantifying 60 years of gender bias in biomedical research with word embeddings. In: Proceedings of the 19th SIGBioMed workshop on biomedical language processing. Association for Computational Linguistics; 2020. p. 1–13. 10.18653/v1/2020.bionlp-1.1.
Quantifying sex bias in clinical studies at scale with automated data extraction
Gene–environment interaction and aetiology of cancer: what does it mean and how can we measure it?
Do environmental factors modify the genetic risk of prostate cancer?
Breast cancer prevention based on gene-environment interaction
Constant AF. The healthy immigrant paradox and health convergence. CESifo Working Paper Series No. 6692. 2017. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3074307 or 10.2139/ssrn.3074307.
The healthy immigrant effect and aging in the United States and other western countries