Adipose‐Derived Stem Cells as Therapeutic Approach in Hypertrophic Scar Formation—A Systematic Review
ABSTRACT
Despite numerous therapeutic approaches, the inhibition of hypertrophic scar formation remains a major challenge. Adipose‐derived stem cells (ADSCs) have been shown to improve wound healing, including remodelling, in vivo. A systematic review was conducted using the electronic databases PubMed, Web of Science, Embase and Medline. The basic research question was formulated with the PICO framework. The aim of this review is to prove the role of ADSCs in the prevention of hypertrophic scar formation based on in vivo studies. Improved macroscopic outcomes with the use of ADSCs have been shown in nine of 10 studies included. Eight studies report inhibition on fibroblast activation, while all studies highlight the efficacy in promoting the extracellular matrix deposition and remodelling process. The immunomodulatory effects of ADSCs during inflammation have been demonstrated in six studies. One study each investigated the effect on adipogenesis or angiogenesis. In all studies the role of ADSCs in the prevention of hypertrophic scarring was conclusive. However, due to their heterogeneity and weighting of disparate outcomes, several investigations only converged upon distinct endpoints. Further research, preferably in pigs, is urgently required in order to assess the role of ADSCs in the prevention of hypertrophic scar.
Key Points
The application of ADSCs has demonstrated a marked improvement in scar formation in vivo, with marcoscopially observable effects.
ADSCs positively influence fibroblast activation and favourably modulate their activity.
Studies have demonstrated that ADSCs improve extracellular matrix deposition.
ADSCs exert anti‐inflammatory effects in vivo.

Introduction
The skin is the largest organ in the body, perceiving pressure, temperature and pain via specific sensory receptors, regulating moisture content and body temperature, and serving as the primary defence against harmful influences.
The final phase of wound healing is the remodelling phase, responsible for the scar tissue formation. Through mechanical tension and TFG‐β, fibroblasts are activated to differentiate into myofibroblasts, which express α‐SMA and contract the wound. In physiological wound healing, myofibroblasts usually undergo apoptosis, but not in hypertrophic scar formation. Hypertrophic scars occur particularly frequently after deep dermal injuries, burns and surgical procedures. Persistent inflammation results in up‐regulation of pro‐inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, consequently inducing the expression of growth factors such as TGF‐β1 and PDGF. These growth factors considerably stimulate fibroblast proliferation and their differentiation into myofibroblasts, leading to hypertrophic scar formation. These excessive scars are characterised by an augmented level of myofibroblasts, due to the absence of apoptosis, which leads to an extensive ECM through an enriched collagen deposition and higher levels of α‐SMA. Unlike physiological scars, hypertrophic scars show significant elevation and thickening of the scar tissue. Clinically, they are often associated with redness, itching, tightness and occasionally pain. Functional and aesthetic impairments are caused by hypertrophic scars, leading to restricted movement, particularly in joint regions, and considerable psychosocial distress.
Despite numerous therapeutic approaches—such as silicone pads, compression therapy, intralesional corticosteroids, laser therapy and surgical scar revision, the inhibition of hypertrophic scar formation remains a major challenge in plastic and reconstructive surgery. The ultimate goal is to develop novel therapies that support the healing process and enable improved treatment outcomes. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have emerged as a novel therapeutic approach in wound care and tissue regeneration. A distinct type of MSCs was discovered in large quantities within adipose tissue, namely ADSCs. The effectiveness of ADSCs in all phases of wound healing inclusive remodelling was proven in vivo. The aim of this review is to prove the role of ADSCs in the prevention of hypertrophic scar formation based on in vivo studies.

Methods
The present systematic literature review was registered in the PROSPERO database (CRD42024362785) and conducted following a protocol guided by the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses (PRISMA) Statement.

Identify the Research Question
The fundamental research question was formulated with the PICO framework as follows: Are ADSCs an effective therapeutic approach to inhibiting hypertrophic scar formation in vivo? The creation process is illustrated in Table 1.
Creation of the research request according to the PICO framework. The population was defined as in vivo hypertrophic scar models, the intervention as ADSCs application, and control—where applicable—served as the control, with improved scar formation selected as the primary outcome.
Population	Intervention	Control	Outcome	 	In vivo hypertrophic scar models	ADSCs application	Control group, if available	Improved scar formation
Note: Are ADSCs an effective therapeutic approach to inhibiting hypertrophic scar formation in vivo?

Search Strategy
A systematic literature review was performed to detect concerns from in vivo studies published up to 18th September 2024 on the efficacy of ADSCs in the inhibition of hypertrophic scar formation. To identify appropriate studies, the following online databases were searched: PubMed, Web of Science, Embase and Medline. The key terms of the applied search strategy for each online databank are displayed in Table 2.
In our systematic review, we focused on the online databases PubMed, Web of Sciene, Embase and Medline. The table presents the corresponding key terms of the applied search strategy for the respective journals.
Database	Search strategy	 	PubMed	(‘adipose‐derived stem cells’OR ‘adipose tissue derived stem cells’OR ‘adipose‐derived mesenchymal stem cells’OR ‘adipose derived mesenchymal stem cells’OR ‘adipose tissue‐derived mesenchymal stem cells’OR ‘adipose tissue derived mesenchymal stem cells’OR ‘adipose stem cells’OR ‘adipose mesenchymal stem cells’)	AND	(hypertrophic scar[MeSH Terms]OR hypertrophic scars[MeSH Terms]OR hypertrophic scarring[MeSH Terms]OR scar formation[MeSH Terms]OR dermal fibrosis[MeSH Terms]OR cicatrix[MeSH Terms])	 	Web of Science	(‘adipose‐derived stem cells’OR ‘adipose‐derived mesenchymal stem cells’OR ‘adipose tissue stem cells’OR ‘adipose mesenchymal stem cells’)	AND	(‘hypertrophic scar’OR ‘hypertrophic scars’OR ‘hypertrophic scarring’OR ‘hypertrophic scar formation’OR ‘scar formation’OR ‘extensive scarring’OR ‘dermal fibrosis’OR ‘scar’OR ‘cicatrix’)	 	Embase	(‘adipose‐derived stem cells’OR ‘adipose‐derived mesenchymal stem cells’OR ‘adipose tissue stem cells’OR ‘adipose mesenchymal stem cells’)	AND	(‘hypertrophic scar’OR ‘hypertrophic scars’OR ‘hypertrophic scarring’OR ‘hypertrophic scar formation’OR ‘scar formation’OR ‘extensive scarring’OR ‘dermal fibrosis’OR ‘scar’OR ‘cicatrix’)	 	MEDLINE	(‘adipose‐derived stem cells’OR ‘adipose‐derived mesenchymal stem cells’OR ‘adipose tissue stem cells’OR ‘adipose mesenchymal stem cells’)	AND	(‘hypertrophic scar’OR ‘hypertrophic scars’OR ‘hypertrophic scarring’OR ‘hypertrophic scar formation’OR ‘scar formation’OR ‘extensive scarring’OR ‘dermal fibrosis’OR ‘scar’OR ‘cicatrix’)

Study Selection
The usage of ADSCs in hypertrophic scar prevention was determined as the fundamental inclusion criterion. Firstly, all search results were exported into Mendeley Desktop (Version 1.19.8) and duplicates were eliminated. Secondly, titles, abstracts, and later, full‐text articles, were analysed in relation to the inclusion criteria. Only full‐text original articles published in English were eligible. Case reports, review articles, letter and comments, but also non in vivo studies were excluded. To ensure no inequity by wrongful exclusion, the analysis was performed by two investigators. In the event of a consensus between two researchers being found, a publication was included in the review process. With regard to missing or unclear information, the corresponding authors were contacted once by email.
Study inclusion criteria:
Randomised and non‐randomised controlled in vivo studies.
Only full‐text original articles published in the English language will be eligible
Studies must focus on ADSCs in the therapy of hypertrophic scars in vivo.
Study Inclusion Criteria:
Clinical trials.
Ex vivo studies.
Case reports.
Reviews.
Letters and comments.
Paper not available as full‐text.
Paper not published in English language.
Scars not classified as Hypertrophic.
ADSCs were not declared as primarily responsible for the treatment outcome.
Study exclusion criteria:

Data Extraction
The following data were extracted from the text, tables, and graphs of the eligible studies by two independent study associates: (1) Study design; (2) Animal model; (3) Scar conditions; (4) Origin of ADSCs; (5) Dosage of ADSCs; (6) Carrier medium; (7) Method of application; (8) Comparison group; (9) Study duration; (10) Measured outcomes.

Results
A total of 818 publications were identified from electronic database searches by using our specified search strategy. After the elimination of duplicates (n = 416), 402 publications were manually screened for relevant publications. Based on the title and abstract, 375 were excluded due to irrelevance or unoriginality (e.g., review articles, comments etc.), with 27 full‐text articles being retrieved and assessed for eligibility. Of these, 17 articles were excluded for the following reasons: two were irretrievable, 12 had no hypertrophic scar model, two focused on ADSC biological signalling and transport molecules rather than the cells themselves, and one publication reported an ex vivo model. Consequently, 10 publications fulfilled the inclusion criteria. The study's inclusion process is displayed in Figure 1.
The analysis selection process is presented in a PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses) Flow diagram detailing the identification, screening, eligibility and inclusion of relevant studies. *Reports were excluded for following reasons: Reason 1: Irretrievable, Reason 2: No hypertrophic scar model, Reason 3: No specific focus on ADSCs, Reason 4: Ex vivo model.

Bias Assessment
Upon applying the SYRCLE's Risk of Bias tool to the 10 in vivo studies included, the following observations were made (Figure 2):
The quality of each included study according to the SYRCLE risk of bias tool for animal studies. Red denotes a high risk of bias, yellow an unclear risk, and green a low risk of bias, respectively.
Within the domain of sequence generation, four studies make reference to randomising. However, no details are reported concerning the underlying process. In two studies, no randomising procedure was applied, and in four others, no information was provided, resulting in the risk of bias being unclear in six studies and high in two. In the domain of baseline characteristics, three studies have no detail in the gender of experimental animals, which indicates an unclear risk, while seven of the included studies showed a low risk of bias. For allocation concealment, four studies each were identified as being at low or high risk, while the remaining two were considered to present an unclear risk. The absence of clarity in sequence generation together with the high number of high‐risk assessments in allocation concealment could potentially result in selection bias.
Except for one study claiming to separate housing, which suggests a high bias risk, no data on randomly housing were reported in the other studies, leaving the risk unclear. None of the studies reported whether caregivers or investigators were blinded. Therefore, the risk of bias is unclear in all studies. In summary, the incomplete information indicates a potential for performance bias.
In the four studies, all animals were assessed on the same day, ensuring that no selection of individual animals for outcome assessment occurred. Therefore, the risk of selection bias was considered low. In five other studies, assessments were conducted at different time points without reporting whether randomisation of the assessment process was performed, which indicates an unclear risk. Since the study consistently assessed the same ear side, outcome assessment was not randomised. According to the SYRCLE tool, this represents a high risk of bias in the domain of random outcome assessment. Only two of the included studies reported that the investigators were blinded, leaving the risk of detection bias for the remaining eight studies unclear.
All the included studies demonstrated a low risk of bias in the domain of incomplete outcome data and selective outcome reporting, indicating a low risk of attrition and reporting bias.
In seven studies, multiple scars per ear or mice back were assessed, leading to potential pseudo‐replication with a high risk of bias.

Study Characteristics

Animal Models
Of 10 studies included, five were based on a rabbit model, four on a mouse model, and in one case a pig model was used. In six studies, full‐thickness wounds were inflicted on the animals, and in two studies, wounds were created by subcutaneous bleomycin injections or by excising full‐thickness defects down to the fascia. The injuries were established using surgical techniques or dermal biopsy punches in six studies. In two studies, xenografting was conducted by transplanting human tissue onto mice.

Intervention
ADSCs were injected in eight studies and applied topically in two. Injections were either subcutaneous, intradermal, into the upper cartilage intralesional or into the graft. In four out of eight studies, Dulbecco's modified eagle medium (DMEM) was used as a carrier for ADSCs injections. Four studies used phosphate buffered saline (PBS) as an injection carrier. In one study, ADSCs were administered using conditioned HTS medium as a carrier and in another, ADSCs were applied to the wound as part of the SVF gel. Please refer to Table 3 for the applied dose of ADSCs.
Characteristics of studies included: The table summarises the following data extracted from the eligible studies: Study, year of publication, ADSC origin, ADSC dose, carrier, mode of application, comparison group, study duration and outcome measures.
Study	Year	ADSC origin	ADSC dose	Carrier	Mode of application	Comparison groups	Duration	Outcome measures	 	Zhang et al. [23]	2015	Allogeneic New Zealand albino rabbit ADSCs	5 × 104 cells/cm2	DMEM	Intralesional injection	• ADSCs• ADSCs‐CM• Control (no treatment)	Days 14, 21, 28, 35	• Macroscopic outcome ↑• α‐SMA ↓• Collagen type I gene expression ↓• Ameliorated collagen deposition• SEI ↓	 	Li et al. [29]	2016	Human ADSCs; allogeneic mouse ADSCs	2 × 105 cells per well	F12/DMEM	Subcutaneous injection	• ADSCs‐CM• Control (DMEM)	2 weeks	• α‐SMA ↓• Skin fibrosis ↓• Collagen type I ↓• Collagen type III ↓• p38/MAPK pathway inhibition	 	Zhang et al. [25]	2021	Allogeneic New Zealand rabbit ADSCs	Not reported	DMEM	Topical application	• Gel (ADSC‐CM + hydrogel)• Non‐gel (ADSC‐CM)• Control (DMEM + hydrogel)	4 months	• α‐SMA ↓• SEI ↓• Inflammation ↓• TGF‐β/SMAD2 ↓	 	Xie et al. [26]	2022	Allogeneic New Zealand rabbit ASCs	0.5 × 106 cells	PBS	Intradermal injection	• ADMSC• IL‐10‐ADMSC• Control (no treatment)	28 days	• Inflammation ↓• IL‐1β ↓• IL‐6 ↓• MIP‐1β ↓• MCP‐1 ↓• Scar size ↓• Collagen I/III↓• TGF‐β1 ↓• p‐SMAD 2/SMAD 2, SMAD 7 ↓• p‐IκBα/IκBα ↓• p‐p65/p65 ↓	 	Domergue et al. [30]	2016	Human ADSCs	2 × 105	PBS	Intralesional injection	• SVF• hASCs• Control (PBS)	2 weeks	• Remodelling ↑• Fibrosis ↓• TGF‐β1 ↓• TGF‐β3 ↑• VEGF ↓• MMP2 ↑• HGF ↑	 	Xiao et al. [27]	2022	Allogeneic New Zealand rabbit ASCs	0.1 mL/cm2	SVF gel	Topical application	• SVF gel• Laser• Combination of SVF gel & Laser• Control (saline)	4 and 12 weeks	• Scar softening and lightening• Collagen remodelling ↑• Inflammation ↓• C/EBP‐α and PPAR‐γ ↑• Adipogenesis ↑	 	Li et al. [31]	2016	Human ADSCs	2 × 106	F12/DMEM	Intralesional injection	• DMEM/F12• AD‐MSC• Triamcinolone• Control (no treatment)	2 and 4 weeks	• Collagen remodelling ↑• Scar tissue weight ↓• Cell proliferation and Apoptosis ↑• Nrf2 and Bcl‐2 expression ↓• BAX and cleaved caspase‐3 ↑	 	Tang et al. [24]	2017	Allogeneic New Zealand rabbit ASCs	5 × 106/ml	PBS	Intracartilage Injection	• ADSCs• PBS• no treatment	3, 14, 21 and 40 days	• Scar improvement• • IL‐1α ↑• KGF ↑• TGF‐β1 ↓• CK10 ↑• PCAN ↑	 	Yun et al. [32]	2012	Human ADSCs	1 × 106	PBS	Subcutaneous injection	• ADSCs + PBS• Control (PBS)	Up to 100 days	• Scar size ↓• Scar flexibility ↑• Scar colour consistency↑• Collagen remodelling ↑• α‐SMA ↓• TIMP1 ↓• Inhibition TGF‐β• MMP1 ↑	 	Chen et al. [28]	2024	Human ADSCs	5 × 106	HTS medium	Subcutaneous injection	• hADSCs• shCCL5‐hADSCs• shCXCL12‐hADSCs• Control (PBS)• belomycin• bleomycin + HTS medium	4‐week follow‐up	• Fibrosis ↓• Collagen remodelling ↑• hypertrohic scar formation ↓• CXCL12 ↓• ADSCs CCL5 ↓
A variety of time‐criteria was employed in the administration of ADSCs following wound creation. In one study, ADSCs were administered immediately after. Another group was injected with ADSCs after 16 h, while in a third, ADSCs were applied after 24 h. One study administered ADSCs after 48 h, as a conditioned medium combined with polysaccharide hydrogel. A different study applied ADSCs after 21 days, once epithelialisation was complete, with repeated injections every 5 days for a total of three treatments. Additionally, two studies injected ADSCs after 4 weeks, when hypertrophic scars had fully formed. In studies where xenografting was performed, administration occurred either in weeks 5 and 7 or only in week 7 after grafting. Another study applied ADSCs after re‐epithelialisation and hypertrophic scar formation was complete, with injections every 10 days for three treatments.
Wound care varied in each of the studies: One study used iodine solutions on the day of incision. Another applied Gentamicin to prevent infection, but no specific dressing was mentioned. In studies using erythromycin eye ointment, the wounds were treated with the ointment immediately after creation, sometimes alongside other antibiotics like penicillin and chloramphenicol to prevent infection. In one study, sterile dressings were applied and changed every day until the wounds healed. Weekly replacement of bandage was reported in one study. In a further study, wounds were covered with Tegaderm and elastic bandages for 5 days, followed by open dressing. In four of the studies, the method of wound covering was not mentioned.

Country of Study‐Origin
Almost all studies examined were conducted in Asia, with nine originating from China and one study from South Korea. Only one study was conducted in France, Europe. None of the studies were conducted in North or South America, Africa, Oceania or Antarctica.

Outcome

Macroscopic Outcome
Nine of the included studies demonstrated improved scar formation in the groups treated with ADSCs.
The included studies examined the macroscopical differences in scar tissue, all of which identified an improvement through the usage of ADSCs. The studies indicated improvements in colour and pliability, along with a reduction in hyperplasia and scar surface. A validated analysis of the quality of scar tissue was conducted in four studies: Xiao et al. and Chen et al. used the Vancouver scar scale (VSS), while Zhang et al. and Zhang Q. et al. applied the scar elevation index (SEI). In addition, histological evidence of thinner scar tissue due to the usage of ADSCs was provided in three studies.

Fibroblast Activation
Eight of the included studies have examined fibroblast activation and its modulation. Four of these studies have investigated the influence of ADSCs on alpha‐SMA (α‐SMA) expression, which correlates with the number of myofibroblasts during hypertrophic scar formation; all found a depressed level of α‐SMA in the groups treated with ADSCs compared with controls. Four of the included studies investigated the expression of transforming growth factor (TGF); three demonstrated a reduction in TGF‐β1 following the application of ADSCs, whereas Yun et al. found no difference in the expression of TGF‐β1 and TGF‐β3 compared to the control group. Domergue et al. reported no significant reduction in TGF‐β1 with the usage of ADSCs, but observed a significant increase in TGF‐β3. In a study by Xie et al. a down‐regulation of the TGF‐β/SMADs and NF‐κB pathway through the usage of ADSCs was demonstrated. Furthermore, Li et al. reported a suppression of the p38/MAPK signalling pathway following the administration of ADSCs. An increased rate of cell apoptosis was observed following the use of ADSCs by Li et al.. In addition, the B‐cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl‐2) levels and nuclear factor erythroid 2‐related factor 2 (Nrf2) were decreased, while Bcl2‐associated X (BAX) and cleaved caspase‐3 levels were increased in ADSCs‐treated animals.

Extracellular Matrix and Remodelling Processes
All included studies have investigated the influence of ADSCs on the extracellular matrix deposit and remodelling processes during scar formation.
A histological investigation was conducted by 9 of the 10 included studies; all of these demonstrated well‐arranged and more organised collagen bundles in study animals treated with ADSCs compared with controls, which exhibited disarranged ones.
A decreased collagen density in ADSCs treated animals was demonstrated in three studies. Four of the included studies investigated the effect of ADSCs in collagen synthesis. A reduction of collagen type I (Col1) following the administration of ADSCs was observed in all four of these; in two of these, a further decrease in collagen type III (Col3) was reported. In two studies, elevated levels of matrix metalloproteinases 1 (MMP‐1) were detected, while tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinas (TIMP)‐1 was decreased in one of them. Furthermore, Domergue et al. reported an increased expression level of MMP‐2 and the MMP‐2/TIMP‐2 ratio in ADSCs‐treated animals.
In Tang et al., ADSC treatment significantly up‐regulated PCAN and CK10 expression in scar tissue; simultaneously, the authors presented an increased keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) level in the ADSCs group.

Inflammation
The impact of ADSCs on inflammation, which is closely associated with scar tissue formation, has been addressed in six of the 10 included studies. Histologically, Xiao et al. reported a reduction in inflammatory cells, whereas Yun et al. described a decreased number of mast cells after ADSCs application. Xie et al. showed a lower infiltration of T‐cells, macrophages and leukocytes in the initial inflammatory response after the application of ADSCs.
Furthermore, they found a significant decrease in MCP‐1, MIP‐1β, IL‐1β and IL‐6. Tang et al. showed that IL‐1α mRNA was significantly increased in the epidermis and decreased in the dermis in ADSCs‐treated rabbit ears, compared to both the untreated model and PBS‐treated control groups. No significant changes in the expression of IL‐6, tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF‐α) and interferon‐gamma (IFN‐γ) were observed in the A‐treated group compared with the control group in the study by Domergue et al.. However, the authors reported a significant increase in hepatocyte growth factor (HGF).
A reduction of CXCL 12 was observed by Chen et al. after the usage of ADSCs. Furthermore, the authors suggested that in the hypertrophic scar microenvironment, ADSCs exhibit increased expression of CCL5, a Th2 cell–related chemokine, related to scarring.

Angiogenesis
Angiogenesis‐related factors were investigated in only one of the nine included studies. This study demonstrated a significant reduction in vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) following the use of ADSCs.

Adipogenesis
Only one of the nine included studies investigated the effect of ADSCs on adipogenesis in hypertrophic scars. Xiao et al. demonstrated an increase in C/EPB‐α and PPAR‐γ through the usage of ADSCs in a rabbit ear model.

Discussion
Despite considerable heterogeneity among the included studies, all demonstrate a preventative effect of ADSCs against hypertrophic scar formation in vivo. The heterogeneity begins with the choice of animal model. The rabbit ear scar model is considered the most popular model for researching hypertrophic scars, even though pigs produce scar tissue that is most similar to human scar tissue. Compared to pigs, rabbits are relatively inexpensive to house. The rabbit ear model offers good reproducibility of results, and the absence of the panniculus carnosus– which is present in mice–enhances the translational relevance to humans by preventing strong tissue contraction. Despite the strong tissue contraction caused by the panniculus carnosus, mouse models enable the investigation of mechanobiology and are important for basic research to identify new targets for establishing novel treatments. In addition, mouse models are employed for the variant of xenografting in which human tissue is transplanted into the animal, likewise in two of the included studies. Of the 8 studies included, 5 were based on a rabbit model and three on a mouse model. Only a single study was conducted based on a pig model.
Fibroblasts are primarily responsible for granulation tissue formation and thus scaring. Triggered by cytokines and growth factors, most notably TGF‐β, they migrate to the wound, where they deposit extracellular matrix (ECM) components constituent's collagen, elastin, proteoglycans and glycoproteins, which, are major components of the new granulation tissue. Several studies suggest that the synthesis of collagen and other ECM components in fibroblasts is triggered by TFG‐β1, which is known as a major profibrotic growth factors and produced by various cells during the wound healing process. Furthermore, TGF‐β1 enhance fibroblast proliferation and induce their differentiation into myofibroblasts. Hypertrophic scars are associated with augmented levels of TGF‐β1. Five studies have investigated the impact of ADSCs on TGF‐β levels; three of which have substantiated that the application of ADSCs results in a reduction of TGF‐β1 levels during hypertrophic scaring in vivo. As with all TFG‐β family ligands, TFG‐β1 initiates biological effects via TGF‐β1/SMAD pathway, which is associated with collagen synthesis in fibroblasts. ADSCs appear to be able to inhibit this TGF‐β1/SMAD signalling. Xie et al. demonstrated reduced levels of TGF‐β1 and, consequently, protein expression of phosphorylated SMAD 2, 3 and SMAD 7 in a hypertrophic scar model treated with ADSCs. The same result was obtained in a study from the research group of Xie et al. in co‐cultures of fibroblasts obtained from hypertrophic scars and keloids with ADSCs.
Beside the SMAD‐dependent pathway, TGF‐β1 can also signal through SMAD‐independent pathways to activate p38 MAPK and NF‐κB signalling and promote myofibroblast differentiation.
Beside the reduction of TGF‐β1 in ADSCs‐treated mice, Domergue et al. observed an increase of TGF‐β3. In contrast to TGF‐β1, TGF‐β3 is known as a major anti‐scarring factor, through the promotion of collagen deposition and re‐epithelialization.
An enhanced level of myofibroblasts occurs during hypertrophic scar formation as a result of apoptosis failure, in contrast with physiological scarring. Consequently, α‐SMA concentrations and ECM deposition are significantly increased. Four of the included studies showed a decrease in myofibroblasts in the ADSC‐treated groups compared to the controls, as demonstrated by lower levels of α‐SMA. This α‐SMA‐reducing effect of ADSCs has also been proven in other in vivo studies.
In hypertrophic scar formation generally, an elevated abundance of myofibroblasts leads to enriched collagen synthesis, which is calculated to be seven times higher than in uninjured skin. Three included studies demonstrated a decrease in collagen synthesis through the usage of ADSCs in their hypertrophic scar models. Significantly, the reduction of Col3 was detected in two of the included studies, in animals treated with ADSCs. This is of particular interest because hypertrophic scars are associated with increased Col3.
A major challenge in hypertrophic scarring is the insufficient apoptosis of myofibroblasts. Of particular interest are the findings of Li et al., who reported an increased rate of apoptosis in association with elevated BAX and cleaved caspase‐3 expression, while Bcl‐2 expression was reduced following the use of ADSCs. Studies have demonstrated that a reduction in Bcl‐2, accompanied by an increase in BAX and cleaved caspase‐3, augments cellular susceptibility to apoptosis. Consequently, fibroblast viability is reduced, contractile forces are attenuated, and the expression of collagen and α‐SMA is markedly downregulated, thereby contributing to the modulation of excessive scar formation. It is particularly interesting that Li et al. suggested that downregulation of Nrf2/HO‐1 by ADSCs increases ROS levels, induces fibroblast apoptosis, and promotes collagen remodelling, whereas Jiang et al. indicated that upregulation of Nrf2/HO‐1 mitigates oxidative stress and inflammation, thereby reducing fibrosis. Overall, the role of Nrf2/HO‐1 in hypertrophic scarring appears to be insufficiently investigated, and further research is indispensable to establish a validated conclusion.
MMPs have a major function in reducing scar formation by instigating the proteolytic depredation of ECM components during the remodelling process. In order to achieve a balance between ECM‐synthesis and ‐degradation, the stimulation of TIMPs is modulated by MMPs. In contrast to physiological scarring, a reduction in the expression of MMP‐1 in hypertrophic scar formation, along with increased levels of TIMP‐1, causes an imbalance between ECM‐synthesis and ‐degradation. The outcome of this is extensive collagen deposition. Although Domergue et al. reported an increase in MMP‐1 and MMP‐2 levels, only Yun et al. investigated the effect on the MMP‐1/TIMP‐1 balance through the usage of ADSCs. In that study, the authors reported increased MMP‐1 levels, while those of TIMP‐1 were decreased. These findings provide further evidence for the potential role of ADSCs in the modulation of MMP expression and their involvement in scar formation. While ADSCs may have beneficial effects on certain aspects of scar formation, further investigation is required to assess their potential influence on myofibroblasts, the expression of MMPs, and subsequent impact on scar formation.
The inflammatory response plays a fundamental role in the healing process, not only as the primary defence mechanism against microorganisms, but also through an increase in important mediators and growth factors, which promote the transition to the proliferative phase. However, the inflammatory response can be extensive and uncontrolled, leading to an augmented level of inflammatory cells and cytokines, which promote hypertrophic scar formation.
An increased number of inflammatory cells, including neutrophils, T‐cells and macrophages, have been observed in hypertrophic scar formation. These cells release pro‐inflammatory cytokines such as IL‐1β, IL‐6, and TNF‐α. IL‐6 is known as a major promoter for acute‐phase proteins and a modifier of leukocyte infiltration. Increased IL‐1β results in prolonged wound healing by stimulating the inflammasome activity in macrophages. In addition, IL‐1β activates the NF‐κB and MAPK signalling pathways, amplifying the inflammatory response and exacerbating tissue fibrosis. The initially dominant M1 macrophages polarise to M2 subtype at a deferred time point. M2 macrophages produce growth factors such as TGF‐β1 and PDGF. In a prospective study by Butzelaar et al., patients who developed hypertrophic scars showed higher baseline values for M2 macrophages compared to patients with physiological scars.
A reduction in inflammatory cells through the usage of ADSCs was observed in three of the included studies. Xie et al. demonstrated a decrease in macrophages, T‐Cells and leukocytes through the application of ADSCs. Furthermore, the authors found a significant reduction in MIP‐1β, IL‐1β, IL‐6 and a downregulation of the NF‐κB pathway.
HGF inhibited macrophage‐mediated pro‐inflammatory cytokine production and reduced hypertrophic scar formation. An up‐regulation of HGF in ADSCs‐treated animals was observed by Domergue et al..
In increased number of mast cells accumulates during hypertrophic scar formation. Chen et al. suggested that mast cells stimulate the TGF‐β1/SMAD signalling pathway and thus TGF‐β1 action. The promotion of fibroblast migration and proliferation occurs through the mast cell mediators histamine and tryptase. This is achieved by inducing fibroblast growth factor (FGF)‐7 and bFGF secretion from the fibroblasts. Furthermore, histamine and tryptase are associated with fibroblast differentiation into myofibroblasts. Of particular interest is the finding by Yun et al., who reported a subsequent reduction in mast cells in hypertrophic scar formation through the usage of ADSCs.
CXCL12 has been shown to promote scar formation in mice; while induction of CXCL12 led to a larger scar area, suppression of CXCL12 downregulated scar formation. Similar observations were made for MCP‐1. In a study by Ferreira et al., MCP‐1‐deficient mice showed a milder inflammatory response and a similar structure to normal skin, while wild‐type mice showed extensive inflammation with subsequent thickened collagen bundles in pathological arrangement. Within the included studies, the application of ADSCs in hypertrophic scar models consistently demonstrated a reduction in both CXCL12 and MCP‐1.
Inflammation is maintained by the action of cytokine IL‐1α on skin cells, thus attracting leukocytes and inducing chemokine expression. Thomay et al. demonstrated that IL‐1R knockout mice developed a reduced scar formation in both cutaneous and deep tissue wounds, indicating an antifibrotic effect of diminished IL‐1 signalling. An elevated IL‐1α mRNA level in rabbit ear epidermis and reduced levels in dermis was observed by Tang et al. after the application of ADSCs. This result is of particular interest, as a significant increase in epidermal expression of IL‐1 α was observed in physiological scars compared to hypertrophic scars 3 and 12 months after surgery.
Th2 cells, a distinct T cell subtype, are known to possess fibrosis‐promoting properties and are increased in hypertrophic scars. Th2‐associated chemokine CCL5 is scarcely expressed in physiological scars but remains persistently elevated in hypertrophic ones, with sustaining high levels throughout hypertrophic scar formation. interestingly, Chen et al. mention that ADSCs exhibit increased CCL5 expression in the hypertrophic scar milieu and propose to suppress this in order to enhance the scar‐inhibitory properties of ADSCs.
Appropriate to their primary physiological function, ADSCs have shown a distinct differentiation potential into adipocytes. In the studies included, five studies have reported adipogenic differentiation of ADSCs. However, only Xiao et al. addressed their adipogenic differentiation abilities in vivo, evidenced by a significant elevation of C/EPB‐α and PPAR‐γ. These findings are of considerable interest, since the transfer of autologous subcutaneous tissue, namely fat grafting, has been shown to improve scar quality in hypertrophic scars in vivo Furthermore, recent investigations have shown fat transfer normalises skin, improves scar quality, reduces pain, normalise the Col3 level, and lower fibroblast density and TGF‐β1 in patients with hypertrophic scars.
In burn patients requiring fascial excision, the absence of subcutaneous fat eliminates the gliding layer, leading to scar fixation to deeper structures with stiffness and limited mobility. Thus, ADSCs are an excellent source for the development of regenerative therapies and could be used for the regeneration or reconstruction of lost subcutaneous fat tissues in deep defects. Currently, there are various approaches to developing artificial adipose tissue from ADSCs by using modern tissue engineering methods. Although good progress has been made in the fabrication of artificial adipose tissue, all of these studies are still in the preclinical phase and further investigations are necessary to bring them into the clinical setting.
Most of the included studies originated from Asia, with a notable paucity of studies from Europe, with only a single study. One possible explanation for this discrepancy is the stringent Advanced Medical Technology and Pharmaceuticals (AMTP) legislation, which presents novel challenges in the field of cell‐based therapies in Europe. These regulations aim to ensure the safety and efficacy of such therapies but may inadvertently hinder research and development in this field. Currently, this situation has the potential to prevent Europe from advancing in the area of cell‐based therapies. However, it is important to note that the absence of studies from Europe does not necessarily indicate a complete lack of progress or advancement in this region. It could simply reflect the focus of the studies included in our analysis or the availability of data.
In summary, ADSCs are a promising candidate for future therapeutic approaches in the prevention of hypertrophic scar formation. All of these experiments demonstrated different aspects of ADSCs that positively influence scar formation. However, the validity of all these results must be critically scrutinised, since the studies exhibit considerable heterogeneity and many positive attributes were highlighted only in individual papers.

Limitations
Our systematic review has some inherent limitations. For one, only articles written in English were taken into account within this review. As a result, some papers that are not available in English have not been considered. Only items discovered through our search strategy retrieved from PubMed, Web of Science, Embase and Medline were considered, with the possibility of missed publications. Another addition to the limitations is that our review is limited to articles published before 18th September 2024. Since science is a dynamic process leading to constant developments, papers published after this date have not been considered within this review. Despite literature screening by two investigators, a possible wrongful exclusion cannot be ruled out. A major limitation is that important anti‐scarring properties of ADSCs have only been addressed in single papers, which precludes establishing reliable validity. Another key limitation is that most studies were conducted in mice or rabbits, despite pigs having skin characteristics more comparable to humans, but remain infrequently used because of higher costs. Finally, despite the usage of SYRCLE's Risk of Bias tool and independent assessment by two reviewers, it is important to acknowledge that bias assessment can be inherently subjective, and so the results should be interpreted with this in mind.

Conclusion
In conclusion, it appears that ADSCs demonstrate remarkable efficacy in the field of regenerative medicine, offering positive support throughout scar formation. The included studies report a decrease in ECM synthesis, TFG‐β1 expression, myofibroblast, α‐SMA levels and inflammatory response. In addition, the balance between ECM synthesis and degradation was reported. ADSCs also appear to positively influence important signalling pathways involved in hypertrophic scar formation, such as SMAD, NF‐κB and p38/MAPK. However, the usage of ADSCs in the prevention of hypertrophic scars is still in the early experimental stage. The included studies have revealed varied approaches to cell count, administration protocol, and carrier selection. Given the initial findings, it is imperative to elucidate the optimal administration protocol for ADSCs and identify the most appropriate carrier. A noticeable trend, presumably due to costs, is the preference for mice and rabbits in the included studies rather than pigs, despite the latter sharing skin characteristics with humans and being capable of developing hypertrophic scars. Furthermore, heterogeneity among the studies, with their respective weighting of disparate outcome parameters, resulted in each investigation converging upon distinct endpoints rather than collectively contributing to a coherent body of evidence. Due to lack of homogeneity, no generally valid statement concerning the usage of hypertrophic scar prevention can be made. Hence, further investigations, preferably in pigs, are necessary to investigate the therapeutic approach of ADSCs in hypertrophic scar formation and its potential adoption in clinical settings.

Funding
The authors have nothing to report.

Ethics Statement
The authors have nothing to report.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Data Availability Statement
Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

References
Skin Wound Healing: An Update on the Current Knowledge and Concepts
Burn Wound Infections
Transition From Inflammation to Proliferation: A Critical Step During Wound Healing
The Wound Healing Process: An Overview of the Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms
Cutaneous Scarring: Basic Science, Current Treatments, and Future Directions
Wound Healing and the Role of Fibroblasts
TGF‐β1 Promotes Scar Fibroblasts Proliferation and Transdifferentiation via Up‐Regulating MicroRNA‐21
Hypertrophic Scarring and Keloids: Pathomechanisms and Current and Emerging Treatment Strategies
Scars
Hypertrophic Scarring: The Greatest Unmet Challenge After Burn Injury
Evasion of Apoptosis by Myofibroblasts: A Hallmark of Fibrotic Diseases Boris
An Update on Molecular Mechanisms of Scarring—A Narrative Review
Vascular and Collagen Target: A Rational Approach to Hypertrophic Scar Management
Update on Hypertrophic Scar Treatment
Updated Scar Management Practical Guidelines: Non‐Invasive and Invasive Measures
Mesenchymal Stem Cells Enhance Wound Healing Through Differentiation and Angiogenesis
Concise Review: Role of Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Wound Repair
Multilineage Cells From Human Adipose Tissue: Implications for Cell‐Based Therapies
Human Adipose Tissue Is a Source of Multipotent Stem Cells
The Efficacy of Adipose‐Derived Stem Cells in Burn Injuries: A Systematic Review
The PRISMA 2020 Statement: An Updated Guideline for Reporting Systematic Reviews
SYRCLE'S Risk of Bias Tool for Animal Studies
Intralesional Injection of Adipose‐Derived Stem Cells Reduces Hypertrophic Scarring in a Rabbit Ear Model
The Influences of Adipose‐Derived Stem Cells (ASCs) on Epithelial‐Mesenchymal Cross‐Talk Factors in the Early Stage of Scar Formation
Combination of Lyophilized Adipose‐Derived Stem Cell Concentrated Conditioned Medium and Polysaccharide Hydrogel in the Inhibition of Hypertrophic Scarring
Interleukin‐10‐Modified Adipose‐Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Prevent Hypertrophic Scar Formation via Regulating the Biological Characteristics of Fibroblasts and Inflammation
Mechanical Micronization of Lipoaspirates Combined With Fractional CO2Laser for the Treatment of Hypertrophic Scars
Adipose‐Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Suppress Fibroblast Proliferation of Hypertrophic Scar Through CCL5 and CXCL12
Adipose Tissue‐Derived Stem Cells Suppress Hypertrophic Scar Fibrosis via the p38/MAPK Signaling Pathway
Comparison Between Stromal Vascular Fraction and Adipose Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Remodeling Hypertrophic Scars
Adipose‐Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells Alleviate Hypertrophic Scar by Inhibiting Bioactivity and Inducing Apoptosis in Hypertrophic Scar Fibroblasts
Effect of Human Adipose Derived Stem Cells on Scar Formation and Remodeling in a Pig Model: A Pilot Study
The Roles of Matrix Metalloproteinases and Their Inhibitors in Human Diseases
In Vivo Models for Hypertrophic Scars—A Systematic Review
A Systematic Review Comparing Animal and Human Scarring Models
Extracellular matrix assembly: A multiscale deconstruction
Biology of the Extracellular Matrix: An Overview
Critical Role of Transforming Growth Factor Beta in Different Phases of Wound Healing
miR‐506‐3p Regulates TGF‐ 1 and Affects Dermal Fibroblast Proliferation, Migration and Collagen Formation After Thermal Injury
TGF‐β1 Stimulates Expression of Keratinocyte Integrins During Re‐Epithelialization of Cutaneous Wounds
The Roles of Inflammation in Keloid and Hypertrophic Scars
Dermal Fibroblasts Have Different Extracellular Matrix Profiles Induced by TGF‐β, PDGF and IL‐6 in a Model for Skin Fibrosis
Transforming Growth Factor‐Beta: Multifunctional Regulator of Differentiation and Development
Increased TGF‐β‐Producing CD4+ T Lymphocytes in Postburn Patients and Their Potential Interaction With Dermal Fibroblasts in Hypertrophic Scarring
Immunolocalization of TGF‐β1 in Human Hypertrophic Scar and Normal Dermal Tissues
Growth Factor Pathways in Hypertrophic Scars: Molecular Pathogenesis and Therapeutic Implications
TGF‐β‐Induced Fibrosis and SMAD Signaling: Oligo Decoys as Natural Therapeutics for Inhibition of Tissue Fibrosis and Scarring
Biological Approaches for Hypertrophic Scars
TGF‐β Signaling in Health, Disease, and Therapeutics
Current Progress in Understanding the Molecular Pathogenesis of Burn Scar Contracture
HMGB1 Induces Lung Fbroblast to Myofbroblast Differentiation Through NF‐κB‐Mediated TGF‐β1 Release
Transforming Growth Factor‐β3‐Loaded Microtextured Membranes for Skin Regeneration in Dermal Wounds
Scar‐Free Healing: From Embryonic Mechanism to Adult Therapeutic Intervention
Scar‐Improving Efficacy of Avotermin Administered Into the Wound Margins of Skin Incisions as Evaluated by a Randomized, Double‐Blind, Placebo‐Controlled, Phase II Clinical Trial
Extracellular Vesicles Derived From Human Adipose‐Derived Stem Cell Prevent the Formation of Hypertrophic Scar in a Rabbit Model
Adipose Tissue‐Derived Stem Cells Inhibit Hypertrophic Scar (HS) Fibrosis via p38/MAPK Pathway
Exosomes Secreted by Human Adipose Mesenchymal Stem Cells Promote Scarless Cutaneous Repair by Regulating Extracellular Matrix Remodelling
Exosomes Derived From Human Adipose Mesenchymal Stem Cells Attenuate Hypertrophic Scar Fibrosis by miR‐192‐5p/IL‐17RA/SMAD Axis
Conformable Hyaluronic Acid Hydrogel Delivers Adipose‐Derived Stem Cells and Promotes Regeneration of Burn Injury
Extracellular Matrix Reorganization During Wound Healing and Its Impact on Abnormal Scarring
Tetramethylpyrazine Induces Apoptosis and Inhibits Proliferation of Hypertrophic Scar‐Derived Fibroblasts via Inhibiting the Phosphorylation of AKT
Targeted Apoptosis of Myofibroblasts by Elesclomol Inhibits Hypertrophic Scar Formation
Arctigenin Suppresses Fibroblast Activity and Extracellular Matrix Deposition in Hypertrophic Scarring by Reducing Inflammation and Oxidative Stress
Matrix Remodeling by MMPs During Wound Repair
The Effect of MMP‐1 on Wound Healing and Scar Formation
Gene Expression Profiles From Hypertrophic Scar Fibroblasts Before and After IL‐6 Stimulation
Metalloproteinases and Wound Healing
Enhanced Secretion of TIMP‐1 by Human Hypertrophic Scar Keratinocytes Could Contribute to Fibrosis
Matrix Metalloproteinases and Tissue Inhibitors of Metalloproteinases in Patients With Different Types of Scars and Keloids
Compression Therapy Affects Collagen Type Balance in Hypertrophic Scar
Keloids and Scars: A Review of Keloids and Scars, Their Pathogenesis, Risk Factors, and Management
Up‐To‐Date Approach to Manage Keloids and Hypertrophic Scars: A Useful Guide
Burn Injury
Stimulation of Toll‐Like Receptor Pathways by Burn Eschar Tissue as a Possible Mechanism for Hypertrophic Scarring
Monocyte M1/M2 Profile Is Altered in Paediatric Burn Patients With Hypertrophic Scarring
Neutrophil Extracellular Traps Contribute to Myofibroblast Differentiation and Scar Hyperplasia Through the Toll‐Like Receptor 9/Nuclear Factor Kappa‐B/Interleukin‐6 Pathway
Characterization of T‐Cell Subsets Infiltrating Post‐Burn Hypertrophic Scar Tissues
The Role of Cytokines in Neutrophil Development, Tissue Homing , Function and Plasticity in Health and Disease
The Role of Macrophages in the Formation of Hypertrophic Scars and Keloids
IL‐6 Promotes T Cell Proliferation and Expansion Under Inflammatory Conditions in Association With Low‐Level RORγt Expression
TNF Activity and T Cells
Interleukin‐6 and Chronic Inflammation
pIL‐6 in Inflammation, Immunity, and Disease
Blocking Interleukin‐1β Induces a Healing‐Associated Wound Macrophage Phenotype and Improves Healing in Type 2 Diabetes
The Role of Fat and Inflammation in the Pathogenesis and Management of Osteoarthritis
A Negative Feedback Loop Involving NF‐κB/TIR8 Regulates IL‐1β‐Induced Epithelial‐ Myofibroblast Transdifferentiation in Human Tubular Cells
The Clinical Dynamic Changes of Macrophage Phenotype and Function in Different Stages of Human Wound Healing and Hypertrophic Scar Formation
Relative Expression of Proinflammatory and Antiinflammatory Genes Reveals Differences Between Healing and Nonhealing Human Chronic Diabetic Foot Ulcers
Inhibited Early Immunologic Response Is Associated With Hypertrophic Scarring
Anti‐Inflammatory Effects of Hepatocyte Growth Factor on the Vicious Cycle of Macrophages and Adipocytes
Hepatocyte Growth Factor Reduces Hypertrophy of Skin Scar: In Vivo Study
The Possible Role of Mast Cells (Allergy) in the Production of Keloid and Hypertrophie Scarring
Mast Cell Analyses in Hypertrophic Scars, Hypertrophic Scars Treated With Pressure and Mature Scars
Mast Cell Chymase Promotes Hypertrophic Scar Fibroblast Proliferation and Collagen Synthesis by Activating TGF‐β1/SMADs Signaling Pathway
Human Mast Cells Activate Fibroblasts: Tryptase Is a Fibrogenic Factor Stimulating Collagen Messenger Ribonucleic Acid Synthesis and Fibroblast Chemotaxis
Human Mast Cells Stimulate Fibroblast Proliferation, Collagen Synthesis and Lattice Contraction: A Direct Role for Mast Cells in Skin Fibrosis
Divergent Effects of the Major Mast Cell Products Histamine, Tryptase and TNF‐Alpha on Human Fibroblast Behaviour
Mast Cell‐Fibroblast Interactions: Human Mast Cells as Source and Inducers of Fibroblast and Epithelial Growth Factors
The Differentiation and Function of Myofibroblasts Is Regulated by Mast Cell Mediators
Aging Suppresses Skin‐Derived Circulating SDF1 to Promote Full‐Thickness Tissue Regeneration
Diminished Induction of Skin Fibrosis in Mice With MCP‐1 Deficiency
The Emerging Therapeutic Targets for Scar Management: Genetic and Epigenetic Landscapes
Disruption of Interleukin‐1 Signaling Improves the Quality of Wound Healing
Polarized Th2 Cytokine Production in Patients With Hypertrophic Scar Following Thermal Injury
The Role of Th1/Th2 Cell Chemokine Expression in Hypertrophic Scar
Adipogenic Differentiation of Adipose‐Derived Stem Cells
Adipose‐Derived and Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells: A Donor‐Matched Comparison
Comparative Investigation of the Differentiation Capability of Bone‐Marrow‐ and Adipose‐Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells by Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis
Stromal Stem Cells From Adipose Tissue and Bone Marrow of Age‐Matched Female Donors Display Distinct Immunophenotypic Profiles
Effects of Autologous Fat and ASCs on Swine Hypertrophic Burn Scars: A Multimodal Quantitative Analysis
Autologous Chyle Fat Grafting for the Treatment of Hypertrophic Scars and Scar‐Related Conditions
Tissue‐Level Effects of Autologous Fat Grafting in Hypertrophic Scars—A Case Series Study
Fat Injection for Cases of Severe Burn Outcomes: A New Perspective of Scar Remodeling and Reduction
Autologous Fat Graft in Scar Treatment
Tissue Engineering in Burn Scar Reconstruction
Enhancement of Adipose Tissue Formation by Implantation of Adipogenic‐Differentiated Preadipocytes
Laser Fabrication of 3D Gelatin Scaffolds for the Generation of Bioartificial Tissues
Preparation and Characterization of Gelatin/Hyaluronic Acid Cryogels for Adipose Tissue Engineering: In Vitro and in Vivo Studies
Three‐Dimensional Bioprinting Adipose Tissue and Mammary Organoids Feasible for Artificial Breast Structure Regeneration
Stem Cells and Cell Therapies in Lung Biology and Diseases: Conference Report
Two Decades of Global Progress in Authorized Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products: An Emerging Revolution in Therapeutic Strategies