Evaluation the Efficiency of Braces for Degenerative Scoliosis: A Systematic Review of Literature
Background
Degenerative scoliosis is a progressive side-to-side deformity of the spine that is common in mature individuals, characterized by a Cobb angle of >10°. Current treatment options vary and can be categorized as conservative or non-conservative (surgery), with the primary goal of pain reduction. However, there is conflicting evidence regarding which treatment option is most effective. The aim of this study was to determine the effectiveness of braces in this group of subjects.
Methods
A systematic search was conducted in databases including PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, and Embase for the period between 1950 and 2024. Keywords used were: (degenerative scoliosis OR adult scoliosis) AND (conservative treatment OR brace OR orthosis). The quality of the selected studies was evaluated using the Downs and Black tool.
Results
Of 500 papers identified in the search, a total of 11 studies were chosen for final analysis. Most of the selected studies focused on the effects of various types of braces on pain intensity, quality of life, and functional performance in subjects with degenerative scoliosis.
Conclusions
Based on the available literature and the lack of strong studies on the effectiveness of braces, it cannot be definitively concluded that the use of braces reduces the severity of scoliosis curves in adults with degenerative scoliosis. However, braces may have an impact on quality of life and pain severity in this group of subjects.

Introduction
Scoliosis is a three-dimensional deformity of the spine that directly impacts the social and physical performance of individuals affected by it. Depending on the age of onset, scoliosis can be categorized as infantile, adolescent, or adult scoliosis). Adult scoliosis is seen in mature individuals with a Cobb curvature angle greater than 10° and can be further classified as idiopathic (existing) or de novo (new scoliosis typically occurring after the age of 40 years). Degenerative scoliosis (DS) occurs when an intervertebral disc begins to deteriorate, leading to generalized spondylosis that results in spine instability, vertebral rotation, lateral listhesis, and spondylolisthesis).
DS has a similar distribution between sexes and typically begins around the age of 50 years. It mostly occurs in the lumbar region with a compensatory curve in the thoracic region. Individuals with DS often report pain during daily activities due to an unstable spine). Various treatment approaches have been used to address DS, including conservative and non-conservative methods such as surgery). The main conservative treatments include physical therapy, yoga, functional electrical stimulation, and braces). The use of both soft and rigid braces aims to stabilize the spine and reduce low back pain). Despite showing pain reduction, the use of braces remains controversial. Some studies suggest that rigid braces provide better control of curve progression in adults), while others have found no improvement with their use).
With conflicting evidence, it may be considered controversial whether to use a brace (soft or rigid) as it may influence the curve of scoliosis, quality of life (QoL), and pain in adults with scoliosis. Moreover, it is not well documented which braces should be used for this group of subjects. Therefore, the aim of this study was to determine the effectiveness of using braces in this group of subjects.

Methods
This systematic review of the literature was conducted following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) 2020 guidelines. Since this is a review article, no ethical approval was necessary.

Search strategy
A search was conducted in databases, including PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, and Embase, for the period between 1950 and 2024. Keywords included DS, adult scoliosis, conservative treatment, brace, and orthosis were utilized. In the initial step, papers were chosen based on their titles and abstracts. The second criterion focused on the population and language: only studies published in English, accessible, and related to DS were included in this review. Therefore, papers on idiopathic scoliosis, congenital scoliosis, or surgical approaches were excluded from the final selection. Fig. 1 shows the flowchart of the search strategy and study selection.
Flowchart of the search strategy and study selection.

Types of studies
Due to the limited evidence on this topic, other study types, such as case-control and case studies, were also considered. However, it is important to note that abstracts, conference articles, editorial comments, and expert opinions were not included in the final list.

Types of participants
Adults with DS who received conservative treatment.

Types of interventions
Conservative treatments (physical therapy exercises) and braces.

Outcomes of interest
The primary outcome measures in this study included pain intensity, scoliosis severity, QoL, and functional abilities of the participants.

Quality assessment and risk of bias determination
The quality of the selected studies was assessed using the tool developed by Downs, S.H., and Black, N (1998). This tool helps evaluate internal validity, external validity, and risk of bias).

Data extraction and analysis
Two reviewers extracted data and selected papers. The information from the selected studies was summarized using Population, Intervention, Comparison, and Outcomes (PICO) tools.

Results
A total of 500 papers were identified in the initial search. After the first screening (titles and abstracts), a total of 25 studies were selected for further evaluation. The second screening resulted in the exclusion of 14 studies, leaving 11 for final analysis. Most of the selected studies focused on the effects of various types of braces on pain intensity, QoL, and functional performance of participants with DS. Eight studies evaluated the effects of treatment on pain severity, while QoL was assessed in three studies. One study examined the use of Finite Element Analysis for correcting the curve in subjects with DS. Although surgical studies were not initially included in this review, two studies comparing surgery with conservative treatment (bracing) were ultimately included. The quality of the available studies, assessed using the Downs and Black (1998) tools, ranged between 5 and 20, with higher scores indicating better methodological quality. Table 1 shows the results of the quality assessment of the included studies. The findings of the studies highlighted several key points:, Table 2-a and b
Methodological Quality Scores of the Included Studies.
Reference	Reporting (10)	External validity (3)	Internal validity	Power (1)	Total (27)	 	Bias (7)	Confounding Selection bias (6)	 	De Mauroy et al, 2016)	7	2	4	1	0	14	 	Palazzo et al, 2017)	9	3	5	3	0	20	 	Weiss and Wek, 2009)	7	1	5	0	0	13	 	Gallo, 2014)	6	1	2	1	0	10	 	Zaina et al, 2018)	8	2	4	3	1	18	 	Weiss et al, 2016)	4	1	4	0	0	9	 	Zheng et al, 2015)	3	0	2	0	0	5	 	Weiss et al, 2006)	7	0	5	2	0	14	 	Bridwell et al, 2009)	8	1	4	2	0	15	 	Kluba et al, 2009)	5	0	3	0	0	8	 	Weiss and Dallmayer, 2006)	7	0	5	2	0	14
A Summary of the Studies on Use of Braces for Degenerative Scoliosis.
Reference	Method	Result	 	Palazzo et al, 2017)	Participants: 38 patients (29 with Degenerative scoliosis and 9 with idiopathic scoliosis)Age: 61.3±8.2 yearCobb angle=49.6±17.7 degreeComparison: rate of progression of the curveIntervention: braceFollow up: 1 year	The subjects wore brace for 6 hours per day. For degenerative scoliosis the progression rate decreased from 1.47±0.83 before to 0.24±0.43 after bracing.	 	Weiss and Dallmayer, 2006)	Participants: A 47 years old woman with 55 degree lumbar scoliosis and with 30 degree upper lumbar kyphosisIntervention: sagittal alignment braceComparison: number of steps in walking and pain	Walking steps before brace=800 steps, 2 day after use of brace=8000 steps, 10-day after=12000.Pain intensity decreased only one point in VRS.	 	Weiss and Werkman, 2009)	Participants: 67 patients (58 female+9 male) with chronic low back pain and scoliosisCobb angle=41 (10 _ 91)Intervention: Physiologic braceComparison: Pain intensity	Pain intensity before treatment was 3.3, at time of brace used was 2.7 and after 18 months was 2.0. Short-term improvement achieved in the patients with chronic low back pain and spinal deformities.	 	Weiss et al, 2009)	Participants: 29 patientsAge: 41 yearsCobb angle=37 degreesIntervention: Physiologic braceFollow up=7.5 monthsComparison: Pain intensity	Pain intensity was high before treatment (3.38) and low after adjustment (1.28). After follow-up it was 2.69. Sagittal realignment brace lead to promising short term effects.	 	Gallo, 2014)	Participants: 2 casesAge: 65 yearsIntervention=Torso braceComparison=Pain intensity	Using torso orthosis allows treatment of these patients with as little invasive measure as possible without losing maximal functionality.
A Summary of the Studies on Use of Braces for Degenerative Scoliosis.
Reference	Method	Result	 	De Mauroy et al, 2016)	Participants: 158 scoliosis patientsAge=56.08±17.35Followed for 5 yearsIntervention: Polyethylene bivalve overlapping braceComparison: progression of deformities of spine	Polyethylene bivalve overlapping brace is effective in stabilizing lumbar and thoracolumbar scoliosis.However, it appears that current braces fail to stop kyphosis evolution of adult scoliosis. It justifies the improvement of exerting braces.	 	Zaina et al, 2018)	Participants: 20 subjects with degenerative scoliosisMean age: 67.8±10.5Cobb angle: 61.9±12.6Intervention: Scoliosis brace for 2-4 hours a dayComparison: GRS for back and leg pain	75% of the patients reported improved in back pain and leg pain. In 65% of the subjects back pain decreased however, the quality of life did not changed significantly.	 	Kluba et al, 2009)	Participants: 55 patients with Degenerative lumbar scoliosisAge: no informationFollowed for 24 monthsIntervention: 26 underwent surgery (group 1)Group 2: 29 patients received conservative treatmentComparison: spinal deformity, walking distance	Significant higher rate of a spinal stenosis was seen in group 1. They also had lumbar deformities in frontal and sagittal planes. However, operative treatment improve walking ability and quality of life.	 	Bridwell et al, 2009)	Participants: 160 patientsAged: 40_80 yearsCobb angle=54 degreeComparison: QOL, ODL, back and leg painTwo group: operative and non-operative groups	Operative group significantly improved in QOL. Nonoperative did not improve QOL. After 2-years follow-up operative had better performance by all measurement compared to non-operative group.	 	Zheng et al, 2015)	Participants: 55 year old subjects with DSFinite element of a spine was done.Comparison: motion of spine in FEA model compared to literature	3D model of a spine is reliable and effective which can be used to carry out further biomechanical research.	 	Weiss et al, 2015)	Participants: A 37 year old female with chronic lumbar back painCobb angle=56 scoliotic curve in thoracic and 50 degree in lumbarPain: 5-7Intervention: Gensingen brace+Schroth exerciseFollow-up: 16 monthsComparison: Pain	Wearing braces: 3-4 hours daily on average 3 days per week. Daily exercise and part-time bracing reduce pain in adult scoliosis.
1. Bracing significantly decreased the progression of scoliosis curves.
2. Pain intensity decreased and functionality improved following brace use.
3. Bracing is primarily used for short-term effects.
4. Bracing does not appear to significantly impact QoL.
5. Surgery seems to be more effective than bracing for pain and QoL.
6. Finite Element Analysis is a useful method for evaluating the effectiveness of braces in DS.

Discussion
Adult scoliosis, also known as DS, primarily affects individuals through pain and spinal instability. Bracing and exercise are the two most commonly used approaches for this group of patients. The purpose of this review was to assess the effectiveness of various braces and conservative treatments used for this population.
According to the literature, there were 11 studies on DS and the use of conservative treatments, with quality ratings ranging from 5 to 20. Some studies had low quality due to small sample sizes and a lack of blinding researchers and patients to the intervention.
The initial question addressed was the effectiveness of braces in treating individuals with DS. There were eight studies on the use of different braces for this population, with quality ratings between 9 and 20. Most studies evaluated brace effectiveness based on pain severity and QoL. There are some studies done by Weiss et al.) on the use of scoliosis braces on pain severity in adults. The results of their study showed that pain decreased following the use of a brace in this group of subjects. However, a decrease in the severity of pain depends on the adjustment of the brace. They recommended that sagittal realignment of the brace lead to promising short-term effects. Zaina et al.) showed that back and leg pain decreased following the use of a brace in adults with scoliosis, however, the use of braces did not influence QoL. Based on the above-mentioned studies and due to the quality of the studies, it can be concluded that the severity of pain could be decreased following the use of a brace in adults with scoliosis. Unfortunately, there are few studies on the effects of brace on the severity of scoliosis curves. One study by Palazzo et al.) found that brace use reduced the rate of curve progression in subjects who wore the brace for 6 hours daily.
Kotwal et al.) in a review study discussed that the use of lumbo-sacral orthoses may provide temporary pain relief, however, muscle weakness occurs in the long-term following the use of braces. Moreover, they have no effects on curve progression). It should be emphasized that the principle of bracing in adult scoliosis is different from adolescent scoliosis. The aim of bracing in this group of subjects is to decompress discs, lift the trunk, improve the alignment of the spine, and finally, relieve pain. However, it seems that current braces fail to stop the progression of spine deformities.
Regarding the other type of conservative treatment, there were only a few studies on the combination of brace and exercise. Based on the results of the study done by Weiss et al.), wearing braces (Gensingen brace) and daily exercise (Schroth exercise) reduces pain in adult scoliosis (however, the brace should be used 3-4 hours per day).
There were two studies on the use of surgery and a conservative approach in the treatment of DS. The output of the study done by Weiss et al.) showed that operative treatment had a significant improvement in QoL, compared to those who used non-operative treatment, (they did not have a significant improvement in QoL). Both groups were followed for 2 years. The results of this study also confirmed that operative treatment improved walking ability and QoL more than conservative treatment. Based on the results of this study, conservative treatment had a short-term effect on pain relief and improvement of QoL).
There are some limitations in the available studies on adult DS and bracing. The main limitation is that a limited number of subjects participated in the available studies. Moreover, different types of braces were used in these studies. Due to the aforementioned limitations, it is not possible to compare the efficiency of the available braces. It should also be noted that very few studies focused on other types of conservative treatments for DS.

Conclusion
Based on the available literature and the lack of robust studies on the efficiency of braces, it cannot be concluded that the use of braces reduces the severity of scoliosis curves in adults with DS. However, it may influence the QoL and severity of pain in this group of subjects, which cannot be compared with the outcomes of surgery.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that there are no relevant conflicts of interest.
Sources of Funding: None.
Author Contributions: M.T.K. was responsible for searching the studies, quality assessment, supervision and writing the draft of the paper. P.B. was responsible for quality assessment and searching the papers.
Ethical and Consent statements: The study does not require an approval from IRB. This is a systematic review.
Consent form approval: Consent was not required because this study involved no human subject and is a systematic review.
Silva FE, Lenke LG. Adult degenerative scoliosis: evaluation and management. Neurosurg Focus. 2010;28(3):E1.
Kotwal S, Pumberger M, Hughes A, et al. Degenerative scoliosis: a review. HSS j. 2011;7(3):257-64.
Palazzo C, Montigny JP, Barbot F, et al. Effects of Bracing in Adult With Scoliosis: A Retrospective Study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2017;98(1):187-90.
Weiss HR, Werkmann M. Treatment of chronic low back pain in patients with spinal deformities using a sagittal re-alignment brace. Scoliosis. 2009;4:7.
McAviney J, Mee J, Fazalbhoy A, et al. A systematic literature review of spinal brace/orthosis treatment for adults with scoliosis between 1967 and 2018: clinical outcomes and harms data. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2020;21(1):87.
Gallo D. Case reports: orthotic treatment of adult scoliosis patients with chronic back pain. Scoliosis. 2014;9(1):18.
Weiss HR, Dallmayer R. Brace treatment of spinal claudication in an adult with lumbar scoliosis--a case report. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2006;123:586-9.
Zaina F, Poggio M, Donzelli S, et al. Can bracing help adults with chronic back pain and scoliosis? Short-term results from a pilot study. Prosthetics and Orthotics International. 2018;42(4):410-4.
Downs SH, Black N. The feasibility of creating a checklist for the assessment of the methodological quality both of randomised and non-randomised studies of health care interventions. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1998;52(6):377-84.
Weiss HR, Moramarco K, Moramarco M. Scoliosis bracing and exercise for pain management in adults-a case report. J Phys Ther Sci. 2016;28(8):2404-7.
de Mauroy JC, Lecante C, Barral F, et al. Prospective study of 158 adult scoliosis treated by a bivalve polyethylene overlapping brace and reviewed at least 5 years after brace fitting. Scoliosis Spinal Disord. 2016;11(Suppl 2):28.
Zheng J, Yang Y, Lou S, et al. Construction and validation of a three-dimensional finite element model of degenerative scoliosis. J Orthop Surg Res. 2015;10(1):189.
Weiss HR, Dallmayer R, Stephan C. First results of pain treatment in scoliosis patients using a sagittal realignment brace. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2006;123:582-5.
Bridwell KH, Glassman S, Horton W, et al. Does treatment (nonoperative and operative) improve the two-year quality of life in patients with adult symptomatic lumbar scoliosis: a prospective multicenter evidence-based medicine study. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2009;34(20):2171-8.
Kluba T, Dikmenli G, Dietz K, et al. Comparison of surgical and conservative treatment for degenerative lumbar scoliosis. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg. 2009;129(1):1-5.