Clinical Approach to Vascular Calcification in Patients With Non-dialysis Dependent Chronic Kidney Disease: Mineral-Bone Disorder-Related Aspects
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with a very high morbimortality, mainly from cardiovascular origin, and CKD is currently considered in the high- or very high risk- cardiovascular risk category. CKD-mineral and bone disorders (CKD-MBDs), including vascular and/or valvular calcifications, are also associated with these poor outcomes. Vascular calcification (VC) is very prevalent (both intimal and medial), even in non-dialysis dependent patients, with a greater severity and more rapid progression. Simple X-ray based-scores such as Adragão's (AS) are useful prognostic tools and AS (even AS based on hand-X-ray only) may be superior to the classic Kauppila's score when evaluating non-dialysis CKD patients. Thus, in this mini-review, we briefly review CKD-MBD-related aspects of VC and its complex pathophysiology including the vast array of contributors and inhibitors. Furthermore, although VC is a surrogate marker and is not yet considered a treatment target, we consider that the presence of VC may be relevant in guiding therapeutic interventions, unless all patients are treated with the mindset of reducing the incidence or progression of VC with the currently available armamentarium. Avoiding phosphate loading, restricting calcium-based phosphate binders and high doses of vitamin D, and avoiding normalizing (within the normal limits for the assay) parathyroid hormone levels seem logical approaches. The availability of new drugs and future studies, including patients in early stages of CKD, may lead to significant improvements not only in patient risk stratification but also in attenuating the accelerated progression of VC in CKD.

Introduction: Chronic Kidney Disease And Cardiovascular Disease
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) has become a major public health problem because of the associated high mortality and elevated cost of treatment for dialysis patients. Worldwide, it is estimated that about 500 million adults suffer from CKD, but prevalence varies widely between countries. In Spain, CKD prevalence is 15.1%, is more common in men, in patients with cardiovascular disease (CVD) (39.8%), and increases with age (37.3% in those ≥65 years). Given this significant link between CKD and CVD, CKD is currently considered an independent cardiovascular risk factor. A similar scenario is described for diabetes, a leading cause of CKD. Moreover, an independent, graded association was observed between a reduced estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and the risk of death, CVD, and hospitalization in a huge community-based population. Consequently, the European Society of Cardiology and European Atherosclerosis Society (ESC/EAS) recently considered moderate (eGFR 30–59 ml/min/1.73m2) and severe (eGFR <30 ml/min/1.73m2) CKD to be in the high- and the very high risk category of cardiovascular risk factors.
Since the seminal report by Foley et al., who noted an extremely high cardiovascular mortality even in young dialysis patients, the existence of non-traditional cardiovascular risk factors, including mineral metabolism parameters, has caught the attention of many. Subclinical atherosclerosis is very frequent in CKD patients, and its evolution is also closely linked with CKD progression and related to several CKD-associated factors. Thus, bone was recently described as a new endocrine organ “at the heart” of CKD and mineral-bone disorders (CKD-MBD). Subsequently, the presence and progression of vascular and valvular calcification, which are also associated with “normal” aging, were clearly linked to prognosis, including in non-dialysis CKD (ND-CKD) patients, especially if the coronary artery calcification (CAC) score was evaluated. Therefore, CKD could be viewed conceptually as an accelerator of traditional cardiovascular risk factors and vascular calcification (VC). Thus, in this review we will focus on the CKD-MBD aspects of VC including potentially helpful treatment considerations.

Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorders (Ckd-Mbd) and Vascular Calcification
The term CKD-MBD was first coined in 2006. It described a systemic disorder due to CKD, manifested by mineral and bone abnormalities and/or extraskeletal calcifications. Several studies have demonstrated the high prevalence of cardiovascular calcifications in CKD, even in ND-CKD patients, with a greater severity and more rapid progression. Furthermore, it has been suggested that these cardiovascular calcifications may be not only a useful prognostic tool but also relevant in guiding therapeutic interventions, as it will be reviewed in section Treatment Implications. However, we will first let readers understand the different diagnostic methods and the important contribution of CKD-MBD-related aspects in the pathophysiology of VC in CKD patients (section Pathophysiology of CKD-MBD-related Vascular Calcification).
In clinical studies, VC is frequently detected by multisliced computed tomography (CT) and less often by electron-beam CT, multiterritorial vascular ultrasound, intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) or Virtual Histology® IVUS, arteriography, or even positron emission tomography (PET) scans. Thus, the prevalence of CAC has been recently systematically reviewed and authors found a variable prevalence ranging from 28 to 93% in predialysis patients (59% pooled prevalence). High heterogeneity was present, at least partially related to ethnic and population differences (such as age or CKD stages). However, simple X-rays may also be used despite their much lower sensitivity and variable associations with CAC. In fact, guidelines suggest that a lateral abdominal radiograph can be used to detect VC and an echocardiogram can be used to detect valvular calcifications, as reasonable alternatives to CT-based imaging. These guidelines also suggest that patients with CKD G3a–G5D with known vascular or valvular calcification be considered at highest cardiovascular risk (evidence 2A) and that it is reasonable to use this information to guide CKD-MBD management.
Lateral abdominal X-ray is helpful not only to semiquantify an aortic risk score such as Kauppila's (KS) (Figure 1) but also to detect unnoticed vertebral fractures, with potential therapeutic renewed interest in CKD-associated osteoporosis guidelines. Spanish CKD-MBD guidelines also suggest use of the simpler Adragão's score (AS) (Figure 1). In their original study in hemodialysis patients, an AS≥3 was independently associated with coronary, peripheral, and vascular disease. Importantly, patients with an AS≥3 had a 2–4-fold higher risk of cardiovascular mortality, hospitalizations, and fatal or non-fatal cardiovascular events. In another study, it was found that an AS>3 was also significantly associated with pulse wave velocity (PWV), pulse pressure, and lower adjusted cumulative survival[hazard ratio (HR) = 3.31)].
Adragão and Kauppila scores. Kauppila score (KS). The score is assigned from 1 to 3 [1: small calcification (1/3 of the vertebral length), 2: moderate (2/3), 3: large (> 2/3)] depending on the length of each plaque detected. The anterior and posterior part of the aorta shall be taken into consideration, associating them with the place where they are located, in front of the L1, L2, L3, or L4 vertebrae. With KS, a final score is achieved between 0 and 24 points. Adragão score (AS). The score is determined by the sum of the absence of calcification (0 points), or the presence of unilateral (1 point) or bilateral (2 points) linear calcification in each section. AS analyzes the calcification of iliac, femoral, radial, and digital arteries. The final value ranges from 0 to 8 points (0–4 in the pelvis and 0–4 in the hands).
In the observational multicentre OSERCE-2 study, we prospectively analyzed VC in a cohort of 742 ND-CKD G3–G5 patients. VC was present in 79%, and VC was severe (AS≥3 or KS>6) in 47%. Age, phosphate (P) levels, and diabetes were independently associated with AS≥3. After a median follow-up of 35 months, AS≥3 but not KS>6 was independently associated with all-cause (HR = 2.07) and cardiovascular (HR = 3.46) mortality, and a shorter hospitalization event-free period (HR = 1.14). Moreover, only AS based on hand-X-ray only (AS-hands) (Figure 1) showed a significant correlation with parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels and renal function. Interestingly, the group AS≥3 showed more than double the risk of all-cause mortality, whereas the risk increased 5-fold using AS-hands. Moreover, AS≥3 but not KS>6 independently predicted all-cause, cardiovascular mortality and hospitalization, and AS-hands ≥1 was also an independent predictor of cardiovascular mortality and hospitalization-related outcomes. Nevertheless, other authors have described significant associations with hard-outcomes in ND-CKD patients evaluated for aortic, pelvic or even breast artery calcifications, and significant differences were also present among distinct vascular beds and associated factors.
We therefore confirmed the potentially better predictive ability of simple X-rays with the AS (vs. KS), and extended its value into the ND-CKD population. Moreover, the even simpler AS-hands demonstrated an important predictive ability, probably because the radial and cubital arteries are muscular arteries with a greater tendency to calcification of the medial layer (arteriosclerosis), especially affected in CKD, as opposed to the elastic abdominal aorta, which may be more prone to intimal calcification (atheromatosis).
Medial and intimal VC lead to different comorbidities: medial calcification (Mönckeberg's disease) induces arterial stiffness and consequently an increased PWV, left ventricular hypertrophy and heart failure, whereas intimal calcification is associated with ischemic episodes and is pathophysiologically characterized by endothelial damage, lipid accumulation, and infiltration of inflammatory cells. These data support the concept that VC (especially in CKD patients) is not just a single entity but the consequence of a wide range of different biological processes, affecting both intimal and medial layers, and it is difficult to study separately because common radiological techniques do not allow clear distinction between them. Reliable differentiation between medial and intimal VC can only be achieved pathomorphologically. Moreover, VC is not exclusive to CKD and is especially prevalent in diabetes and during the aging process (also accelerated in CKD patients).
Nevertheless, while the high prevalence and prognostic value of VC in CKD patients are now well-established, the clinical usefulness of early screening is still controversial since it is far from proven that early diagnosis permits beneficial actions that improve outcomes (e.g., regarding different P binders or vitamin D (VD) derivatives).

Pathophysiology of CKD-MBD-Related Vascular Calcification
CKD-MBD-related factors are obviously not the only mechanisms responsible for VC but, as mentioned before, CKD acts as an accelerator of the VC process. Moreover, VC is not only a passive process of excess calcium (Ca) and P deposition (enhanced in CKD due to the loss of excretory function) but also an active process where transdifferentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) from a contractile to a secretory calcific phenotype plays an important role. This is probably magnified by CKD-MBD-related factors. These VSMCs can also display adipogenic and macrophagic features. Moreover, adventitial Gli1+ mesenchymal stem-cells serve as progenitors of VSMC which migrate into the media and neointima during arteriosclerosis and atheromatosis.
Multiple physiopathological mechanisms and pathways are involved in the process of VC, but a comprehensive review is beyond the goals of this article, and we therefore refer interested readers to other references. Interestingly, some critical factors might play a double and sometimes opposite roles in terms of vascular health, such as the effects of high and low PTH levels on stem-cells, or the roles of fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF23), VD, and calcimimetics. Importantly, in addition to a genetic background, the altered balance between calcification contributors (Figure 2) and circulating or tissue calcification inhibitors (Figure 2) makes CKD patients more or less susceptible to accelerated VC. Different comorbid pathologies associated with intimal atheroma calcification (ischemic events), arteriosclerosis (arterial stiffening), and heart valvular calcification may be overlapping, and CKD predisposes to all these types of VC. Finally, the revolution in omics technology (genomics, epigenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics) has resulted in the accumulation of cellular and molecular-level data which will provide novel approaches on the mechanisms associated with VC. Although clinical application is still in its early stages, CKD may become an interesting model to analyse, especially considering that as many as 17% of dialysis patients show no calcification.
Key aspects of vascular calcification (VC) in chronic kidney disease (CKD): the important balance between calcification contributors and inhibitors (tissue or circulating factors) in the pathophysiology of vascular calcification. The altered balance between calcification contributors and inhibitors makes CKD patients more or less susceptible to accelerated calcifications. Of note, CKD patients exhibit both types of VC, intimal atheroma calcification, and medial arteriosclerosis. A key role in the initiation and propagation are calcium (green) and phosphate (orange) ions. The passive formation of calciprotein nanoparticles (CPP) act as active precursors of micro-calcification. Initially, the small calcium/phosphate complex can be removed by Fetuin-A, which can eventually become saturated leading to primary CPP (light blue) that can develop secondary CPP particles (yellow). Later, phosphate entries into vascular smooth muscle cells producing osteochondrocytic transdifferentiation (vascular “ossification”). Many of the contributors may also promote this phenotypic osteochondrocytic transdifferentiation. Among them, tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), aldosterone, parathyroid hormone, activin-A, collagen I, osteocalcin, osteonectin, oxidized-low density lipoproteins, have been associated with vascular calcification. On the other hand, parathyroid hormone related-peptide, collagen IV, high density lipoproteins, nitric oxide, and others, have been described as potential inhibitors. At the bone level, the role of FGF-23 and the co-factor Klotho are relevant in all the process, and a genetic background (e.g., proteins derived from Ank, Npps, ENPP1 genes) should also be considered. BMP, Bone Morphogenetic Proteins; TNF-α, Tumor Necrosis Factor- α; IL, Interleukin; AGE, Advanced-Glication End-products; AGE-Rs, AGE-receptors.
Central to the increasing knowledge on mechanisms involved in VC is the discovery that calcifying extracellular vesicles act as active precursors of cardiovascular microcalcification in diverse vascular beds. Novel in vitro assays may quantify the propensity for VC in serum (as a composite measure capturing a global effect) by evaluating the semimaximal transformation time (T50) from the so-called primary to secondary calciprotein particles (CPP) when challenged with additional Ca and P. Primary CPP are amorphous accumulations of Ca-P, and their transformation to secondary CPP, composed of crystalline Ca-P, may provide information about the contributor/inhibitor balance. T50 has been associated not only with more severe CAC and progression in patients with CKD G2–G4, but also with cardiovascular and all-cause mortality in individuals with ND-CKD, hemodialysis and transplant patients. T50 could also reflect factors that promote intimal calcification since secondary CPP stimulates inflammation and apoptosis of macrophages, which may promote ectopic calcification. Actually, early stages of CKD were associated with local up-regulation of proinflammatory and pro-osteogenic molecules in the vascular wall and calcification of the aortic media layer. Moreover, Ca × P product correlated well with markers of inflammation, but not with calcification itself. In fact, Takx et al. recently conducted a retrospective study including CKD-G3 patients and matched controls who underwent fluorodeoxyglucose-PET or CT imaging and concluded that moderate CKD is associated with arterial inflammation, independently of subclinical atherosclerosis. On the other hand, Joshi et al. demonstrated the presence of VC at baseline to be associated with progressive calcification and suggested that VC can be the inducer of inflammation and not only its consequence. Of note, hyperphosphatemia, among other mineral metabolism parameters, has also been independently associated with inflammation and VC in CKD. Thus, T50 may not directly reflect the initial pathophysiological pathway of VC but could theoretically help in clinical decisions on CKD-MBD-related treatments and/or identifying high-risk patients. Similarly, the so-called fetuin-A (VC inhibitor) reduction ratio was also evaluated as a potential parameter to measure extraosseous calcification stress.

Treatment Implications
Although VC is a surrogate marker and is not yet considered a treatment target in CKD, the presence of VC may have important therapeutic implications, unless all patients are treated with the mindset of reducing the incidence or progression of VC (i.e., using all minimization strategies such as reducing exogenous Ca and P).

Phosphate Binders
Several studies have shown that non-Ca-based P binders, mainly sevelamer in dialysis patients, attenuate the progression of valvular and VC as compared to Ca-based P binders. Non-Ca-based P binders have also been associated with improved survival, although certainty of evidence is low. Russo et al. randomized 90 non-diabetic ND-CKD G3-G5 patients without a history of CVD to three groups: low P-diet only, Ca-based P binders, or sevelamer. They monitored patients for an average of 2 years and found that CAC significantly increased in patients on the low-P diet alone, to a lesser extent in Ca-carbonate-treated patients, and not at all in sevelamer-treated patients. Moreover, Di Iorio et al. found in 212 patients with CKD G3-G4 that sevelamer provided benefits in all-cause mortality and in the composite end point of death or dialysis inception. Interestingly, considering only patients with CAC>0, a significant regression of CAC was observed in more patients treated with sevelamer than Ca-carbonate (24 vs. 2). Over 24 months, the final cumulative percentage of de novo onset of CAC was 12.8 and 81.8%, respectively. Consequently, recent guidelines increased the degree of evidence from 2C to 2B, suggesting that in adult patients with CKD G3a–G5D the dose of Ca-based P binders should be restricted.
In these guidelines, lowering elevated P levels only toward the normal range is also suggested, mainly because of an absence of data supporting the benefit of efforts to maintain P in the normal range (e.g., in G3a–G4 patients) and also some safety concerns. Therefore, guidelines now suggest that treatment should only aim at overt hyperphosphatemia and emphasize that early “preventive” P-lowering treatment is currently not supported by data. Nevertheless, recent studies have analyzed the potential of “preventive” treatment of early P loading in CKD patients. Bouma-de Krijger et al. found that sevelamer carbonate for 8 weeks did not induce a significant reduction in PWV and that serum FGF23 did not decrease despite a decline in 24-h urine P excretion. These findings challenged to some extent the concept that “preventive” P binder therapy is a useful approach, at least over this short period. Interestingly, in a subgroup of patients with absent or limited abdominal VC, treatment did result in a statistically significant reduction in adjusted PWV, suggesting that PWV is amenable to improvement in this subset. On the other hand, Toussaint et al. recently reported that lanthanum carbonate did not affect arterial stiffness or VC in CKD G3b-4 patients; however, an absence of a significant decline in 24-h urine P excretion seems difficult to explain. Therefore, interpretation of the scarce and heterogeneous observations described in early CKD remains difficult, and the possibility of beneficial effects of a “preventive” treatment may not yet be completely disregarded. Finally, significant beneficial effects of a fixed dose of ferric citrate in advanced ND-CKD patients merit further study, since it was not a placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial (RCT), about 1/3 of patients in the “standard of care” arm took Ca-based P binders, and the outcome was a composite end-point.

Treatment for Hyperparathyroidism
Recent guidelines also state that in patients with ND-CKD G3a–G5, the optimal PTH level is not known. However, an association between improvement of PTH levels with all-cause mortality has not only been described in dialysis but also in ND-CKD patients. Guidelines also suggest that patients with intact PTH levels progressively rising or persistently above the assay's upper normal limit should be evaluated for modifiable factors, including hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, high P intake, and VD deficiency (evidence 2C). In fact, low calcidiol levels represent a novel cardiovascular risk marker and have been directly associated with the presence and progression of VC and decreased survival. VD may have atheroprotective effects; however, clinical studies do not show improved survival with VD administration.
Supplementation with native (nutritional) VD has been shown to have beneficial effects on several biological parameters, even in dialysis patients, but a significant RCT with positive hard-outcomes is lacking. On the other hand, in adult patients with ND-CKD G3a–G5, recent guidelines suggest that calcitriol and VD analogs should not now be routinely used (evidence 2C), now considering reasonable to reserve them for patients with CKD G4–G5 with severe and progressive hyperparathyroidism. Recent RCTs of VD analogs failed to demonstrate improvements in clinically relevant outcomes and an increased risk of hypercalcemia. However, very high doses of paricalcitol and/or Ca-based P binders were frequently used in those studies. All guidelines agree that modest increases in PTH may represent an appropriate adaptive response in CKD and “progressively rising” PTH levels (trends) rather than PTH “above the upper normal limit” should be considered for treatment. Nevertheless, other guidelines do not consider it acceptable to wait until severe hyperparathyroidism is present, and physicians are then advised to avoid hypercalcemia and/or hyperphosphatemia but not to aim for complete normalization of PTH. In experimental animals, low clinically relevant dosages of calcitriol and paricalcitol seem to protect against CKD-related VC. Paricalcitol and calcitriol at equipotent doses also showed different effects on VC, and distinct positive pleiotropic effects and survival benefits were described in retrospective studies in dialysis patients; however, they have not been demonstrated in RCTs.
On the other hand, calcimimetics are important contributors to the achievement of biochemical treatment goals (especially Ca and PTH, but also P) in CKD-MBD. Calcimimetics have been shown to decrease VC in experimental uremic animals and, in the ADVANCE study, Raggi et al. demonstrated that in hemodialysis patients with secondary hyperparathyroidism, cinacalcet plus low-dose VD may attenuate cardiac valve and VC. In fact, calcimimetics do not only correct PTH hypersecretion but also modulate the vascular Ca-sensor activity. However, cinacalcet has not been approved in ND-CKD patients, although it can be prescribed in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (with or without CKD) as an alternative or bridging therapy to treat hypercalcemia.
Finally, the fact that a statin paradox exists (statins promoted coronary atheroma calcification but improved clinical outcomes) means that the implication of VC may be reconsidered. Nevertheless, many experimental and/or preliminary clinical studies on VC with different compounds are ongoing. Thus, other factors (directly or indirectly related with CKD-MBD) such as magnesium, vitamin K, inhibitors of intestinal P transporters, bisphosphonates, denosumab, sodium thiosulfate, alkaline phosphatase inhibitors, apabetalone, sotatercept, recombinant BMP-7, as well as metformin, antioxidants, spironolactone, senolytics, zinc, and the recently tested SNF472 have been shown to potentially attenuate VC. However, as it has been mentioned before, prospective RCTs on hard-outcomes are still lacking with any treatment.

Conclusion
CKD-MBD is a common complication and contributes to the high morbimortality (mainly cardiovascular) in CKD patients. The prevalence of VC (intimal and medial), even in early stages of CKD, is very high and progresses rapidly. Although VC may not be a direct cause of CVD, it may reflect underlying pathophysiologic derangements and does have deleterious hemodynamic consequences linked to a negative prognosis. Several common treatments may increase or attenuate its natural progression; therefore, CKD-MBD treatment requires an integral approach, addressing all its components, although clear evidence that this strategy improves hard outcomes is lacking. Meanwhile, it seems logical to avoid P loading, restrict Ca-based P-binders, avoid high doses of VD, and avoid normalizing PTH levels. The availability of new drugs and future studies including early CKD patients may lead to significant improvements not only in patient stratification but also in slowing the natural progression of VC.

Author Contributions
JB was invited as an expert in the field as co-coordinator of the Spanish Nephrology guidelines and experience in the field of chronic kidney disease and mineral and bone disorders (pathophysiology and treatment), contributed to the conceptualization and writing and editing of the manuscript. AA contributed to the conceptualization, search and selection of the most important references, and writing and editing of the manuscript, as well as creation of illustrative Figure 1. CA contributed to the search and selection of the most important references and editing of the manuscript. PM, ML, JO, GB, YG-M, and NR contributed to the conceptualization and review and editing of the manuscript. LD'M contributed to the conceptualization and review and editing of the manuscript, as well as the creation of illustrative Figure 2. JG contributed to the conceptualization, review and editing of the manuscript, and he is the first author of the main contribution to the field of vascular calcification in non-dialysis dependent CKD patients.

Conflict of Interest
JB declares advisory, lecture fees, and/or travel funding from Amgen, Abbvie, Sanofi-Genzyme, Shire, Vifor-Fresenius-Renal Pharma, Rubió, and Sanifit. AA declares lecture fees and/or travel funding from Amgen. PM acknowledges consultation or speaker honoraria from Abbott Nutrition, Amgen, Fresenius-Kabi, Nutricia, Palex, Sanofi-Genzyme, and ViforPharma. ML declares lecture fees from Abbvie and Vifor-Fresenius-Renal Pharma. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

References
A systematic analysis of worldwide population-based data on the global burden of chronic kidney disease in 2010
On behalf of the European CKD Burden Consortium. CKD prevalence varies across the European general population
Prevalencia de enfermedad renal crónica en España: impacto de la acumulación de factores de riesgo cardiovascular
Chronic kidney disease as a coronary artery disease risk equivalent
Diabetes as “Coronary Artery Disease Risk Equivalent”: a historical perspective
Chronic kidney disease and the risks of death, cardiovascular events, and hospitalization
2019 ESC/EAS Guidelines for the management of dyslipidaemias: lipid modification to reduce cardiovascular risk
Epidemiology of cardiovascular disease in chronic renal disease
Atherosclerosis in chronic kidney disease: more, less, or just different?
Subclinical atherosclerosis burden predicts cardiovascular events in individuals with diabetes and chronic kidney disease
Bone: a new endocrine organ at the heart of chronic kidney disease and mineral and bone disorders
Coronary calcium as a predictor of coronary events in four racial or ethnic groups
Vascular calcifications as a marker of increased cardiovascular risk: a meta-analysis
Progression of coronary artery calcium predicts all-cause mortality
Progression of coronary calcium and incident coronary heart disease events: MESA (Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis)
Valvular heart disease and calcification in CKD: more common than appreciated
Bone and mineral disorders in chronic kidney disease: implications for cardiovascular health and ageing in the general population
Pro: cardiovascular calcifications are clinically relevant
A plain X-ray vascular calcification score is associated with arterial stiffness and mortality in dialysis patients
Prevalence of coronary artery calcification and its association with mortality, cardiovascular events in patients with chronic kidney disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Coronary calcification as a predictor of cardiovascular mortality in advanced chronic kidney disease: a prospective long-term follow-up study
Coronary artery calcification and risk of cardiovascular disease and death among patients with chronic kidney disease
Impact of cardiovascular calcification in nondialyzed patients after 24 months of follow-up
Subclinical atherosclerosis measures for cardiovascular prediction in CKD
Definition, evaluation, and classification of renal osteodystrophy: A position statement from Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO)
Vascular calcification in patients with nondialysis CKD over 3 years
Vascular calcification and 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels in non-dialysis patients with chronic kidney disease stages 4 and 5
Progressive vascular calcification over 2 years is associated with arterial stiffening and increased mortality in patients with stages 4 and 5 chronic kidney disease
Coronary artery calcification in patients with CRF not undergoing dialysis
Prevalence and associations of coronary artery calcification in patients with stages 3 to 5 CKD without cardiovascular disease
Relationship of estimated GFR and coronary artery calcification in the CRIC (Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort) Study
Incidence and progression of coronary calcification in chronic kidney disease: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis
Risk factors for the progression of coronary artery calcification in asymptomatic subjects: results from the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA)
Integral pharmacological management of bone mineral disorders in chronic kidney disease (part I): from treatment of P imbalance to control of PTH and prevention of progression of cardiovascular calcification
KDIGO 2017. Clinical practice guideline update for the diagnosis, evaluation, prevention, and treatment of Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD)
Coronary artery disease: improved reproducibility of calcium scoring with an electron-beam CT volumetric method
The ADVANCE study: a randomized study to evaluate the effects of cinacalcet plus low-dose vitamin D on vascular calcification in patients on hemodialysis
Coronary artery calcium area by electron-beam computed tomography and coronary atherosclerotic plaque area. a histopathologic correlative study
The dilemma of diagnosing coronary calcification: angiography versus intravascular ultrasound
Coronary plaque classification with intravascular ultrasound radiofrequency data analysis
Coronary arterial 18F-sodium fluoride uptake: a novel marker of plaque biology
18F-fluoride positron emission tomography for identification of ruptured and high-risk coronary atherosclerotic plaques: a prospective clinical trial
Coronary artery calcification score and common iliac artery calcification score in non-dialysis CKD patients
Spanish Society of Nephrology recommendations for controlling mineral and bone disorder in chronic kidney disease patients (S.E.N.-M.B.D.)
New indices to classify location, severity and progression of calcific lesions in the abdominal aorta: a 25-year follow-up study
European Consensus Statement on the diagnosis and management of osteoporosis in chronic kidney disease stages G4-G5D
Osteoporosis, bone mineral density and CKD-MBD complex (I): diagnostic considerations
A simple vascular calcification score predicts cardiovascular risk in haemodialysis patients
Clinical impact of coexisting retinopathy and vascular calcification on chronic kidney disease progression and cardiovascular events
Abdominal aorta and pelvic artery calcifications on plain radiographs may predict mortality in chronic kidney disease, hemodialysis and renal transplantation
Relationships between abdominal aortic calcification, glomerular filtration rate, and cardiovascular risk factors in patients with non-dialysis dependent chronic kidney disease
The risk for medial arterial calcification in CKD
Large artery calcification on dialysis patients is located in the intima and related to atherosclerosis
Cardiovascular calcifications in uremic patients: clinical impact on cardiovascular function
Chronic kidney disease: medial or intimal calcification in CKD-does it matter?
Intimal and medial calcification in relation to cardiovascular risk factors
Media calcification and intima calcification are distinct entities in chronic kidney disease
Role of smooth muscle cells in vascular calcification: implications in atherosclerosis and arterial stiffness
Vascular smooth muscle cells: isolation, culture, and characterization
Embryonic origins of human vascular smooth muscle cells: implications for in vitro modeling and clinical application
Adventitial MSC-like cells are progenitors of vascular smooth muscle cells and drive vascular calcification in chronic kidney disease
Vascular calcification in chronic kidney disease
Omics research in vascular calcification
Vascular calcification; stony bridge between kidney and heart
mechanisms of vascular calcification in kidney disease
Signaling pathways involved in vascular smooth muscle cell calcification during hyperphosphatemia
Vascular calcification- new insights into its mechanism
The cardioprotective effects of parathyroid hormone are independent of endogenous granulocyte-colony stimulating factor release
Calcifying circulating cells: an uncharted area in the setting of vascular calcification in CKD patients
Klotho-FGF23, cardiovascular disease, and vascular calcification: black or white?
The dualistic role of vitamin D in vascular calcifications
Calcimimetics increase CaSR expression and reduce mineralization in vascular smooth muscle cells: mechanisms of action
Mechanisms of vascular calcification in chronic kidney disease
Direct effects of phosphate on vascular cell function
Replicative senescence of vascular smooth muscle cells enhances the calcification through initiating the osteoblastic transition
Oxidative stress induces vascular calcification through modulation of the osteogenic transcription factor Runx2 by AKT signaling
Free DNA precipitates calcium phosphate apatite crystals in the arterial wall in vivo
KLF4-dependent phenotypic modulation of smooth muscle cells has a key role in atherosclerotic plaque pathogenesis
Elastin degradation and vascular smooth muscle cell phenotype change precede cell loss and arterial medial calcification in a uremic mouse model of chronic kidney disease
Vascular calcification: contribution of parathyroid hormone in renal failure
Matrix Gla-protein: the calcification inhibitor in need of vitamin K
Osteopontin protects against high phosphate-induced nephrocalcinosis and vascular calcification
BMP-7 is an efficacious treatment of vascular calcification in a murine model of atherosclerosis and chronic renal failure
Vascular calcification is dependent on plasma levels of pyrophosphate
Intermedin1-53 attenuates vascular calcification in rats with chronic kidney disease by upregulation of?-Klotho
The effect of increasing dialysate magnesium on serum calcification propensity in subjects with end stage kidney disease: a randomized, controlled clinical trial
Role of vascular calcification inhibitors in preventing vascular dysfunction and mortality in hemodialysis patients
Phosphate, pyrophosphate, and vascular calcification: a question of balance
Cardiac calcification in renal patients: what we do and don't know
2020 Jeffrey M. Hoeg Award Lecture: calcifying extracellular vesicles as building blocks of microcalcifications in cardiovascular disorders
Nanoparticle-based test measures overall propensity for calcification in serum
Novel assessments of systemic calcification propensity
Identification and quantification of plasma calciprotein particles with distinct physical properties in patients with chronic kidney disease
Serum calcification propensity predicts all-cause mortality in predialysis CKD
Blood calcification propensity, cardiovascular events, and survival in patients receiving hemodialysis in the EVOLVE Trial
Serum calcification propensity is a strong and independent determinant of cardiac and all?Cause mortality in kidney transplant recipients
Serum calcification propensity and coronary artery calcification among patients with CKD: the CRIC (Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort) study
Vascular calcification: pathobiology of a multifaceted disease
Fetuin-A-containing calciprotein particles reduce mineral stress in the macrophage
Apoptosis-mediated endothelial toxicity but not direct calcification or functional changes in anti-calcification proteins defines pathogenic effects of calcium phosphate bions
Vascular inflammation and media calcification are already present in early stages of chronic kidney disease
Increased arterial inflammation in individuals with stage 3 chronic kidney disease
Does vascular calcification accelerate inflammation?: A substudy of the dal-PLAQUE trial
Mineral metabolism and inflammation in chronic kidney disease patients: a cross-sectional study
Phosphate overload directly induces systemic inflammation and malnutrition as well as vascular calcification in uremia
Fetuin-mineral complex reflects extraosseous calcification stress in CKD
The isolation and quantification of fetuin-A containing calciprotein particles from biological fluids
Con: vascular calcification is a surrogate marker, but not the cause of ongoing vascular disease, and it is not a treatment target in chronic kidney disease
Initiation of sevelamer and mortality among hemodialysis patients treated with calcium-based phosphate binders
Valvular calcification in hemodialysis patients randomized to calcium-based phosphorus binders or sevelamer
Effect of sevelamer and calcium-based phosphate binders on coronary artery calcification and accumulation of circulating advanced glycation end products in hemodialysis patients
Sevelamer attenuates the progression of coronary and aortic calcification in hemodialysis patients
Effect of calcium-based versus non-calcium-based phosphate binders on mortality in patients with chronic kidney disease: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis
Sevelamer versus calcium-based binders for treatment of hyperphosphatemia in CKD: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Comparative effectiveness of phosphate binders in patients with chronic kidney disease: a systematic review and network meta-analysis
Sevelamer versus calcium-based phosphate binders for chronic kidney disease
The progression of coronary artery calcification in predialysis patients on calcium carbonate or sevelamer
Mortality in kidney disease patients treated with phosphate binders: a randomized study
Effects of phosphate binders in moderate CKD
Short-term effects of sevelamer-carbonate on fibroblast growth factor 23 and pulse wave velocity in patients with normophosphataemic chronic kidney disease Stage 3
A randomized trial on the effect of phosphate reduction on vascular end points in CKD (IMPROVE-CKD)
Small steps towards the potential of “preventive” treatment of early phosphate loading in chronic kidney disease patients
A pilot randomized trial of ferric citrate coordination complex for the treatment of advanced CKD
Disorders in bone-mineral parameters and the risk of death in persons with chronic kidney disease stages 4 and 5: the PECERA study
Improvement of mineral and bone metabolism markers is associated with better survival in haemodialysis patients: the COSMOS study
Association of changes in bone mineral parameters with mortality in haemodialysis patients: insights from the ARO cohort
Low calcidiol levels and risk of progression of aortic calcification
Vitamin D status and mortality risk in CKD: a meta-analysis of prospective studies
CKD, arterial calcification, atherosclerosis and bone health: Inter-relationships and controversies
The effect of vitamin D administration on serum leptin and adiponectin levels in end-stage renal disease patients on hemodialysis with vitamin D deficiency: a placebo-controlled double-blind clinical trial
Cholecalciferol supplementation in hemodialysis patients: effects on mineral metabolism, inflammation, and cardiac dimension parameters
Vitamin D therapy and cardiac structure and function in patients with chronic kidney disease
Effect of paricalcitol on left ventricular mass and function in CKD-The OPERA trial
Spanish Society of Nephrology recommendations for controlling mineral and bone disorder in chronic kidney disease patients (S.E.N.-M.B.D.)
Vitamin D receptor activators can protect against vascular calcification
Differential effects of vitamin D receptor activators on vascular calcification in uremic rats
Differential effects of vitamin D analogs on vascular calcification
Survival of patients undergoing hemodialysis with paricalcitol or calcitriol therapy
Activated injectable vitamin D and hemodialysis survival: a historical cohort study
Effect of cinacalcet on cardiovascular disease in patients undergoing dialysis
Clinical and practical use of calcimimetics in dialysis patients with secondary hyperparathyroidism
Evocalcet prevents ectopic calcification and parathyroid hyperplasia in rats with secondary hyperparathyroidism
Etelcalcetide, a novel calcimimetic, prevents vascular calcification in a rat model of renal insufficiency with secondary hyperparathyroidism
Calcimimetic R-568 decreases extraosseous calcifications in uremic rats treated with calcitriol
Cinacalcet suppresses calcification of the aorta and heart in uremic rats
Cinacalcet and primary hyperparathyroidism: systematic review and meta regression
Hiperparatiroidismo autónomo en paciente renal crónico estadio 3: valoración clínica a propósito de un caso
Autonomous hyperparathyroidism in CKD stages 3-4 treated with cinacalcet
Impact of statins on serial coronary calcification during atheroma progression and regression
Vascular calcification in chronic kidney disease: different bricks in the wall?
Magnesium-based interventions for normal kidney function and chronic kidney disease
The effects of vitamin K supplementation and vitamin K antagonists on progression of vascular calcification: ongoing randomized controlled trials
Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action
The antioxidant tempol ameliorates arterial medial calcification in uremic rats: important role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of vascular calcification in chronic kidney disease
Effect of bisphosphonates on vascular calcification and bone metabolism in experimental renal failure
Impact of denosumab on cardiovascular calcification in patients with secondary hyperparathyroidism undergoing dialysis: a pilot study
Sodium thiosulfate delays the progression of coronary artery calcification in haemodialysis patients
Sotatercept safety and effects on hemoglobin, bone, and vascular calcification
Updates on the mechanisms and the care of cardiovascular calcification in chronic kidney disease
Current and potential therapeutic strategies for the management of vascular calcification in patients with chronic kidney disease including those on dialysis
Slowing progression of cardiovascular calcification with SNF472 in patients on hemodialysis
Improvement in wound healing, pain, and quality of life after 12 weeks of SNF472 treatment: a phase 2 open-label study of patients with calciphylaxis