The development of evaluation scale of the patient satisfaction with telemedicine: a systematic review
Background
Since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, telemedicine become more and more popular, patients attempt to use telemedicine to meet personal medical needs. Patient satisfaction is a key indicator of insight into the patient experience.
Purpose
This systematic review aims to explore the measurement factors of patient satisfaction with telemedicine and develop a more comprehensive and systematic scale of patient satisfaction with telemedicine.
Methods
In February 2023, a literature search was conducted on the PubMed, EMBASE, and Web of Science, identifying measurement factors and tools of patient satisfaction with telemedicine. For inclusion, the studies had to have or make a questionnaire about patient satisfaction with telemedicine delivered through video/audio visits in English. The quality of the studies was evaluated according to the Critical Appraisal Tool for Analytical Cross-Sectional Studies of the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI). The dimensions and items in each tool were also analyzed.
Results
The initial search showed 14,020 studies. After eliminating duplicates and utilizing inclusion and exclusion criteria, 44 studies were included. This systematic review identified and integrated the measurement factors and develops a scale of patient satisfaction with telemedicine, which was divided into 9 dimensions and consists of 37 items.
Conclusion
Future measurement and evaluation of telemedicine will benefit from scale that was developed in this study, and it will more directly reflecting patient needs when patient satisfaction with telemedicine is evaluated.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12911-024-02436-z.

Introduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines telemedicine as “an interaction between a healthcare provider and a patient when the two are separated by distance”, and this communication may be synchronous (as in telephone or video consultations) or asynchronous (when data, queries and responses are exchanged by email or short message service). Telemedicine could not only provide clinical support and improve health outcomes, but also avoid patient travels, decrease exposure for patients and medical staff, and reduce health sector costs. Therefore, It became an essential component of the medical response.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, telemedicine played an important role in provision of healthcare services to patients. The use of telemedicine delivered through synchronous visits in various countries has increased significantly. At the early stage of pandemic, the weekly telemedicine visits have increased from 12,000 to 1,000,000 in just 3 months in the United States. During the isolation period, the remote consultation involving basic medical care has reached 1.2 million people per day in the UK. Telemedicine expanded tremendously and continue to flourish. In other words, telemedicine has completely changed the medical service mode.
Patient satisfaction is one of the most significant indicators reflecting assurance of validation and acceptance of this emerging medical service mode. As the voice of the patient, it is the only source of information that can report how they were treated and if the treatment patients received met their expectations. With the increasing uptake of telemedicine, it is necessary to insight into what practices and process patients consider to be satisfied with. However, Barsom et al. mentioned that different studies used a diverse range of questionnaires to measure patient satisfaction with telemedicine, which resulted in heterogeneous data, so it is difficult to compare and combine results of different studies. Agbali et al. concluded that it was necessary to develop a standardized uniform patient satisfaction with telemedicine evaluation tool to increase versatility and agility. Therefore, In this systematic review, we aimed to summarized and integrated the relevant measurement factors of patient satisfaction with telemedicine and develop a more comprehensive and systematic patient satisfaction scale for future research use.

Methods
This systematic review was conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) statement. The protocol was registered with PROSPERO under registration number CRD42022369348.

Study design and search strategy
The retrieval formula consisted of two main parts: “telemedicine” and “satisfaction”. Through the two main parts, the following search terms were used: “telemedicine”, “telehealth”, “telecommunication”, “teleconferenc*”, “videoconferenc*”, “video consultation”, and, “satisfaction”, “experience”, “perception”, “preference”. Based on the above search terms, we tailored search strategies to each database and used controlled medical subject headings (MeSHs) and search filters where available, or Boolean search methods and free-text terms (Supplementary 1). Due to the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic, the telemedicine audiovisual mode developed rapidly, and people paid more attention to its satisfaction. During this period, a lot of relevant research appeared, therefore, the search scope for the study was determined from January 2020 to February 2023.

Data sources
A systematic literature search was conducted in the following databases: PubMed, EMBASE, and Web of Science. We also carried out hand searches from reference lists of retrieved studies.

Study selection
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Item	Inclusion Criteria	Exclusion Criteria	 	Participants	Patients who received telemedicine services.	Other populations.	 	Interest of phenomenon	Telemedicine delivered through video/audio visits.	Other telemedicine modes.	 	Outcomes	Patient satisfaction.	–	 	Study type	Qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods studies.	Reviews.	 	Language	Only used English.	–
The inclusion and exclusion criteria are described in Table 1. Two reviewers screened search results by title and abstract to identify studies whether meet the inclusion criteria outlined above. The full text of potentially eligible studies was retrieved and assessed by the two same reviewers. Any disagreement between them over the eligibility of studies was resolved through discussion with a third reviewer.

Data extraction
The included studies were read in full. Two reviewers performed the relevant information and data that were collated in Microsoft Excel, which includes author, year of publication, country, study design, disease type, telemedicine mode, questionnaire dimension, and the number of satisfaction measurement factors.

Quality and risk of bias assessment
To ensure the validity and credibility of this study, the quality of the included studies was evaluated according to the Critical Appraisal Tool for Analytical Cross-Sectional Studies of the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI). Quality assessment of the included studies was conducted by two reviewers. Any disagreement between them over the quality assessment of literatures was resolved through discussion with a third reviewer.

Results

Study selection
Flowchart of the selection process
The study selection process and the results of the literature search are depicted in Fig. 1. Using our search strategy, 14,020 studies were retrieved from 3 databases. After removing 2949 duplicates, 11,071 studies were screened by titles and abstracts, and 10,948 studies were excluded. The remaining 123 studies were read full text, 79 were excluded and finally 44 studies were selected for this study.

Study characteristics
Compilation of observations for our sample
Author, Year	Country	Disease Type	Telemedicine Mode	Evaluation Questionnaire	Questionnaire Dimension	Number of Items	 	Layfield et al. 2020 	United States	Head and neck otolaryngology	Video visit	Telehealth Usability Questionnaire (TUQ)	5: usefulness, ease of use, effectiveness, reliability, and satisfaction	21	 	López Seguí et al. 2020 	Spain	Pediatric	Video visit	No mention	No dimension	10	 	Tenforde et al. 2020 	United States	Physical, Occupational, and Speech Therapy	Video/Audio visit	No mention	No dimension	7	 	Abdel Nasser et al. 2021 	Egypt	No limited	Video visit	No mention	2: participants’ satisfaction, and attitude toward telehealth and telemedicine	13	 	Bate et al. 2021 	Australia	No limited	Video visit	An existing questionnaire was developed by Bate et al	4: confidence, overall quality of consultation, cost saved, and time saved	4	 	Bisson et al. 2021 	United States	Orthopaedic	Video/Audio visit	A self-developed questionnaire	No dimension	9	 	Capusan et al. 2021 	United States	Pediatric Pulmonary	Video/Audio visit	No mention	4: technology, the experience of the visit, overall satisfaction, and likelihood to use the telehealth platform again	30	 	Chang et al. 2021 	United States	Cancer	Video/Audio visit	Design based on prior studies	No dimension	7	 	Dratch et al. 2021 	United States	Neurology	Video/Audio visit	Modified Telehealth Usability Questionnaire (MTUQ)	No dimension	6	 	Drerup et al. 2021 	United States	No limited	Video/Audio visit	No mention	3: friendliness of registration staff, convenience of appointment times, and communication with physicians	9	 	Gan et al. 2021 	United States	Pediatric Urology	Video visit	Design based on prior studies	3: a visit’s impact on access to care, patient/family experience and a visit’s effectiveness	6	 	Hentati et al. 2021 	United States	Rhinology	Video/Audio visit	A self-developed questionnaire	No dimension	7	 	Hooshmand et al. 2021 	United States	Neuromuscular Disorder	Video visit	The Utah Telehealth Patient Satisfaction survey	7: communication, timeliness of physician, picture quality, sound quality, protection of privacy, the comfort of the physical exam, and ease of receiving telehealth	8	 	Lanier et al. 2021 	United States	Allergy	Video visit	No mention	No dimension	6	 	March et al. 2021 	United States	Pediatric Diabetes	Video visit	A 12-item Parent Satisfaction Survey	No dimension	12	 	Nair et al. 2021 	India	Epilepsy	Video visit	A 14-point Telemedicine Satisfaction Questionnaire	No dimension	14	 	Sathiyaraj et al. 2021 	United States	Prechemotherapy	Video visit	A questionnaire developed by study investigators	No dimension	8	 	Shaverdian et al. 2021 	United States	Cancer	Video/Audio visit	An existing questionnaire was developed by MSKCC	No dimension	20	 	Volcy et al. 2021 	United States	No limited	Video visit	Not mentioned	No dimension	3	 	Waqar-Cowles et al. 2021 	United States	Pediatric Rheumatology	Video visit	Telehealth Usability Questionnaire (TUQ)	4: usefulness, ease of use, effectiveness, and satisfaction	14	 	Yoon et al. 2021 	United States	Neurosurgery	Video visit	An existing questionnaire was developed by Hicks et al	No dimension	8	 	Zimmerman et al. 2021 	United States	No limited	Video/Audio visit	Clinically Useful PatientSatisfaction Scale (CUPPS)	3: clinician attitude and behavior, office environment and staff, global satisfaction and expectation of improvement	14	 	Ahmed et al. 2022 	United States	Cystic Fibrosis	Video/Audio visit	Not mentioned	No dimension	6	 	Bassi et al. 2022 	Italy	Pediatric and Young Adult Type 1 Diabetes	Video visit	Design based on prior studies	4: adequacy of medical care, psychological impact of telemedicine, possible advantages and future use of telemedicine, and telenursing	15	 	Cascella et al. 2022 	Italy	Cancer	Video visit	Telehealth Usability Questionnaire (TUQ)	6: usefulness, ease of use & learnability, interface quality, interaction quality, reliability, and satisfaction and future use	22	 	Cha et al. 2022 	United States	Shoulder Arthroscopy	Video/Audio visit	Not mentioned	No dimension	8	 	Chen et al. 2022 	United States	No limited	Video/Audio visit	Not mentioned	3: access, care provider, and overall assessment	9	 	Cockrell et al. 2022 	Spain	Pediatric Surgery	Video visit	Not mentioned	9: provider rating, office recommendation, explaining, listening, questions, understanding, medical history knowledge, respect, and time	9	 	Contractor et al. 2022 	United Kingdom	Vascular Surgery	Video visit	A questionnaire developed by by a team of experts	3: acceptability of teleconsultation, benefits of teleconsultation, and future role and acceptability of virtual clinic	17	 	Gondal et al. 2022 	Canada	Cancer	Video visit	A modified existing questionnaire	No dimension	8	 	Guille et al. 2022 	United States	Maternal Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Treatment	Video visit	Not mentioned	4: overall quality of care, similarity to face-to-face care, access to care, and MH care	24	 	Jones et al. 2022 	United States	Referral	Video visit	A questionnaire was developed by a QI committee based on prior studies	No dimension	2	 	Kaunitz et al. 2022 	United States	Dermatology	Video visit	Not mentioned	No dimension	4	 	Majmundar et al. 2022 	United States	Endovascular Neurosurgery	Video visit	Not mentioned	No dimension	7	 	Mojdehbakhsh et al. 2022 	United States	Gynecologic Cancer	Video/Audio visit	Telehealth Satisfaction Scale (TeSS)	No dimension	11	 	Omari et al. 2022 	United States	Orthopedic	Video/Audio visit	Not mentioned	No dimension	7	 	Sansone et al. 2022 	United States	Urogynecology	Video/Audio visit	Not mentioned	5: scheduling, technology, provider, personal needs, and overall satisfaction	19	 	Summers et al. 2022 	United States	Ophthalmology	Video/Audio visit	Not mentioned	No dimension	4	 	Yu et al. 2022 	United States	Irritable Bowel Syndrome	Video/Audio visit	Telehealth Usability Questionnaire (TUQ)	No dimension	13	 	Zhang et al. 2022 	United States	Sickle Cell Disease	Video/Audio visit	Telemedicine Satisfaction Questionnaire (TSQ)	4: interpersonal communication, caring, care delivery, and proficiency	24	 	Daouadji-Ghazou et al. 2023 	France	Bariatric	Video/Audio visit	An existing questionnaire	No dimension	9	 	Kilipiris et al. 2023 	Colombia	Craniosynostosis-Operated Children	Video visit	A questionnaire was developed by the surgical members of the craniofacial team	No dimension	9	 	Rosellini et al. 2023 	Italy	Chronic Neurologic Disorders	Video visit	A questionnaire was developed by Google Moduli	3: satisfaction for current televisit, opinions about future televisit, and quality of doctor–patient relationship	11	 	Yao et al. 2023 	United States	Colorectal Surgery	Video visit	Not mentioned	No dimension	7
The characteristics of 44 studies were summarized in Table 2. The included studies were all the cross-sectional study, and each study was about telemedicine that delivered through video/audio visits. Most of included studies (n = 32) were conducted in United States, and a few were conducted in Italy (n = 3), Spain (n = 2), Egypt (n = 1), Australia (n = 1), India (n = 1), United Kingdom (n = 1), Canada(n = 1), France (n = 1), Colombia (n = 1). The vast majority included studies (n = 38) reported on the types of participants’ diseases, which includes head and neck otolaryngology (n = 1), pediatric (n = 1), physical, occupational, and speech therapy (n = 1), orthopaedic (n = 1), pediatric pulmonary (n = 1), cancer (n = 4), neurology (n = 1), pediatric urology (n = 1), rhinology (n = 1), neuromuscular disorder (n = 1), allergy (n = 1), pediatric diabetes (n = 1), epilepsy (n = 1), prechemotherapy (n = 1), pediatric rheumatology (n = 1), neurosurgery (n = 1), cystic fibrosis (n = 1), pediatric and young adult type 1 diabetes (n = 1), shoulder arthroscopy (n = 1), pediatric surgery (n = 1), vascular surgery (n = 1), maternal mental health and substance use disorder treatment (n = 1), referral (n = 1), dermatology (n = 1), endovascular neurosurgery (n = 1), gynecologic cancer (n = 1), orthopedic (n = 1), urogynecology (n = 1), ophthalmology (n = 1), irritable bowel syndrome (n = 1), sickle cell disease (n = 1), bariatric (n = 1), craniosynostosis-operated children (n = 1), chronic neurologic disorders (n = 1), and colorectal surgery (n = 1). While the remaining studies (n = 6) did not limit the patient types. For the evaluation questionnaire, there are part of studies (n = 16) using existing questionnaires, a few of studies’ questionnaire (n = 3) were designed based on different studies, several studies (n = 7) evaluating by self-developed questionnaires, and some (n = 18) studies did not mension the specific questionnaires used. In addition, the questionnaires used in several studies (n = 18) were divided into various dimensions.

The outcome of quality assessment
Quality assessment
Based on the Critical Appraisal Tool for Analytical Cross-Sectional Studies of the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI), 42 studies were at low risk of bias, while the rest 2 studies were rated as the moderate risk of bias. The details of study quality are shown in Fig. 2.

Synthesis of results
We summarized the measurement factors of patient satisfaction with telemedicine of 44 included studies. The process of integrating factors led us to find that the measurement of patient satisfaction with telemedicine involves various dimensions. To ensure the scientific rationality of this study, it is essential to build a conceptual framework for measuring patient satisfaction. 18 included studies’ questionnaires presented in Table 2 are dimensioned. The dimensions involve perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), facilitating conditions of the model of Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT), and interpersonal manner, technical quality, accessibility/convenience, finances, efficacy/outcomes, continuity, physical environment, and availability of a widely used Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire. Based on the above category of models and literatures, we have divided all items into 9 dimensions: humanistic care, doctor-patient communication, service efficiency, diagnosis and treatment result, ease of use, system quality, usefulness, privacy and security, overall satisfaction.
According to above dimensions and items in included studies, we sorted out and combined them. Of the 44 included studies, 14 studies involved humanistic care, which includes the courtesy, friendliness, and care of doctors to patients. Twenty-eight studies involved doctor-patient communication, which includes doctor’s listening to patients, doctor’s explanations to patients, and communication between doctors and patients. Nine studies involved service efficiency, which includes the punctuality of the telemedicine visiting process. Twenty-three studies involved diagnosis and treatment result, which includes whether patients’ problems, concerns, and needs were achieved. Nineteen studies involved ease of use, about medical services and system technology. Twenty-five studies involved system quality, which includes telemedicine systems support during telemedicine visits. Nineteen studies involved usefulness, which includes the benefits of telemedicine. Eight study involved privacy and security, which includes the security of personal privacy when patients use telemedicine. Thirty-nine studies involved overall satisfaction, which is the patient’s general evaluation on telemedicine.
Evaluation scale framework for patient satisfaction with telemedicine
Patient satisfaction scale for telemedicine
Dimensions and Items	References	Frequency	 	Humanistic Care		14	 	My doctor is courteous.		4	 	My doctor is warm and friendly.		5	 	My doctor cares about me.		9	 	Doctor-Patient Communication		28	 	My doctor listens carefully.		4	 	My doctor gives me a clear and understandable explain.		12	 	My doctor explains diagnosis and treatment in a clear and understandable way.		3	 	My medical staff is skillful and knowledgeable.		7	 	My doctor asks if I have any questions.		5	 	The communication with my doctor is smooth.		6	 	There is enough time to communicate with my doctor.		9	 	Service Efficiency		9	 	My telemedicine visit begins on time.		7	 	My prescriptions and orders are placed without delay.		2	 	I believe I could become productive quickly using telemedicine system.		2	 	Diagnosis and Treatment Result		23	 	The telemedicine can solve my every medical problem.		9	 	The telemedicine can address my every medical concern.		4	 	The telemedicine can satisfy my every medical need.		14	 	Ease of Use		19	 	The appointment for medical treatment is easy.		6	 	The telemedicine system easy to learn.		4	 	The telemedicine system easy to use.		14	 	System Quality		25	 	The quality of system is good.		9	 	I can see the doctor clearly.		17	 	I can hear the doctor’s voice clearly.		17	 	I feel comfortable seeing and communicating with the doctor using system.		14	 	Usefulness		19	 	The telemedicine visit saves me travel time.		12	 	The telemedicine is an acceptable way to receive healthcare services.		8	 	The telemedicine visit improves my access to healthcare services.		12	 	It is easy to access the telemedicine doctor I need.		2	 	I am told what to do when my symptoms get worse.		2	 	Privacy and Security		8	 	I am worried about my privacy.		8	 	Overall Satisfaction		39	 	I am satisfied with the health care quality.		7	 	I like using this telemedicine system.		5	 	Overall, I am satisfied with telemedicine system.		3	 	Overall, I am satisfied with telemedicine visit.		22	 	My telemedicine visit is as good as in-person visit.		9	 	I would use telemedicine services again.		28	 	I would recommend the telemedicine option to other patients.		10	 	Expectation of improvement.		3
Trough the above work, we developed a systematic patient satisfaction scale for telemedicine, involving 9 dimensions and 37 items. It has 36 objective questions and 1 subjective question. The patient satisfaction conceptual framework and scale for telemedicine are displayed in Fig. 3 and Table 3.

Discussion
Our review of 44 studies that assessed patient satisfaction with telemedicine shows that there is minimal agreement on their evaluation tools. As a result, this study makes a comprehensive questionnaire for future research of patient satisfaction with telemedicine. To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to develop a scale to assess patient satisfaction with telemedicine by a review and integrate of included studies.

Summary of included studies
By observing the characteristics of included studies, we found that most of them were from developed countries, including United States, Italy, Spain, Australia, United Kingdom, Canada and France. Although telemedicine has not been popularized worldwide, the patient satisfaction survey could provide a reference for developing and underdeveloped countries. In addition, this study contains a variety of disease types, which shows that the future development of telemedicine is almost unlimited by disease types, and the prospect is extremely bright. As a major role in the development of medical services in the future, telemedicine needs to be continuously improved according to patient satisfaction.

Principal findings
In our scale, there was significant variation in the number of reference studies for each dimension (Table 3), 4 dimensions from 20 or more included studies and 3 dimensions from 10 to 20 included studies, while 2 dimension from less than 10 included studies.
For “Humanistic Care” and “Doctor-Patient Communication”, some included studies (n = 14) (n = 28) supported these 2 dimensions, which could reveal that the strongly importance and closely relevance of these 2 dimensions. The process of establishing interpersonal relationships usually relies on the initial minutes of a conversation, including physician’s courtesy, friendliness and care, which determines the patient’s first impression and whether they are willing to trust and communicate with the physician. However, doctor-patient communication is the primary action for the physician and the patient exchange information, which involves physician’s listen and explanation. Undoubtedly, doctor-patient communication plays a decisive role in the follow-up close cooperation, diagnosis and treatment, and overall satisfaction.
A small amount of included studies (n = 9) discussed the dimension of “Service Efficiency”. Each item of this dimension revolves around decreasing wait times and increasing visit efficiency. It is one of advantages why patient embrace telemedicine.
According to included studies (n = 23) which relate to the dimension of “diagnosis and treatment result”, whether the medical problem and need were overcame are valued. As the initial expectation of patient who use telemedicine, physical condition improvement closely associates with satisfaction. To be widely adopted, telemedicine must compete favorably with in-person visits in medical outcomes.
A number of included studies has the dimension of “Ease of Use” (n = 19). It mainly includes appropriate system setting and access of services. Ease of use of the technology is an important factor that can influence or even determine the intention to use telemedicine.
“System Quality” (n = 25) is the basic factor of telemedicine technology, which may affect telemedicine visits directly and indirectly. On the one hand, audio quality must be of a sufficiently high standard to make effective communication. On the other hand, doctor may get vague message with unclear video. This phenomenon could lead patients’ treatment delay or diagnostic error.
Based on half of (n = 19) included studies, the usefulness of telemedicine involves various aspects, including saving travel time, increasing access to care and doctor. In the process of offline medical diagnosis and treatment, patients often encounter the problem of registration difficulties, even the experts. However, the online reservation service of telemedicine can better save the travel time of patients and avoid the situation of making a futile trip.
Although the dimension of “privacy and security” are covered by fewer included studies (n = 8), it is a major obstacle to the adoption of telemedicine. Most patients are accustomed to consider medical quality, and service efficiency as main factors in choosing medical services, which result in the neglect of privacy issues. However, once there was problem about privacy, it will seriously affect patients’ impressions and even cause distrust telemedicine. Previous questionnaires nearly did not follow with interest this point, our research made up the lack of overlooking the privacy and security.
The dimension of “Overall Satisfaction” is included in most included studies (n = 39), which is used to measure patients’ integrated perception. TAM’s originators reasoned that the key to increasing use was to first increase acceptance of technology, which could be assessed by asking users about their future intentions to use the technology. Therefore, a subjective question that “Expectation of improvement” was included in this dimension.
Multiple digital and telecommunication technologies have created an unprecedented opportunity for the field of health. As one of the new technology, telemedicine can offer flexibility and convenience to patients. The drivers for satisfaction stem from the benefit of telemedicine. According to the above discussion, during the process of researching the patient satisfaction with telemedicine, we not only pay more attention to the significant dimension, but also can we not ignore the issues that have not yet attracted concern and patient’s expectation of improvement. These will help providers constantly modify or develop systems widely accepted by users. In a word, the widespread adoption of this scale could help transform telemedicine from a convenience-driven technology into a patient-centered healthcare delivery model.

Limitations
There are 3 limitations in this study. The first limitation is that our research only included three English databases, it may omit valid literatures for our review. The second limitation is that telemedicine is developing rapidly during the COVID-19 pandemic, and its satisfaction measurement factors may be changed in the future. And the last limitation of this study is that this study just research on telemedicine that delivered through video/audio visits.

Conclusion
This review reported on 44 studies that focused on patient satisfaction with telemedicine for various disease. We developed a scale for evaluating patient satisfaction with telemedicine by applying multidimensional constructs to capture patient satisfaction comprehensively, which involves nine dimensions, such as humanistic care, doctor-patient communication, service efficiency, diagnosis and treatment result, ease of use, system quality, usefulness, privacy and security, overall satisfaction. This scale could be a meaningful tool for future studies to delve into patient satisfaction with telemedicine. Not only will it provide researchers with a framework for quantitatively analyzing patient feedback, but also it will give telemedicine providers insights into areas where they can improve their services. And eventually, providers create a truly “patient-centered” telemedicine service to better meet the needs of patient.

Supplementary Information
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Authors’ contributions
Yifei Du and Yu Gu searched and selected literature, extracted data, assessed the quality of the included studies, and developed the scale. Yifei Du wrote the original manuscript. Yu Gu reviewed and amended the original manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Availability of data and materials
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this article.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
World Health Organization. Global Diffusion of eHealth: Making Universal Health Coverage Achievable. Report of the Third Global Survey on eHealth. 2019. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241511780/. Accessed February 16, 2022.
World Health Organization. Telemedicine: Opportunities and Developments in Member States: Report on the Second Global Survey on eHealth. 2009. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/44497/. Accessed February 16, 2022.
Telemedicine and virtual respiratory care in the era of COVID-19
Patient satisfaction with telemedicine during the COVID-19 pandemic: retrospective cohort study
Paying for telemedicine after the pandemic
Maximizing the calm before the storm: tiered surgical response plan for novel coronavirus (COVID-19)
Technology in the era of COVID-19: a systematic review of current evidence
Liu X. Overseas observation: the rise of global telemedicine during the COVID-19 pandemic. Yangtze River Delta Hospital Alliance H-TQM Review. 2020; Available from: https://www.cn-healthcare.com/articlewm/20201019/content-1154485.html. Accessed January 16, 2023
Use of telehealth during the COVID-19 pandemic: scoping review
The telehealth satisfaction scale: reliability, validity, and satisfaction with telehealth in a rural memory clinic population
Patient satisfaction with medications for opioid use disorder treatment via telemedicine: brief literature review and development of a new assessment
A hospitalization from hell: a patient's perspective on quality
Explorations in quality assessment and monitoring
Barsom EZ, van Hees E, Bemelman WA, Schijven MP. Measuring patient satisfaction with video consultation: a systematic review of assessment tools and their measurement properties. Int J Technol Assess Health Care. 2020;1-7
A review of audiovisual telemedicine utilization and satisfaction assessment during the COVID-19 pandemic
The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elaboration
Telemedicine for head and neck ambulatory visits during COVID-19: evaluating usability and patient satisfaction
Outpatient physical, occupational, and speech therapy synchronous telemedicine: a survey study of patient satisfaction with virtual visits during the COVID-19 pandemic
The association between patient satisfaction and mode of visit (telemedicine versus in-person) in a large Orthopaedic practice during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown: a retrospective study
Patient satisfaction with telehealth during the COVID-19 pandemic in a pediatric pulmonary clinic
Patient and provider-reported satisfaction of Cancer rehabilitation telemedicine visits during the COVID-19 pandemic
Transitioning to telegenetics in the COVID-19 era: patient satisfaction with remote genetic counseling in adult neurology
Reduced no-show rates and sustained patient satisfaction of telehealth during the COVID-19 pandemic
Single institution experience with telemedicine for pediatric urology outpatient visits: adapting to COVID-19 restrictions, patient satisfaction, and future utilization
Patient satisfaction with telemedicine in rhinology during the COVID-19 pandemic
Satisfaction of telehealth in patients with established neuromuscular disorders
Patient satisfaction and utilization of telemedicine services in allergy: an institutional survey
How do virtual visits compare? Parent satisfaction with pediatric diabetes telehealth during the COVID-19 pandemic
Patient satisfaction with telemedicine for prechemotherapy evaluation during the COVID-19 pandemic
Impact of telemedicine on patient satisfaction and perceptions of care quality in radiation oncology
Assessment of patient and provider satisfaction with the change to telehealth from in-person visits at an academic safety net institution during the COVID-19 pandemic
Evaluation of pediatric rheumatology telehealth satisfaction during the COVID-19 pandemic
Patient satisfaction with neurosurgery telemedicine visits during the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic: a prospective cohort study
Patient satisfaction with partial hospital telehealth treatment during the COVID-19 pandemic: comparison to in-person treatment
Satisfaction and concerns with telemedicine endocrine Care of Patients with cystic fibrosis
Patient satisfaction in shoulder arthroscopy: telemedicine vs. clinic follow-up visits
Patient satisfaction with telehealth versus in-person visits during COVID-19 at a large, public healthcare system
A pilot study examining access to and satisfaction with maternal mental health and substance use disorder treatment via telemedicine
Parent satisfaction with outpatient telemedicine services during the COVID-19 pandemic: a repeated cross-sectional study
Assessing patient satisfaction with live-interactive Teledermatology visits during the COVID-19 pandemic: a survey study
Telemedicine for endovascular neurosurgery consultation during the COVID-19 era: patient satisfaction survey
The long game: telemedicine patient satisfaction metrics and methods of recurrence detection for gynecologic cancer patients throughout the initial year of the COVID-19 pandemic
Patient satisfaction with orthopedic telemedicine health visits during the COVID-19 pandemic
No pelvic exam, no problem: patient satisfaction following the integration of comprehensive urogynecology telemedicine
Pediatric ophthalmology provider and staff attitudes and patient satisfaction in telehealth implementation during COVID-19
Satisfaction with telehealth among patients with irritable bowel syndrome during COVID-19: cross-sectional survey findings
Zhang S, Xue W, Boorman EP, et al. Accessible Care with High Patient Satisfaction: Telemedicine Use in Sickle Cell Disease. Telemed J E Health. 2022; 10.1089/tmj.2022.0387.
Impact of postoperative telemedicine visit versus in-person visit on patient satisfaction: a randomized clinical trial
Patient satisfaction of telemedicine in pediatric and young adult type 1 diabetes patients during Covid-19 pandemic
Satisfaction with telemedicine for Cancer pain management: a model of care and cross-sectional patient satisfaction study
Rosellini I, Vianello M, Palmieri A, et al. Patient satisfaction with televisit in chronic neurologic disorders during Covid-19 pandemic [published online ahead of print, 2023 Jan 12]. Acta Neurol Belg. 2023:1–9.
Families' degree of satisfaction with pediatric Telehomecare: interventional prospective pilot study in Catalonia
Understanding hispanic patient satisfaction with telehealth during COVID-19 [published online ahead of print, 2022 Dec 22]
Measuring the Patients' satisfaction about telemedicine used in Saudi Arabia during COVID-19 pandemic
Effect of the COVID-19 induced phase of massive telehealth uptake on end-user satisfaction
Video teleconsultation services for persons with epilepsy during COVID-19 pandemic: an exploratory study from public tertiary care hospital in southern India on feasibility, satisfaction, and effectiveness
Patient satisfaction with tele- and video-consultation in the COVID-19 era - a survey of vascular surgical patients
Patient and physician satisfaction with telemedicine in Cancer Care in Saskatchewan: a cross-sectional study
Follow-up, safety, and satisfaction with tele-bariatric follow-up implemented during the COVID-19 French lockdown: a 2-year follow-up study [published correction appears in Obes Surg. 2023 Apr 26;:]
Parental satisfaction from telemedicine in the follow-up of children operated for Craniosynostosis during COVID-19 pandemic
A systematic review of the technology acceptance model in health informatics
Technology acceptance models in health informatics: TAM and UTAUT
Defining and measuring patient satisfaction with medical care
Telemedicine for developing countries. A survey and some design issues
Patient satisfaction in China: a national survey of inpatients and outpatients
Doctor-patient communication in a cancer ward
You only have one chance for a first impression! Impact of Patients' first impression on the global quality assessment of Doctors' communication approach
Telehealth and patient satisfaction: a systematic review and narrative analysis
A review of patient and provider satisfaction with telemedicine
Telemedicine is as effective as in-person visits for patients with asthma
Links between ease of use, perceived usefulness and attitudes towards technology in older people in university: a structural equation modelling approach
Patient satisfaction with realtime teledermatology in Northern Ireland
Formative evaluation of a telemedicine model for delivering clinical neurophysiology services part I: utility, technical performance and service provider perspective
Conversations on telemental health: listening to remote and rural first nations communities
Development, validation, and use of English and Spanish versions of the telemedicine satisfaction and usefulness questionnaire
The technology acceptance model: its past and its future in health care
Artificial intelligence in COVID-19 management: a systematic review
Telemedicine pays: billing and coding update
Administering a telemedicine program