Clinical evaluation of the painful adolescent and young adult hip
The history and physical exam are crucial components of the initial assessment of hip pain in adolescents and young adults to identify the cause of the pain, distinguish between common causes of early degeneration such as femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) and acetabular dysplasia (instability), and guide further workup and management. Different aspects of the history and exam are specific to various common causes of hip pain in this patient population. The purpose of this review is to synthesize these components to provide a comprehensive approach to the history and physical exam for adolescents and young adults presenting with hip pain.
Key Concepts
Common signs that suggest a mechanical hip problem, but are not specific for the etiology, include symptoms that worsen with activity, discomfort in a seated position, pain on rising from a seated position, or difficulty with ascending or descending stairs.
A Trendelenburg gait is caused by insufficient abductors that are unable to maintain a level pelvis and is commonly associated with hip instability due to the biomechanical disadvantage of the dysplastic hip joint.
Obligate external rotation of the hip during hip flexion is concerning for slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) and warrants an AP pelvis and frog leg lateral view for evaluation.
The Prone Apprehension Relocation Test (PART) assesses for anterior undercoverage of the acetabulum, and a positive test has been found to be correlated with radiographic markers of instability.

Introduction
Orthopaedic evaluation of hip pain in adolescents and young adults relies on interpretation of the combination of clinical and radiographic findings and has continued to evolve alongside a growing understanding of the natural history and pathophysiology of pre-arthritic hip conditions. The 2 main etiologies of hip pain that may cause early hip degeneration are thought to be acetabular dysplasia and femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) . Other common causes of hip pain in this patient population include muscle sprains or strains, tendonitis, coxa saltans (“snapping hip syndrome”), slipped capital femoral epiphyses (SCFE), Perthes disease, apophysitis, and apophyseal avulsion fracture. The history and physical exam are the initial steps in evaluation, followed by radiographic assessment, that can guide clinical decisions and, perhaps, hip preservation efforts . The objective of this review is to provide a comprehensive approach to the history and physical exam of the painful adolescent and young adult hip. When performed in combination with the radiographic evaluation described in the accompanying article of this publication, this approach can reliably identify the source of the pain and guide the next steps in workup and management.

Clinical history
Evaluation of a hip pain should begin with a detailed patient history that includes the location, quality, and onset/duration of symptoms. Chronicity of symptoms helps narrow the initial differential. Acute traumatic injuries include apophyseal avulsion injuries, which typically occur in adolescents approaching skeletal maturity during activities involving sudden eccentric muscle contractions such as kicking and jumping . Similarly, a patient who has mild thigh, knee or hip pain with mild limping and a progressively increasing external foot progression angle who then has an acute episode of pain and inability to mobilize is likely to have a SCFE. A more insidious onset of pain is associated with impingement , dysplasia, and apophysitis . Exacerbating activities or positions, activity level, and prior treatments should also be considered . Anterior groin pain may indicate an intra-articular pathology, such as impingement or chondrolabral injury, or an extra-articular pathology such as an iliopsoas strain or tendinitis. Lateral hip pain may be attributed to hip abductor fatigue, which is commonly seen in dysplasia. The biomechanical disadvantage associated with a dysplastic hip can contribute to this abductor fatigue, leading to lateral hip pain proximal to the greater trochanter . Lateral pain localized directly over the greater trochanter may indicate trochanteric bursitis. Proximal pelvic pain with tenderness over the bony prominences such as the anterior inferior iliac spine (AIIS), anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS), or iliac crest suggests an apophyseal injury such as an apophyseal avulsion fracture or apophysitis. Patients may describe a “c-shaped” distribution of pain about the inguinal crease, which indicates an intra-articular pathology.
A sensation that the hip may dislocate, coupled with a visible “snapping,” is indicative of coxa saltans externa as the iliotibial (IT) band snaps over the grater trochanter during hip flexion and extension or internal and external rotation . A “locking” sensation, coupled with an audible “snapping” suggests coxa saltans interna, with the iliopsoas snapping over the iliopectineal eminence . An intermittent “clicking” or “catching” often indicates an intra-articular source, although this is a non-specific finding
Signs that suggest a mechanical hip problem, but are not specific for the etiology, include symptoms that worsen with activity, discomfort in a seated position, pain on rising from a seated position, difficulty with ascending or descending stairs, and dyspareunia . A detailed patient history should be used to target the physical exam to identify the most likely etiology of the pain.

Physical exam
The physical exam of the painful hip should include inspection, bony and soft tissue palpation, range of motion assessment, muscle strength testing, and condition-specific exam maneuvers.

Inspection
With the patient standing, the posture of the patient’s hips, lumbar spine, and knees can be observed. Any splinting or maneuvers to alleviate stress on the hip joint should be noted. A slightly flexed position of the hip and ipsilateral knee may be associated with an irritated hip joint.
A patient with a normal left hip but abductor insufficiency of the right hip. In single limb stance, a patient should be able to maintain a level pelvis (left). A positive Trendelenburg sign occurs when hip abductor insufficiency of the stance limb causes a patient’s contralateral hemipelvis to drop away from the stance limb and/or when there is a compensatory trunk lean towards affected hip (right).
Figure 1
The patient’s gait should also be observed for any abnormalities. An antalgic gait is a nonspecific finding of hip pathology that is defined by a shortened stance phase of gait, and increased flexion of the hip while the pelvis remains level. An antalgic gait with external rotation is concerning for slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) . By contrast, patients with a Trendelenburg gait may demonstrate that the hemipelvis drops away from the limb in stance phase as they have insufficient abductor strength to maintain a level pelvis. Alternatively, they may demonstrate a trunk lean over the stance limb to decrease the force required by the ipsilateral hip abductors to maintain a level pelvis (Fig. 1). This gait pattern indicates weakness or fatigue of the abductors and can be seen in patients with hip dysplasia
Limb length symmetry can be assessed by palpating the iliac wings with the patient standing. While standing, the patient should also be asked to bend forward at the trunk to assess for scoliosis. When lying supine, the patient’s hip position should be noted. A hip that is resting in flexion and external rotation allows for relaxation of the joint capsule and reduction of intra-articular pressure and may suggest synovitis or SCFE

Bony and soft tissue palpation
Tenderness to palpation over the bony prominences is generally assessed in the supine position and can indicate an apophyseal injury such as an avulsion fracture or apophysitis. This may include tenderness over the greater trochanter, iliac crest, ASIS, AIIS, ischial tuberosity, and the pubic ramus/symphysis. Tenderness to palpation over the SI joint may be performed in the standing or lateral position and may indicate sacroiliitis. Soft tissue tenderness to palpation of the anterior hip may suggest iliopsoas tendonitis or intra-articular pathology. Soft tissue tenderness to palpation over the lateral hip may indicate IT band syndrome, or greater trochanteric bursitis if localized over the greater trochanter. Soft tissue tenderness of the posterior hip may suggest a gluteus maximus contusion.

Range of motion
Straight leg raise (SLR) test. Radiating pain in a dermatomal distribution along the lower extremity suggests spinal pathology.
Figure 2
With the patient lying supine, a passive straight leg raise (SLR) test should be performed with the knee in full extension (Fig. 2). Radiating pain along a dermatomal distribution of the ipsilateral lower extremity represents a positive test and indicates spinal pathology especially a disc herniation.
Internal rotation (left) and external rotation (right) of hip.
Figure 3
Passive range of motion of both hips should be evaluated, with the unaffected hip measured first to establish a standard with which to compare the painful hip. In the supine position, with the ipsilateral knee flexed to 90°, hip flexion is assessed by bringing the knee as close to the chest as possible before the pelvis begins to rock (suggesting motion is then instead occurring through the lumbar spine). Next, with the hip flexed to 90°, internal rotation is assessed by rotating the limb about the vertical axis of the femur away from the midline. External rotation is assessed by rotating the limb in the opposite direction (Fig. 3). Rotational profile may also be assessed in the prone position which may decrease the contribution of impinging lesions and may better reflect the femoral anteversion. Abduction and adduction are both measured with the hip and knee in a neutral extended position. The hip is adducted by moving the limb towards the midline above the contralateral leg and is abducted by moving the limb away from midline. Hip extension is best assessed in the lateral decubitus with the knee flexed to 90°
On hip flexion, hip is normally able to maintain neutral alignment (left). With obligate external rotation, hip flexion forces the hip to fall into external rotation, which is concerning for slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) (right).
Figure 4
Normal values for hip range of motion in the adolescent and young adult when assessed as described above include approximately 120° for hip flexion, 30-40° for internal rotation, 40-50° for external rotation, and 5-10° for hip extension . Limited internal rotation may suggest predisposition for FAI or SCFE. Specifically, hip internal rotation <10° in patients with FAI has been associated with progressive osteoarthritic changes on imaging . If the hip is unable to maintain neutral alignment during flexion and falls into external rotation, this is referred to as “obligate external rotation,” which is concerning for SCFE and warrants an AP and frog view of the pelvis for confirmation (Fig. 4)  Excessive range of motion of >60° in either internal or external rotation suggests capsular laxity and/or instability . Pain with passive ROM including log roll may suggest an irritable hip, synovitis, or SCFE.

Muscle strength testing
In the supine position, strength assessment consists of hip flexion, abduction, and adduction. Resisted hip flexion is assessed with the patient performing an active leg raise against downward pressure over the distal femur. This is also referred to as the Stinchfield test, and pain with this maneuver suggests apophysitis, iliopsoas strain, or intra-articular pathology . Hip abduction and adduction are examined with the knees flexed to 90° and the feet lying flat on the exam table. Abduction strength may also commonly be assessed in the lateral decubitus position. Resisted abduction and adduction are evaluated by applying lateral pressure over the medial or lateral portion of the distal femur.

Condition-specific exam maneuvers
A variety of provocative maneuvers can be used to identify the etiology of hip pain. It is important to note, however, that there is significant variability in the literature regarding the description and application of these maneuvers and their reliability . These tests should be used in conjunction with relevant symptoms and imaging findings to arrive at the diagnosis

Hip impingement and labral pathology

Flexion-adduction-internal rotation
Hip is flexed, adducted, and internally rotated (FADIR), with a positive test indicating femoroacetabular impingement (FAI).
Figure 5
The flexion-adduction-internal rotation (FADIR) test can be performed in either the supine position or in the lateral recumbent position with the affected side facing up. The hip should be brought passively into flexion, internal rotation, and adduction. Reproduction of hip pain, which may be felt anteriorly, laterally, or even posteriorly, with this maneuver is considered a positive test (Fig. 5) . A positive test suggests that the location of impingement is anterior/anterolateral between the acetabular rim and the head-neck junction of the femur . When performed with the hip in 90° of flexion, the test been reported in the literature to have a sensitivity ranging between 51 to 100%, a specificity of 89%, and an inter-observer agreement of 96%

Internal rotation over pressure
Internal Rotation over Pressure (IROP) is a modification of the FADIR test in which an axial compression is placed onto the affected leg while in the supine position. A positive test suggests the location of impingement is anterior between the acetabular rim and femoral head-neck junction . The sensitivity of this test in detecting impingement is reported to range between 75-89% . This test has a higher positive predictive value than the Stinchfield test described above, or the Scour or flexion abduction external rotation (FABER) tests described below, for detecting intra-articular pathology

Scour test
Axial compression is applied as the hip is brought from a flexed and internally rotated position into abduction and extension. Reproduction of pain or mechanical symptoms is indicative of bony impingement of the labrum. The location of impingement is typically between a 10 o’clock to 3 o’clock position along the acetabular rim and femoral head-neck junction. The sensitivity has been reported to vary widely between 50 to 100%

Flexion abduction external rotation
The FABER test is performed in the supine position with the affected hip flexed, abducted, and externally rotated and application of downward pressure on the knee. Ipsilateral anterior hip or groin pain with this maneuver indicates FAI and/or labral pathology, while posterior hip pain on the contralateral side suggests sacroiliac (SI) joint pathology . A positive test may indicate posterolateral impingement between the greater trochanter and IT band or deep posterolateral impingement between the greater trochanter and ischium. The sensitivity and specificity of this test for FAI and labral pathology vary widely in the literature, with ranges reported as 41 to 97% for sensitivity and 18 to 100% for specificity . The inter-observer reliability is 98%

Posterior impingement test
The posterior impingement test is performed with the patient lying supine at the end of the examination table, allowing the legs to hang freely off the table. The affected hip is placed into extension, abduction, and external rotation. Reproduction of posterior hip pain represents a positive test and indicates posterior impingement between the acetabular rim/ischium and femoral head-neck junction or trochanteric region . Posterior impingement is difficult to diagnose on exam, and this test has a sensitivity of only 21%

Instability or capsular insufficiency

Anterior apprehension test
Anterior apprehension test. The contralateral hip is flexed, while the affected hip is passively extended and brought into external rotation, producing stress on the anterior capsule and labrum. Pain or apprehension signifies a positivetest for instability.
Figure 6
The anterior apprehension test is performed with the patient lying supine and the lower extremities hanging over the edge of the exam table. The contralateral hip is flexed, and the affected hip is passively extended and brought into external rotation. This produces stress on the anterior capsule and labrum, and a positive test is represented by anterior groin pain or apprehension with this maneuver (Fig. 6). The sensitivity and specificity of this test for detecting instability are 71% and 89%, respectively

Prone apprehension relocation test
Prone apprehension relocation test (PART). The affected hip is extended to 10-15° and abducted 10° from midline as the knee is supported in flexion. An anteriorly applied force on the femur reproduces the pain (left). Release of pressure on the femur relieves the pain (right).
Figure 7
The prone apprehension relocation test (PART) is performed with the patient lying prone. The knee on the affected limb is lifted and supported in a flexed position as the hip is extended to 10-15° and abducted 10° from midline. The examiner then applies a downward (anterior) force on the femur distal to the inferior gluteal fold. A positive test is indicated by anterior hip pain that occurs with the downward (anterior) pressure on the femur and that is relieved when the pressure is released (Fig. 7) . A positive test is thought to be associated with anterior undercoverage of the acetabulum and has been found to be correlated with radiographic markers of instability including the lateral center-edge angle (LCEA), femoro-epiphyseal acetabular roof index (FEAR index), anterior wall index (AWI), and an upsloping lateral sourcil (ULS) . The sensitivity and specificity of this test merit further evaluation, but studies have reported excellent intra-rater and inter-rater reliability

Abduction extension external rotation test
Abduction extension external rotation test. The affected hip is abducted to 30°, extended, and externally rotated. Anterior groin pain or apprehension suggests anterior instability.
Figure 8
The abduction extension external rotation test is performed with the patient in the lateral decubitus position. The affected hip is abducted to 30°, extended, and then externally rotated Anterior groin pain or apprehension suggests anterior capsular instability (Fig. 8). This test has been reported to have a sensitivity of 81% and specificity of 89%.

Prone external rotation test
While the patient lies prone, the knee of the affected leg is flexed to 90° and the hip is externally rotated by bringing the leg across the midline. An anteriorly directed (downward) force is applied posterior to the greater trochanter. Anterior groin pain or apprehension with this maneuver indicates anterior capsular instability . This test has a sensitivity of only 33% but a specificity of 98%

Dial test
The patient should be instructed to lay supine with the hip and knee in full extension. The examiner should passively rotate the patient’s foot to maximal internal rotation and then let go, allowing for the foot to spontaneously return to an externally rotated position. If the foot returns to a resting position that is in greater external rotation than the contralateral side, or if the foot forms an angle of <20° with the exam table, this is considered a positive test and indicative of anterior capsular instability

Posterior apprehension test
In a supine position, the hip is flexed to 90°, adducted, and internally rotated. Then, a posterior (downward) force is applied to the knee. Reproduction of posterior hip pain or apprehension suggests posterior capsular instability

Coxa saltans

Coxa saltans interna
Assessment for coxa saltans interna. The affected hip is brought from a flexed, abducted, and externally rotated (FABER) position (left) to an extended, adducted, and internally rotated (EADIR) position (right). Reproduction of a snapping sensation indicates coxa saltans.
Figure 9
To assess for coxa saltans interna, the patient’s hip should be moved from a FABER position to an extended, adducted, and internally rotated (EADIR) position (Fig. 9). Reproduction of a snapping sensation, often audible, with this maneuver indicates coxa salta interna as the iliopsoas tendon snaps over the iliopectineal eminence

Coxa saltans externa
Ober test with the hip brought into external rotation and abduction. The hip is then allowed to fall into adduction slowly. No restriction to adduction indicates a normal iliotibial (IT) band (left). Restriction to adduction represents a positive Ober test and indicates a tight IT band (right).
Figure 10
With the patient lying in a lateral decubitus position, the patient should be asked to actively flex their hip. Then, passive extension and abduction of the hip should be performed by the examiner. A snapping sensation, often visible, indicates snapping of the IT band over the greater trochanter and is diagnostic for coxa saltans externa. In this position, the Ober test can be performed to assess for IT band syndrome, which is often associated with coxa saltans externa . To perform the Ober test, the patient should be in the lateral decubitus position. The hip is passively extended and abducted while supporting the knee, and then the leg is slowly allowed to adduct with gravity. A positive test is indicated by restriction of adduction due to tightness of the IT band (Fig. 10).
Alternatively, the “hula hoop” test may be performed to assess for coxa saltans externa. In a standing position with the hip adducted, circumduction may reproduce snapping of the IT band over the greater trochanter.

Summary
Exam maneuvers for femoroacetabular impingement (FAI).
Table 1
Patient positioning	Maneuver	Description of maneuver	Location of impingement	 	Supine or Lateral Decubitus	Flexion Adduction Internal Rotation (FADIR)	Affected hip is flexed, internally rotated, and adducted	Anterior/anterolateral acetabular rim and femoral head-neck junction	 	Supine	Internal Rotation over Pressure (IROP)	FADIR with axial compression	Anterior acetabular rim and femoral head-neck junction	 	Supine	Scour Test	Application of axial compression as hip is brought from flexed and internally rotated position into abduction and extension	Between 10 o’clock to 3 o’clock position along acetabular rim and femoral head-neck junction	 	Supine	Flexion Abduction External Rotation (FABER)	Flexion, abduction, and external rotation of hip with downward pressure applied to knee	Posterolateral impingement between greater trochanter and IT band Deep posterolateral impingement between greater trochanter and ischium	 	Supine	Posterior Impingement Test	Laying at end of table with legs hanging freely, affected hip is placed into extension, abduction, and external rotation	Posterior acetabular rim and femoral head-neck junction
Exam maneuvers for instability.
Table 2
Patient positioning	Maneuver	Description of maneuver	Positive findings	Diagnosis	 	Supine	Anterior Apprehension Test	With lower extremity hanging off exam table, hip is extended and brought into external rotation	Anterior groin pain or apprehension	Anterior instability	 	Prone	Prone Apprehension Relocation Test (PART)	Hip extended to 10-15° and abducted 10° from midline, with anterior force applied to femur	Anterior hip pain that occurs with anterior pressure on femur and that is relieved when pressure is released	Anterior instability	 	Lateral Decubitus	Abduction Extension External Rotation	Affected hip abducted to 30°, extended and then externally rotated	Anterior groin pain or apprehension	Anterior instability	 	Prone	Prone External Rotation Test	Hip is externally rotated by bringing leg across midline, with anteriorly directed force applied posterior to greater trochanter	Anterior groin pain or apprehension	Anterior instability	 	Supine	Dial Test	Foot is rotated into maximal internal rotation and then released, allowing for spontaneous return to externally rotated position	Foot reaches resting position in greater external rotation than the contralateral side, or foot forms angle of <20° with exam table	Anterior instability	 	Supine	Axial Distraction Test	Hip and knee flexed to 30° and axial distracting force is applied	Pain or apprehension	Instability	 	Supine	Posterior Apprehension Test	Hip flexed to 90°, adducted, and internally rotated, with a posteriorly directed force applied to knee	Posterior hip pain or apprehension	Posterior instability
The comprehensive approach outlined above for clinical evaluation of hip pain in adolescents and young adults utilizes key components of the history, physical exam, and condition-specific maneuvers to help to identify the underlying etiology and appropriately guide management. A concise summary of condition-sepcific exam maneuvers for femoroacetabular impingement and hip instability has been provided in Table 1 and 2, respectively. This approach should be supplemented by radiographic evaluation as described in our accompanying article. Nevertheless, a reliable history and physical exam remains the gold standard in the initial patient evaluation to accurately identify the cause of the pain, thereby expediting clinical decision-making and leading to appropriate treatment strategies (Table 1, Table 2).

Additional links
POSNAcademy: Pediatric and Adolescent Hip Exam. University of Maryland Resident Webinar Series 2020.
POSNA Study Guide: Femoroacetabular Impingement.

Funding
There was no funding received for this study.

Author contributions
Rishi Sinha: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Henry B. Ellis: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. David A. Podeszwa: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Daniel J. Sucato: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. William Z. Morris: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Declarations of competing interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
The evolution and concepts of joint-preserving surgery of the hip
Radiographic structural abnormalities associated with premature, natural hip-joint failure
Trends in utilization and outcomes of hip arthroscopy in the United States between 2005 and 2013
Acute pelvic and hip apophyseal avulsion fractures in adolescents: a summary of 719 cases
Pelvic avulsion injuries in the adolescent athlete
Clinical presentation of patients with symptomatic anterior hip impingement
Clinical presentation of symptomatic acetabular dysplasia in skeletally mature patients
Developmental dysplasia of the hip in adolescents and young adults
Apophysitis and osteochondrosis: common causes of pain in growing bones
Hip pathology in the adolescent athlete
The biomechanical disadvantage of dysplastic hips
Clinical and radiographic assessment of the young adult with symptomatic hip dysplasia
Understanding and treating the snapping hip
Evaluation of the hip: history and physical examination
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis: diagnosis and management
Transient synovitis of the hip: a comprehensive review
Intracapsular pressure in transient synovitis of the hip
Physical examination of the hip
Physical examination of the hip: assessment of femoroacetabular impingement, labral pathology, and microinstability
Hip range of motion in children: what is the norm?
Cam deformities and limited hip range of motion are associated with early osteoarthritic changes in adolescent athletes: a prospective matched cohort study
Diagnostics of femoroacetabular impingement and labral pathology of the hip: a systematic review of the accuracy and validity of physical tests
The Warwick Agreement on femoroacetabular impingement syndrome (FAI syndrome): an international consensus statement
Clinical diagnosis of hip pain
Management of femoroacetabular impingement syndrome: current insights
Anterior impingement test for labral lesions has high positive predictive value
The acetabular rim syndrome. A clinical presentation of dysplasia of the hip
Reliability and agreement of hip range of motion and provocative physical examination tests in asymptomatic volunteers
The diagnostic validity of hip provocation maneuvers to detect intra-articular hip pathology
A preliminary report on prevalence of acetabular labrum tears in sports patients with groin pain
Magnetic resonance imaging predictors of failure in the nonoperative management of ulnar collateral ligament injuries in professional baseball pitchers
Diagnostic accuracy of 3 physical examination tests in the assessment of hip microinstability
Microinstability of the hip-gaining acceptance
Radiographic and clinical characteristics associated with a positive PART (Prone Apprehension Relocation Test): a new provocative exam to elicit hip instability
Prone Apprehension Relocation Test significantly correlates with radiological instability scores of the hip
Interrater reliability of the prone apprehension relocation test
Arthroscopic capsular plication and labral preservation in borderline hip dysplasia: 2-year clinical outcomes of a surgical approach to a challenging problem
Comprehensive clinical evaluation of femoroacetabular impingement: part 1, physical examination
Hip instability: anatomic and clinical considerations of traumatic and atraumatic instability
Microinstability of the hip-it does exist: etiology, diagnosis and treatment
Permission to reproduce copyrighted materials: No copyrighted materials are included in this manuscript.