A Personalised Caring Approach at Home—Patients, Relatives and Nurses' Experiences of Specialised Palliative Care: An Integrative Literature Review
ABSTRACT
Aim
This study aimed to describe patients, relatives and nurses' experiences of specialised palliative home care.
Design
Integrated literature review.
Methods
The review was performed using the PRISMA 2020 Statement. The searches were conducted in Cinahl, PubMed and Scopus.
Results
Eighteen articles were selected. An overall theme ‘co‐creation for personalised home care’ emerged, based on three categories: ‘Safe and secure care’, ‘Care based on wishes and needs’ and ‘Relatives' caring role’. Patients, relatives and nurses' experiences showed that co‐creation was an important strategy for achieving goals and enabling patients to remain at home despite illness and limited life expectancy.
Conclusion
Co‐creation becomes a prerequisite for personalised home care and enabled through collaboration and learning between patients, relatives and nurses.
Patient or Public Contribution
This article is an overview of how patients, relatives and nurses experience care at home, supported by a specialised palliative care unit, and the result showed that co‐creation enables personalised care.

Introduction
The goal of palliative care is to enhance quality of life for patients and relatives facing problems associated with life‐threatening illness by preventing and alleviating suffering, regardless of whether the symptoms are of a physical, psychosocial or spiritual nature. The national healthcare system is responsible for including palliative care in the care context and ensuring that patients with severe chronic, life‐threatening problems have access to appropriate care (WHO ). In the definition used by the International Association for Hospice and Palliative Care (IAHPC), palliative care shifts from disease‐oriented to person‐centred care with focus on the patient's needs and suffering instead of prognosis, making palliative care useful in all care settings, on different levels and in both general and specialised care (Radbruch et al. ). Europe has a high level of access to advanced palliative care compared with other parts of the world (Clark et al. ), and since the beginning of the 21st century, specialised palliative care in Europe has been developed within homecare teams, hospital support teams and inpatient palliative care services (Arias‐Casais et al. ). A prerequisite for good palliative care is access to support and symptom relief to enhance quality of life, thus the need for general or specialised palliative care in the patient's home (Payne et al. ; The National Board of Health and Welfare ). It is therefore important to gain an insight into patients, relatives and nurses' experience of specialised palliative care at home to enable further development, which is takes place in close collaboration with municipal healthcare (MHC).

Background
A palliative approach to care strives to maintain quality of life for patients and their relatives throughout the illness, not just at the end of life. Open, clear and sensitive communication around the disease and prognosis enables control, an opportunity to influence care and creates conditions for active participation to fulfil patient goals (Xiao et al. ).
Palliative care can be performed in various ways and on different levels. The palliative care approach is a strategy for integrating palliative care into other settings. It includes pharmacological and non‐pharmacological measures to gain control over symptoms as well as communication with patients, relatives and other healthcare professionals. Patients in general palliative care are assisted by professionals with some specialised knowledge of palliative care who also have other healthcare assignments and specialities. Patients with complex needs that have not been adequately met in other healthcare settings receive specialised palliative care, which is dependent on a team approach, where highly capable team members form multidisciplinary teams and combine interdisciplinary knowledge with a primary focus on alleviating patients' complex needs together with relatives (Payne et al. ).
Patients approaching the end of life described that they preferred to be cared for at home (Cai et al. ; Nysæter et al. ) as it increased their sense of control over their situation (Nysæter et al. ). The possibility of dying at home became greater when the patient was defined as a palliative patient and even more so if they were assisted by a specialised palliative care team (Engeser et al. ). Staying at home for as long as possible may also have a positive impact on the patient's quality of life (McCaffrey et al. ). Hilli and Eriksson  claimed that ontologically, the house symbolises the human being's own inner world, the protective covering of the innermost core. Patients' strong sense of belonging to the home in which they lived could be interpreted as the home being considered a sheltered place, where fellowship is a prerequisite for the creation of the home but not always in a positive way. However, in cases of poor treatment and lack of respect the home could be experienced as a prison with feelings of homelessness, as well as being associated with suffering, making patients feel not at home despite receiving home care (Hilli and Eriksson ).
Caring for others was already described by Florence Nightingale, including instructions about how to promote health by focusing on the environment around the patient in their own home (Bates and Godshaw Memel ; Pfettscher ). In Ericsson's caritative theory (Lindholm Nyström et al. ), caring for others is a central and natural part where the ethical perspective of caring ethics is described as the basic relationship between nurses and patients. The caring communion forms the context for caring, where meetings between those involved play an important part in giving and receiving love, hence cannot be taken for granted. Caring strives to mediate faith, hope and love to the person in need. It is carried out through tending, playing and learning (Lindholm Nyström et al. ), which describes the way caring is performed in different actions and reflection. Tending, which implies being close, is seen as concrete actions to take care of the human being and connected to interactive playing and learning to develop and grow, in a constant becoming (Bergbom, Nåden, and Nyström ). Caritative caring aims to alleviate suffering, where endurable sufferings are seen as comparable to health. The suffering human being needs to be confirmed, as well as given time and space to reconcile, as suffering itself has no meaning. When entering the care context, the human being becomes a patient who patiently endures and in the case of unbearable suffering, the human being becomes unable to continue growing (Lindholm Nyström et al. ).
Specialised palliative care is organised and structured differently (The National Board of Health and Welfare ) and access to it varies (Payne et al. ). To enable patient and relatives to have access to good, specialised palliative care at home, regardless of geographical location, specialised palliative care is dependent on MHC and parts of specialised palliative care in Sweden are conducted in close collaboration with MHC nurses. Therefore, gaining an overview of how patients, relatives and nurses experience palliative home care when patients are enrolled in a specialised palliative care unit (SPCU) is of great importance. Such an overview can enable further development of specialised palliative care, which takes place in close collaboration with MHC nurses.

Aims
The purpose of the integrated literature review was to describe patients, relatives and nurses' experiences of specialised palliative home care.

Methods/Methodology

Design
An integrative literature review was carried out based on Whittemore and Knafl's  methodology. The integrative literature review is a broad research review that summarises empirical and theoretical studies from different perspectives, which makes it suitable for describing complex concepts or health problems within nursing, such as specialised palliative home care. This review can provide an overview of how specialised palliative care is conducted in the patients' own homes from three different perspectives, namely those of the patients, the relatives and the specialised palliative care and community healthcare nurses. The integrative review could be used in clinical practice as a knowledge base and for the development of specialised palliative care home care in close collaboration with MHC.

Search Methods
A systematic review of the Cinahl, PubMed and Scopus databases was conducted with the support of a university librarian, based on three search blocks: palliative care, experiences and home care (Table 1). The search words were truncated, combined with OR and the various search blocks were then combined with AND, according to Boolean systematics (Polit and Beck ).
Search block.
Search block	Palliative care	Experience	Home care	 	Keywords	palliative care OR terminal care OR hospice and palliative nursing OR specialised palliative care OR palliative care unit OR palliative care team OR end of life care	life experience OR experience OR perception OR feelings OR attitude OR view	home healthcare OR palliative home care OR advanced home care OR home care nursing

Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Inclusion criteria for the integrated literature review were primary research on patients, relatives and nurses' experiences of specialised palliative home care, including adult patients enrolled in an SPCU irrespective of type of illness. Exclusion criteria were not primary research, literature reviews, children in specialised palliative care, patients not cared for at home and contact with relatives more than 1 year after the patient's death.

Search Outcome
The updated Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses (PRISMA 2021) flow diagram was used to enable readers to follow the search strategies and results in the integrative process (Page et al. ). The search was limited to peer reviewed articles published between 2010 and 2021 in the English language including adult patients. In Scopus the search was also limited to the subject area of nursing. After delimitations, titles and abstracts were read and articles excluded in accordance with the inclusion and exclusion criteria. After duplicates were excluded, the 40 remaining articles were read in their entirety to determine whether they corresponded with the aim, that is, patients cared for at home and if contact with relatives had been < 1 year after the patient's death. Two articles were included where data collection consisted of participants from both SPCUs and primary palliative care teams as during the daytime they had access to a palliative care consultant and a specialist nurse. This resulted in 18 articles (Figure 1) from five different countries: Sweden (n = 14), Germany (n = 1), Finland (n = 1), Belgium (n = 1) and the United Kingdom (n = 1) (Table 2).
Article selection based on PRISMA (Page et al. ).
Overview of included studies.
Author, publication year, country	Objective	Methods, participants and measurements	Key findings	Theoretical perspective	Working model	Qualitative assessment	 	1. Alvariza, Mjörnberg, and Goliath , Sweden	To explore palliative care nurses' experiences of caring for patients at the end of life in private homes.	Qualitative study. Participant‐generated photographs of the home care environment followed by Individual interviews with 10 nurses. Interpretative descriptive analysis.	Specialised palliative care nurses deliberately use different strategies when working in private homes. They adjusted interactions and actions, supported and guided patients and relatives to balance self‐care, interdependence and safe care based on the private home environment. They used the journey between home visits for reflection, recuperation and preparation.	No clear theoretical perspective	Palliative homecare units	High (9/9)	 	2. Carlander et al. , Sweden	To explore situations in daily life that challenge the caregiver's self‐image when caring for a dying family member at home.	Qualitative study. Individual interviews with 10 family caregivers 6–12 months after the death of their family member. Interpretive descriptive analysis.	When relatives cared for a dying family member where they faced with challenging situations in daily life. It affected them and created a modified self‐image by challenging ideals, stretching limits and interdependency but also allowed them to be close to each other.	No clear theoretical perspective	Advanced palliative homecare	Medium (7/9)	 	3. Glasdam et al. , Sweden	To explore nursing practice in specialised palliative homecare and how it influences organisational and cultural structures.	Qualitative study. Semi‐structured interviews with 9 nurses in specialised palliative homecare. Latent content analysis.	Nurses in specialised palliative care are influenced by the doxa of medicine and guided by a medical way of working. They act as medical assistants but wish to work closer to the patients, make their own assessments and live up to their own humanistic ideals in order to deliver good palliative care.	Bourdieu's theoretical framework	Specialised palliative home care teams	Medium (7/9)	 	4. Groh et al. , Germany	To evaluate the effectiveness of specialised outpatient palliative care teams.	Quantitative study. Prospective non‐randomised study. 60 patients and 53 relatives. Descriptive statistics. SPSS 20.0 for analysis.	Patients and caregivers' quality of life improved after contact with specialised palliative outpatient care, which could reduce the burden for caregivers.	No clear theoretical perspective	Specialised outpatient palliative care	High (45/51)	 	5. Hemberg and Bergdahl , Finland	To explore how nurses experience cocreation as a phenomenon while working in palliative home care.	Qualitative study. In‐depth interviews with 12 nurses. Thematic analysis.	Co‐creation is seen as an important part of palliative care in the home. A holistic approach enables caring with a genuine interest in and commitment to patients and their families through security, teaching and encouraging relationships, preserving hope and being realistic together with fulfilling needs and wishes.	Eriksson's caritative theory	Palliative home care	High (9/9)	 	6. Holm et al. , Sweden	To explore family caregivers' experience of preparing for caregiving in specialised palliative home care.	Qualitative study. Individual interviews with 12 caregivers. Constant comparative analysis.	Family caregivers described their preparations for caregiving as an ongoing process during the period of illness, consisting of an awareness of the seriousness of the situation, adjusting to what was happening and anticipating the future loss.	No clear theoretical perspective	Urban specialised homecare units	High (8/9)	 	7. Janze and Henriksson , Sweden	To explore family caregivers' experiences by examining partners' stories about preparing for caregiving.	Qualitative study. 9 Individual interviews with 6 relatives, of whom 3 were interviewed twice. Qualitative content analysis.	For the caregivers, preparing for caregiving was an experience of the awareness of death. They lived in uncertainty, trying to keep hope alive, fearing the unknown and focusing on the present while preparing for the inevitable loss. It was a preparation for caregiving and transitions into new roles in life.	No clear theoretical perspective	Urban specialised homecare unit	Medium (7/9)	 	8. Kaup, Höög, and Carlsson , Sweden	Nurses' experiences of caring for midlife patients in specialised palliative care and investigating their coping strategies.	Qualitative study. 3 focus group interviews with 14 nurses in specialised palliative care. Inductive and abductive Systematic Text Condensation (STC) analysis.	Nurses experienced invigoration, admiration and confirmation when caring for patients in midlife. They were affected by external influences such as atmospheres in families, psychological stress, identifying with the family's situation, difficulties reaching out to the family and stress‐related symptoms. To manage the distress, they used coping strategies on individual, group and organisational level.	Tentative coping model	Rural and urban specialised palliative home care teams	Medium (7/9)	 	9. Klarare et al. , Sweden	To investigate how teamwork is manifested in care episodes narrated by patients and families in specialised palliative home care.	Qualitative study. 13 narrative interviews with 6 patients and 7 family members. Thematic analysis.	Patients and family members experienced security and continuity of care after contact with the specialised palliative home care teams. Security consisted of availability, sensitivity to change, practical solutions and feeling cared for. Continuity of care included collaboration, information and an inclusive caring relationship with patient and family members.	No clear theoretical perspective	Specialised palliative home care	High (9/9)	 	10. Klarare et al. , Sweden	To describe patients and family caregivers' experiences of specialist palliative home care team actions, identified as helping or hindering interventions.	Qualitative study. 13 interviews, 6 patients and 7 family members. Enhanced critical incident technique (ECIT) analysis.	Formal interprofessional team meetings were not common. Approachability, knowing each other, open communication and absence of hierarchy positively influenced collaboration. On the other hand, time constraints, lack of expertise, no open communication and hierarchy negatively influenced the collaboration within the team around the palliative patient.	No clear theoretical perspective	Urban and rural specialised palliative home care team	High (9/9)	 	11. Mertens et al. , Belgium	To explore community nurses' experience of collaboration with general practitioners and specialist palliative home care team nurses together with factors influencing collaboration.	Qualitative study. 20 semi‐structured individual interviews with community nurses. Constant comparative analysis.	Formal interprofessional meetings rarely occurred when working with palliative care patients at home but accessibility, knowing each other, open communication and absence of hierarchy had a positive impact on collaboration. Time constraints, lack of expertise, absence of open communication and hierarchy had a negative impact.	No clear theoretical perspective	Palliative home care teams, community nurses and general practitioners	high (9/9)	 	12. Milberg et al. , Sweden	To explore patients and family members' experiences of palliative home care as a secure base, through attachment theory and the underlying meaning of the experiences.	Qualitative study. Semi‐structured interviews with 12 patients and 14 family members. Deductive content analysis.	Palliative home care was experienced as a secure base by patients and family members. This was made possible through trust in staff, comfort, being seen as individuals and feeling welcomed in terms of both participating in the care and contacting staff, which relieved family members' burden, kept them informed and enabled them to continue everyday life at home. This enabled patients and family members to feel a sense of control, inner peace, be themselves and maintain hope.	Attachment theory	Palliative homecare team + primary care team with a palliative consultant	Medium (7/9)	 	13. Milberg and Friedrichsen , Sweden	To use experiences of patients and family members to explore attachment figures during palliative home care.	Qualitative study. Interviews with 12 patients and 14 relatives. Deductive content analysis.	Family and friends, healthcare practitioners, pets and God were seen as attachment figures. Through physical and non‐physical contact, they facilitated security and could be part of a “we” relationship. They encouraged security, someone to lean on during the progression of the illness and made it possible to focus on everyday life. Loss of attachment figures during the course of the illness created a feeling of uncertainty.	Attachment theory	Palliative homecare team + primary care team with a palliative consultant	High (8/9)	 	14. Noble et al. , UK	To determine if the Midhurst Macmillan Specialist Palliative Care Service was meeting original aims, gather financial evidence for commissioning and whether the service could serve as a model for palliative care.	Mixed method. Economic and clinical activity, 971 patients, descriptive analysis. Postal survey, 232 General Practices, PAS software. Qualitative Interview, 11 patients, 10 informal caregivers, 30 health and social care staff, service staff and volunteers. Postal survey, 102 bereaved caregivers, descriptive statistics and thematic analysis.	The service was useful in meeting the needs of patients and relatives in palliative care at home at the end of life. The service was complementary to other service and filled gaps in existing community services. It appears likely that the flexibility of the team members was crucial and necessary for the model to work.	No clear theoretical perspective	Medical consultant‐led multidisciplinary team	Quantitative high (35/51), Qualitative medium (7/9)	 	15. Nordström and Strang , Sweden	To evaluate the satisfaction of home care users and their family member with a focus on availability, continuity, medication, symptom control and information given by the team and their overall impressions.	Quantitative study. Non‐randomised. 1424 patients and 329 relatives. Descriptive statistics.	Both patients and relatives appreciated care from the multiprofessional teams they encountered in the home. The care enabled a high level of symptom management, good information, communication, availability and overall satisfaction with the care.	No clear theoretical perspective	Urban palliative home care teams	High (37/51)	 	16. Norinder, Goliath, and Alvariza , Sweden	To explore patients' experiences of care and support at home after family members' participation in a psycho‐educational intervention during palliative care.	Qualitative study. 11 interviews with patients. Interpretative description. The article states descriptive analysis.	The patients felt safer at home after the psycho‐educational intervention. It made them feel like a care unit that could manage things together and opened up more honest communication within the family. By increasing the family members' sense of belonging and appreciation, the patients' feeling of being a burden was reduced.	No clear theoretical perspective	Urban specialised palliative home care units	High (8/9)	 	17. Svensson and Wåhlin , Sweden	To describe patients' perception of what it is like to be cared for by a specialised palliative care team within hospital‐based palliative home care.	Qualitative study. 14 semi‐structured interviews with patients. Phenomenographical analysis.	Palliative care at home with help from a specialised multiprofessional team was perceived as safe and secure. The professionals were engaged, gave time, were available 24/7 and experienced as knowledgeable and supportive.	No clear theoretical perspective	Hospital‐based palliative home care	Medium (7/9)	 	18. Talabani et al. , Sweden	To describe patients' experiences of a new model of person‐centred integrated heart failure and palliative care at home.	Qualitative study. 12 Semi‐structured interviews with patients. Qualitative Content analysis.	Patients felt secure by having access to readily available care, had trust in the team's ability and being followed up based on a holistic perspective. They appreciated being acknowledged, seen as a person and not just a patient and receiving help for all symptoms, not only those related to heart failure.	No clear theoretical perspective	Advanced palliative home care and heart failure clinical care	High (9/9)
In 13 of the 18 studies, specialised palliative care was performed by teams that manage healthcare both in the home and within inpatient palliative units and not in close collaboration with MHC nurses.

Quality Appraisal
For quality assessment of included articles, two different guidelines were used. Three ranking levels were applied: high, medium and low. One for quantitative research (Long et al. ), where high levels were estimated to be between 31 and 51, medium levels 10 and 30 and low levels < 9. For qualitative research the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (Long, French, and Brooks ) was used with high 8–9, medium 6–7 and low < 5 levels. In research with a mixed method, both checklists were used. The articles were of high (n = 11) and medium quality (n = 6). In the mixed method articles the quantitative part was of high quality, whereas the qualitative part was of medium quality.

Data Abstraction
The data analysis was conducted in accordance with Whittemore and Knafl  and consisted of reduction, display, comparison and conclusion together with verification. In the first step of the analysis, the articles were sorted based on three different perspectives: patient, relatives and nurses and their experiences of specialised palliative home care. Some studies comprised the perspective of both patients and relatives as well as qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods but only those results that corresponded with the aim of the review were included. All selected articles were read several times to gain an idea of the content and identify experiences of specialised palliative home care. The next step in the data reduction was the extraction of meaning units based on the aim, which were collected in a Word document and coded according to content to enable systematic comparison of the data material. The codes were grouped and displayed as tables to enhance the data interpretation. In the next step, data comparison began. Differences and similarities were identified based on the patients, relatives and nurses' perspectives, where common and unusual patterns of experiences were grouped into subcategories, categories and an overall theme. The entire analysis process was characterised by a constant movement between the parts of the coded units and the whole of the primary sources.

Synthesis
The final step of the analysis was a synthesis of all the articles. Through all the steps of the analysis there was a discussion between the authors to reach consensus about the categories and subcategories, which then formed the overall theme, serving as a conclusion and verification of the analysis. The overall theme summarises what emerged during the analysis, namely co‐creation for a personalised caring approach of personal home care.

Results
In the integrated review it appeared that specialised palliative home care was based on the individual needs of patients and their relatives with the support of nurses. It was co‐created in collaboration between the patient, relatives and nurses to enable safe and secure care based on the patient's needs and wishes. The co‐creation was essential for performing and receiving care together with relatives, who played an important caring role. This led to the overall theme co‐creation for a personalised caring approach (Table 3).
Overall theme, categories and subcategories.
Overall theme	Co‐creation for a personalised caring approach	 	Category	Safe and secure care	Care based on wishes and needs	Relatives' caring role	 	Subcategories	Security through continuity and availability	Facilitating everyday life	Preparing for the loss	 	Modified information and education	Maintaining faith and hope	Balancing responsibilities	 	Relief of symptoms	Collaboration in a caring environment

Safe and Secure Care
Patients, relatives and nurses felt that specialised palliative home care provided safe and secure care at home, which formed the category, safe and secure care based on the following subcategories: security through continuity and availability, modified information and education together with symptom relief.

Security Through Continuity and Availability
Patients experienced specialised palliative home care as safe, secure and the best alternative (Svensson and Wåhlin ; Talabani et al. ). Both patients and relatives experienced a sense of security related to the SPCU and the medical expertise available around the clock (Groh et al. ; Klarare et al. ; Milberg et al. ; Svensson and Wåhlin ; Talabani et al. ). Through the security mediated by the SPCU patients' possibility of being cared for and ultimately dying at home increased (Svensson and Wåhlin ) and they gained a feeling of not being abandoned (Talabani et al. ). When the patients received help with care, assessments and trusted the SPCU nurses to come and act in accordance with their agreement, they experienced that security was not only facilitated (Milberg et al. ), but increased due to the holistic approach (Klarare et al. ). The experience of continuity of care improved with the SPCU's ways of working, such as immediate help in the event of changes or deterioration, their cooperation and interest in the patient and her/his relatives (Klarare et al. ). They appreciated the fact that the SPCU encouraged them to phone if they had any questions or concerns and wanted to help them (Milberg et al. ; Milberg and Friedrichsen ). The availability of the SPCU increased security, whereas trust alleviated the feeling of insecurity and provided patients and relatives with space for everyday activities. They experienced both physical and non‐physical contact as comforting and trusting relationships with the SPCU could develop on an individual level but also with the entire service (Milberg and Friedrichsen ).
In the case of deterioration, the patients' need for continuity increased. They noticed that there was a large number of staff members and not knowing who they were talking to created insecurity. It appeared that contact nurses within the SPCU facilitated coordination and enabled patients to have someone to confide in (Svensson and Wåhlin ). Most patients and relatives preferred to have the same person responsible for them (Nordström and Strang ) and some wanted to have contact with a smaller number of nurses. It also appeared that signs of insecurity on the part of pets when confronted with unfamiliar nurses could be experienced as unsafe (Milberg and Friedrichsen ). SPCU unavailability, lack of competence or interest, having to argue in order to receive help and unsatisfied needs created feelings of insecurity in patients and relatives due to burdensome responsibility, fear and anxiety, abandonment, hopelessness and a feeling of being unable to take it anymore (Milberg et al. ).
Nurses within the SPCU experienced that they worked to provide safe and secure care by means of support, enabling self‐care and while not taking over, at the same time being aware of when self‐care was not feasible (Alvariza, Mjörnberg, and Goliath ). In addition, security was dependent on continuous and well‐planned home visits. SPCU nurses experienced that trust was created through openness, honesty and closeness (Hemberg and Bergdahl ). Nurses from the SPCU were encouraged to make regular home visits for supervision, symptom assessment and to create good relationships with patients and relatives. They reported that they had time for conversations, but also had a desire to work more closely to enable their own assessments (Glasdam et al. ). Nurses in municipal care experienced that SPCU nurses were highly accessible. They relied on the SPCU nurses' palliative knowledge, willingness to help and technical knowledge, which in turn increased municipal nurses' knowledge and independence (Mertens et al. ).

Modified Information and Education
After contact with the SPCU, 67% of the 922 patients and 66% of the 248 relatives felt fully informed about the medical situation. Those in the small younger age groups (n = 37, < 45 years) felt informed to a greater degree (90%). Positive experiences regarding information, communication and accessibility varied between 87% and 100% among relatives and between 96% and 100% among patients (Nordström and Strang ). Patients and relatives felt that the SPCU nurses took time for conversations, listened and involved relatives in the care (Klarare et al. ). Patients received education and advice from competent palliative care specialists (Groh et al. ) and the experience of being involved in their own care increased when the SPCU nurses informed and explained (Talabani et al. ). They also felt that education for relatives helped them manage illness, increased security and enhanced the possibilities of managing life together at home (Norinder, Goliath, and Alvariza ). Some patients experienced that older nurses had more knowledge and were easier to talk to (Svensson and Wåhlin ). Patients and relatives needed information adapted to living with a progressive disease in order for practical and mental preparation and to reduce anxiety, but also to be aware of what support the SPCU offered (Milberg et al. ). Insufficient information, feedback or non‐response on the part of the SPCU made the patient and relatives feel frustrated (Klarare et al. ). Relatives had a need for knowledge and information about the patient's illness. It appeared that information was experienced as meaningful for caregiving and initiated their preparation for the upcoming loss, but information from the SPCU nurses on the patient's condition was not always something they appreciated (Holm et al. ). Vague and unclear information made it difficult for relatives to plan, prepare, make decisions, as well as influencing their personal decisions. It also emerged that meetings with the SPCU could create anxiety and relatives avoided questions due to fear of the answers (Janze and Henriksson ).
The SPCU nurses used a holistic perspective when informing and educating families. They gave a realistic picture of the situation by informing about risks, encouraged active participation and the education was experienced as giving the courage to engage in self‐care. The information given to patients could differ from that provided to their relatives and nurses experienced that when relatives were not satisfied with the care, it was often due to insufficient information and the fact that death was close (Hemberg and Bergdahl ). Municipal nurses experienced that they obtain support, information and advice from the SPCU nurses, who listened and answered questions quickly and were seen as experts in palliative care (Mertens et al. ).

Relief of Symptoms
Patients experienced improved symptom relief after contact with the SPCU (Svensson and Wåhlin ) as well as due to the holistic perspective (Talabani et al. ). The relief of pain and other symptoms helped the patient to experience a positive change in quality of life, but according to patients and relatives, the symptom control could be better. A few patients stated that the problems could not be adequately solved (Groh et al. ). On the other hand, Nordström and Strang  reported that 80% of 922 patients had a problem with pain, of whom 99% stated that after contact with the SPCU, they received sufficient medication, leading to total or partial pain relief. Anxiety occurred in 79% of the patients, of whom 77% experienced a complete relief of anxiety and 97% partial relief after contact with a team member from the SPCU or when using prescribed medications. It also appeared that there were differences regarding the experience of nausea and shortness of breath between patients and relatives. 30% of the patients stated that they had no symptoms, whereas 17% of relatives described an absence of symptoms in the patient. Other symptoms were greatly reduced, completely for 79% of the patients and partly for 98% (Nordström and Strang ). Patients and relatives experienced that they had access to competent and effective symptom relief around the clock (Milberg et al. ) but in cases of deterioration or increased symptoms, they both needed a nurse who was physically present (Milberg and Friedrichsen ). It was also found that relatives' mental health improved after contact with the SPCU, although they continued to experience a high psychological burden due to caring for seriously ill persons (Groh et al. ).

Care Based on Wishes and Needs
The SPCU promoted patients and relatives' opportunities for home care based on their own wishes and needs by putting the human being at the centre. This resulted in the category, care based on wishes and needs with the following subcategories: facilitating everyday life, maintaining faith and hope and collaboration in a caring environment.

Facilitating Everyday Life
The contact with the SPCU was experienced as facilitating by both patients and relatives (Milberg et al. ; Groh et al. ) who considered that the SPCU nurses saw the person behind the disease (Milberg and Friedrichsen ). SPCU nurses' personal knowledge and care of the patients gave them the feeling of being treated like a human being (Talabani et al. ). The relationship was strengthened by commitment, time and conversation about aspects other than the illness. SPCU nurses saw the human being, adapted the care based on needs, were in control and spoke on behalf of the patient. The possibility of being at home, surrounded by family and their own belongings, enabled the patients to experience increased dignity (Svensson and Wåhlin ). Everyday life represented health, reduced the experience of living with a progressive illness, dying and death, hence increasing the possibility of living despite the approach of death. SPCU nurses' knowledge of the patients and their family situation facilitated autonomy (Milberg et al. ), provided an opportunity to share everyday life with the family and enabled a care based on wishes (Milberg et al. ; Klarare et al. ). In a sample of 922 patients and 248 relatives, positive or very positive overall satisfaction with the SPCU was 99% on the part of patients and 98% on the part of relatives (Nordström and Strang ). The relatives' burden was reduced through help with daily activities and psychological support (Groh et al. ). Noble et al.  reported that of 102 bereaved relatives, 78% were satisfied and received the help they wanted. A small number (12%) stated that they received some support but not as much as they wished for and a few (2%) did not receive enough support despite requesting it (Noble et al. ). It emerged that relatives wanted to participate in the care, but it was difficult and unfamiliar for them. The experience was that the SPCU nurses guided them practically and emotionally, which made it possible to be themselves and feel better despite the progressive illness (Milberg et al. ). Having a good relationship with and feeling supported by the SPCU both facilitated everyday life and made them feel safe with the healthcare system (Holm et al. ). Patients and relatives experienced that when the SPCU nurses failed to fulfil an expressed need or meet their expectations, it hindered them. They could also perceive it as disrespectful to enter the house without permission during home visits (Klarare et al. ).
Nurses within the SPCU experienced that they facilitated life for patients and relatives by adapting the home environment, initiating facilities and anchoring the changes in the family (Alvariza, Mjörnberg, and Goliath ). They also experienced that a broad medical approach made it difficult for them to prioritise the psychosocial needs of patients and relatives and used unplanned time slots for home visits to maintain their own humanistic ideals within specialised palliative care (Glasdam et al. ).

Maintaining Faith and Hope
Patients and relatives experienced the SPCU as reliable, fulfilling promises, comforting and calming (Milberg and Friedrichsen ; Klarare et al. ). Confidence in the SPCU gave patients and relatives hope that their current and future needs could be met to make them feel comfortable at home (Milberg et al. ). After contact with the SPCU, it appeared that the patients' general condition improved together with an enhanced quality of care and reduced impact of illness. Quality of life was perceived to be positively influenced by trustworthiness, helpfulness and compassion, whereas concern for relatives, anxiety and dependence on others had a negative impact. It also appeared that relatives experienced the patient's quality of life as lower than the patient, whereas in turn patients experienced that their relatives' quality of life was higher (Groh et al. ).
Nurses from the SPCU experienced it as challenging to avoid taking hope away from patients, while at the same time being realistic. Together with relatives, they tried to maintain hope, fulfil wishes at the end of life and their involvement enabled wishes to be fulfilled, sometimes in their spare time (Hemberg and Bergdahl ). SPCU nurses experienced that it was easier to care when emotions were allowed and humour both influenced and facilitated encounters. They admired how patients handled the situation, involved and acknowledged them. Despite problems, the encounters were experienced as positive, strengthened the nurses' sense of making a difference and made them appreciate their own lives to a higher degree (Kaup, Höög, and Carlsson ).

Collaboration in a Caring Environment
Patients and relatives felt that the SPCU collaborated and organised care. The SPCU's approach created a partnership, where patients and relatives were included in assessment, planning, implementation, evaluation and involved in decision‐making (Klarare et al. ). They experienced that the SPCU cared for them, and it was a relief when the patient was known by the SPCU (Klarare et al. ).
When working in patients' home, SPCU nurses experienced an altered power relationship, which affected their role as nurses and how they meet the patient and relatives. The power was within the family, they treated patients and relatives with respect and adapted the care by using working methods based on their wishes and needs (Alvariza, Mjörnberg, and Goliath ). Co‐creation was positively affected by the care environment at home (Hemberg and Bergdahl ). SPCU nurses worked to adjust and anchor the physical care environment within the family and were aware of its impact on their own work environment. Some encounters were experienced as particularly appreciated, although encounters with patients and relatives who were not satisfied or questioned them were difficult, especially when working alone (Alvariza, Mjörnberg, and Goliath ). SPCU nurses worried about families with children and teenagers and if they failed to build a relationship with the family was it difficult to work based on palliative care philosophy. SPCU nurses found it challenging to be professional if they identified too closely with the family's situation and physical symptoms could occur in difficult work situations. Nurses also experienced being unable to process events that had occurred as risky (Kaup, Höög, and Carlsson ). SPCU nurses perceived that the journey between home visits was important. They used the time for reflection and recovery, but also to prepare for the next home visit. External conditions such as traffic, weather and delays could be experienced as stressful, although pets were seen as positive for the patient's well‐being but challenging for the nurse from a hygienic perspective (Alvariza, Mjörnberg, and Goliath ).
Collaboration between SPCU nurses and MHC nurses was experienced to positively influence accessibility, previous knowledge and joint work. Improved intraprofessional relationships were seen as necessary to increase the efficiency of care and MHC nurses felt that there were too few interprofessional encounters (Mertens et al. ). SPCU nurses saw collaboration with MHC nurses in end of life care as consultative, which was experienced as challenging (Glasdam et al. ). MHC nurses were comfortable in the relationship with SPCU nurses, saw themselves as equals and felt that when the SPCU was involved, palliative care received more attention. It emerged that nurses from the SPCU influenced the collaboration between different partners and could be experienced as mediators in the event of disagreements (Mertens et al. ).

Relatives' Caring Role
In specialised palliative home care, relatives had a caring role that included preparing for the loss of the patient but also a balancing of caregiving responsibilities. This resulted in the category relatives' caring role with the subcategories: preparing for the loss and balancing responsibilities.

Preparing for the Loss
Relatives experienced that the SPCU enabled them to be close to the dying patient, sharing thoughts and feelings (Carlander et al. ). Palliative care was associated with a mental and emotional preparation for facing death and was influenced by affection, obligations towards the patient and relatives' previous experiences of grief. It emerged that they withheld their own needs, wanted to be strong but were afraid of being unable to care for the patient until the end. Their awareness was affected by newly emerging symptoms together with signals from the SPCU nurses but stated that good relationships with and support from the SPCU was facilitating (Holm et al. ).
Relatives gradually adapted to a new life situation where death was less threatening, but also felt inadequately prepared for their caring role and what caring would be like. They experienced that their financial situation, the possibility of taking time off and self‐confidence were affected, but dialogue about the future with the patient and SPCU nurses made it easier. Sometimes planning was postponed, as it caused anxiety and sadness. They experienced that practical care reduced emotional and existential challenges and although they understood on a cognitive level that the patient was dying, it was still difficult to prepare emotionally (Janze and Henriksson ). Relatives needed to get away, find themselves, release emotions and reflect upon caring for a dying person. They also needed to prepare for the coming loss and a changed future. This adaptation took place when alone but also with friends and together with the SPCU (Holm et al. ).

Balancing Responsibilities
Relatives oscillated between different feelings around caring, meeting expectations from the patient, themselves, the SPCU and society at large. They saw themselves as mainly responsible for the caring and adapted to the patients' needs, while neglecting their own needs (Carlander et al. ). They balanced their own needs with those of the patient, with whom they experienced a changed relationship. They took responsibility when the patient wanted to be at home through taking care of practical and medical tasks, contact with the SPCU and provided emotional support (Holm et al. ). The responsibilities among relatives varied, from considering it natural to take full responsibility to allowing the SPCU to take overall responsibility (Holm et al. ; Janze and Henriksson ). In some family cultures, was it natural to care for and adapt to the patient. Some relatives developed strategies to adapt to caregiving (Holm et al. ), although others had difficulty leaving home (Carlander et al. ; Holm et al. ). They experienced that care at home was more burdensome than expected and in times of anxiety and stress the thoughts of death increased even though they tried to avoid it. The patient's mood affected their own mood and they were sensitive about how the SPCU nurses approached them (Janze and Henriksson ). Work outside the home gave some relatives the mental and physical strength to continuing caring, but they also felt tired, insufficient, bad carers, stretched and exceeded the limits of what they could handle. The negative experience increased if they were misunderstood by staff from the SPCU, who assumed them to have knowledge that they lacked, but within their social network they were seen as a person with knowledge, control and felt joy and gratitude for their own life (Carlander et al. ).

Discussion
The aim of the integrated review was to describe patients, relatives and nurses' experiences of specialised palliative home care. The results show that through co‐creation a personalised caring approach was experienced by patients, relatives and nurses based on security, safety, needs and wishes, together with relatives' caring role. This is in line with Eriksson's caritative theory (Lindholm Nyström et al. ), where love and care for the human being are at the centre and caring takes place within the caring communion.
Findings indicated that safe and secure care was an important part of sustainable home care and through continuity, availability, competent staff and symptom relief the SPCU made it possible for patients to remain at home until the end of life. Oosterveld‐Vlug et al.  found that medical knowledge, availability, being taken seriously and perceiving that professionals are interested in them were important factors for patients with advanced cancer and their relatives within palliative home care. Findings indicted that unavailability, unmet needs, disinterest in or unknown professionals from the SPCU created feelings of insecurity. When deterioration occurred, the need for security often increased in both patients and relatives. Nurses experienced that they identified needs and enabled safe and secure care at home by repeated home visits. Staats et al.  concluded that for older women with cancer, the quality of care was more important than the physical location, even though home was the place they wanted to be for as long as possible. Oosterveld‐Vlug et al.  noted that effective collaboration and information transfer between professionals together with clear and quick decisions were important aspects for enabling patients and relatives to receive good palliative care at home, thus improving their situation. This is line with Eriksson's theory, where caring ethics are described as the relationship that exists between patients and nurses. It includes how the nurse encounters the patient as a human being and the nurse's ethical approach, hence caring ethics are seen as the core of caritative caring (Lindholm Nyström et al. ).
It also occurred that nurses from the SPCU created conditions for safe and secure care, where information and education contributed to patients and relatives' experiences of safety. This was confirmed by Petursdottir and Kolbrun Svavarsdottir , who revealed that relatives who underwent a therapeutic conversation intervention reported a higher degree of emotional and cognitive support, less stress symptoms and reduced burden. In line with Erikson's theory (Lindholm Nyström et al. ), learning is seen as a part of caring, where learning implies sharing and being there to alleviate suffering. Learning can involve both patients and relatives within the caring communion, but can also take place between nurses in specialised palliative care and MHC to create conditions for an environment that contributes to learning. This form of learning can be seen as work‐integrated learning, which means that different healthcare professions share knowledge and work experience with each other and thus produce ‘advanced knowledge’ (Sunnemark et al. ). ‘Advanced knowledge’ is a knowledge that, by integrating both theory and practice, is applicable to a particular situation and context and aims to improve practice, which benefits patients and relatives' learning and co‐creation for a personalised caring approach.
Symptom relief emerged as another important aspect for safe and secure care, where findings indicated that patients and relatives experienced improved symptom relief after contact with the SPCU. Their quality of life improved, which is in line with the goals of palliative care outlined by the WHO  and IAHPC (Radbruch et al. ), in addition to alleviating suffering. Högberg, Alvariza, and Beck  revealed that use of an assessment scale in specialised palliative care could contribute to dependable and safe care for patients, as it facilitated discussion around needs and enabled reflections about well‐being from different perspectives. When looking at suffering based on Eriksson's caritative theory (Lindholm Nyström et al. ), suffering is seen as an inevitable part of being human and the aim of caring is to alleviate suffering due to illness. Caring is a part of a nurse's role and responsibility, including acknowledging the patient, giving time and opportunity to reconcile with suffering, both as a human being and as a patient.
It emerged in the result that patients, relatives and nurses received and gave care based on wishes and needs. Both patients and relatives described the importance of being seen as a human being and their experience was affected by how they were encountered. In Eriksson's theory (Lindholm Nyström et al. ), the human being is seen as a unit, consisting of body, soul and spirit. With this perspective in mind, nurses can use their knowledge to provide care and fulfil needs of a physical, psychosocial or existential nature, where co‐creation becomes a natural part of caring and directs the activities towards the goals of patients and relatives. Co‐creation also implies that SPCU nurses need to invite patients and relatives into a relationship and make room for a sustainable environment that allows learning to take place in the communion. When co‐creation arises in a community that is characterised by respect and trust in each other, work‐integrated learning can be developed when the environment invites interaction and exchange of knowledge and experiences between the participants involved (Sunnemark et al. ).
Hemberg and Bergdahl's  study showed that co‐creation with an ethical sensitivity and perceptiveness in encounters with patients in palliative homecare made nurses change and adapt their caring to patients' wishes. On the other hand, Andreassen Devik, Enmarker, and Hellzen  observed that community nurses caring for palliative patients at home experienced positive feelings of compassion in caring situations, while lack of compassion generated both negative and neutral feelings, which affected them in the meeting with the patient. This is in line with Eriksson (Lindholm Nyström et al. ), who emphasises the concept of dignity and being treated based on becoming in a constant development within a caring communion. If specialised palliative care takes place in the caring communion and meets the needs of patients and their families, it is possible that caring will become natural for all, including the nurse. In the study by Staats et al. , it was concluded that control and self‐determination were important aspects for experiencing dignity for older women with cancer receiving home care, in addition to hope and meaning despite illness and feeling valued as a human being in a caring environment.
The present findings indicated that relatives experienced palliative care as a preparation for death. It emerged that they felt insufficiently prepared and mainly responsible for the care at home, but contact with the SPCU made it easier for them. Petursdottir, Haraldsdottir, and Svavarsdottir  observed that nurses in specialised palliative care involved relatives to a greater degree after participating in an educational intervention within family nursing. They worked more effectively, had a family‐oriented approach to caring, changed their motivation and attitudes and improved their use of knowledge and ways of working in practice. Joren et al.  concluded that home care nurses supported relatives through discussions about capacity, burden, values, wishes and needs. In addition, they offered support to avoid overload to a greater extent than hospital nurses. Eriksson (Lindholm Nyström et al. ) argues that caring takes place in the caring communion, where nurses meet and acknowledge patients and relatives with dignity in accordance with their individual needs as human beings.

Limitations
The results are based on 18 articles from Europe, 14 of which are from Sweden. Although this can be considered a limitation, it also shows that specialised palliative care research is of interest in the Nordic countries. The meaning and description of specialised palliative care have similarities in all the countries included in the study, which can be seen as a strength. Additionally, the reviewed articles were of high informational value, representative of the field and relevant to the study aim. The decision to limit the search in Scopus to nursing can also be seen as a limitation. The databases differ in their search word options, that is, they may use different words for the same phenomenon. For this reason, a university librarian conducted the search and selected the search words. The design of this integrative literature review may have influenced the results, but in the aim of the study, the nurse's experiences were one of the inclusion criteria. Furthermore, credibility can be said to increase when there is a clear description of how the search for articles was conducted.

Conclusion
The result of this integrated review showed that patients, relatives and nurses experienced safe and secure care based on their individual needs and wishes. These categories are dependent on and connected to each other, where co‐creation becomes a prerequisite for achieving personalised home care. Co‐creation makes it possible to fulfil the wishes of the patient and her/his relatives at home within the caring communion where all caring takes place (see Figure 2). Co‐creation provides space for patient and relative learning in collaboration with nurses, both in the SPCU and in community healthcare.
Co‐creation within palliative care.
Caring based on Eriksson's theory (Lindholm Nyström et al. ) constitutes the motive for all caring, where co‐creation becomes an important way of working together for providing personalised care to patients. Co‐creation between patients, relatives and nurses becomes a prerequisite for achieving personalised care in specialised palliative home care. In order to fulfil the wishes and plan individual goals for patients and relatives, co‐creation becomes a way to identify, plan and act in a caring communion for those involved. The interpretation of caritative caring theory, based on Eriksson's perspective, can facilitate a personalised approach to palliative care in the home with the support of the SPCU for both patient and relatives together with nurses, where caring is seen as a natural part of life.

Practical Implications
Specialised palliative care based on co‐creation between patient, relatives and nurses can enhance care that takes account of the needs from patients and relatives. By implementing the different parts of the co‐creation in palliative care model, safe and secure care based on the patient's needs and wishes together with the caring role of relatives can increase the quality of palliative care in collaboration with MHC for patients in their own homes. The model can promote a methodical and patient‐safe care, ensuring that the care is provided on the basis of a personalised home care that facilitates patient self‐determination and autonomy.
From a nursing science perspective, the model can visualise how palliative care can be performed. The model can also contribute to improving palliative care on wards through the implementation of new policies and procedures. By clarifying what patients, relatives and nurses perceive as specialised palliative care, the model can be seen as a practical guide to how care can be provided based on a palliative approach in nursing practice. The model originates from specialised palliative care but can also be used in general palliative care. The model can be seen as a routine in how palliative care can be designed and thus improve nursing practice. It could be included in the knowledge content of the nursing education but also in the education of assistant nurses, as the model emphasises that learning in collaboration constitutes the foundation of palliative care, where all parties involved are included in the care of the patient and relatives. The model could be used in further research to explore how patients, relatives and nurses experience access to care based on their needs and wishes. Further research in this area is necessary, as specialised palliative care conducted in close collaboration with the healthcare system must continue to develop.

Implications for the Profession and/or Patient Care
Through co‐creation, the specialised palliative care unit enables personalised care in the home. The implementation of a model for co‐creation within palliative care could increase the possibility for patient and relatives to receive person‐centred care in the patient's own home.

Ethics Statement
There is no ethical approval as it is an integrated review of already existing literature. All included studies have had an approved ethical application or an ethical consideration.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Reporting Method
The PRISMA 2020 Statement (Page et al.).

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
Data available on request from the author.

References
Palliative Care Nurses' Strategies When Working in Private Homes – A Photo‐Elicitation Study
Nurses' Experiences of Compassion When Giving Palliative Care at Home
Trends Analysis of Specialized Palliative Care Services in 51 Countries of the WHO European Region in the Last 14 Years
Florence Nightingale and Responsibility for Healthcare in the Home
Katie Eriksson Caring Theories. Part 1. The Caritative Caring Theory, the Multidimensional Health Theory and the Theory of Human Suffering
What Variables Contribute to the Achievement of a Preferred Home Death for Cancer Patients in Receipt of Home‐Based Palliative Care in Canada?
The Modified Self: Family Caregivers' Experiences of Caring for a Dying Family Member at Home
Mapping Levels of Palliative Care Development in 198 Countries: The Situation in 2017
Identifying Palliative Patients in General Practice: Focusing on the Place of Death and the Vital Role of Specialized Home Palliative Care: An Observational Study
A Gap Between the Philosophy and the Practice of Palliative Healthcare: Sociological Perspectives on the Practice of Nurses in Specialised Palliative Homecare
Effectiveness of a Specialized Outpatient Palliative Care Service as Experienced by Patients and Caregivers
Co‐Creation as a Caring Phenomenon: Nurses' Experiences in Palliative Home Care
Ethical Sensitivity and Perceptiveness in Palliative Home Care Through Co‐Creation
The Home as Ethos of Caring: A Concept Determination
Patients' Experiences of Using the Integrated Palliative Care Outcome Scale for Person‐Centered Care: A Qualitative Study in the Specialized Palliative Home‐Care Context
Preparing for Family Caregiving in Specialized Palliative Home Care: An Ongoing Process
Preparing for Palliative Caregiving as a Transition in the Awareness of Death: Family Carer Experiences
Home Care Nurses More Positive About Palliative Care That Is Provided and Their Own Competence Than Hospital Nurses: A Nationwide Survey
Care for Dying Patients at Midlife. Experiences of Nurses in Specialized Palliative Home Care
Experiences of Security and Continuity of Care: Patients' and Families' Narratives About the Work of Specialized Palliative Home Care Teams
Actions Helping Expressed or Anticipated Needs: Patients With Advanced Cancer and Their Family Caregivers' Experiences of Specialist Palliative Home Care Teams
“Developing Evidence Based Social Care Policy & Practice. Part III
Optimising the Value of the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) Tool for Quality Appraisal in Qualitative Evidence Synthesis
What Aspects of Quality of Life Are Important From Palliative Care Patients' Perspective? A Framework Analysis to Inform Preference‐Based Measures for Palliative End‐of‐Life Settings
Interprofessional Collaboration Within Fluid Teams: Community Nurses' Experiences With Palliative Home Care
Attachment Figures When Death Is Approaching: A Study Applying Attachment Theory to Adult Patients' and Family Members' Experiences During Palliative Home Care
What Is a ‘Secure Base’ When Death Is Approaching? A Study Applying Attachment Theory to Adult Patients' and Family Members' Experiences of Palliative Home Care
Can Comprehensive Specialised End‐of‐Life Care Be Provided at Home? Lessons From a Study of an Innovative Consultant‐Led Community Service in the UK
High Degree of Satisfaction With the Support Given by Multidisciplinary Palliative Home Care Teams in the County of Stockholm
Patients' Experiences of Care and Support at Home After a Family Member's Participation in an Intervention During Palliative Care
Preferences for Home Care to Enable Home Death Among Older Patients With Cancer in Late Palliative Phase‐ a Grounded Theory Study
What Are Essential Elements of High‐Quality Palliative Care at Home? An Interview Study Among Patients and Relatives Faced With Advanced Cancer
The PRISMA 2020 Statement: An Updated Guideline for Reporting Systematic Reviews
Revised Recommendations on Standards and Norms for Palliative Care in Europe From the European Association for Palliative Care (EAPC): A Delphi Study
The Impact of Implementing an Educational Intervention to Enhance a Family‐Oriented Approach in Specialised Palliative Home Care: A Quasi‐Experimental Study
The Effectivness of Strengths‐Oriented Therapeutic Conversation Intervention on Perceived Support, Well‐Being and Burden Among Family Caregivers in Palliative Home‐Care
Redefining Palliative Care – A New Consensus‐Based Definition
Dignity and Loss of Dignity: Experiences of Older Women Living With Incurable Cancer at Home
Bridging Theory and Practice Through Work‐Integrated Learning (WIL): Critical Perspectives on the Conceptualisations of WIL at a University in Sweden
Patient Perceptions of Specialised Hospital‐Based Palliative Home Care: A Qualitative Study Using a Phenomenographical Approach
Patients' Experiences of Person‐Centred Integrated Heart Failure Care and Palliative Care at Home: An Interview Study
“National Guidelines‐Performance Assessment 2016
The Integrative Review: Updated Methodology
“Palliative Care
Definitions of Palliative Care Terms: A Consensus‐Oriented Decision‐Making Process