Targeting gut microbiota as a therapeutic approach for neurodegenerative diseases
Abstract
Recent evidence suggests a more important role of the gut microbiota in neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs) given its relationship through the microbiota‐gut‐brain as an active communication system aiding in maintaining homeostasis between the brain and the gut. This review focuses on how modulation of gut microbiota can serves as a therapeutic strategy for NDDs, emphasizing the neuroprotective effects of probiotics. Probiotics are live microorganisms that confer health benefits, and their interaction with gut‐microbiota influences neurogenesis, neurotransmitter regulation, and neuroinflammation. Recent advancements, including germ‐free animal models, fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), and diverse probiotic strains, have revealed the underlying mechanisms linking gut health to brain function. Notably, several Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium species have been shown to exert neuroprotective effects via the upregulation of neurotrophic factors such as brain‐derived neurotrophic factor and enhancing mitochondrial function through reducing the impacts of oxidative stress. Interestingly, FMT has exhibited a degree of success in overcoming cognitive impairment and motor deficits in preclinical studies and clinical trials. However, further research is warranted to explore its therapeutic potential in humans. Overall, this review highlights the significant role of gut microbiota in NDDs and advocates for gut‐targeted interventions as innovative approaches to mitigate these diseases.
Highlights
Significant findings of the study
This study highlights the impact of various probiotics in alleviating neurodegenerative conditions through the microbiota‐gut‐brain axis and the development of potential probiotic strains into live biotherapeutic products.
What this study adds
This study provides a current update on how germ‐free animal models, antibiotics, fecal microbiota transplantation, as well as diverse probiotic strains have provided insights into the gut‐brain connection.
The abstract depicts the gut‐brain axis, illustrating the bidirectional communication between the gastrointestinal tract and the central nervous system. Probiotics can induce the production of neurotrophins, neurotransmitters, SCFAs, and contribute to increased antioxidant levels, which can benefit brain health. In contrast, antibiotics can disrupt the gut microbiota and cause a negative impact to the brain by inhibiting the neuroprotective signatures. Illustration created using Biorender.com. 5‐HT, serotonin; Ach, acetylcholine; BBB, blood‐brain‐barrier; BDNF, brain‐derived neurotrophic factor; C2, acetate; C3, propionate; C4, butyrate; NT‐3, neurotrophin‐3; SCFAs, short‐chain fatty acids.

INTRODUCTION
Gut microbiota have gained significant attention as potential modulators of neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs). The recent update of research in various neurological disorders including NDDs indicates that the brain and gut are connected through a bidirectional communication network, often referred to as the gut‐brain axis (GBA). However, despite advances in understanding this connection, the mechanisms by which gut microbiota modulate neurodegenerative processes remains incomplete. Ongoing research is uncovering how gut dysbiosis, that is, an imbalance in gut microbial composition, can contribute to neuroinflammation, dysfunction of metabolites and neurotransmitters, as well as various accumulations of proteins that served as hallmark of various NDDs. Interestingly, the gut microbiota has been increasingly recognized for its role in regulating brain cellular processes and functions, including adult hippocampal neurogenesis, by enhancing the expression of neurotrophic factors such as brain‐derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), through what is known as the microbiota‐gut‐brain (MGB) axis. The global consumption of probiotics is rising due to their numerous health benefits, as they have been proven to be used as adjuvant therapeutic agents for diseases, including cognitive disorders. Therefore, by understanding the relationship between these two entities, that is, the brain and gut, researchers can open new avenues for therapeutic intervention, such as targeting the gut microbiota through probiotics (Figure 1), prebiotics, or dietary modifications. This short review highlights potential gut bacteria strains (probiotics) that have been shown to exert neuroprotective effects and current ongoing knowledge in MGB research through a review of existing clinical and preclinical studies.
The figure depicts the gut‐brain axis, illustrating the bidirectional communication between the gastrointestinal tract and the central nervous system. Probiotics can induce the production of neurotrophins, neurotransmitters, SCFAs, and contribute to increased antioxidant levels, which can benefit brain health. In contrast, antibiotics can disrupt the gut microbiota and cause a negative impact to the brain by inhibiting the neuroprotective signatures. Illustration created using Biorender.com. 5‐HT, serotonin; Ach, acetylcholine; BBB, blood‐brain‐barrier; BDNF, brain‐derived neurotrophic factor; C2, acetate; C3, propionate; C4, butyrate; NT‐3, neurotrophin‐3; SCFAs, short‐chain fatty acids.

Probiotics and its neuroprotective potentials
According to the 2001 joint report by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization, probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host”. According to the International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics, while live microorganisms are found in many foods and supplements, only well‐characterized strains with scientifically proven health benefits can be classified as probiotics. Probiotics interact with the mainstay host microbiota and its intestinal epithelium to exert a wide range of effects upon host health. Moreover, the consumption of fermented foods has demonstrated numerous health benefits, as many of these foods contain live microorganisms, some of which are genetically similar to strains commonly used in probiotics. According to studies, consuming probiotics may help maintain the integrity of the intestinal lining and the blood‐brain barrier while also mitigating the progression of NDDs. Various strains have been shown to enhance metabolism, boost immunity, regulate endocrine function, slow the aging process, and even improve cognition in preclinical and clinical studies. Probiotics are identified by their genus, species, and strain, such as Lactobacillus plantarum (L. plantarum) IS‐10506. The strain designation is crucial because different strains within the same species can have varying health effects. Also, the dosage regimen of probiotics is important, as a higher dose of a probiotic does not necessarily provide greater health benefits than a lower dose. Therefore, in this regard, the dose should correspond to the level demonstrated in efficacy studies to provide the intended benefit.
Different Lactobacillus species, such as L. plantarum and L. buchneri and others have been shown to be neuroprotective in various NDDs, with each species having its own mechanism of action. Species like L. plantarum are known to be neuroprotective by increasing the levels of BDNF and antioxidant defense, as well as reducing neuroinflammation and oxidative stress in the brain. A study conducted by Kim et al. confirmed that lactic acid bacteria (LAB) treatment alleviated oxidative stress by scavenging 2,2‐diphenyl‐1‐picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) and 2,2′‐azino‐bis (3‐ethylbenzothiazoline‐6‐sulfonic acid) (ABTS) radicals. Among the LAB strains tested, L. curvatus demonstrated the highest radical scavenging activity. In this study, LAB treatment significantly suppressed nitric oxide (NO) production and reduced the expression levels of inducible NO synthase and cyclooxygenase‐2 in lipopolysaccharide‐activated RAW264.7 cells, indicating its potential anti‐inflammatory effects. Moreover, Ranuh et al. reported that treatment with L. plantarum IS‐10506 increased brain BDNF expression in the hippocampus compared to untreated rats, suggesting that probiotic supplementation may support brain development, particularly memory and neural plasticity. Additionally, they also detected a concurrent increase of serotonin in the ileum and brain, with increased levels of neurotrophic growth factor in the brain, which corresponded to the elevation of BDNF levels. The activation of the protein kinase B/mammalian target of the rapamycin (Akt/mTOR) pathway promotes the survival of dopaminergic neurons by enhancing protein synthesis, reducing oxidative stress, and preventing cell death as this pathway is particularly implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD). Research has shown that L. plantarum DP189 can promote the phosphorylation of Akt protein and enhance mTOR expression by boosting the production of ERK2. This, in turn, supports the phosphorylation of mTOR, leading to neuroprotective effects of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) of mice model of PD. Furthermore, an in vitro study using SH‐SY5Y cells, the protective action exerted by exopolysaccharides (EPSs) derived from L. delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus B3 and L. plantarum GD2 directly inhibited fibril formation by the amyliod‐β protein. EPSs derived from these bacterial species were known to reduce neuronal cell death and inhibit the destabilization of mitochondrial function. Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), found in synaptic gaps, breaks down acetylcholine and is believed to play a role in the progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Evidence suggests that other bacterial species like Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, are capable of synthesizing acetylcholine, one of the main neurotransmitters involve in learning and memory. One study suggested that administering L. acidophilus probiotics may help regulate and improve hippocampal mitochondrial health and AChE activity via increasing acetylcholine levels in patients with AD. A clinical trial conducted by Tamtaji et al. reported that probiotic products containing L. acidophilus, L. reuteri, and L. fermentum were shown to allievate movement disorders in PD patients after 12 weeks of consumption. Furthermore, Lu et al., also discovered that after 12 weeks of L. plantarum PS128 administration, patients with PD showed significant improvements in unified PD rating scale motor and PD questionnaire‐39 scores, indicating its potential therapeutic effect in clinical cases Additionally, a previous randomized controlled trial in patients with AD, demonstrating that a 12‐week supplementation with L. rhamnosus significantly improved scores on the Mini‐Mental State Examination (MMSE), the Clock Drawing Test, and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder‐7 scale. The L. rhamnosus species has been known to exert its neuroprotective effects via the regulation of fatty acid metabolism.
Several studies conducted in recent years have shown that Bifidobacterium probiotics like Bifidobacterium breve (B. breve), B. longum, and B. bifidum can have a therapeutic effect on NDDs and may protect the brain through the MGB axis. Species like B. breve CCFM1067, when administered orally for 5 weeks in an 1‐methyl‐4‐phenyl‐1,2,3,6‐tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) ‐induced PD mouse model, demonstrated neuroprotective effects by preserving dopaminergic neurons, reducing glial cell hyperactivation, suppressing neuroinflammation, and increasing neurotrophic factor and short‐chain fatty acids (SCFAs) levels. A randomized controlled trial study indicated that B. breve MCC1274 improves cognitive scores in elderly with mild cognitive impairment. The cognitive score was assessed with ADAS‐Jcog (Japanese version of Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale) and MMSE. Fecal microbiota analysis of the PD mice revealed that B. breve CCFM1067 helped counteract the MPTP‐induced gut microbiota imbalance by reducing pathogenic bacteria like Escherichia‐Shigella and elevating beneficial bacteria such as Akkermansia and Bifidobacterium. Similar to L. plantarum, as discussed earlier, B. breve was also seen to increase the level of BDNF, gut SCFA like acetate, propionate, and butyrate, and delay AD progression in mice. All these bacterial metabolites can be sensed by multiple receptor systems through the gut, including the SCFA‐activated G‐protein coupled receptors and nuclear receptors such as aryl hydrocarbon receptor, peroxisome proliferator‐activated receptors, pregnane X receptor, and bile acid receptor. Numerous studies have demonstrated the link between SCFAs and human physiological processes, including immunity. Microglia, a key player in central nervous system (CNS) inflammation and neurodegeneration, are particularly vulnerable to alterations in the gut microbiome. Host microbiota regulate microglia functions, with acetate identified as the major SCFA that rescues microglial homeostasis in GF mice. Moreover, sodium butyrate can serve as a neuroprotective agent in MPTP‐induced PD mice by attenuating microglial reactivity via the inhibition of toll‐like receptor 4 (TLR4)/myeloid differentiation marker 88 (MyD88)/nuclear factor‐kappaB (NF‐kappaB) in the colon and striatum. Boosting the levels of SCFAs with probiotic intervention has been seen to upregulate the neuroprotective phenotype of microglia. However, findings on the role of SCFAs in alleviating NDDs remain inconsistent. Some studies have reported that reducing SCFAs in MPTP‐induced mouse models led to beneficial outcomes, including improved motor function and reduced activation of glial cells in the SN. These contradictory findings highlight the need for further investigation into the role of SCFAs in NDDs. The Bifidobacterium probiotics are known to exert their neuroprotective effect across different experimental models such as zebrafish, Caenorhabditis elegans,  and even in clinical studies. The use of formulated probiotics containing multiple bacterial genera or more than one species is now being employed for their maximum potency in treating NDDs. In most case the use of combined probiotic are more effective when compared to a single strain probiotic. For instance, Ghalandari et al. revealed that a combination of L. plantarum, L. acidophilus, L. casei, L. bulgaricus, B. infantis, B. longum, B. breve, and Streptococcus thermophilus positively affected the frequency of bowel movements in patients with PD. Also, probiotics containing L. plantarum and L. acidophilus were seen to improve the integrity of the gut barrier and neuromuscular function, as well as decreasing abnormal protein aggregates in an ALS mouse model. Interestingly, the combinations of L. plantarum and L. acidophilus have been mostly present in various probiotic formulations.

Advances in MGB research
Advancements in understanding the modulatory effects of beneficial bacteria on GBA signaling have necessitated the development of innovative models and techniques. One of the most effective methods to address this challenge is the use of germ‐free (GF) mice. GF animals have been shown to exhibit a negative impact on distinct morphological, physiological, and immunological traits as well as neurodevelopmental deficits, highlighting the critical role microbiota plays in maintaining host homeostasis. For instance, research has shown that the transplantation of gut‐microbiota of old donor mice into GF mice causes an increase in hippocampus neurogenesis and improved intestinal beneficial microbes. It has also been shown that motor impairments in GF mice with Parkinson's disease‐like symptoms worsened after receiving gut microbiota transplants from PD patients, demonstrating the role of gut microbes and SCFAs in α‐synuclein‐induced neurotoxicity and inflammation. Similarly, conventional probiotics with Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus species can elevate plasma tryptophan levels and influence central serotonin transmission. Conversely, the use of antibiotics in MGB research has also played an important role in understanding the GBA, as the use of various antibiotics can cause gut dysbiosis and lead to changes in behavior and brain chemistry. Moreover, increasing evidence suggests that the complex interactions among host genetics, gut microbiota, and perinatal risk factors can shape susceptibility to neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders later in life. A study conducted by Morel et al. reveals that perinatal antibiotic exposure negatively causes lasting changes in offspring gut microbiota, affecting social and emotional behaviors in a sex‐dependent manner, with females being less vulnerable than males to these neurodevelopmental impacts. Antibiotic treatment has served as an alternate for GF animal models at different developmental stages. Unlike probiotics, the effect of antibiotics on the brain has been shown to have a detrimental impact on the brain through the GBA (Figure 1). For instance, nonabsorbable antibiotics, such as vancomycin, neomycin, and bacitracin, provide the benefit of reducing gut microbiota without entering the systemic circulation. This prevents potential systemic or CNS effects, enabling a direct evaluation of how the loss of microbiota impacts the brain. Additionally, other antibiotics such as metronidazole, ciprofloxacin, and others can potentially enter the CNS and can have a direct impact on brain and behavior. Möhle et al. confirmed that a group of antibiotic compounds caused a reduction in hippocampal neurogenesis and impaired memory retention when given via drinking water for 7 weeks in female C57BL/6 mice. Another advancement that has gained more attention in GBA research is fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT). FMT is a procedure that transfers intestinal microbiota from one individual to another, often administered orally in rodents and as engrafted capsules or colonoscopy in humans. Although the FMT technique has been known for about 1700 years, dating back to a Chinese physician named Ge Hong who used a fecal suspension called “yellow soup” to treat diarrhea and food poisoning. It was reintroduced in the 1950s when it was first used as a therapy for pseudomembranous enterocolitis, and later reported in the treatment of Clostridium difficile infection. However, its widespread use and recognition in research and clinical settings, particularly as a novel treatment for NDDs, has begun to gain momentum in recent years. Finally, the use of other non‐mammal models has also been used in MGB research. Models such as zebrafish and Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) have enabled researchers to uncover the neuroprotective effect of various probiotics. Interestingly, great advancement has been made pertaining to the use of C. elegan. In 2020, a group of researchers identified a well‐characterized model microbiome for C. elegans, known as CeMbio. This discovery consists of 12 bacterial strains from 9 distinct families, with fully sequenced and annotated genomes, forming the core microbiome of C. elegans. This finding, supported by analysis and experimental studies of intestinal colonization, revealed that each strain can successfully colonize the C. elegans gut, either independently or within a microbial community, impacting the host's growth and development. This discovery will serve as a powerful high‐throughput tool in understanding the mechanisms by which the microbiome impacts host health and disease, including NDDs.

Recent findings and clinical implications of FMT
It has now been seen that FMT has begun to gain recognition as a novel treatment for NDDs. A recent study carried out by Elangovan and others discovered that FMT from young wild‐type donor mice to old 5xFAD AD model mice caused a significant improvement in cognitive function and reduction of amyloid pathology within just a 7‐day FMT treatment regimen, without the need for any probiotics intake to colonize the gut or any antibiotics to clear the existing gut microbiome. In an MPTP‐induced mouse model of PD, FMT from aged mice to MPTP‐treated mice was shown to improve motor function, rescue dopaminergic neurons in the SN pars compacta, increase serotonin levels in the striatum and enhance neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus. The fact that the FMT procedure has been proven beneficial in germ‐free, mutant mice, and even in conventional mice, demonstrates the efficacy of this procedure. However, the main advantage of using FMT in GF animals is that it doesn't face competition from existing microbes to colonize the gut, unlike the conventional mice. Notably, approximately 80% of PD patients experience constipation, a symptom associated with α‐syn accumulation, neuronal degeneration, heightened local inflammation, high oxidative stress, increased intestinal permeability, and disturbed energy metabolism. In clinical studies, FMT has demonstrated efficacy and safety in significantly improving PD‐related autonomic symptoms compared to placebo at 12 weeks in patients with PD. Moreover, in a case study done by Huang et al., a severe clinical case of a patient diagnosed with PD accompanied by chronic constipation, standard interventions such as laxatives and various anti‐Parkinsonian medications proved ineffective. However, following the administration of FMT, both the patient's constipation and tremors were significantly alleviated. This outcome was attributed to the strong association between the patient's gut microbiota composition and the severity of PD symptoms before the FMT intervention. To this end, while FMT seems to be a promising therapeutic approach for NDDs, more research is needed to investigate its effects in human trials.

NEUROGENESIS
Neurogenesis is the process by which neural stem cells (NSCs) differentiate into neurons and glial cells in specific regions of the brain. Due to neuronal loss in various NDDs, the concept of generating new neurons (neurogenesis), particularly after birth, has been extensively studied by researchers over the years. Although it is known that the NSCs remain dormant for a long time after the embryonic stage, in the adult brain, NSCs are now known to be present in the ventricular‐subventricular zone lining the lateral ventricles, where they produce olfactory bulb neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes. They are also found in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus in the hippocampus, where they primarily give rise to neurons, supporting the concept of adult neurogenesis. Hippocampal adult neurogenesis is vital for regulating emotions and supporting higher‐order cognitive processes, including memory formation and learning. Interestingly, an increasing number of studies has suggested that astrocytes and microglia can control the growth and differentiation of adult‐born granule cells in the dentate gyrus by secreting various trophic factors, including BDNF that modulate the neurogenic microenvironment.

Neurogenesis and MGB: An emerging hypothesis
Adult neurogenesis is highly responsive to environmental factors, including alcohol consumption, dietary habits, smoking, and social stress. Emerging evidence highlights the important role of gut microbiota in modulating this process. Studies have confirmed that the key factors for NSC self‐renewal, differentiation, and maintenance are genetic and rely on the integration of various cellular signaling pathways within the microenvironment, including the wingless‐related integration (Wnt), Notch, and sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathways. These cellular signaling pathways have been positively influenced by gut microbiota through the MGB axis with evidence suggesting that gut microbiota can modulate NSCs activities. Additionally, several neurotrophins, including BDNF, have been implicated in the regulation of adult neurogenesis and brain plasticity. Moreover, factors such as sex, exercise, and estrogen administration have been shown to upregulate BDNF levels. Interestingly, recent MGB studies involving probiotics have demonstrated the induction of elevated BDNF expression, thus promoting neurogenesis (Table 1 and Figure 2). The use of probiotics, antibiotics, and GF animal models supported the influence of microbiota on adult neurogenesis. Using the GF mice model, It was observed that, compared to conventionally raised mice, both GF and GF‐colonized mice showed increased cell proliferation, particularly in the dorsal hippocampus, along with changes in hippocampal BDNF levels. Along similar lines, as previously mentioned, research carried out by Kundu et al. showed that the transplantation of gut microbiota from aged donor mice into GF mice enhanced hippocampal neurogenesis and improved intestinal microbial profiles. Moreover, a recent experiment demonstrated that administering a probiotic preparation, known as ProB3, which comprises three strains—Bacillus subtilis TO‐A, Enterococcus faecium T‐110, and Clostridium butyricum TO‐A—promotes adult neurogenesis in mice and corrects its dysregulation in GF mice. The colonization of the gut in GF mice with this combined probiotic (ProB3) was able to mitigate the arrest of newborn neuron maturation and the reduction of quiescent NSC. This effect was associated with increased levels of several metabolites in the blood, which are known to promote proliferation, neurogenesis, and the maturation of newborn neurons in cultured human fetal NSCs and mouse adult hippocampal NSCs. Conversely, supporting these findings, several studies have shown that certain antibiotic compounds can reduce hippocampal neurogenesis and impair cognition by depleting BDNF and other neurotrophic factors. Among these cited studies, a study demonstrated that treating adult mice with antibiotics reduces hippocampal neurogenesis and impairs memory retention. The findings revealed that reconstituting the host gut microbiota with normal specific pathogen‐free microbiota did not fully restore neurogenesis deficits unless the mice had access to a running wheel or were administered probiotics. Furthermore, the study concluded that the recovery of neurogenesis and behavioral deficits in antibiotic‐treated mice through exercise and probiotics is partially mediated by Ly6Chi monocytes, a type of monocyte significantly elevated in the brain, which enhances neurogenesis. This study validates the fact that the immune system plays a vital role in neurogenesis, as previous studies have indicated that cells of the immune system help to maintain neurogenesis. Interestingly, dysfunction of microglia has been seen to induce cascading effects in the inflammatory system that can suppress adult hippocampal neurogenesis, which increases susceptibility to NDDs. Therefore, as research continues to uncover the influence of gut microbiota on neurogenesis through the use of probiotics, it becomes increasingly clear that the manipulation of the microbiota could offer therapeutic avenues for enhancing brain health, particularly in NDDs.
This table provides an overview of some probiotic species researched for different neurodegenerative conditions along with the mechanisms of action observed.
Bacterial species	Disorder studied	Mechanism of action	Reference	 	L. plantarum DP189	PDa	Increased BDNF levels, reduced oxidative stress, enhanced mTOR pathway	Wang et al.	 	L. plantarum IS‐10506	Memory decline and brain plasticitya	Enhanced brain development and memory through BDNF upregulation and serotonin increase	Ranuh et al.	 	L. acidophilus (strain not specified)	ADb	Increased acetylcholine levels and improve hippocampal mitochondrial health	Beltagy et al.	 	B. breve CCFM1067	PDa	Preserved dopaminergic neurons, reduced neuroinflammation, altered gut microbiota composition	Li et al.	 	B. breve CCFM1025	ADa	Increased BDNF, improved cognition and delayed AD progression	Zhu et al.	 	Exopolysaccharides from L. delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus B3 and L. plantarum GD2	ADa	Inhibited amyloid‐β aggregation, reduced mitochondrial destabilization	Sirin and Aslim	 	B. breve MCC1274	Mild cognitive impairmentb	Improvement in cognitive test scores	Asaoka et al.	 	L. plantarum PS 128	PDb	Improvement in UPDRS motor and PDQ‐39 scores	Lu et al.	 	L. rhamnosus HA‐114	ADb	Improvement in MMSE, CFT and GAD‐7 scores	Akhgarjand et al.
Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer's disease; B. breve, Bifidobacterium breve; BDNF, brain‐derived neurotrophic factor; CFT, clock drawing test; GAD‐7, generalized anxiety disorder‐7; L. plantarum, Lactobacillus plantarum; MMSE, Mini‐Mental State Examination; mTOR, mammalian target of the rapamycin; PD, Parkinson's disease; PDQ‐39, Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire‐39; UPDRS, Unified Parkinson's disease rating scale.
animal experimental model.
clinical investigation.
The administration of probiotics leads to the enhancement of neurogenesis in the SGZ of the DG in the hippocampus by increasing the expression of BDNF and activating various signaling pathways such as the Wnt, Notch, and Shh pathways, all of which are involved in cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation. BDNF, brain‐derived neurotrophic factor; CA, cornu ammonis; DG, dentate gyrus; GCL, granule cell layer; NSC, neural stem cell; SGZ, subgranular zone; Shh, sonic hedgehog; Wnt, wingless‐related integration. Image generated by Biorender.com.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS ON PROBIOTICS
More recently, the MGB axis has emerged as a critical component in the pathophysiology and treatment of NDDs through the use of probiotics. While probiotics are initially known as functional foods, typically formulated for healthy individuals as dietary supplements, often without requiring a prescription, increasing interest in the development of probiotics as live biotherapeutic products (LBPs) has been recognized, with a regulatory framework on probiotics intended for use in a diseased state. LBPs are biological products that contain live organisms and apply to the prevention, treatment, or cure of a disease or condition in humans, much like pharmaceutical drugs. Moreover, as the emerging therapeutic applications of probiotics often involve addressing different specific health conditions, such as gastrointestinal disorders, mental health challenges, metabolic syndromes, and other diseases, probiotics need to be repositioned from functional foods to LBPs. Preclinical and clinical evidence on the therapeutic effects exerted by probiotics in NDDs is still on the rise, as the first clinical trial on PD patients, dating back to 2011, revealed that fermented milk enriched with L. casei Shirota improved chronic constipation in PD patients. However, while many probiotic strains have been identified over the years, most of the studies are based on Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus probiotic strains. Interestingly, as most of these probiotics are more effective when formulated, the application of formulated probiotics as a therapeutic intervention for NDDs, particularly AD and PD, is currently undergoing clinical trials based on U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidelines, as briefly reviewed recently by Kim et al. To this end, emerging fields such as microbiome and genomics research are revolutionizing the design and application of LBPs, particularly through the development of genetically engineered probiotics with enhanced capabilities. These advancements are paving the way for probiotics to function as neuroprotective agents, targeting conditions like NDDs and other mental health disorders.

Conclusion
To date, several studies have explored the direct and indirect effects of probiotics on the enteric and CNS with significant insights into neurogenesis. Adult neurogenesis is a complex process influenced by genetic factors and signaling pathways like Wnt, Notch, and Shh. These pathways, along with key molecules, help activate signals that affect neuronal health, synaptic plasticity, and neurogenesis. Recent research has highlighted the role of gut microbiota in modulating these processes through the MGB axis, with probiotics, antibiotics, and GF animal models providing significant insights. Most research discussing the mechanisms of action of various probiotics in gut and brain functions is largely based on their ability to protect the intestinal mucosal barrier, stabilize gut microbiota, and modulate various neuroprotective metabolites and neurotransmitters, including the enhancement of neurotrophic factors like BDNF. This further supports the potential for gut‐based interventions to enhance neurogenesis and brain plasticity, given that neuronal loss is the ultimate outcome of NDDs. Therefore, taking together the current understanding of probiotics and advances like FMT, as well as the improvement in various animal models used in MGB research, these therapeutic and novel approaches represent exciting frontiers for addressing NDDs.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Tobiloba S. Olajide: Conceptualization (lead); visualization (lead); writing—original draft (lead); writing—review and editing (lead). Omamuyovwi M. Ijomone: Funding acquisition (lead); supervision (lead); writing—review and editing (lead).

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

ETHICS STATEMENT
Not applicable.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

REFERENCES
The gut microbiota‐brain axis in neurological disorders
The role of the microbiota‐gut‐brain axis in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases
Taming neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's disease: the protective role of phytochemicals through the gut−brain axis
The microbiota–gut–brain axis and Alzheimer's disease: neuroinflammation is to blame?
The microbiota‐gut‐brain axis
Microbial therapeutics in neurocognitive and psychiatric disorders
Health and nutritional properties of probiotics in food including powder milk with live lactic acid bacteria
The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic
Health benefits of fermented foods: microbiota and beyond
Gut microbiota in neurodegenerative disorders
The role of gut microbiota in neurodegenerative diseases: current insights and therapeutic implications
Gut microbiota: the conductor in the orchestra of immune‐neuroendocrine communication
Gut microbiota, obesity and diabetes
Bifidobacterium longum 1714 as a translational psychobiotic: modulation of stress, electrophysiology and neurocognition in healthy volunteers
Efficacy of single‐strain probiotics versus multi‐strain mixtures: systematic review of strain and disease specificity
Lactiplantibacillus (Lactobacillus) plantarum as a complementary treatment to improve symptomatology in neurodegenerative disease: a systematic review of open access literature
Probiotic properties and neuroprotective effects of lactobacillus buchneri KU200793 isolated from Korean fermented foods
Antioxidant activity and probiotic properties of lactic acid bacteria
Effect of the probiotic Lactobacillus plantarum IS‐10506 on BDNF and 5HT stimulation: role of intestinal microbiota on the gut‐brain axis
Balancing mTOR signaling and autophagy in the treatment of Parkinson's disease
Neuroprotective effect of lactobacillus plantarum DP189 on MPTP‐induced Parkinson's disease model mice
Characterization of lactic acid bacteria derived exopolysaccharides for use as a defined neuroprotective agent against amyloid beta1–42‐induced apoptosis in SH‐SY5Y cells
Efficacy of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors in Alzheimer's disease
Emerging role of gut microbiota in modulation of neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration with emphasis on Alzheimer's disease
Beneficial consequences of probiotic on mitochondrial hippocampus in Alzheimer's disease
Clinical and metabolic response to probiotic administration in people with Parkinson's disease: a randomized, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled trial
The add‐on effect of lactobacillus plantarum PS128 in patients with Parkinson's disease: a pilot study
The effects of probiotic supplements on oxidative stress and inflammation in subjects with mild and moderate Alzheimer's disease: a randomized, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled study
Fatty acids derived from the probiotic Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus HA‐114 suppress age‐dependent neurodegeneration
Effect of probiotic Bifidobacterium breve in improving cognitive function and preventing brain atrophy in older patients with suspected mild cognitive impairment: results of a 24‐week randomized, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled trial
Neuroprotective effects of bifidobacterium breve CCFM1067 in MPTP‐induced mouse models of Parkinson's disease
The role of short‐chain fatty acids in the interplay between diet, gut microbiota, and host energy metabolism
Administration of Bifidobacterium breve improves the brain function of Aβ1‐42‐treated mice via the modulation of the gut microbiome
Aryl hydrocarbon receptor: its roles in physiology
Short‐chain fatty acid receptors and gut microbiota as therapeutic targets in metabolic, immune, and neurological diseases
The pregnane X receptor and its microbiota‐derived ligand indole 3‐propionic acid regulate endothelium‐dependent vasodilation
Enteric microbiota‐gut‐brain axis from the perspective of nuclear receptors
Identification of molecular network of gut‐brain axis associated with neuroprotective effects of PPARdelta‐ligand erucic acid in rotenone‐induced Parkinson's disease model in zebrafish
Microglial senescence in neurodegeneration: insights, implications, and therapeutic opportunities
Priming of microglia with dysfunctional gut microbiota impairs hippocampal neurogenesis and fosters stress vulnerability of mice
Microglia and gut microbiota: a double‐edged sword in Alzheimer's disease
Microbiota‐derived acetate enables the metabolic fitness of the brain innate immune system during health and disease
Neuroprotective effects of sodium butyrate by restoring gut microbiota and inhibiting TLR4 signaling in mice with MPTP‐induced Parkinson's disease
A prebiotic diet modulates microglial states and motor deficits in α‐synuclein overexpressing mice
ApoE isoform‐ and microbiota‐dependent progression of neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy
Fecal microbiota transplantation exerts a protective role in MPTP‐Induced Parkinson's disease via the TLR4/PI3K/AKT/NF‐κB pathway stimulated by α‐Synuclein
Neuroprotective effects of fecal microbiota transplantation on MPTP‐induced Parkinson's disease mice: gut microbiota, glial reaction and TLR4/TNF‐α signaling pathway
Microbiota‐gut‐brain axis and its therapeutic applications in neurodegenerative diseases
The possible role of bifidobacterium longum BB536 and lactobacillus rhamnosus HN001 on locomotor activity and oxidative stress in a rotenone‐induced Zebrafish Model of Parkinson's disease
Nanoplastics exacerbate Parkinson's disease symptoms in C. elegans and human cells
Oral administration of probiotic bifidobacterium breve improves facilitation of hippocampal memory extinction via restoration of aberrant higher induction of neuropsin in an MPTP‐induced mouse model of Parkinson's disease
Probiotics mixture increases butyrate, and subsequently rescues the nigral dopaminergic neurons from MPTP and rotenone‐induced neurotoxicity
Impact of interval training with probiotic (L. plantarum/Bifidobacterium bifidum) on passive avoidance test, ChAT and BDNF in the hippocampus of rats with Alzheimer's disease
Multi‐strain probiotics: synergy among isolates enhances biological activities
Efficacy of probiotics in improving motor function and alleviating constipation in Parkinson's disease: a randomized controlled trial
Probiotics and microbial metabolites maintain barrier and neuromuscular functions and clean protein aggregation to delay disease progression in TDP43 mutation mice
Probiotics as potential treatments for neurodegenerative diseases: a review of the evidence from in vivo to clinical trial
Germ‐free animal experiments in the gut microbiota studies
Growing up in a bubble: using germ‐free animals to assess the influence of the gut microbiota on brain and behavior
Neurogenesis and prolongevity signaling in young germ‐free mice transplanted with the gut microbiota of old mice
Gut microbiota regulate motor deficits and neuroinflammation in a model of Parkinson's disease
Serotonin, tryptophan metabolism and the brain‐gut‐microbiome axis
Cognitive impairment by antibiotic‐induced gut dysbiosis: analysis of gut microbiota‐brain communication
Sex‐specific effects of microbiome perturbations on cerebral Aβ amyloidosis and microglia phenotypes
Dissecting the contribution of host genetics and the microbiome in complex behaviors
Gut microbiota composition is associated with newborn functional brain connectivity and behavioral temperament
The impact of maternal gut microbiota during pregnancy on fetal gut‐brain axis development and life‐long health outcomes
Perturbation of maternal gut microbiota in mice during a critical perinatal window influences early neurobehavioral outcomes in offspring
Administration of non‐absorbable antibiotics to pregnant mice to perturb the maternal gut microbiota is associated with alterations in offspring behavior
Ly6Chi monocytes provide a link between antibiotic‐induced changes in gut microbiota and adult hippocampal neurogenesis
Fecal microbiota transplantation: review and update
Should we standardize the 1,700‐year‐old fecal microbiota transplantation?
Fecal enema as an adjunct in the treatment of pseudomembranous enterocolitis
Relapsing clostridium difficile enterocolitis cured by rectal infusion of homologous faeces
Fecal microbiota transplantation: a new therapeutic attempt from the gut to the brain
Fecal microbiota transplantation for treatment of parkinson disease: a randomized clinical trial
Efficacy of fecal microbiota transplantation in patients with parkinson's disease: clinical trial results from a randomized, placebo‐controlled design
Caenorhabditis elegans as a model for microbiome research
CeMbio‐The Caenorhabditis elegans microbiome resource
Fecal microbiota transplantation reduces pathology and improves cognition in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease
Fecal microbiota transplantation from aged mice render recipient mice resistant to MPTP‐induced nigrostriatal degeneration via a neurogenesis‐dependent but inflammation‐independent manner
Investigating causality with fecal microbiota transplantation in rodents: applications, recommendations and pitfalls
Pathogenesis of Parkinson disease–the gut‐brain axis and environmental factors
The role of the gut microbiota in neurodegenerative diseases
Fecal microbiota transplantation to treat Parkinson's disease with constipation: a case report
Gut brain interaction theory reveals gut microbiota mediated neurogenesis and traditional Chinese medicine research strategies
Neural stem cell niche and adult neurogenesis
Single‐cell transcriptomics reveals a population of dormant neural stem cells that become activated upon brain injury
The adult ventricular‐subventricular zone (V‐SVZ) and olfactory bulb (Ob) neurogenesis
Neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus
Single‐cell analysis of regional differences in adult V‐SVZ neural stem cell lineages
Adult neurogenesis, glia, and the extracellular matrix
Dopamine cross‐reacts with adrenoreceptors in cortical astrocytes to induce BDNF expression, CREB signaling and morphological transformation
Synaptic integration of adult‐born hippocampal neurons is locally controlled by astrocytes
BDNF overexpression in mouse hippocampal astrocytes promotes local neurogenesis and elicits anxiolytic‐like activities
M2 microglia promotes neurogenesis and oligodendrogenesis from neural stem/progenitor cells via the PPARγ signaling pathway
Salvianolic acid B promotes microglial M2‐polarization and rescues neurogenesis in stress‐exposed mice
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis: a coming‐of‐age story
Microbiota‐gut‐brain axis regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis
Exploring sonic hedgehog cell signaling in neurogenesis: its potential role in depressive behavior
Phosphatase WIP1 regulates adult neurogenesis and WNT signaling during aging
Role of Wnt signaling in adult hippocampal neurogenesis in health and disease
Notch promotes survival of neural precursor cells via mechanisms distinct from those regulating neurogenesis
Notch and neurogenesis
Gut‐derived metabolites influence neurodevelopmental gene expression and Wnt signaling events in a germ‐free zebrafish model
Notch signaling inhibition alleviates allergies caused by antarctic krill tropomyosin through improving Th1/Th2 imbalance and modulating gut microbiota
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is regulated by the microbiome
Critical roles of embryonic born dorsal dentate granule neurons for activity‐dependent increases in BDNF, adult hippocampal neurogenesis, and antianxiety‐like behaviors
NGF, BDNF, NT3, and NT4
Sex differences in brain‐derived neurotrophic factor signaling and functions
Hippocampal learning, memory, and neurogenesis: effects of sex and estrogens across the lifespan in adults
Adolescent treadmill exercise enhances hippocampal brain‐derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression and improves cognition in autism‐modeled rats
Combination of 3 probiotics restores attenuated adult neurogenesis in germ‐free mice
Antibiotic‐Tlherapy‐Induced gut dysbiosis affecting gut microbiota‐brain axis and cognition: restoration by intake of probiotics and synbiotics
Antibiotic cocktail‐induced gut microbiota depletion in different stages could cause host cognitive impairment and emotional disorders in adulthood in different manners
CD4‐positive T lymphocytes provide a neuroimmunological link in the control of adult hippocampal neurogenesis
Immune cells contribute to the maintenance of neurogenesis and spatial learning abilities in adulthood
Regulation of learning and memory by meningeal immunity: a key role for IL‐4
The participation of microglia in neurogenesis: a review
Neurogenesis in aging and age‐related neurodegenerative diseases
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis, aging and neurodegenerative diseases: possible strategies to prevent cognitive impairment
Live biotherapeutic products: the importance of a defined regulatory framework
Use of probiotics for the treatment of constipation in Parkinson's disease patients