Nanotherapeutic smart approaches for combating Alzheimer’s disease and overcoming existing obstacles: A novel eco-friendly green approach
The scientific community has united to raise awareness of Alzheimer's disease (AD) as a critical condition for future generations because recent predictions indicate that it will become common among the elderly within a few years. Nevertheless, the intricacies of the disease's progression demand exhaustive investigations to unravel its potential mechanisms. Only then can clinicians develop more efficacious therapeutic strategies. Cognitive impairment caused by amyloid aggregation, the development of hyperphosphorylated neurofibrillary tangles, and a malfunctioning cholinergic system are the hallmarks of AD. Even after the disease has started, brain tissue integrity may degenerate. The physiological characteristics of the highly selective blood-brain barrier and the electrostatic charge of the nanoporous extracellular matrix have long placed restrictions on the treatment of brain disorders. A prospective revolution in drug delivery for the treatment of AD is the use of nanomedicine. It depends on enhancing the way that medications are distributed pharmacokinetically throughout the central nervous system. Several types of nanoparticles (Nps) are available thanks to nanotechnology, and these Nps could target the brain and have a long half-life with few systemic side effects and motor problems. With the latest technological developments, scientists are working to develop unique approaches for the treatment of AD. To evaluate the prospective uses of medicinal plants, their components, and different nanomedicine techniques, it was determined that this literature study was necessary. To provide an overview of the various challenges and approaches related to using nanoparticles (NPs) to combat Alzheimer's disease (AD), this introductory review article was developed.

Introduction

Alzheimer disease (AD)
Alois Alzheimer originally provided a description of AD in 1906. A major public health issue, AD is one of the most complicated and debilitating neurodegenerative illnesses. The cerebral cortex exhibits significant shrinkage and cortical neuron loss in AD. The primary clinical sign of AD is short-term memory loss. As the illness worsens, other cognitive abilities are also compromised. It has recently gotten a lot of attention, particularly in areas involving new treatments. Clinical signs and symptoms of AD include increasing cognitive decline, impairment in daily living activities, and behavioral abnormalities that worsen with time, lowering quality of life.AD is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder in adulthood, occurring 1.5 times more frequently than stroke and as commonly as congestive heart failure. The worldwide prevalence of AD was 55 million in 2021, nearly ten million new cases every year, and expected to rise to 139 million in 2050 (WHO, 2022).
The cholinergic system plays an important role in learning and memory, and the severity of memory impairment in AD is primarily related to cholinergic dysfunction. Therefore, restoring cholinergic neurotransmission may aid in the treatment of assisting patients with AD. There are no specific therapeutic tools to prevent AD, therefore it is considered a top research priority. In modern therapeutic approaches to efficiently treat AD, various synthetic and natural molecules have been used to inhibit the cholinesterase enzyme which is responsible for the progression of AD. Studies have shown encouraging results using cholinesterase inhibitors to increase the concentration of acetylcholine in the brains of AD patients.
Neurodegeneration in AD with the Formation of amyloid-β plaques and Tau protein tangles.
Fig. 1
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques outside neurons and tau protein tangles inside neurons, leading to neuronal damage and cognitive decline. Aβ plaques disrupt cell communication, while tau tangles, also known as neurofibrillary tangles, cause the breakdown of microtubules, essential for nutrient transport, leading to further neuronal dysfunction. The exact cause of AD is complex and involves genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors, with key mechanisms including aberrant Aβ production and clearance, tau protein dysfunction, and neuroinflammation. Together, these processes drive neurodegeneration and cognitive decline (Fig. 1).
Amyloid fibrils with crossed patterns as a misfolded state of the protein are a common feature in polypeptide chains. The charge, hydrophobicity, and polarity of the amino acid sequence in the polypeptide, as well as environmental conditions, determine the propensity of amyloid fibrils. A high tendency for fibril formation is observed in synuclein, amyloid-beta peptides, polyglutamine, prion proteins, 2-microglobulin and glucagon inducing AD. Protein aggregation and fibril formation, which also occur in apatogenic proteins were considered amyloidogenic templates for in vitro studies and were referred to as "myloid-like",
Several studies have shown that the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is involved in the interaction of Aβ peptides with mitochondria and with resident proteins such as cyclophilin, alcohol dehydrogenase and Adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP) synthase. As this type of ROS- induced mitochondrial dysfunction precedes the accumulation of Aβ plaques in the brain, which is a hallmark of AD, therapies that can protect mitochondria from ROS induced oxidative stress would be highly effective for early AD prevention.
Protein aggregation exhibits various structures from irregular amorphous deposits to regular amyloid fibrils. The transient local folded or unfolded state in proteins can form soluble oligomers, which are the starting point for the stepwise fibrillation process. In this pathway, nucleation and growth phases induce various types of production from amorphous aggregates, dimers, globular forms, protofibrils to fibrils. The size of amyloid fibrils differs between different proteins and peptides, ranging from a few nanometers to diameters > 30 nm, with lengths up to several micrometers.
The high stability of the amyloid fibril conformer hinders the therapeutic approach of this type of misfolded disease. Preventing fibril aggregation creates the potential for disease-fighting amyloid protein. The structural protection of proteins during denaturing conditions arises from osmolytes, and chaperones. Various groups of materials have been reported to inhibit fibril formation.

Methods
The relevant literature was searched using Science Direct, and Web of Science databases by covering the period from 2006 to 2024.The search was conducted using the following keywords: “Alzhaimer diseases”, “current therapies”, “phytocompounds”,“Nanoparticles”, and their equivalent terms. Editorial papers, commentary, and case reports were not included in this review.

Current therapies
Alzheimer disease treatments targets.
Fig. 2
Alzheimer’s disease treatments focus on several key targets (Fig. 2) such as reducing amyloid-beta (Aβ) plaques using monoclonal antibodies and BACE inhibitors, preventing tau protein aggregation, and modulating neuroinflammation through anti-inflammatory agents. Therapies also aim to enhance cholinergic and glutamate pathways to improve cognition and reduce neurotoxicity. Additionally, antioxidants and mitochondrial enhancers address oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction. These strategies aim to slow disease progression, reduce symptoms, and improve cognitive functions.
There are now ChE inhibitors available to treat AD at all stages. Many natural and synthetics compounds with the ability to thwart the cholinesterase enzyme have been published. Within synapses and neuromuscular junctions, the enzyme catalyzes the transformation of acetylcholine into choline and acetic acid. Diminished levels of acetylcholine may be associated with the onset of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Presently, drugs that temporarily obstruct ChE enzymes have a fundamental effect on elevating ACh concentrations in the CNS.
Pharmaceuticals sanctioned by the FDA for Alzheimer's disease.
Table 1
FDAApproved AD Drug	Class	Mechanism	Side effects	 	Rivastimine	Cholinesterase inhibitor Severe AD	Prevent the breask down of butrylcholin and acetylcholine in brain	Nausea,loss of appetite, muscle weakness	 	Donepezil	CholinesteraseinhibitorModerate AD	Prevent the breask down ofAcetylcholineinbrain	Nausea, diarrhea and vomiting	 	Memantine	N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonistModerate to severe AD	Block the toxic effects associated with excess glutamate and regulate activation	Headache, dizziness and constibation	 	Galantamine	CholinesteraseinhibitorChemical massenger regulationMild to moderate AD	Stimulate nicotinic receptor store lease more acetylcholine in the brain	Weightloss,vomiting and diarrhea	 	Combination drug Donepezil+Memantine	Severe AD	Combination effect	Nausea, loss of appetite,muscle weakness and weightloss
FDA-Approved drugs for AD as AChE inhibitors and NMDA antagonists.
Fig. 3
These days, the FDA has only approved five medications to treat AD: memantine, galantamine, rivastigmine, and donepezil (Table 1, Fig. 3). The first is an antagonist of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDA), whereas the other four are AChE inhibitors. Unfortunately, the current state of AD treatment choices reflects our poor understanding of the disease's pathological underpinnings, meaning that these medications solely treat its symptoms. Although they are unable to stop the disease's course, they can momentarily improve cognitive abilities by somewhat improving glutamatergic and cholinergic neurotransmission. AchE inhibitors do, however, have certain drawbacks, including the possibility of gastrointestinal issues, variable absorption and bioavailability, and instability in the bloodstream.

Existing obstacles
Since AD primarily affects the elderly population, polypharmacy, comorbidities, and nonadherence have a major impact on reducing the effectiveness of treatment regimens. Currently available AD drugs have limited efficacy, including symptom relief, side effects, and are expensive. The main cause of gastrointestinal side effects has been associated with stimulation of the peripheral cholinergic system. In addition, these drugs have limited efficacy and prolong therapy. The disadvantages mentioned can be attributed to the poor pharmacokinetic profile of these therapeutic components, including volatility, oxidative hydrolysis, low bioavailability, limited across blood-brain barrier and propensity for drug interactions. Therefore, the use of nanotechnology to overcome this limitation has been reported in various studies.
Polypharmacy, comorbidities, and nonadherence have a significant impact on lowering the effectiveness of treatment regimens because AD mostly affects the older population. Drugs for AD are already available, however they are expensive, only partially effective in relieving symptoms, and have negative effects. The stimulation of the peripheral cholinergic system has been linked to the primary cause of gastrointestinal adverse effects. These medications also prolong therapy and have low efficacy. The poor pharmacokinetic profile of these medicinal components, which includes volatility, oxidative hydrolysis, low bioavailability, limited across the blood-brain barrier, and a susceptibility for drug interactions, is to blame for the drawbacks listed. Hence, it has been reported that using nanotechnology to overcome this restriction.

Advantages of phytocompounds as potent therapeutics
Summary of evidence for therapeutic potential of phytochemicals against AD.
Table 2
PBC	Outcome	Reference	 	Curcumin	Protection against Aβ-induced mitochondrial and synaptic toxicities in Human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells		 	Decreased secretion of TNF-α, prostaglandin E2 and NO; Inhibition of extracellular signal regulated kinase, p38, phosphorylation in Lipoteichoic acids-stimulated BV−2 malbinomiceoglial cells		 	Reduction of oxidative damage, inflammation and amyloid pathology In APPSw(Tg2576) transgenic AD mice		 	Reduction of soluble tau level in Human tau (hTau) transgenic mice		 	Inhibition of Aβ aggregation, oxidative stress and inflammation in AD patients		 	Decrease of cognitive deficits in animal models Reduction of BACE−1 mRNAReduction of the formation of Aβ fifibrilsReduction of Aβ deposits and senile plaques in		 	Tg2576 mice modelProtect cells from Aβ-induced toxicityReduction of Aβ-induced expression of cytokines and chemokinesReduction in oxidized proteins in Tg2576 mice model Increase of post-synaptic density−95 in vitro in the brain of Aβ-injected rats		 	Decrease of cognitive defificits in animal models Reduction of BACE−1 mRNAReduction of the formation of Aβ fifibrilsReduction of Aβ deposits and senile plaques in Tg2576 mice modelProtect cells from Aβ-induced toxicityReduction of Aβ-induced expression of cytokines and chemokinesReduction in oxidized proteins in Tg2576 mice modelIncrease of post-synaptic density−95 in vitro in the brain of Aβ-injected rats		 	Quercetin	Attenuated Aβ1 −42-induced cytotoxicity, protein oxidation, lipid peroxidation and apoptosis at low doses; toxic effects at high doses In Cortical neuronal culture from Sprague-Dawley rat fetuses		 	Preventing the toxic effects induced by H2O2 and, to a lesser extent, the Aβ-induced toxicityIn Culture of the hippocampal neurons from Sprague-Dawley rat fetuses		 	Amelioration of mitochondrial dysfunction by decreased ROS production; Reduced scattered senile plaques; Rescued learning and memory deficitsInAPPswe/PS1dE9 transgenic AD mice		 	Decreased β-amyloidosis, astrogliosis tauopathy,and malbinomiceogliosis; Improved performance on learning and spatial memory tasksIn Triple transgenic 3xTg-AD mice	Sabogal-Guáqueta et al., 2015	 	No differences in MMSE and cognitive impairment rating scale scores in older subjects; Higher MMSE scores at week 24 in younger subjectsIn AD patients aged 65–84 years	Nishimura et al., 2017	 	Resveratrol	Remodels soluble oligomers and fifibrils form into nontoxic form of AβReduction of production of Aβ peptides in vitro Decrease of ROS and lipid peroxides levels in animal modelsDecrease of cognitive deficits in animal models	 Sharma et al., 2002 	 	Inhibition of Aβ-induced neuronal apoptosis in PC12 cells		 	Amelioration of spatial learning memory impairment induced by Aβ1 −42In Hippocampal injection- induced AD rat model	Wang et al., 2017	 	Amelioration of Aβ-induced learning and cognitive declineIn Kunming mice		 	Reduced MMP9; modulated neuroinflammation; induced adaptive immunityIn Mild-moderate AD patients		 	Differences in Aβ40 levels in the plasma and cerebrospinal fluid in comparison with placebo groupIn Patients with moderate AD		 	Reduced glycated hemoglobin A1c levels; Preserved hippocampus volume; Improved hippocampal functional connectivityIn Patients with mild cognitive impairment (age - 50 −80 y)		 	Enhancement of vasodilator responsiveness in cerebral vesselsIn Diabetic patients (49 −78 y) with sub-clinical cognitive impairment		 	Genistein	Inhibition of Aβ-induced production of COX−2, iNOS, IL−1β and TNF-αIn Primary culture of fetal cortical rat astrocytes	Valles et al., 2010	 	Lowered Aβ levels in brain; Improved learning, recognition and implicit memory and odor discrimination In APPswe/PS1dE9 AD mouse model	Bonet-Costa et al., 2016	 	Degradation of Aβ and hyperphosphorylation of tau proteins In Streptozotocin-induced AD rat model		 	EGCG	Inhibited aggregation of tau into toxic oligomersIn Neuronal model PC−12 cells		 	Enhanced clearance of AD-relevant phosphorylated tau; Iincreased expression of autophagy adaptor proteins NDP52 and p62In Culture of primary cortical neurons isolated from E18 Sprague–Dawley rat embryos		 	Reduced Aβ deposits and inhibited Aβ oligomerizationIn Transgenic TJ356 (DAF- 16:GFP)		 	Prevention of amyloidogenesis and memory impairmentIn Lipopolysaccharide-induced neurodegenerative albino mice mice model		 	Catechins	Reduction in the translation of APP mRNA Increase α-secretase activityReduction in the production of Aβ peptides inAPP695 over-expressing neurons Reduction in β-secretase activityReduction in the formation of Aβ fibrils by binding to the native unfolded AβProtect cells from Aβ-induced toxicityReduction in Aβ-induced caspase activity in hippocampal neuronalcellsReduction in Aβ-inducedcytokines in human astrocytoma U373MGcellsReduction in Aβ-induced levels of lipid oxidation in hippocampal neuronalcellsDecrease of cognitive defificits in animal models
Alzheimer's disease poses a major public health challenge in developed societies. Because flavonoids have been repeatedly reported to have anti-AD activities due to their ability to affect major mechanisms of AD, including mitochondrial dysfunction, neuroinflammation and oxidative stress, they have become increasingly important investigated for their anti-AD potential (Table 2). However, the medicinal properties of orally administered flavonoids are largely limited by their poor solubility, stability and bioavailability. In addition to using polymeric NPs in drug delivery. It has been reported that nanocomposites loaded with biologically active ingredients offer many advantages over their conventional formulations, including increased targeting, solubility, stability, bioavailability, permeability, and minimized side effects.
Many natural compounds, especially phytochemicals, may have preventive and therapeutic potential for diseases. However, most of these compounds have low levels of solubility, stability, bioavailability and target specificity in the body, which makes it unrealistic for these compounds to be present at their effective levels in the target tissues. This is particularly true for (−)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) found in green tea, resveratrol found in grapes, curcumin found in turmeric and quercetin found in red onions, which are valuable for prevention and treatment of many diseases. Therefore, this represents an excellent opportunity for introducing NP technology to help resolve this issue (Table 2).

Advantages and disadvantages of current therapies and phytochemical compounds
Modern treatments come with several benefits, including the ability to control symptoms, alter the course of the underlying illness, demonstrate efficacy, and provide targeted care. However, it has a few drawbacks, such as side effects, accessibility and cost issues, treatment complexity, etc. Similarly, using phytocompounds in age-related brain disorders has several benefits: they come from natural sources; they have strong anti-inflammatory and antioxidant qualities; they may have neuroprotective effects; and they can be used as an adjuvant therapy. They can, however, restricted bioavailability, interact with other pharmaceuticals, thereby compromising their safety or efficacy, and there is no universal standardization or quality control. Therefore, it can be stated that recent developments in the treatment of age-related brain illnesses hold promise for better health care in the future due to the larger advantage when compared to the disadvantages surrounding present medicines and phytocompounds. Notwithstanding these drawbacks, new developments in phytochemical research and existing therapies hold out hope for better management of age-related brain problems down the road. To guarantee consistent clinical results, more research is necessary to completely comprehend the mechanisms of action of phytocompounds, determine the best dosages, and create standardized extracts.

Nanotechnology
Nanotechnology is a fast-expanding area of study because of its numerous applications in the medical sciences. To improve treatment efficacy and reduce hazardous side effects, a number of drug delivery systems have been created. Due of their capacity to distribute different medications to different parts of the body over an extended period of time, Nps have grown to be a significant study topic in the field of drug delivery. Nps are frequently employed for site-specific drug targeting and controlled drug release. The Nps can integrate, encapsulate, absorb, adsorb, or be linked to drugs. Numerous authors have used Nps as carriers to deliver a variety of medications. Nps offer an added benefit over larger microparticles in that they can be administered intravenously more easily.
A brief synopsis of multipurpose NPs: Diagrammatic illustration of the two main NP synthesis procedures, which are carried out via physical, chemical, and biological synthesis techniques. For targeted medication delivery, a typical NP is adorned with a variety of ligands, antibodies, peptides, nucleic acids, etc. Various kinds of nanoformulations that are frequently employed to deliver drugs, along with some important classification criteria for these nanomaterials.
Fig. 4
Nps have entirely better properties. There are several techniques for creating NPs in the liquid phase, and they typically call for the following four elements: the medium, the precursor which in the case of MNPs are metal salts, reducing agents, and stabilisers. Numerous physical and chemical processes, including electrochemistry, hydrothermal, laser ablation, lithography, microwave, and thermal decomposition, can be used to create Nps. All of these techniques, use dangerous chemicals, hazardous solvents, and expensive, occasionally unreliable, high pressure and temperature reactions that are bad for the environment and human health. A concise overview of multifunctional nanoparticles illustrated in Fig. 4.

Advantages of using Nps for CNS-directed drug delivery: overcoming existing obstacles
Designing medicine delivery systems for AD is difficult because of blood-brain barriers. Drug dosage forms often have relatively low bioavailability and are unable to easily cross the blood–brain barrier; instead, they can only do so through active efflux or carrier–mediated transport. Studies conducted in vitro and in vivo support Nps' ability to cross the blood–brain barrier. They advocate for integrating nanotherapeutics into the brain so that Nps can be utilized for gene therapy, brain-directed therapy, and diagnostic purposes in addition to treatment.
Nanotechnology, a broad topic, can be a hotspot for the discovery of new treatment techniques, such as drug delivery.Currently, NPs have a multitude of applications within the field of medicine, including both diagnostics and drug delivery systems. Due to their diminutive size, adaptable morphology, and customizable surface features, NPs present themselves as exceptional candidates for circumventing any obstacles that impede medication delivery systems in the brain. NPs are suitable for improving the brain-to-blood ratio of already approved drugs by transporting larger amounts of drug across the blood-brain barrier and interacting with amyloid in the brain due to their high loading capacity, improving targeted drug delivery across the blood-brain barrier (Rocha, 2013), boosting the potency of the already available approved drugs, and offering a multifunctional platform that can help with theranostic application.

Various techniques have been utilized to enhance the efficacy of AD pharmaceuticals for more effective treatment
Hydrophilic polymer-based NPs act as a sustained release parenteral medication system and confer stealth properties by prolonging the blood retention time.
Lipophilic NPs, like liposomes, improve the blood-brain barrier crossing of hydrophilic medicines.
NPs that are receptor-mediated transcytosis-targeted with surface ligands.
By facilitating direct uptake across the blood-brain barrier through endocytosis, mucoadhesive polymeric NPs have been employed to improve nasal medication delivery.
Overall, Nps have a number of promising benefits that can be used in the medical field to produce advanced new dosage forms, including high drug loading capacity, which lowers the likelihood of toxic or chemical interactions, high surface area to volume ratio, ease of handling for parenteral administration due to Nps' particle size and surface characteristics, ability to be used for active drug targeting strategies, objectives of sustained and controlled drug release, and more.
NPs use several different methods to transfer drugs across the blood-brain barrier: (a) transporting drugs through tight junctions; (b) transporting drugs via cellular transport proteins;(c) NP transport by receptor-mediated transcytosis; (d) NP transport via diffusion uniquely adopted by gold nanoparticles; and (e) NP transport via adsorption-mediated transcytosis for cationic nanoparticles and liposomes.

Ideal properties of Nps for drug delivery in the brain
Nps must be biocompatible, biodegradable and non-toxic.
(2) The cleaning rate increases with increasing particle size above 100 nm, affecting both biodistribution and bioavailability. The NP size is preferably less than 100 nm.
(3)When specific forms of Nps are regarded as harmful based on physical rather than chemical surface features, physical stability and avoidance of aggregation in blood are necessary.
(4) Extended circulation time, with PEGylated Nps being the only ones to exhibit reduced absorption and a longer time.
(5) Tailored delivery to the brain without active reflux or carrier-mediated routes to boost medication bioavailability and effectiveness and lower needed therapeutic dose and consequent efficacy.
(6) Gene-directed non-invasive delivery to the brain, such as PEGylated immune liposomes by receptor-mediated transcytosis, which transports their contents to brain tissue without compromising the blood brain barrier.
Advantage and limitation of different classes of Nps used in AD therapy.
Table 3
Inorganic Nps	Organic lipid based Nps	Organic polymeric Nps	 	Advantages	Increased uptake due to ionic interaction with BBB	Ease of ligand conjugation to improve blood circulationUse for hydrophilic and lipophilic cargo	BiodegradableAdjustable surface modificationUse for hydrophilic and lipophilic cargo	 	limitations	Potential cytotoxicity caused by metal accumulation	Potential cytotoxicity caused by non-specific uptake	Self-aggregation may impact brain delivery
(7) Cost-effectiveness studies ought to assess the possible application of Nps in medicine. The decreasing reimbursement rates will reduce the number of people who can use this medication (Parikh, 2016). (Table 3)

Biogenic NPs as a future promising therapeutic agent in AD
There are numerous disadvantages to producing Nps using conventional methods. Therefore, the creation of non-toxic and eco- friendly processes to synthesis these beneficial Nps is urgently needed.
Recently, effective alternatives to the production of Nps have been discovered in medicinal plants. This method, known as the biogenic approach, uses medicinal plants to produce valuable chemicals that can be of great concern in the treatment of AD and cancer. These organisms are abundant in nature and have the potential to convert metals into NPs using a straightforward synthesis while also maintaining the stability of the NPs produced. Nps can be produced using this ecologically friendly method without using dangerous chemicals or under difficult reaction circumstances.
Nevertheless, green synthesis is the preferred method for producing Nps due to its accessibility, environmental friendliness, biocompatibility, ease of usage, and short synthesis time. The environmentally friendly Nps that are developed offer an alternative to AD medicines as a delivery technology for targeted and secure drug distribution.
Moreover, the primary benefits of this biogenic synthesis include its speed, efficiency, safety, and ability to produce Nps with distinct morphologies and sizes. Several plant components can serve as capping and reducing agents in biogenic processes, decreasing the need for toxic reducing agents such sodium lauryl sulfate, sodium borohydride, and hydrazine, which may alter how other reducing agents can be employed.

The mechanistic principle of NPs therapy
The potential therapeutic impact of NPs on AD.
Fig. 5
Nanoparticles (NPs) in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) therapy encapsulate therapeutic agents targeting amyloid-β and tau proteins to prevent their accumulation and reduce plaque formation. NPs also act as antioxidants, alleviating oxidative stress in neurons and modulating immune responses to decrease neuroinflammation. Mechanistically, NPs promote amyloid-β clearance by activating microglial phagocytosis through the PI3K/Akt pathway, enhancing cell survival and amyloid breakdown. They also reduce oxidative stress by modulating the Nrf2/Keap1 pathway, which regulates antioxidant protein expression. Furthermore, NPs influence the NF-κB pathway to lower inflammatory cytokine production and mitigate neuroinflammation. Additional pathways include RAGE and LRP1 for amyloid management, GSK-3β and CDK5 for tau phosphorylation inhibition, and PP2A for tau dephosphorylation. TLR4, NF-κB, and TREM2 are also targeted to control inflammation and support neuroprotection. This multi-pronged approach demonstrates NPs as both delivery agents and modulators of critical AD pathways, providing a comprehensive therapeutic strategy against neurodegeneration (Fig. 5).The unidentified pathophysiology and rising older population point to a growing need for the creation of AD-specific treatment compounds. In an effort to identify the fundamental cause or limiting factor of AD, numerous researchers from around the world have created NPs that target various molecular pathways. The pathophysiology of AD can be targeted with NP at four key and basic sites. A neurotransmitter modulator, a metal stress reliever, an anti-amyloid beta immunotherapy, an inflammation inhibitor, and a neurotransmitter modulator (Fig. 5).

Anti-inflammatory agent
Anti-inflammatory Agent: CoQ10-based formulations using trimethylated chitosan (TMC) and PLGA nanoparticles have shown improved brain accumulation, biocompatibility, and reduction in memory impairment. These formulations reduce oxidative stress and amyloid-beta (Aβ) concentrations, demonstrating potential in mitigating mitochondrial damage and neuroinflammation in AD.

Neurotransmitter modulator
Nanoparticles (NPs) carrying drugs like rivastigmine are designed to cross the blood-brain barrier, modulating acetylcholine (Ach) levels to correct neurotransmitter imbalances, improve memory, and alleviate cognitive deficits in animal models.

Immunotherapy directed at beta amyloid
chitosan-based NPs enhanced the transport of Aβ subfragments across the blood-brain barrier, stimulating immune responses and targeting amyloid deposits. Studies show these formulations can effectively trigger immunogenicity and improve amyloid clearancey.

Metal chelator
Metal ions (e.g., Cu2 +, Zn2 +) contribute to Aβ aggregation in AD. NPs loaded with metal chelators, such as ruthenium-based and polystyrene compounds, prevent metal-induced Aβ fibrillation and scavenge reactive oxygen species (ROS), offering neuroprotection and reducing cytotoxicity. These strategies emphasize the importance of optimizing NP properties (size, charge, and modification) for effective metal chelation.

Promising nanomedicine trials

Nanomedicine for delivering FDA-approved Alzheimer’s drugs
Recent applications of NPs for delivering FDA-approved Alzheimer’s drugs.
Table 4
NPs Type	Results	Ref.	 	PEG / Donepezil Liposomes	liposome-based sustained release of donepezil and improved bioavailability in the brain and plasma.		 	Chitosan / Donepezil Polymeric	NPs increased the drug's concentration in the target tissue by improving its pharmacokinetic characteristics and bioavailability.		 	PLGA / Donepezil Polymeric	Drug concentration in the target tissue rose as a result of NPs' considerable increase in drug transport to the brain.		 	PLGA-PEG / Donepezil Polymeric	NPs were able to effectively deliver donepezil across the BBB and release it in a controlled manner.		 	Dynasan / Donepezil Polymeric	NPs demonstrated enhanced permeability, more cellular absorption, and a prolonged release of the medication.		 	cholesterol, and PG /GalantaminePolymeric	Liposomes have the potential to improve AChE inhibition and transport galantamine via the nose-to-brain pathway with enhanced pharmacokinetic behavior.		 	PLGA / Galantamine Polymeric	NPs are expected to increase therapeutic effectiveness and decrease negative effects because they gave the medicine a longer-lasting release than galantamine solution.		 	Glyceryl Behenate / Galantamine SLNs	SLNs offered a regulated release, altered the drug's temporal course in vivo, and improved its bioavailability.		 	Chitosan // Galantamine Polymeric	NPs improved the pharmacodynamic behavior of the medication. The rats who received the NPs recovered considerably from induced amnesia and showed increased AChE levels.		 	MPEG-PCL / Rivastigmine Polymeric	NPs were able to enhance memory impairment by delaying the release of the drug and increasing rivastigmine's in vivo brain uptake clearance.		 	Chitosan / Rivastigmine Polymeric	In comparison to rivastigmine solution, NPs provide a controlled and prolonged release of the medication with better brain targeting efficiency.		 	Soya lecithin /Rivastigmine Liposomes	NPs were able to enhance memory impairment by delaying the release of the drug and increasing rivastigmine's in vivo brain uptake clearance.		 	Lecithin, and Tween® 80/ Rivastigmine Liposomes	Liposomes increased rivastigmine's bioavailability and delayed its release. The drug levels were almost quadrupled in both the brain and bloodstream.		 	Phosphatidylcholine, Dihexadecyl phosphate, cholesterol, and glycerol /Rivastigmine Liposomes	The medication was released via liposomes in a controlled and prolonged manner. Additionally, the application of nanocarriers led to a marked improvement in cognitive impairment and an increase in AChE activity.		 	Cholesterol, Lecithin, oleic acid, PG, and PEG / Rivastigmine Liposomes	Following topical administration, liposomes preserved plasma levels within the therapeutic window and improved rivastigmine penetration through the skin.		 	Glyceryl Behenate / Rivastigmine SLNs	SLNs increased the drug's nasal penetration both in vitro and ex vivo. Its safety for intranasal delivery was demonstrated by the nasal mucosa's preservation.		 	Glyceryl monostearate / Rivastigmine SLNs	In vivo, SLNs enhanced the drug's pharmacokinetic profile, bioavailability, and concentration in the brain and plasma.		 	Silica /Rivastigmine Organic NPs	NPs enhanced the drug's pharmacokinetics parameters and enabled a prolonged release in vitro.		 	PLGA / Memantine Polymeric	Because NPs extended the duration of the drug's release, oral administration is used less frequently. In vivo, memantine-loaded NPs decreased inflammation and β-amyloid brain plaques linked to AD while also enhancing learning.		 	PAMAM / Memantine Dendrimers	The drug's pharmacokinetic characteristics were enhanced using dendrimers. In vivo, the DDS demonstrated a notable improvement in memory and behavioral responses.
An overview of the most recent uses of NPs as carriers to deliver FDA-approved Alzheimer's medications is given in Table 4. The table highlights the many NP types, their loaded cargo, their material composition, the administration route, and the primary results noted.

Promising trials using nanophytocompounds
The delivery of neuroprotective phytochemicals in AD may be improved with the aid of nanotechnology. However, because of their limited solubility, low bioavailability, and poor blood brain barrier (BBB) penetration, these natural compounds frequently have poor therapeutic efficiency despite their amazing neuroprotective qualities. Personalized medication delivery methods, made possible by nanotechnology, are essential for resolving these issues. The development of personalized drug delivery systems could be facilitated by the use of nanotechnology in addressing these obstacles.
Nanophytocompounds providing neuroprptective effect in AD therapy.
Table 5
Nanophyto compound	Mechanism	Ref	 	BacosideNPs	Cross blood brain barrier in vivo		 	Lectin-NPs	Bind to acetylglucosamine on the nasal epithelial membraneImprove memory in ADrat		 	HuperzineNPs	Crossbloodbrainbarrier		 	GinsenosideNPs	Crossbloodbrainbarrier		 	CholineNPs	Exhibit high gene expression and distributionHigh permeability across capillary cells	Lietal., (2011)	 	QuercetinNPs	Increase efficacy of system iccirculation		 	QuercetinNPs	InhibitAB42fibrilationReduce AB42-induced toxicity Enhane memory in ADmice		 	BlockNFTsandAPsformationRegulatemicroglialandastrocyteactivitiesImproveneurona lfunction Minimize the degenerative changesof AD affected hippo campus Preserve myelinsheath Enhance regenerative changes		 	CoumarinNPs	Increase Aβ-degrading enzymes Reduce amyloidplaquesImproves patiall earning and memoryProtecting synapses Reduce tauprotein phosphorylationin APP/PS1transgenic mice		 	EGCGstabilizedseleniumnanoparticles	AβpeptidesAβaggregationandcytotoxicity/protectiveeffect		 	CurcuminNPs	Improve memory in Tg2576 ADmice		 	CurcuminecapsulatedPLGA NPs	Induce neuralstem cells poliferationInduce neural differentiation invitroandin vivo inadultrats		 	Curcumin and selenium Nanospheres	Decreases the amyloid-βinTransgenicmice		 	VitaminD-bindingproteinNPs	Reduce Aβaggregation and accumulation in Aβ-overexpressing mice
Nanophytocompounds show promise for Alzheimer’s disease treatment by efficiently crossing the BBB and targeting multiple AD pathways. Derived from plant compounds like curcumin, quercetin, and bacoside, these nanoparticles have neuroprotective, anti-inflammatory, and antioxidant effects. Functionalizing these compounds enhances their stability, bioavailability, and efficacy, allowing targeted and sustained therapeutic delivery (Table 5).
Therapeutical activity of phytocompounds nanoformulations in AD.
Fig. 6
Plant-based phytochemicals functionalized on NPs, such as EGCG-coated selenium nanoparticles (SeNPs), show potential in inhibiting Aβ fibrillation and degrading amyloid plaques. Other compounds like curcumin and its derivatives are also explored for their affinity to amyloid proteins, highlighting the potential of natural compounds in AD treatment (Fig. 6).

Transport mechanisms for Nanophytocompoundsover the BBB
Schematic representation of various transport mechanism involved in the delivery of nanoparticles into the brain to achieve targeted delivery of drugs.Figure adapted from.
Fig. 7
Encapsulating phytocompounds in NPs is a way to overcome several physicochemical limitations of drugs. ex, phytochemicals may be encapsulated within bio-degradable, bio-compatible NPs to increase water solubility, bioavailability, and stability (Fig. 7).
5.3.1. Passive BBB transport
5.3.1.1. Transmembrane diffusion
5.3.2. Active BBB transport
5.3.3. Carrier-mediated transport
5.3.4. Receptor-mediated transcytosis
5.3.4.1. Transferrin receptor mediated brain delivery
5.3.4.2. Insulin receptor mediated brain delivery
5.3.4.3. Low-density lipoprotein receptor and low-density lipoprotein receptor-related proteins 1 and 2 mediated brain delivery
5.3.4.4. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor mediated brain delivery
5.3.5. Adsorptive-mediated transcytosis
5.3.5.1. Peptide carriers as brain delivery shuttles
5.3.5.2. Macromolecules as brain delivery shuttles

Biogenic synthesis mechanism
There are several methods for determining the nature of interactions between plant extract biomolecules and MNPs. These biological sources are made up of biomolecules like proteins, enzymes, and polysaccharides that catalyze the conversion of metal precursors to NPs. They can function as surfactant-type molecules, lower surface tension and interfacial energy, influence how molecules are oriented on the NP surface, and enhance stability because they are big, amphiphilic molecules. The use of compounds that can lower this energy is necessary because NPs with high surface and/or interfacial energies are unstable and have a propensity to assemble quickly.
It is known that some biomolecules can also function as surfactant-type molecules because of their amphiphilic nature, which influences the surface tension and surface orientation of the molecules. As a result, these molecules can also function as capping agents and reduce surface energy.
Numerous factors, including targeting properties, NPs size, hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity, physical and chemical stability, permeability, surface charge, biocompatibility, biodegradability, cytotoxicity, end product antigenicity, and drug release profile, affect the choice of material method for the production of Nps.

Recent applications of Nps in the management of AD
Anti-amyloid therapy, oxidative stress reduction, and blood-brain barrier crossing for brain-directed activities are the core objectives of AD therapy. Bolus injections of the medication Nps into the brain have various benefits, including the achievement of high brain concentrations without affecting or decreasing blood-brain barrier function, an increase in cerebral cortex vascularity, and a decrease in beta amyloid deposits.

Metal nanoparticles (MNps) in AD therapy
The utilization of MNps is growing as a result of their unique physical, chemical, optical, and mechanical characteristics. In recent years, numerous researchers have been drawn to the biosynthesis of MNps due to its many benefits over traditional synthesis as a result of advancements in medicinal plant research and nanotechnology (fast, facile, safer, energy efficient, more economical, biocompatible and one-pot process). The finest sources of varied phytochemicals for the manufacture of biogenic Nps have been found to be medicinally bioactive plants.
Therapeutic efficacy of different MNps in AD therapy.
Table 6
Nps	Effect	Reference	 	biogenic platinum NPs produced by Bacopa monnieri	Prevent free radical production		 	Zn-PLGANPs	Affect proinflammatory release cytokinesIL−6andIL−18Reduce plaque size in Wild-typeandAPP23mice		 	Biogenic AgNPs	Antioxidant activity and anti-ACHEin adults prague dawleyalbino male rats		 	AgNPs	Glutathione gene expression inmicehippocampus		 	AgNPs	Induction and progression of AD	Huang et al.2014	 	Selenium-containing clioquinol derivatives	Cu(II)-induced Aβ oxidation and aggregationProtective effect in Neuroblastoma cell line		 	Sialic acid-modified SePC12	Crossblood-brain barrier Reduce Aβ aggregation in neuronalcellline		 	PEG chain to Aβ1–42 peptidemonoclonal antibody	Enhance Aβ1–42 elimination through the “sink effect”in AD-like transgenic mice		 	BiphenylethersconjugatedCdSe/ZnS core	Aβ fibrildisruption		 	ZnO	Decrease SOD and GSH-Pxinadultalbino male brain		 	Biogenic lead oxide Nps	Inhibit ChE enzymes		 	Pdhydride NPs	Reduce oxidative stress		 	AuNPs	Inhibit of PC12 cells		 	AuNPs	Inhibit of Aβ42 aggregation		 	Selenium/ Curcumin-loadednanospheres	Decrease amyloid-β plaquesCurcumin binds with β amyloid and iron in plaques		 	AgNPs Citrate cap	Reduce neurotoxicity		 	Cerium-containing NPs (CeONPs)	Increase blood-brain barrier absorption and lack of unintended accumulation in other biological locations		 		CAT and SOD`mimetic activity		 	triphenylphosphonium-conjugated CeONPs	Suppress neuronal death in AD mouse model by attenuate reactive gliosis		 	Gold AuNPs	AuNPs are attached to a collection of Aβ fibrils and destroying it, also lessening the propensity of the protein to combine.		 		small hydrodynamic diameter, small core size, positive zeta potential, hydrophobicity, and good colloid stability		 		AuNPs block Aβ fibrillationDevelop spherical oligomers and fragmented fibrilsStrongly linked to the fibrillar structure.Co-incubated with Aβ than were amine-conjugated AuNPs.Control and prevent Aβ fibrillation,		 	biosynthesized AuNPs using Paeoniamountan root extract	Reduce neuroinflammation and improve motor control in mice affected by AD		 	Terminalia arjuna produces biogenic AuNPs	Decrease Aβ fibrillation processes, inhibitChE enzymes-destroyed mature fibrils.	Sugarnthy et al. 2018	 	Trehalose-functionalized AuNPs	Prevent protein aggregationDisintegration of mature fibrils Inhibit acheReduce Ab fibrillation processesInhibit protein aggregation		 	AuNPs	- inhibit chedisrupting mature fibrils,		 	Biosynthesized of AgNPs from the Mucuna pruriens L. seed extract	Reduce symptoms catalepsy in rats		 	AgNPs biosynthesized useingNepenthes Khasiana extract	Avoid impaired object recognition performanceInhibit ChE enzymes		 	Biosynthesized AgNPs from Malephora lutea and Lampranthuscoccineus extracts	Reduce oxidative stress		 	AgNps	Prevent the formation of amyloid fibrils in reduced lactalbumin.		 	Sialic acid (SA) on the surface of SeNps(SA@SeNps)	lysing Aβ fibrils and inhibiting Aβ aggregation,shield PC12 cells from the toxicity caused by Aβ.possesses high blood brain barrier permeability, outstanding anti-amyloid, and antioxidant capabilities		 		Se-containing clioquinol derivatives in Cu(II)-induced A-oxidation and discovered that these compounds had positive effects on hydrogen peroxide scavenging activity, intracellular ROS production, and induced Aβ-aggregation in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma mobile channel.		 	SeNPs	Prevent Aβ aggregation		 	Tet−1-EGCG@SeNps	Prevent Aβ aggregation and fibrillation and shield PC12 cells from oxidative damage		 	ZnONPs	Accumulate in synaptic vesicles as part of glutamatergic neurons to support brain health		 	ZnONPs	Increase CNS neural excitability by releasing glutamate		 	ZnNPs	Transport to the brain via the blood brain barrier to prevent neurotoxicity		 		Stabilize the neural proteins and make them less susceptible to oxidation		 	Biogenic ZnONPs	Potent antioxidants and strong protectors against pro- oxidant-induced carcinogenicity and tumorigenicity		 		act as a cofactor of SOD to promote the formation of metallothionein to induce scavenging		 		Modulating the NO radicals in the brain.		 	Iron NPs	Strong inhibitor of tau aggregation		 	Iron NP sprepared by Convolvulus pluricaulisaqueous extract	Improve memory and learning in normal rats and rats with scopolamine-induced amnesia.
The eco-friendly MNPs of silver, gold, iron, nickel, platinum, zinc, calcium and palladium have been synthesized by various biogenic approaches, such as using plants, bacteria, and fungi. Among all these biogenic MNps are of considerable interest due to their diverse applications, especially in clinical medicine, biomedical fields (Table 6).

Limitations
Most of the current results for these innovative drug delivery systems are either in vitro or in the mouse model and are only preliminary. When using these NPs in people for clinical purposes, there could be numerous difficulties. Any alteration in the functional activities of a tissue or cell that the NPs come into contact with while moving toward their destination is a little-studied topic. Furthermore, nothing is known about whether and how NPs alter the electrical impulse conduction of the neurons they target. The possibility that nanoparticles themselves are cytotoxic and that their administration could result in neurotoxicity is also a crucial factor to take into account. Furthermore, because these nanomaterials disrupt the integrity of the blood-brain barrier, they may open a channel for the entry of pathogens or harmful chemicals into the brain in addition to therapeutic medications. Moreover, NPs have the ability to disrupt regular cellular metabolism, which raises ROS and modifies gene expression. Even though there are still many unanswered questions, a lot of research is being done, and every advancement in nanotechnologies for medication delivery gets around the current problems. Drug delivery by nanoparticles is becoming more and more significant. A hopeful era in the treatment of AD may be unlocked by new targets such as mutant genes, DNA synthesis, hypoxia, neuroproteins, and neuropilin-1. Additionally, innovative therapeutics such as virus-, protein-, and nucleic acid-based NPs with improved BBB penetration could be employed.
There are still a lot of questions and gaps in the field of NPs application in biology. Even though the research of NPs for biomedical applications has advanced significantly over the past ten years, there are still numerous obstacles to be addressed before these materials are routinely used in clinical settings. More work is needed to develop innovative nanomedicine from the lab to the patient's bedside. Two main concerns with NPs are their toxicity and safety. While many NPs show promise in terms of their effectiveness for drug delivery, imaging, and other biomedical applications, it can be challenging to assess their safety using traditional evaluation techniques due to their peculiar properties, which can also lead to unpredictable toxicity and unanticipated effects on biological systems. Examining the safety profiles of nanomedicine is difficult because to various factors, such as the way in which it is administered, the intricate cellular makeup of the brain, and the modifications made to nanomedicine. It is imperative to thoroughly assess the long-term safety of these chemicals, both in vitro and in vivo, in order to reduce the possibility of unanticipated consequences.
Another difficulty is the requirement for standardization in the synthesis and characterization of NPs. For example, because there are currently no widely established criteria for the characterization and quality control of NPs, it may be difficult to compare the findings of different research or to accurately assess the performance of different types of NPs.
Lastly, the lack of understanding regarding the physiological and pathological pathways underlying AD further impedes the development of therapeutics based on NPs. As research into the underlying molecular causes of AD progresses, greater emphasis will likely be placed on NPs-based therapeutics.

Future prospects
NPs have the ability to attach to diverse molecules and transport them to distinct locations throughout the brain. In order to treat AD, these NPs can also bind several therapies with different purposes, possibly producing synergistic effects. Moreover, NPs allow for the simultaneous administration of therapy when paired with both therapeutic and diagnostic substances. Antibody fragments and NPs work together to create a fantastic theranostic system. Despite the availability of several NPs and antibodies, powerful combinations to create more successful nanomedicine-based immunotherapy for AD have not yet been developed. It is necessary to identify a novel immunotherapeutic target or NPs combination that ensures BBB penetration. Tau protein immunotherapies based on nanomedicines are currently scarce. To validate the development of tau protein immunotherapy employing nanomedicine, more studies in animal models are required. Furthermore, to ascertain the safety of medication formulations, a comprehensive in vivo evaluation of the dose, route of administration, and dosage form is required. To determine the toxicological profile, any alteration or change in the medication's composition requires additional testing. All things considered, using NPs seems to be a promising method for treating AD. Nevertheless, more thorough research is required to provide a reliable and effective nanomedicine against AD.

Conclusions, and viewpoint
The development of therapeutic drug efficacy in the treatment of AD is the goal of NPs-targeted brain drug delivery, which attempts to enhance clinical outcomes. This method of successful symptomatic therapy has received a lot of attention and is still being worked on in order to slow the progression of AD and lessen the known harmful side effects of therapeutic treatment. A number of NPs have been patented for the treatment of AD; some are still in the experimental stage, while others have been reported to be cytotoxic. There is currently no proof of the efficacy and safety margins of utilizing Nps in AD patients, despite the fact that research studies are still being conducted and all of these studies indicate promise for the prevention of AD.
Nanotechnology can be used to more effectively deliver medications to the target region, increasing the potential of bioactive chemicals. It is known that a number of NPs have a sizable capacity to scavenge radicals in the brain. While the majority of the NPs created to date have been through chemical processes, which are linked to these adverse effects, green chemistry-based NPs may be safer and more efficient. Because the field of green nanofabrication is relatively young, further work in biogenic fabrication may pave the way for novel approaches to the treatment of AD.
Even though these studies have shown encouraging findings, more investigation is necessary to properly understand any potential security issues with this particular type of structured NPs. Because of this, caution must be used when thinking about using NPs in clinical applications, and toxicity tests must be performed.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Hamdy Rania: Writing – review & editing. El-Keblawy Ali: Writing – review & editing. Mahdy Ahmed: Writing – review & editing. Abou Baker Doha: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Project administration.

Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Neuroprotective effects of a biodegradable poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid)-ginsenoside Rg3 nanoformulation: a potential nanotherapy for Alzheimer’s disease?
Effect of orally administered zinc oxide nanoparticles on albino rat thymus and spleen
Epigallocatechin gallate inhibits beta amyloid oligomerization in Caenorhabditis elegans and affects the daf-2/insulin-like signaling pathway.
Green biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles using Galaxaura elongata and characterization of their antibacterial activity
An ethnopharmacological review on the therapeutical properties of flavonoids and their mechanisms of actions: a comprehensive review based on up to date knowledge
Exploiting Citrus aurantium seeds and their secondary metabolites in the management of Alzheimer disease
Development of a smart nano-vehicle to target cerebrovascular amyloid deposits and brain parenchymal plaques observed in Alzheimer’s disease and cerebral amyloid angiopathy
Preparation, characterization, and in vivo evaluation of intranasally administered liposomal formulation of donepezil
Protective effect of quercetin in primary neurons against Aβ (1–42): relevance to Alzheimer's disease.
QbD-based rivastigmine tartrate-loaded solid lipid nanoparticles for enhanced intranasal delivery to the brain for Alzheimer’s therapeutics
A review on biosynthesis of nanoparticles by marine organisms
Neurodegenerative diseases and oxidative stress
Polysorbate-coated mesoporous silica nanoparticles as an efficient carrier for improved rivastigmine brain delivery
Neuroprotective effects of green and black teas and their catechin gallate esters against β-amyloid-induced toxicity
Gold nanoparticles for selective and remote heating of β-amyloid protein aggregates
Lipid nanoparticles for intranasal administration: application to nose-to-brain delivery
Six-month randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, pilot clinical trial of curcumin in patients with Alzheimer disease.
Emerging applications of nanotechnology for diagnosis and therapy of disease: a review
Donepezil loaded PLGA-b-PEG nanoparticles: Their ability to induce destabilization of amyloid fibrils and to cross blood brain barrier in vitro
The effect of nanoparticle size on the ability to cross the blood– brain barrier: an in vivo study
Preparation, characterization, in vivo biodistribution and pharmacokinetic studies of donepezil-loaded PLGA nanoparticles for brain targeting
Donepezil nanosuspension intended for nose to brain targeting: in vitro and in vivo safety evaluation
EGCG remodels mature α-synuclein and amyloid-β fibrils and reduces cellular toxicity
Nanomaterials for the treatment and diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: an overview
Oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease: a possibility for prevention
Ultra-low fouling and functionalizable zwitterionic coatings grafted onto SiO2 via a biomimetic adhesive group for sensing and detection in complex media
Antibody- functionalized polymer nanoparticle leading to memory recovery in Alzheimer's disease- like transgenic mouse model
Drugs for Alzheimer’s disease: are they effective?
Silver nanoparticles induced hippocampal neuronal damage involved in mitophagy, mitochondrial biogenesis and synaptic degeneration
Graphene oxide-gold star construct on triangular electrodes for Alzheimer’s disease identification
Oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease
Highly stabilized curcumin nanoparticles tested in an in vitro blood–brain barrier model and in Alzheimer’s disease Tg2576 mice
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate enhances clearance of phosphorylated tau in primary neurons.
The green tea polyphenol (−)-epigallocatechin gallate attenuates β-amyloid-induced neurotoxicity in cultured hippocampal neurons
Evaluation of the kinetic and catalytic properties of biogenically synthesized silver nanoparticles
Amyloid-β fibrillogenesis: structural insight and therapeutic intervention
EGCG redirects amyloidogenic polypeptides into unstructured, off-pathway oligomers
Chemical, biological, and molecular studies on different citrus species wastes
Progress and prospects of magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles in biomedical applications: a review
Electrosteric stealth Rivastigmine loaded liposomes for brain targeting: preparation, characterization, ex vivo, bio-distribution and in vivo pharmacokinetic studies
Metalnanoparticles fabricated by green chemistry using natural extracts: biosynthesis, mechanisms, and applications
Development and evaluation of rivastigmine loaded chitosan nanoparticles for brain targeting
A quantum dot probe conjugated with Aβ antibody for molecular imaging of Alzheimer’s disease in a mouse model.
EGCG functions through estrogen receptor-mediated activation of ADAM10 in the promotion of non-amyloidogenic processing of APP
The role of amyloid β peptide 42 in Alzheimer's disease
Galantamine-loaded PLGA nanoparticles, from nano-emulsion templating, as novel advanced drug delivery systems to treat neurodegenerative diseases
Phenolic anti-inflammatory antioxidant reversal of Aβ-induced cognitive deficits and neuropathology
Curcumin labels amyloid pathology in vivo, disrupts existing plaques, and partially restores distorted neurites in an Alzheimer mouse model
Clinical applications of coenzyme Q10
Modulation of amyloid protein fibrillation by synthetic polymers: Recent advances in the context of neurodegenerative diseases
Curcumin, the active constituent of turmeric, inhibits amyloid peptide-induced cytochemokine gene expression and CCR5-mediated chemotaxis of THP-1 monocytes by modulating early growth response-1 transcription factor
Upconverting nanoparticles: assessing the toxicity
Quercetin exerts differential neuroprotective effects against H 2 O 2 and Aβ aggregates in hippocampal neurons: the role of mitochondria.
Silver nanoparticles reduce brain inflammation and related neurotoxicity through induction of H2S-synthesizing enzymes
Receptor specific, stimuli responsive and subcellular targeted approaches for effective therapy of Alzheimer: role of surface engineered nanocarriers
The role of lipid–protein interactions in amyloid-type protein fibril formation
Lactoferrin coupled lower generation PAMAM dendrimers for brain targeted delivery of memantine in aluminum-chloride-induced Alzheimer’s disease in mice
Detection of isolated cerebrovascular β-amyloid with Pittsburgh compound B
Biphenyl ethers conjugated CdSe/ZnS core/shell quantum dots and interpretation of the mechanism of amyloid fibril disruption
Antiviral potential of green synthesized silver nanoparticles of Lampranthuscoccineus and Malephora lutea
Neuroprotective effects of resveratrol against β-amyloid-induced neurotoxicity in rat hippocampal neurons: involvement of protein kinase C
Green tea catechins prevent cognitive deficits caused by Aβ1–40 in rats
Advancements in nanotherapeutics for Alzheimer’s disease: current perspectives
Biogenic synthesis of gold and silver nanoparticles used in environmental applications: a review
Plant-mediated green synthesis of iron nanoparticles
The effect of nanoparticle size on in vivo pharmacokinetics and cellular interaction
Chiral gold nanoparticles enantioselectively rescue memory deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease
Neuroprotective effect of gold nanoparticles composites in Parkinson's disease model
A novel synthesis of selenium nanoparticles encapsulated PLGA nanospheres with curcumin molecules for the inhibition of amyloid β aggregation in Alzheimer's disease
Marine algal sterol hydrocarbon with anti-inflammatory, anticancer and anti-oxidant properties
Amelioration of cognitive deficits and neurodegeneration by curcumin in rat model of sporadic dementia of Alzheimer's type (SDAT)
Potential therapeutic effect of nanobased formulation of rivastigmine on rat model of Alzheimer’s disease
Protective effect of resveratrol on β-amyloid-induced oxidative PC12 cell death
Green tea catechins as a BACE1 (β-secretase) inhibitor
Vitamin D-binding protein-loaded PLGA nanoparticles suppress Alzheimer's disease-related pathology in 5XFAD mice
In vivo pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of resveratrol-loaded solid lipid nanoparticles for brain delivery.
Biological consequences of zinc deficiency in the pathomechanisms of selected diseases
Polymer nanomaterials for drug delivery across the blood brain barrier
Revolutionizing Neurotherapeutics: Nanocarriers Unveiling the Potential of Phytochemicals in Alzheimer's Disease
Kapetanović, I. ed., 2011. Drug Discovery and Development: Present and Future. BoD– Books on Demand.
Nanoparticle therapy is a promising approach in the management and prevention of many diseases: does it help in curing Alzheimer disease?
Biosynthesis and potential applications of silver and gold nanoparticles and their chitosan-based nanocomposites in nanomedicine
Neurotheranostics as personalized medicines
In vitro cholinesterase enzymes inhibitory potential and in silico molecular docking studies of biogenic metal oxides nanoparticles
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate suppresses NF-κB activation and phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and JNK in human astrocytoma U373MG cells
Curcuminoids from Curcuma longa L.(Zingiberaceae) that protect PC12 rat pheochromocytoma and normal human umbilical vein endothelial cells from βA (1–42) insult
The amyloid state and its association with protein misfolding diseases
Impact of resveratrol on glucose control, hippocampal structure and connectivity, and memory performance in patients with mild cognitive impairment.
Nanoparticle-mediated local and remote manipulation of protein aggregation
Zinc deficiency and its effect on the brain: an update
Neuroprotective effects of resveratrol against intracerebroventricular colchicine-induced cognitive impairment and oxidative stress in rats
Plant-mediated synthesis of silver and gold nanoparticles and their applications
Mitochondria-targeting ceria nanoparticles as antioxidants for Alzheimer’s disease
Resveratrol selectively remodels soluble oligomers and fibrils of amyloid Aβ into off-pathway conformers
Estimation and partitioning of polygenic variation captured by common SNPs for Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis and endometriosis.
Neuroprotection and neurorescue against Aβ toxicity and PKC-dependent release of non-amyloidogenic soluble precursor protein by green tea polyphenol (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate
Pharmacokinetic behavior and efficiency of acetylcholinesterase inhibition in rat brain after intranasal administration of galanthamine hydrobromide loaded flexible liposomes
Dynamic supraparticles for the treatment of age-related diseases
The curry spice curcumin reduces oxidative damage and amyloid pathology in an Alzheimer transgenic mouse
The inhibitory effects of different curcuminoids on β-amyloid protein, β-amyloid precursor protein and β- site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 in swAPP HEK293 cells
Nanoparticle technology for drug delivery across the blood-brain barrier
Discovery of ADDL-targeting small molecule drugs for Alzheimer's disease
Nanodelivery of phytobioactivecompoundsfortreatingaging-associated disorders
Curcumin suppresses soluble tau dimers and corrects molecular chaperone, synaptic, and behavioral deficits in aged human tau transgenic mice.
A comprehensive review of magnetoencephalography (MEG) studies for brain functionality in healthy aging and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Green nanosilver as reinforcing eco-friendly additive to epoxy coating for augmented anticorrosive and antimicrobial behavior
Resveratrol promotes clearance of Alzheimer's disease amyloid-β peptides
Polymeric nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery system for cancer therapy
Nanoparticles for brain drug delivery
Effects of various flavonoids on the α‐synuclein fibrillation process.
Galantamine-loaded solid–lipid nanoparticles for enhanced brain delivery: Preparation, characterization, in vitro and in vivo evaluations
Nanoparticles for direct nose-to-brain delivery of drugs
Review of nanomaterial aging and transformations through the life cycle of nano-enhanced products
Preparation, Optimization, and Evaluation of Methoxy Poly(ethylene glycol)-co-Poly(ε-caprolactone) Nanoparticles Loaded by Rivastigmine for Brain Delivery
Bioactivity and antidiabetic properties of Malva parviflora L. leaves extract and its nano-formulation in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats
Cerium oxide- decorated γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles: Design, synthesis and in vivo effects on parameters of oxidative stress
Resveratrol regulates neuro-inflammation and induces adaptive immunity in Alzheimer’s disease.
Green synthesis of biogenic metal nanoparticles by terrestrial and aquatic phototrophic and heterotrophic eukaryotes and biocompatible agents
Nanotechnology solutions for Alzheimer's disease: advances in research tools, diagnostic methods and therapeutic agents
Nanotechnology for Alzheimer's disease detection and treatment
Bacopa monnieri phytochemicals mediated synthesis of platinum nanoparticles and its neurorescue effect on 1-methyl 4-phenyl 1, 2, 3, 6 tetrahydropyridine-induced experimental parkinsonism in zebrafish
Drug penetration into the central nervous system: pharmacokinetic concepts and in vitro model systems
Pharmacodynamic, pharmacokinetic and pharmacogenetic aspects of drugs used in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease
Curcumin has potent anti‐amyloidogenic effects for Alzheimer's β‐amyloid fibrils in vitro.
Potent anti-amyloidogenic and fibril-destabilizing effects of polyphenols in vitro: implications for the prevention and therapeutics of Alzheimer's disease.
Cell encapsulation: promise and progress
Surface-adaptive zwitterionic nanoparticles for prolonged blood circulation time and enhanced cellular uptake in tumor cells
Role of plant phytochemicals and microbial enzymes in biosynthesis of metallic nanoparticles
Phyto-therapeutic and nanomedicinal approaches to cure Alzheimer’s disease: present status and future opportunities
Alzheimer's disease and blood– brain barrier function—Why have anti-β-amyloid therapies failed to prevent dementia progression?
Quercetin nanoparticles attenuates scopolamine induced spatial memory deficits and pathological damages in rats. Bulletin of Faculty of Pharmacy,
Preventive effect of quercetin in a triple transgenic Alzheimer’s disease mice model
Carbohydrate based nanoparticles for drug delivery across biological barriers
Autophagy-dependent mechanism of genistein-mediated elimination of behavioral and biochemical defects in the rat model of sporadic Alzheimer's disease.
Biosynthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles using aqueous extract of convolvulus pluricaulis plant, its characterization and acute oral toxicity studies
Intracerebroventricular injection of resveratrol ameliorated Aβ-induced learning and cognitive decline in mice.
Expression of genes related to oxidative stress in the mouse brain after exposure to silver-25 nanoparticles
Protective effects of a natural product, curcumin, against amyloid β induced mitochondrial and synaptic toxicities in Alzheimer's disease.
Investigation of the zinc oxide nanoparticles effect on testosterone, cholesterol and cortisol in rats
Green tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) modulates amyloid precursor protein cleavage and reduces cerebral amyloidosis in Alzheimer transgenic mice.
Neuroprotective effect of quercetin nanoparticles: A possible prophylactic and therapeutic role in alzheimer’s disease
Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic evaluation of nasal liposome and nanoparticle based rivastigmine formulations in acute and chronic models of Alzheimer’s disease
Liposome delivery systems for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease
Cerium oxide nanoparticles in neuroprotection and considerations for efficacy and safety
Bactericidal and in-vitro cytotoxic efficacy of silver nanoparticles (Ag-NPs) fabricated by endophytic actinomycetes and their use as coating for the textile fabrics
Dermal pharmacokinetics of rivastigmine-loaded liposomes: an ex vivo–in vivo correlation study
Memantine loaded PLGA PEGylated nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease: In vitro and in vivo characterization
The role of the brain renin-angiotensin system in neurodegenerative disorders.
Application of quality by design approach for intranasal delivery of rivastigmine loaded solid lipid nanoparticles: Effect on formulation and characterization parameters
Simonis, F. and Schilthuizen, S., 2006. Nanotechnology; Innovation Opportunities for Tomorrow’s Defence, Report TNO Science & Industry Future Technology Center, the Netherlands.
Biological synthesis of nanoparticles from plants and microorganisms
Nanolipidic particles improve the bioavailability and α-secretase inducing ability of epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease
Oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease
Novel palladium tagged ferrite nanoparticle supported ionic liquid phase catalyst for the efficient copper-free Sonogashira coupling.
Quercetin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles: a highly effective antibacterial agent in vitro and anti-infection application in vivo.
Nose to Brain Delivery of Galantamine Loaded Nanoparticles: In-vivo Pharmacodynamic and Biochemical Study in Mice
Effect of green synthesis of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) from Hibiscus sabdariffa on the aggregation of α-lactalbumin
Bisphenol-A mediated inhibition of hippocampal neurogenesis attenuated by curcumin via canonical Wnt pathway.
ApoE-Targeting Increases the Transfer of Solid Lipid Nanoparticles with Donepezil Cargo across a Culture Model of the Blood–Brain Barrier
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of resveratrol for Alzheimer disease
Transferrin-and transferrin- receptor-antibody-modified nanoparticles enable drug delivery across the blood–brain barrier (BBB)
Phenolic, flavonoid contents, anticholinesterase and antioxidant evaluation of Iris germanica var; florentina
Mitigating effect of chrysin loaded solid lipid nanoparticles against Amyloid β25–35 induced oxidative stress in rat hippocampal region: an efficient formulation approach for Alzheimer's disease
Reduced plaque size and inflammation in the APP23 mouse model for Alzheimer’s disease after chronic application of polymeric nanoparticles for CNS targeted zinc delivery
Evaluation of neurological effects of cerium dioxide nanoparticles doped with different amounts of zirconium following inhalation exposure in mouse models of Alzheimer's and vascular disease
Design, synthesis, and evaluation of multitarget-directed selenium-containing clioquinol derivatives for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease
A comprehensive review of green synthesis of copper oxide nanoparticles and their diverse biomedical applications
Chitosan nanoparticles as a new delivery system for the anti-Alzheimer drug tacrine
Long-term treatment of Alzheimer disease: efficacy and safety of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
The green tea polyphenol (−)-epigallocatechin gallate prevents the aggregation of tau protein into toxic oligomers at substoichiometric ratios.
Low dose resveratrol improves cerebrovascular function in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Neuroprotective effect of biosynthesised gold nanoparticles synthesised from root extract of Paeonia moutan against Parkinson disease–in vitro & In vivo model
Curcumin inhibits formation of amyloid β oligomers and fibrils, binds plaques, and reduces amyloid in vivo.
Sialic acid (SA)-modified selenium nanoparticles coated with a high blood–brain barrier permeability peptide-B6 peptide for potential use in Alzheimer’s disease
Anti- Alzheimer potential, metabolomic profiling and molecular docking of green synthesized silver nanoparticles of Lampranthuscoccineus and Malephora lutea aqueous extracts
Anti-inflammatory effects of curcumin in microglial cells.
Strategies for transporting nanoparticles across the blood–brain barrier
Dual-functional nanoparticles targeting amyloid plaques in the brains of Alzheimer's disease mice.
Sustained release of bioactive hydrogen by Pd hydride nanoparticles overcomes Alzheimer's disease
Epigallocatechin- 3-gallate (EGCG)-stabilized selenium nanoparticles coated with Tet-1 peptide to reduce amyloid-β aggregation and cytotoxicity
Dual- functional nanoparticles for precise drug delivery to Alzheimer’s disease lesions: Targeting mechanisms, pharmacodynamics and safety
Nanoparticles: A Hope for the Treatment of Inflammation in CNS
Vascular oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease
Potential applications of biogenic selenium nanoparticles in alleviating biotic and abiotic stresses in plants: A comprehensive insight on the mechanistic approach and future perspectives.
Anisotropic slip magneto-bioconvection flow from a rotating cone to a nanofluid with Stefan blowing effects

Data availability
Available.