Management of Gastrointestinal Symptoms in Parkinson’s Disease
Gastrointestinal symptoms in Parkinson’s disease (PD) are among the most prevalent and debilitating of complications and present unique diagnostic and management challenges. Patients with PD commonly experience dysphagia, nausea, bloating, and constipation related to pathologic involvement of the enteric nervous system. In turn, gastrointestinal complications may impact motor fluctuations and the efficacy of levodopa therapy. This review will explore the common gastrointestinal manifestations of PD with an emphasis on clinical presentation, workup, and treatment strategies.
Gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms in Parkinson’s disease (PD) are among the most prevalent and debilitating of nonmotor complications. As many as 81% of patients with PD develop GI disturbances, with constipation, dysphagia, and nausea and vomiting among the most frequent symptoms (Fig. 1). For many patients with severe PD, the burden of GI symptoms has a greater impact on quality of life than even motor symptoms. Like with other disorders of gut-brain interaction, the relationship between GI symptoms and mental health in PD is bidirectional: A recent study found that in PD both anxiety and depression were predicted by the degree of GI symptom burden, and inversely, worse anxiety and depression significantly predicted the development of poorer GI symptoms. Over the last decades, significant attention has been paid to GI symptoms manifesting not only after a PD diagnosis, but in fact, occurring as many as 20 years prior. Indeed, our group has identified 4 main prodromal GI symptoms in a case-control study of PD, namely: dry mouth, heartburn, dysphagia, and constipation, with no significant differences between males and females (Fig. 2). Because of newer evidence in this regard, constipation was recently added to the diagnostic criteria for prodromal PD by the Movement Disorder Society Task Force on the Definition of Parkinson’s Disease.
Gastrointestinal complications related to Parkinson’s disease. GI indicates gastrointestinal; PD, Parkinson’s disease; SIBO, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
Time from gastrointestinal symptoms to Parkinson’s disease diagnosis. Figure reproduced with permission. GI indicates gastrointestinal.
The earlier onset of GI symptoms underscores the proposed pathophysiological gut-brain pathway of PD, popularized by Braak’s hypothesis. A rostrocaudal theory of PD posits that neurotropic triggers originating in the gut, such as viral, environmental, or involving other disturbances to the microbiome, propagate via the vagus nerve to the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, where ultimately 50% of neurons are lost in PD, and later the substantia nigra. This gut-brain axis of PD has been supported in multiple murine models, and in epidemiological studies demonstrating reduced risk of PD among those who have undergone truncal vagotomy. However, it has long been established that the gut-brain axis is bidirectional, and conflicting murine studies have also emerged to reveal the consequences of nigrostriatal denervation on the GI tract. Others have argued that it is possible that the pathologic changes observed in the central nervous system (CNS) and enteric nervous system (ENS) may represent simultaneous susceptibility to a systemic process. Figure 3 presents a schematic diagram of the proposed interplay between the CNS and ENS in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s and related symptoms.
Schematic of proposed interplay between the central nervous system and ENS in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease and related complications. ENS indicates enteric nervous system; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; MHC, major histocompatability complex; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; Th, T-helper cell.
Yet despite many advances in understanding the gut’s mechanistic role in PD and the high prevalence of GI symptoms which greatly impact patient quality of life, few patients with PD receive the help of a gastroenterologist (Fig. 4). In a retrospective study of our tertiary care center, only 12% of patients with PD were referred for consultation by a gastroenterologist, but when a referral occurred, significant changes in diagnoses and treatment were made. Gastroenterology consult is an underutilized resource in this population as the nuances of GI symptoms in PD can present unique diagnostic and management challenges for which a specialist may be best equipped to handle.
Prevalence of GI symptoms and referral for GI consultation among patients with Parkinson’s disease in outpatient tertiary neurology clinic. Figure reproduced with permission.
Here we review the common clinical presentations of individual GI complications of PD with an approach to workup and management based on the most recent evidence and guidelines. For the purposes of this review, we will focus on esophageal dysphagia, nausea and vomiting, bloating, and constipation. In addition, we review the mechanisms behind the suspected effect of GI dysmotility on the absorption of antiparkinsonian drugs with a suggested approach in such cases of worsening motor fluctuations.

ESOPHAGEAL DYSPHAGIA
Dysphagia is among the most common GI symptoms in PD. Studies of dysphagia prevalence in this population have largely focused on oropharyngeal dysphagia, the management of which has been thoroughly reviewed elsewhere. The etiology of esophageal dysphagia is not yet well-understood but has long been thought to involve defective coordination of the esophageal musculature due to the involvement of the dorsal nuclear vagus of the brainstem. However, like other GI symptoms, dysphagia has been known to occur before motor manifestations of PD, and patients with PD demonstrate marked histopathologic abnormalities of the esophageal ENS. Postmortem studies of patients with PD have revealed increased Lewy bodies in the mid- and especially distal esophagus at the level of the myenteric plexus, but the correlation of esophageal Lewy pathology with dysphagia symptom severity or with esophageal manometric pattern has not been established. Regardless, esophageal dysphagia remains an important entity to address both in terms of the nutritional and symptomatic needs of patients, but also to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia, a common cause of death in PD. Dysphagia is also associated with an increased risk of malnutrition among patients with PD, and accounts for about 50% of referrals for percutaneous gastrostomy tube placements in this population. In addition, dysphagia is associated with higher levels of depression and lower quality of life.
Esophageal motility disorders per Chicago classification criteria are present in about one-third of patients with PD, although minor alterations in manometry parameters compared to normative data are present in 95% of patients with PD. Such abnormalities are present in even early stages of PD. While up to 8 out of 10 patients with PD may report difficulty swallowing, esophageal dysphagia, in particular, may be suggested by a history of food impactions or the sensation of food “stuck in throat or chest” after swallowing, often by referring to discomfort around the sternal notch. Often in conjunction with a videofluoroscopic swallowing study or fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing to evaluate any possible oropharyngeal contribution to symptoms, we recommend high-resolution esophageal manometry testing, where available.
The most common disorders of esophageal motility found in PD, per Chicago classification criteria, are ineffective esophageal motility (IEM), distal esophageal spasm (DES), and esophagogastric junction outflow obstruction (EGJOO)—with frank achalasia being relatively rare.

IEM
Management of these disorders in symptomatic can be challenging, even outside the Parkinson’s population. In the case of IEM, our understanding of the natural history is somewhat limited, but one study demonstrated that in the general population, IEM does not progress over time. Patients with IEM are at an increased risk of severe gastroesophageal reflux disease symptom severity, although the data are unclear whether one is causative of another, and indeed improvement of hypocontractility after antireflux surgery has been previously shown. Therefore, in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease symptoms, it is reasonable to treat with proton pump inhibitor therapy, but a recent small study did not show a clear pattern of improved esophageal motility associated with 6 months of such treatment.
The mainstay of treatment in IEM is prokinetic agents, but unfortunately, there is a paucity of studies specifically evaluating outcomes of IEM in the PD population. While metoclopramide, a dopaminergic antagonist, is often used in the general motility disorder population, this medication, as well as other dopamine full or partial antagonists such as buspirone, should be strictly avoided in the PD population with IEM. Table 1 summarizes common GI medications that should be avoided in PD. Furthermore, the benefit of metoclopramide in IEM has not been robustly proven. We, therefore, recommend serotonin-modulating agents as the first-line agents for IEM in PD. The most commonly prescribed of these is prucalopride, which has a high affinity and specificity for 5-HT4 receptors, resulting in the release of acetylcholine to promote motility throughout the gut, and in the treatment of IEM, potentially enhancing the primary peristalsis of the esophagus. Alternatives include erythromycin, which warrants the consideration of corrected heart-rate interval prolongation and should be dosed in an on-off fashion due to tachyphylaxis (in our practice, we often recommend 5 days of treatment “on,” and then 2 days of a drug holiday “off”). While bethanechol, a muscarinic receptor agonist, has been shown to improve esophageal contraction pressures and bolus transit of patients with severe IEM in a small pilot study, its cholinergic side effects, particularly nausea and urinary frequency, make this a suboptimal choice in the PD population.
Common GI Medications Contraindicated in Parkinson’s Disease
Medication	Mechanism of action	Purpose	 	Prochlorperazine (Compazine)	Blocks central D2 receptors	Anti-emetic	 	Promethazine (Phenergan)	Blocks central D2 receptors	Anti-emetic	 	Metoclopramide (Reglan)	Blocks central D2 receptors	Anti-emetic	 	Buspirone (Buspar)	5HT1A receptor partial agonist, weak D2 antagonist	Anxiolytic, used off-label for nausea	 	Haloperidol (Haldol)	Blocks central D2 receptors	Typical antipsychotic, used off-label for nausea	 	Olanzapine (Zyprexa)	Blocks central D2 receptors and serotonin receptors. Can dissociate more quickly than typical antipsychotics.	Atypical antipsychotic, used off-label for nausea	 	Amoxapine (Asendin)	Blocks central D2 receptors in addition to cholinergic, muscarinic, and histaminergic receptors.	Tricyclic antidepressant, used off-label for chronic abdominal pain, visceral hypersensitivity

DES
The first step in the evaluation and treatment of DES is to assess the degree of underlying reflux as approximately one-third of patients with DES in the general population have pathologic acid exposure. The prevalence of reflux among patients with DES PD has not been studied; however, patients with PD have nearly twice the odds of experiencing heartburn symptoms compared to the general population, and spastic disorders of the esophagus like DES may be a reactive clearance mechanism in response to reflux as well as to peptic strictures. In these patients, we therefore first recommend a trial of proton pump inhibition with possible additional diagnostics including ambulatory pH monitoring (off acid suppression) as well as the evaluation on upper endoscopy for a possible stricture with consideration of empiric dilation.
Other pharmacotherapies for DES include smooth muscle relaxants such as calcium channel blockers or phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors. These carry notable side effects (hypotension and dizziness are of particular concern if the patient has autonomic dysfunction), and randomized controlled trials of both medications primarily evaluated their effects on chest pain, rather than dysphagia.
In patients who have failed treatment as above, it is worthwhile to consider timed barium swallow or endoFLIP, if available, to assess any possible intervenable pathology at the lower esophageal sphincter. These interventions will be reviewed under the management of EGJOO.

EGJOO
Manometric EGJOO in patients with PD with dysphagia should prompt a second confirmatory diagnostic study such as a timed barium swallow (with a 13 mm tablet) or endoFLIP. First-line therapy for EGJOO includes endoscopic pneumatic dilation with a response rate of 69.6% or potentially botulinum toxin injection to the lower esophageal sphincter with a comparably favorable response rate of 63.6%. It should be noted that the effect of botulinum toxin injection often wears off by 6 to 12 months postprocedure, and repeated injections may affect the patient’s candidacy for per oral endoscopic myotomy. Of note, while these data are based on interventions performed in the general EGJOO population, a small pilot study of patients with PD with various esophageal motility disorders not limited to EGJOO (n=3) demonstrated the feasibility and safety of botulinum toxin injection to the lower esophageal sphincter specifically among patients with PD. Indeed, botulinum toxin treatment has been used successfully in other complications of PD such as tremor, dystonia, and neurogenic bladder. However, larger prospective studies are warranted before botulinum toxin injections could be more commonly recommended outside the standard indications in EGJOO.
Surgical or per oral endoscopic myotomy in EGJOO has to date been evaluated in small uncontrolled studies and has not been specifically evaluated in the PD population. Although well established in the treatment of achalasia, the results of myotomy in EGJOO, in general, have been variable. Nonetheless, for patients with severe symptoms and refractory to alternative treatments, these options may be discussed including the potential risks of perforation and aggravation of reflux.

NAUSEA AND VOMITING
Nausea and vomiting are highly prevalent features of PD, with gastroparesis being present in at least 70% of cases. While gastroparesis is currently diagnosed with a gold standard study of gastric emptying scintigraphy, this test correlates poorly with symptom severity and lacks reproducibility, commonly turning negative if repeat testing is performed on the same person in whom it was recently positive (and vice versa). Furthermore, in many cases of delayed gastric emptying in PD, patients are asymptomatic, and the only FDA-approved medication for gastroparesis, the antidopaminergic agent metoclopramide, should be avoided in patients with PD as discussed previously.
Several hypotheses exist regarding the pathophysiology of nausea and vomiting in PD, including a consequence of levodopa therapy itself, which can delay gastric emptying. As in the esophagus, postmortem studies have demonstrated alpha-synuclein deposition in the stomach (though sampling location and techniques have had mixed results), and studies have consistently demonstrated alterations in intestinal permeability in PD, supporting Braak’s hypothesis by which PD arises within the enteric nervous, triggered by a pathogen in the gut lumen.
However, because of the heterogeneity in technique assessing alpha-synuclein deposition in the gut, studies have not reproducibly demonstrated an association between such aggregates and GI symptoms. Other theories include decreased serum ghrelin, a key hormone in gastric emptying that is decreased in patients with PD, as well as alterations in the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway as demonstrated in a murine model of PD. These remain key areas of ongoing research.
We recommend beginning the evaluation with gastric emptying scintigraphy as there are a handful of off-label treatments for gastroparesis for which a formal diagnosis may be useful. But because of the aforementioned issues, regardless of delayed gastric emptying, the presence and degree of symptoms should guide the treatment, consistent with the most recent general gastroparesis guidelines published by the American College of Gastroenterology.
While metoclopramide is contraindicated in PD because it crosses the blood-brain barrier, domperidone, a similar dopamine antagonist, does not cross the blood-brain barrier and can be carefully considered in patients with PD. However, this medication, though efficacious in improving nausea and vomiting, is not approved for sale in the United States, largely stemming from the concern regarding cardiac arrhythmia, particularly at doses above 30 mg daily.
Since 2019, 2 randomized controlled trials evaluating prucalopride, a 5-HT4 agonist, in gastroparesis have shown mixed results in symptom improvement. Because of this drug’s efficacy in constipation, it is reasonable to pursue a trial of prucalopride especially in patients who suffer from both. Constipation, in general, is a key consideration in patients with symptoms of nausea and vomiting. Thirty-four percent of such patients have concomitant severe to very severe constipation, and increasing severity of constipation is associated with increasing symptoms of gastroparesis. It is therefore prudent to also perform a thorough review of a patient’s bowel habits to assess any underlying constipation that may, in fact, aggravate their “upper GI” symptoms. Workup and management of constipation in PD will be further reviewed below.
Other medications that have been studied in chronic nausea include aprepitant and tradipitant, neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists, Randomized controlled trials of both aprepitant and tradipitant demonstrated meaningful improvements in nausea and vomiting per Gastroparesis Cardinal Symptom Index scores among patients with gastroparesis. These drugs have not been studied in PD specifically; however, neurokinin-1 antagonism has been shown to exert neuroprotective activities in early PD. Erythromycin can be trialed in patients with similar caveats to their use in esophageal dysmotility described previously—namely, with regard to tachyphylaxis and possible cardiac side effects. We usually prescribe oral suspension of erythromycin in 50 mg doses to be taken ~30 minutes before meals. Lastly, a survey of patients with chronic nausea revealed marijuana (especially with more severe symptoms), ondansetron, and promethazine to be perceived as the most effective treatments. However, promethazine, in addition to being an H1 receptor antagonist, is also a dopamine and muscarinic antagonist, and so should be avoided in the PD population. Other important dopamine antagonists often used as anti-emetics, haloperidol, and prochlorperazine, are also contraindicated in PD.
Lastly, although gastric per oral endoscopy myotomy is a novel intervention that has shown promise in open-label studies for gastroparesis, long-term sham-controlled randomized trial data are still needed before this can be routinely recommended, much less in the PD population where it has not yet been thoroughly examined.

BLOATING AND MOTOR FLUCTUATIONS
Chronic bloating often poses a therapeutic challenge. Approximately 1 in 4 patients with PD suffer from bloating, and bloating is the GI symptom most associated with referral to a GI specialist for management in this population. In addition to being difficult to treat, this is perhaps driven by a common concern among neurologists treating patients with PD that bloating, as a reflection of an underlying motility disorder, contributes to motor fluctuations, a phenomenon in which patients with PD on levodopa therapy experience a decline in the usual benefit from a dose of the medication.
From a patient’s perspective, regardless of motor fluctuations, bloating is a bothersome symptom and warrants attention. The etiology of bloating can be broadly grouped into 5 factors (and maybe multifactorial): diet, abnormal bowel habits, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO), visceral hypersensitivity (related to a disorder of gut-brain interaction), or abdomino-phrenic dyssynergia. Because of a paucity of data on PD-specific bloating targets, these 5 broad factors should each be considered in the PD population. Workup and management of these possibilities have been extensively reviewed elsewhere and we will focus on SIBO in the PD population here. In addition, there are several other important causes of bloating to be considered outside the traditional luminal gastroenterology realm as well as including ovarian pathology (particularly, with new bloating in a postmenopausal female), ascites, pancreatic insufficiency, and the use of continuous positive airway pressure.

SIBO
The clinical implications of SIBO have been a subject of heated debate in the gastroenterological literature for years. The very definition of SIBO—precisely what threshold of bacterial density constitutes “overgrowth”—as well as the optimal way to diagnose this, and how such a diagnosis relates to symptoms or indeed, responds to treatment, are all areas that continue to evolve. Originally formulated as potentially injurious colonization of the small bowel by colonic bacteria in high-risk patients with evidence of malabsorption, SIBO has since been invoked as a general cause of bloating in average-risk patients and those with functional GI disorders. Symptoms attributed to SIBO in addition to bloating are abdominal pain, diarrhea, flatulence, and nutritional deficiencies. Several diseases or physiological changes are associated with SIBO, including PD, such as scleroderma or surgical alterations in GI anatomy. Although the etiology is multifactorial, small intestinal transit time has been shown to be delayed in SIBO and can occur even when gastric emptying time is normal.
Patients with PD are more than twice as likely to have SIBO than controls—with a prevalence as high as 55%. The presence of SIBO has also been shown to be associated with the Hoehn and Yahr stage and Unified PD rating score in PD. Unfortunately, the relationship between a positive SIBO test (most commonly lactulose and/or glucose breath tests) and GI symptoms has been understudied in PD. Furthermore, a prospective study by Fasano et al found that 42.9% of patients with PD were SIBO-positive again 6 months after eradication.
Given the higher prevalence and pathophysiologic plausibility in this population, it is reasonable to test for SIBO in patients with symptomatic PD and treat if positive (typically with a 14-day course of rifaximin, which has been shown, albeit heterogeneously, to improve symptoms attributed to SIBO). In patients with recurrent symptoms after initial benefit, a discussion of the risks and benefits of retreatment with an additional course of antibiotics should be considered on a case-by-case basis.

Motor Fluctuations and Dysmotility
In a study of 31 patients with PD, delayed gastric emptying as measured by (13)C-octanoic acid expiration breath testing was shown to be associated with a slower onset of plasma levodopa peak, suggesting a correlation with motor fluctuations. Levodopa is absorbed in the small bowel but is metabolized by DOPA decarboxylase, which can be found in the stomach. There has been long-standing dogma in the neurological literature that motility disorders associated with bloating like gastroparesis, which in theory prolongs exposure to these enzymes, may contribute to worsening motor control through early degradation of levodopa, limiting the amount available for absorption. Other studies, however, have demonstrated contradictory findings, and failed to support this hypothesis, and our group recently found no association between dysmotility symptoms and a need for increasing levodopa requirements.
Of note, infection with Helicobacter pylori has been shown in several prospective studies to be associated with motor fluctuations, potentially related to mucosal inflammation. A recent cross-sectional study of over 100 patients with PD found that while SIBO was interestingly not associated with worse bloating, it independently predicted worse motor function. The study by Fasano et al demonstrated an improvement in motor fluctuations after treatment of SIBO with rifaximin. Therefore, when motor fluctuations are a concern, we do routinely test for H. pylori and SIBO. Further mechanistic studies are needed to elucidate a possible link between the myriad of possible underlying etiologies of “dysmotility” and motor fluctuations—and if present, how these may be optimally managed medically.

CONSTIPATION
Constipation is among the most common GI complaints in PD and has consistently been demonstrated to appear well in advance of motor symptoms—even up to 20 years before PD diagnosis. Indeed, increasing severity of constipation is associated with a likelihood of later developing PD (hazard ratio: 10.47 [9.46-11.58] for severe constipation). As in other segments of the GI tract, several studies have noted the presence of alpha-synuclein deposition, in the colon, predominantly examining the submucosal plexus, although a handful have also examined the myenteric plexus. Because of small sample sizes and heterogeneity in study design, there remains inadequate data to draw concrete correlations between constipation symptom severity and the extent or precise location of abnormal alpha-synuclein depositions as well as with neuronal loss. However, it has been proposed that Lewy body pathology in the ENS is linked to vagal neurodegeneration, reduced peristalsis, dysregulation of intestinal secretions, and dysbiosis as well as inflammation—all of which contribute to constipation.
Furthermore, depression and constipation in PD appear to be closely related, potentially related to alpha-synuclein involvement of critical nuclei in the brainstem as well as the depletion of 5-HT that shares a role in both mood and GI motility.
Constipation in PD generally falls into 3 categories: slow-transit constipation, pelvic floor dyssynergia, or a combination of both. Because many patients with dyssynergic defecation also have concomitant slow-transit constipation, investigation of and treatment for both etiologies is frequently warranted. We will review our approach and management of these etiologies, as well as review alternative and promising PD-targeted treatments in the pipeline.

Slow-transit Constipation

Standard Workup and Therapy
Nearly 80% of patients with PD demonstrate prolonged colonic transit time, although far more patients demonstrate this objective abnormality than report subjective constipation symptoms. Slow-transit constipation can be confirmed with a radio-opaque, or Sitz, marker study. Treatment of symptomatic patients with slow-transit constipation is largely similar to the management of slow-transit constipation in the general population due to a paucity of PD-specific trials. This begins with dietary and lifestyle interventions including an increase in fiber and water intake, as well as exercise and mobility. Osmotic laxatives and lubiprostone have both been shown to be efficacious in prospective studies of patients with PD. Furthermore, a small retrospective study of patients with Parkinsonism treated with linaclotide or prucalopride found these medications to be effective and well-tolerated, with a higher proportion reporting satisfaction with linaclotide. However, these preliminary findings have yet to be confirmed in larger prospective trials. While small studies of promotility 5-HT4 agonists like cisapride and tegaserod have been shown to be beneficial in the PD population, these are no longer on the market due to the possibility of serious adverse cardiac events.
Levodopa, while beneficial for the motor symptoms of PD and even for dysphagia, tends to not improve constipation. Interestingly, a cross-sectional study of 205 Parkinson’s patients with constipation found that treatment with a beta-blocker (including metoprolol, carvedilol, and propranolol) significantly lowered the risk of constipation. While beta-blockers tend to be considered constipating agents in the general population, in PD this seemingly opposite observed effect may be related to the beneficial effects of beta-blockade on a dysregulated autonomic nervous system.

Probiotics
Multiple randomized controlled trials have been performed in patients with PD investigating the role of probiotics in the treatment of constipation based on potentially modulating the gut-microbiota-brain axis that may be dysregulated in PD (Fig. 3). Probiotics can exert effects through the ENS in part due to their release of short-chain fatty acids that affect the energy supply for CNS cell metabolism, increasing intestinal motility, and modulating intestinal endocrine 5-HT, as well as alternating barrier immune function.
A recent meta-analysis of 9 such studies as well as 3 single-arm studies (n=818 patients) revealed that oral probiotics resulted in improved stool frequency [odds ratio: 3.22, 95% CI (1.97, 5.29)] while decreasing the number of laxatives needed [mean difference: −0.72, 95% CI (−1.04, −0.41)]. Motor function, notably, was also improved per the UPSDRS-III score [mean difference: −6.58, 95% CI (−12.02, 1.14)]. Trials of both single-strain and multi-strain probiotic formulations were included, with individual trials that demonstrated benefits ranging from those that studied only Lactobacillus strains to combinations of Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Bacillus. Based on the data thus far, therefore, it is hard to make strain-specific recommendations.
While additional research is still needed, given the overall safety and promising data hitherto of this intervention, discussing the possible benefits of probiotics is nonetheless worthwhile for patients with PD who do not prefer more traditional pharmacotherapy.

Deep Brain Stimulation
Deep brain stimulation targeting the subthalamic nucleus (DBS-STN) is an established therapy for motor complications of PD such as tremors and dyskinesia in patients whose symptoms cannot be controlled with medications. This is a surgical procedure in which electrodes are implanted to the brain allowing electrical stimulation to targeted areas. There is growing evidence that DBS-STN affects nonmotor function in patients with PD as well, including autonomic dysfunction as well as urinary and GI symptoms in theory through its effect on the vagus nerve.
Much of the literature regarding the effect of DBS-STN on constipation is limited by subjective measurements of improvement. However, a small prospective study of 10 patients who completed bowel diaries experienced an improvement from 2.2 to 4.7 complete spontaneous bowel movements per week after DBS-STN; however, laxative use was unchanged. In addition, a recent randomized controlled trial of DBS-STN at the subthalamic nuclei on anorectal motility demonstrated improvement in anal squeezing pressure, but not in dyssynergia as measured by anorectal manometry. At present, DBS-STN is not approved solely for its potential effects on nonmotor symptoms, and larger controlled studies are needed to validate its true benefit, if any, in GI dysfunction.

Vagal Nerve Stimulation
An attractive alternative to deep brain stimulation is noninvasive transcutaneous vagal nerve stimulation which is thought to exert benefit in the GI complications of Parkinson’s in a direct and indirect fashion, that is, through its effects upon the CNS (through the solitary nucleus and its projections). A recent small sham-controlled study of 19 patients found a modest improvement in global GI symptoms among patients with PD and a broad range of GI symptoms. This represents an exciting opportunity for future research given its early promise in the motor complications of PD; however, conclusive, focused outcomes for the GI complications remain to be seen.

Pelvic Floor Dyssynergia
Pelvic floor dyssynergia is generally thought to be an acquired abnormality of coordination in the abdominal, recto-anal, and pelvic floor muscles, resulting in difficulty or inability to achieve defecation. Patients with dyssynergic defecation commonly report a history of excessive straining and a feeling of incomplete evacuation, and many use digital maneuvers to disimpact stool—however, in general, symptoms alone do not differentiate the etiology of constipation well. Digital rectal exams are limited by operator-dependence but have a high sensitivity and positive predictive value for diagnosing dyssynergic defection. However, they are not a component of the Rome IV criteria for dyssynergic defecation, which instead rely on abnormal objective testing.
Therefore, in patients for whom dyssynergia is suspected, additional testing with high-resolution anorectal manometry with balloon expulsion is warranted to distinguish pelvic floor dyssynergia. We have a low threshold to perform such tests for patients with PD, as they are abnormal in nearly 90% of patients with PD with constipation. Despite a relatively straightforward and efficacious treatment, dyssynergic defecation is underdiagnosed in the PD population, stemming in part from limited referrals to gastroenterologists who are typically the gatekeepers to ordering and interpreting these tests.
For patients who have confirmed pelvic floor dyssynergia with abnormal balloon expulsion time, we refer to pelvic floor physical therapy with biofeedback. While the effect of such biofeedback therapy has not been studied specifically in the PD population, general success rates are quite high: biofeedback has been shown to be associated with long-term increased bowel movement frequency and satisfaction even 1 year after completing therapy.
Apomorphine is a dopamine agonist that can be given “on-demand” during off-periods. A small study evaluating anorectal manometry parameters of 5 patients with PD with pelvic floor dyssynergia demonstrated improvement in initial and sustained squeeze response among 4 subjects who received apomorphine injection (not statistically significant). Additional studies evaluating functional outcomes—such as increased spontaneous complete bowel movements—in a larger cohort are needed before we can draw conclusions about apomorphine’s efficacy for patients with PD with dyssynergia.

Alternative and Emerging Strategies for Constipation in PD
There are several promising preclinical and clinical studies of novel therapeutics for constipation in PD. One such therapy is squalamine, a zwitterionic amphipathic aminosterol that displaces membrane-bound alpha-synuclein. Oral squalamine has been shown in a murine model of PD to effectively restore the excitability of intrinsic primary effects of neurons in the ENS, and in vivo, improve fecal pellet output. A subsequent stage 1 human trial demonstrated that oral tablets of a synthetic squalamine salt were safe and increased the mean number of complete spontaneous bowel movements per week from 1.2 to 3.6 with minimal systemic absorption. A phase 2b double-blind placebo-controlled study confirmed these findings, significantly improving the weekly complete spontaneous bowel movement rate from 0.7 to 3.2 as well as stool consistency, ease of passage, and laxative use compared to the placebo group. Additional studies are ongoing and, if efficacious, squalamine may represent a promising novel therapeutic for patients with PD in coming years.
In addition, an ileal bile acid transporter inhibitor, elobixibat, is being studied in a Japanese multicenter double-blind randomized controlled trial in patients with PD with constipation. Elobixibat is currently approved in certain Asian countries for chronic constipation, and is not yet available in the United States.

Fecal Microbiota Transplant (FMT)
A handful of prospective studies have evaluated the role of FMT for constipation in PD. While currently an effective treatment for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection, FMT has gained interest in the amelioration of constipation of PD, due in part to its theoretical potential in addressing suspected pathophysiological dysbiosis. A recent study of 11 patients found that FMT resulted in the improvement in both constipation symptoms and Hoehn-Yahr score. A smaller case series similarly demonstrated sustained improvement in constipation symptoms as well as motor symptoms at 6 months post FMT. Overall, FMT carries certain serious risks and may be a potentially promising therapeutic intervention; however, larger randomized controlled trials will be needed before FMT can be recommended to patients with PD.

CONCLUSIONS
The GI complications of PD are highly prevalent, and management thereof is a key determinant of patient quality of life. In this practical review, we summarize the clinical presentation, workup, and treatment algorithms for the variety of GI symptoms that manifest in this population. While our current toolkit, particularly when guided by the expertise of a gastroenterologist, can benefit these patients, it is also clear that far more research is needed to not only better elucidate target treatments for the unique pathogenesis of GI dysfunction in PD, but also further to achieve a greater understanding of ENS abnormalities that can guide us toward disease-modifying therapies. This is an important recently discussed goal of the National Institutes of Health, and represents an important unmet need for this substantial and long-suffering patient population.
This work was funded by the American Gastroenterological Research Foundation’s Research Scholar Award—AGA2022-13-03.
B.K. has received research support from NIH, AstraZeneca, Takeda, Gelesis, Medtronic, and Genzyme; served as a consultant to Shire, Takeda, Evoke, Phathom, and Ironwood; and done educational speaking for Medtronic. The remaining authors declare that they have nothing to disclose.

REFERENCES
Gastrointestinal dysfunction and neuropathologic correlations in Parkinson disease
Association of motor and nonmotor symptoms with health-related quality of life in a large online cohort of people with Parkinson disease
Gastrointestinal dysfunction impact on life quality in a cohort of Russian patients with Parkinson’s disease I-III H&Y stage
A bidirectional relationship between anxiety, depression and gastrointestinal symptoms in Parkinson’s disease
Upper and lower gastrointestinal symptom association and duration preceding Parkinson’s disease
Update of the MDS research criteria for prodromal Parkinson’s disease
Gastric alpha-synuclein immunoreactive inclusions in Meissner’s and Auerbach’s plexuses in cases staged for Parkinson’s disease-related brain pathology
Age-related loss of dorsal vagal neurons in Parkinson’s disease
Pathogenesis of Parkinson disease—the gut-brain axis and environmental factors
Vagotomy and Parkinson disease: a Swedish register-based matched-cohort study
Alteration of colonic excitatory tachykininergic motility and enteric inflammation following dopaminergic nigrostriatal neurodegeneration
Nigral overexpression of α‐synuclein in a rat Parkinson’s disease model indicates alterations in the enteric nervous system and the gut microbiome
The threshold theory for Parkinson’s disease
The gut in Parkinson’s disease: bottom-up, top-down, or neither?
Impact of outpatient gastroenterology consult on pharmacotherapy and management of gastrointestinal symptoms in Parkinson’s disease
Dysphagia treatments in Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
The prevalence and patterns of pharyngoesophageal dysmotility in patients with early stage Parkinson’s disease
Parkinson’s disease: the presence of Lewy bodies in Auerbach’s and Meissner’s plexuses
Multiple organ involvement by alpha-synuclein pathology in Lewy body disorders
Causes of death in a community-based study of Parkinson’s disease
Nutrition impact symptoms and the risk of malnutrition in people with Parkinson’s disease: a cross-sectional study
Outcome of gastrostomy in parkinsonism: a retrospective study
Esophageal dysfunction in different stages of Parkinson’s disease
Prevalence of oropharyngeal dysphagia in Parkinson’s disease: a meta-analysis
Dysphagia
Clinical and manometric characteristics of patients with Parkinson’s disease and esophageal symptoms
Long-term outcomes of patients with normal or minor motor function abnormalities detected by high-resolution esophageal manometry
Esophageal motility in nonacid reflux compared with acid reflux
Durability of esophageal motor disorders identified on high-resolution esophageal manometry: a case series
Ineffective esophageal motility: concepts, future directions, and conclusions from the Stanford 2018 symposium
Influence of prucalopride on esophageal secondary peristalsis in reflux patients with ineffective motility
Erythromycin in the short- and long-term control of dyspepsia symptoms in patients with gastroparesis
Bethanechol improves smooth muscle function in patients with severe ineffective esophageal motility
Esophageal spasm: demographic, clinical, radiographic, and manometric features in 108 patients
Esophageal motility disorders: current approach to diagnostics and therapeutics
Effect of sildenafil on oesophageal motor function in healthy subjects and patients with oesophageal motor disorders
Diltiazem therapy for symptoms associated with nutcracker esophagus
Esophagogastric junction outflow obstruction: current approach to diagnosis and management
Pilot cohort study of endoscopic botulinum neurotoxin injection in Parkinson’s disease
Novel botulinum toxin injection protocols for Parkinson tremor and essential tremor—the Yale technique and sensor-based kinematics procedure for safe and effective treatment
Botulinum toxin type A in patients with Parkinson’s disease and refractory overactive bladder
Comparison of Botulinum neurotoxin efficiency in dystonia associated with Parkinson’s disease and atypical parkinsonism: a retrospective study with a self-reported improvement scale
Gastroparesis and Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review
Functional dyspepsia and gastroparesis in tertiary care are interchangeable syndromes with common clinical and pathologic features
Gastric emptying time and gastric motility in patients with Parkinson’s disease
Gastroparesis in Parkinson disease: pathophysiology, and clinical management
Postprandial ghrelin response is reduced in patients with Parkinson’s disease and idiopathic REM sleep behaviour disorder: a peripheral biomarker for early Parkinson’s disease?
Mo1541-activating Alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor on macrophage attenuates gastric inflamation and gastroparesis in Parkinson’s disease rats
ACG Clinical Guideline: Gastroparesis
Domperidone to treat symptoms of gastroparesis: benefits and side effects from a large single-center cohort
Prucalopride in gastroparesis: a randomized placebo-controlled crossover study
Prucalopride in diabetic and connective tissue disease-related gastroparesis: randomized placebo-controlled crossover pilot trial
Constipation in patients with symptoms of gastroparesis: analysis of symptoms and gastrointestinal transit
Aprepitant has mixed effects on nausea and reduces other symptoms in patients with gastroparesis and related disorders
Efficacy and safety of tradipitant in patients with diabetic and idiopathic gastroparesis in a randomized, placebo-controlled trial
Treatment with a substance P receptor antagonist is neuroprotective in the intrastriatal 6-hydroxydopamine model of early Parkinson’s disease
Marijuana, ondansetron, and promethazine are perceived as most effective treatments for gastrointestinal nausea
Gastric per-oral endoscopic myotomy (G-POEM) for refractory gastroparesis: results from an international prospective trial
Gastrointestinal barriers to levodopa transport and absorption in Parkinson’s disease
Updates in functional dyspepsia and bloating
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth—pathophysiology and its implications for definition and management
Small intestinal transit time is delayed in small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
The role of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in Parkinson’s disease
Prevalence of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in Parkinson’s disease
Meta-analysis: antibiotic therapy for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
Plasma levodopa peak delay and impaired gastric emptying in Parkinson’s disease
Is there a difference in gastric emptying between Parkinson’s disease patients under long-term L-dopa therapy with and without motor fluctuations? An analysis using the 13C-acetate breath test
Helicobacter pylori eradication improves motor fluctuations in advanced Parkinson’s disease patients: a prospective cohort study (HP-PD trial)
Helicobacter pylori eradication and l-dopa absorption in patients with PD and motor fluctuations
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in Parkinson’s disease
Medical records documentation of constipation preceding Parkinson disease: a case-control study
Risk of Parkinson’s disease following severe constipation: a nationwide population-based cohort study
A critical analysis of intestinal enteric neuron loss and constipation in Parkinson’s disease
Downregulation of neuronal vasoactive intestinal polypeptide in Parkinson’s disease and chronic constipation
Parkinson’s disease from the gut
Altered gut microbiota and intestinal permeability in Parkinson’s disease: pathological highlight to management
Parkinson disease with constipation: clinical features and relevant factors
Objective colonic dysfunction is far more prevalent than subjective constipation in Parkinson’s disease: a colon transit and volume study
American Gastroenterological Association technical review on constipation
Gastrointestinal dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease
Placebo-controlled trial of lubiprostone for constipation associated with Parkinson disease
Macrogol 3350/electrolyte improves constipation in Parkinson’s disease and multiple system atrophy
Linaclotide and prucalopride for management of constipation in patients with Parkinsonism
Long-term results with cisapride in Parkinson’s disease
Tegaserod in constipation associated with Parkinson disease
Autonomic symptoms and dopaminergic treatment in de novo Parkinson’s disease
Constipation is reduced by beta-blockers and increased by dopaminergic medications in Parkinson’s disease
Efficacy and safety of probiotics in Parkinson’s constipation: a systematic review and meta-analysis
International Parkinson and movement disorder society evidence-based medicine review: update on treatments for the motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease
Clinical impact of deep brain stimulation on the autonomic system in patients with Parkinson’s disease
Efficacy of deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus on autonomic dysfunction in patients with Parkinson’s disease
The MDS-UPDRS tracks motor and non-motor improvement due to subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation in Parkinson disease
A prospective pilot study of the effects of deep brain stimulation on olfaction and constipation in Parkinson’s disease
Does bilateral deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus modify ano-rectal motility in Parkinson’s disease? Results of a randomized cross-over study
Transcutaneous vagal nerve stimulation improves gastroenteric complaints in Parkinson’s disease patients
Dyssynergic defecation and biofeedback therapy
The use of standardized questions in identifying patients with dyssynergic defecation
Symptoms in chronic constipation
The diagnostic value of a digital rectal examination compared with high-resolution anorectal manometry in patients with chronic constipation and fecal incontinence
Functional anorectal disorders
Utility of high-resolution anorectal manometry and wireless motility capsule in the evaluation of patients with Parkinson’s disease and chronic constipation
Long-term efficacy of biofeedback therapy for dyssynergic defecation: randomized controlled trial
Defecatory function in Parkinson’s disease: response to apomorphine
Squalamine restores the function of the enteric nervous system in mouse models of Parkinson’s disease
Targeting neurons in the gastrointestinal tract to treat Parkinson’s disease
Oral ENT-01 targets enteric neurons to treat constipation in Parkinson disease : a randomized controlled trial
Investigating the efficacy and safety of elobixibat, an ileal bile acid transporter inhibitor, in patients with Parkinson’s disease with chronic constipation: a multicentre, placebo-controlled, randomised, double-blind, parallel-group stud (CONST-PD)
Evaluation of fecal microbiota transplantation in Parkinson’s disease patients with constipation
Fecal microbiota transplant as a potential treatment for Parkinson’s disease—a case series
2021 Workshop: Neurodegenerative diseases in the gut-brain axis-Parkinson’s disease