Evaluation of Liver Fibrosis through Noninvasive Tests in Steatotic Liver Disease
Liver fibrosis, a critical predictor of the prognosis of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), is traditionally diagnosed via biopsy. Nevertheless, non-invasive alternatives, such as serum biomarkers, vibration-controlled transient elastography, and magnetic resonance elastography, have become prominent because of the limitations of biopsies. Serum biomarkers, such as fibrosis-4 index and NFS Score, are also used widely, offering reliable diagnostic performance for advanced fibrosis. Vibration-controlled transient elastography and shear wave elastography provide further non-invasive evaluations with high diagnostic accuracy, particularly for advanced fibrosis, but the results may be affected by factors such as obesity. Magnetic resonance elastography, with superior diagnostic accuracy and operator independence, is a promising method, but its high cost and limited availability restrict its widespread use. Emerging algorithms, such as NIS4, FAST, or MAST score, have strong potential in identifying high-risk metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis patients. The integration of multiple non-invasive methods can optimize diagnostic accuracy, reducing the need for invasive biopsies while identifying patients at risk of liver-related complications. Further research is needed to refine these diagnostic tools and improve accessibility.

INTRODUCTION
In metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), liver fibrosis is a key determinant of the long-term prognosis, including the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma and liver-related mortality. A liver biopsy is the gold standard for diagnosing fibrosis, steatohepatitis, and liver inflammation in MASLD. Nevertheless, a liver biopsy has limitations, such as high cost, invasiveness, risks of bleeding or infection, variability among interpreters, and sampling errors. As a result, non-invasive methods, such as serum biomarkers, transient elastography, shear wave elastography, and magnetic resonance elastography, are frequently used in clinical practice.

MAIN SUBJECT

1. Serum Markers
Several non-invasive fibrosis evaluation studies have been validated using serum biomarkers, such as fibrosis-4 index (FIB-4) and the nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) fibrosis score (NFS) (Table 1). FIB-4 was initially proposed for patients with chronic hepatitis C and HIV co-infection and has been evaluated for its efficacy in diagnosing liver fibrosis in MASLD patients. In a Japanese study, FIB-4 and NFS were superior in diagnosing advanced fibrosis compared to other panels. Recent meta-analyses reported that FIB-4 had an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.76 for advanced fibrosis, with a sensitivity and specificity of 42% and 93%, respectively. Age is a significant consideration when interpreting FIB-4 scores. The diagnostic ability of serum biomarkers is lower in patients younger than 35 years, and alternative non-invasive tests are recommended. A previous study suggested that the upper cutoff for advanced fibrosis in FIB-4 should be 2.67, while the age-adjusted lower cutoffs should be 1.30 and 2.0 for patients aged 35–64 years and 65 years or older, respectively.
NFS, which was developed based on a cohort of U.S. MASLD patients, has an AUC of 0.82–0.88 for diagnosing advanced fibrosis. The recommended cutoffs are <−1.455 and >0.676. A meta-analysis of 13 studies with 3,064 patients revealed an AUC of NFS for advanced fibrosis of 0.85, with a sensitivity and specificity of 90% and 60%, respectively, at the lower cutoff. A higher cutoff (>0.676) had a sensitivity and specificity of 67% and 97%, respectively, for advanced fibrosis. Recent studies recommend adjusting the lower cutoff to 0.12 in patients aged 65 or older.
The enhanced liver fibrosis (ELF) score, using three matrix proteins, is used mainly in Europe and some institutions in Korea. The score showed good diagnostic performance for advanced fibrosis, with an AUC, sensitivity, and specificity of 0.90, 80%, and 90%, respectively.
Through a global multicenter cohort study, the NIS4 algorithm, consisting of four biomarkers (microRNA-34a, alpha-2 macroglobulin, YKL-40, and glycated hemoglobin), was proposed as a blood test-based approach. The NIS4® algorithm showed an AUC of 0.80 for identifying high-risk groups with a NAFLD activity score (NAS) of 4 or higher and significant liver fibrosis unaffected by gender, body mass index (BMI), or aspartate aminotransferase (AST)/alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels. Furthermore, the NIS2+™ algorithm, an optimized version of the NIS4 algorithm using only two variables, microRNA-34a and YKL-40, was introduced. NIS2+™ exhibited superior diagnostic performance for identifying high-risk patients (AUC=0.813) to the NIS4® algorithm (AUC=0.792). Based on a single-center Korean cohort, the nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)-PT scoring system was developed to diagnose high-risk metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) patients. The NASH-PT score includes factors such as PNPLA3 and TM6SF2 genotypes, the presence of diabetes, insulin resistance, AST levels, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein. This score demonstrated a diagnostic AUC of 0.787 for distinguishing between MASLD and MASH at a cutoff value of 0.785. Furthermore, this scoring system was validated in a Chinese cohort of 276 patients, with an AUC of 0.80 at a cutoff value of −0.11. Recently, the gut microbiome and its metabolites have been proposed as biomarkers for diagnosing significant liver fibrosis in non-obese MASLD patients.

2. Vibration-Controlled Transient Elastography
Research on vibration-controlled transient elastography (VCTE) for diagnosing fibrosis in MASLD has revealed high sensitivity and specificity. In meta-analyses, VCTE showed AUC values of 0.65–0.98 for advanced fibrosis, with cutoffs ranging from 6.6 to 10.4 kPa (Table 2). VCTE was also highly accurate in diagnosing cirrhosis, with AUC values of 0.94–0.97 and cutoffs ranging from 10.3 to 17 kPa. On the other hand, in patients with abdominal obesity, the accuracy of TE decreases, and 5–20% of patients may require an XL probe for measurement because the standard M probe may be unsuitable. A study of patients undergoing bariatric surgery, with a mean BMI of 42.3 kg/m2, reported that VCTE had an AUC of 0.85 for advanced fibrosis, with a cutoff of 7.6 kPa. In cases where the skin-to-liver capsule distance was ≥2.5 cm, the XL probe was used successfully in 96% of participants. The use of XL probes and different cutoffs was also studied in Japan, where the cutoffs for the XL probe (8.2 kPa) differed from those for the M probe (10.8 kPa). Furthermore, VCTE is less accurate in patients with elevated ALT levels (>100 IU/L) or significant steatosis, and caution should be taken when interpreting the results under such conditions.
Recently, a global multicenter cohort study proposed the FAST score (e– 1.65 + 1.07 × In(LSM) + 2.66*10-8 × CAP³ – 63.3 × AST-1/1+e–1.65 + 1.07 × In(LSM) + 2·66*10-8 × CAP³ – 63.3 × AST-1), which incorporates the liver stiffness measurement (LSM), controlled attenuation parameter (CAP), and AST values. The FAST score was designed to identify high-risk patients with a NAS of 4 or higher and significant fibrosis in patients with MASH. At a cutoff value of 0.35, the FAST score showed positive and negative predictive values of 83% and 85%, respectively. The score also showed a high diagnostic ability, with a c-index of 0.85 in an external validation cohort.
The AGILE score, developed from seven global multicenter cohorts, was reported to have significantly higher positive predictive values for diagnosing advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis than FIB-4 or VCTE alone. AGILE 3+ calculates the scores based on age, gender, AST/ALT ratio, platelet count, diabetes status, and VCTE results. AGILE 3+ showed an AUC of 0.86 for diagnosing advanced fibrosis, with a positive predictive value of 0.72 at lower and upper cutoffs of 0.451 and 0.679, respectively. For cirrhosis, AGILE 4 showed an AUC of 0.93, with a positive predictive value of 0.73 at cutoffs of 0.251 and 0.565, overcoming the limitations of the lower predictive values associated with FIB-4, NFS, and ELF.
VCTE also exhibited high diagnostic accuracy in patients with MASLD and type 2 diabetes mellitus. A recent meta-analysis involving 1,780 patients with MASLD and type 2 diabetes reported that when FIB-4 ≥1.3 or NFS ≥1.455, the VCTE (≥8 kPa) or AGILE 3+ score (≥0.45) could be used individually or sequentially to diagnose advanced fibrosis accurately.

3. Shear Wave Elastography
Shear wave elastography (SWE) performs similarly to VCTE in diagnosing significant fibrosis. Point SWE and 2D-SWE, which provide simultaneous imaging, offer advantages in reducing the failure rates compared to TE. A study using point SWE reported an AUC of 0.8 or higher for diagnosing significant fibrosis. A Korean cohort study reported that the AUC for advanced fibrosis using point SWE was 0.861, but the diagnostic performance decreased as the steatosis severity increased. Meta-analyses of 2D-SWE showed similar diagnostic accuracy to VCTE (Table 3). SWE can also be influenced by factors, such as the fasting time, abdominal obesity, liver diseases with cholestasis, AST and ALT levels, and hepatic steatosis. Hence, caution is needed when interpreting the results. In obese patients, however, 2D-SWE allows for real-time adjustment of the measurement location, making it easier to perform compared to VCTE.

4. Magnetic Resonance Elastography
Magnetic resonance elastography (MRE) offers excellent diagnostic accuracy for fibrosis and can assess the entire liver without being affected by obesity. MRE outperforms VCTE in diagnosing liver fibrosis, with AUC values of 0.84–0.93.10,54,55 Failures are rare (<5%) compared to VCTE. In a meta-analysis involving data from eight international cohorts, MRE had an AUC of 0.92 for diagnosing significant fibrosis, with a cutoff of 3.14 kPa. MRE is less dependent on operator skill and is unaffected by obesity or iron deposition. On the other hand, using MRE universally in all medical institutions is difficult because of the high cost and limited accessibility. In addition, signal strength measurements can be challenging in cases of iron deposition. In addition to liver fibrosis, the MRE results may also be affected by other infiltrative conditions such as severe steatosis, liver congestion, and acute inflammation.
The MAST score (−12.17+7.07 log MRE+0.037 PDFF+3.55 log AST), based on the MRI-PDFF and MRE results, was recently proposed through a U.S. cohort study. The score showed an AUC of 0.929 for diagnosing high-risk MASH patients with a NAS of 4 or higher and significant fibrosis, with a cutoff value of 0.165, outperforming the diagnostic abilities of FIB-4 (AUC 0.711), NFS (AUC 0.689), and the FAST score (AUC 0.868).
A recent multicenter study conducted in the U.S. and Japan compared the diagnostic ability of the MEFIB index (MRE ≥3.3 kPa+FIB-4 ≥1.6) (MRE ≥3.3 kPa+FIB-4 ≥1.6) with the FAST score for detecting significant fibrosis. In the U.S. cohort, the diagnostic AUC for the MEFIB index and the FAST score were 0.86 and 0.757, respectively, while in the Japanese cohort, the corresponding AUCs were 0.899 and 0.724, respectively, showing that the MEFIB index had significantly higher diagnostic accuracy. Although MRE can also be affected by factors, such as fasting time, abdominal obesity, cholestasis, AST/ALT levels, and hepatic steatosis, it was reported that in patients with severe obesity, MRE was less affected by the subcutaneous fat thickness compared to transient elastography, resulting in a higher success rate.

CONCLUSION
Non-invasive diagnostic tools for liver fibrosis in patients with MASLD have advanced significantly in recent years. Methods, such as serum biomarkers (e.g., FIB-4, NFS), VCTE, SWE, and MRE, have shown strong diagnostic performance for detecting advanced fibrosis. Although liver biopsy remains the gold standard, these non-invasive approaches reduce the need for invasive procedures and allow for more accessible, cost-effective, and safer MASLD patient management. Further research into refining these tools and integrating them with emerging algorithms, such as the NIS4 and AGILE scores, will enhance the identification of MASH-at-risk patients for liver-related complications, improving the prognosis and clinical outcomes. Despite their progress, challenges remain, particularly in patients with obesity or elevated ALT levels, where the diagnostic accuracy may be compromised. Therefore, continued efforts to optimize these methods and expand their accessibility are essential to improve MASLD management and patient care.
Financial support
None.
Conflict of interest
None.

REFERENCES
Fibrosis stage is the strongest predictor for disease-specific mortality in NAFLD after up to 33 years of follow-up
Liver biopsy
Prospective analysis of discordant results between biochemical markers and biopsy in patients with chronic hepatitis C
One hundred consecutive hepatic biopsies in the workup of living donors for right lobe liver transplantation
Prevalence of liver steatosis and fibrosis and the diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound in bariatric surgery patients
The utility of radiological imaging in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Steatosis severity affects the diagnostic performances of noninvasive fibrosis tests in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Impact of obesity and alanine aminotransferase levels on the diagnostic accuracy for advanced liver fibrosis of noninvasive tools in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Development of a simple noninvasive index to predict significant fibrosis in patients with HIV/HCV coinfection
Magnetic resonance imaging more accurately classifies steatosis and fibrosis in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease than transient elastography
Accuracy of noninvasive scoring systems in assessing liver fibrosis in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Diagnostic accuracy of non-invasive tests for advanced fibrosis in patients with NAFLD: an individual patient data meta-analysis
Age as a confounding factor for the accurate non-invasive diagnosis of advanced NAFLD fibrosis
The NAFLD fibrosis score: a noninvasive system that identifies liver fibrosis in patients with NAFLD
Meta-analysis: natural history of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and diagnostic accuracy of non-invasive tests for liver disease severity
The utility of the "NAFLD fibrosis score" in morbidly obese subjects with NAFLD
Validation of the NAFLD fibrosis score in a Chinese population with low prevalence of advanced fibrosis
Noninvasive markers of fibrosis in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: Validating the European Liver Fibrosis Panel and exploring simple markers
A new risk index for the estimation of fibrosis in non alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD): comparison with the Mayo Score and the AST platelet ratio index (APRI)
Development and validation of a simple NAFLD clinical scoring system for identifying patients without advanced disease
Comparison of blood tests for liver fibrosis specific or not to NAFLD
Comparison of NAFLD fibrosis score and BARD score in predicting fibrosis in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Can clinical scoring systems replace liver biopsy in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease?
Diagnosis of fibrosis and cirrhosis using liver stiffness measurement in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
A simple clinical scoring system using ferritin, fasting insulin, and type IV collagen 7S for predicting steatohepatitis in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Evaluation of the nonalcoholic fat liver disease fibrosis score for patients undergoing bariatric surgery
External validation of the non-alcoholic fatty liver disease fibrosis score for assessing advanced fibrosis in Korean patients
A blood-based biomarker panel (NIS4) for non-invasive diagnosis of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis and liver fibrosis: a prospective derivation and global validation study
NIS2+™, an optimisation of the blood-based biomarker NIS4® technology for the detection of at-risk NASH: A prospective derivation and validation study
Development and validation of a scoring system, based on genetic and clinical factors, to determine risk of steatohepatitis in Asian patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
External validation of the nonalcoholic steatohepatitis scoring system in patients with biopsy-proven nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in China
Distinct signatures of gut microbiome and metabolites associated with significant fibrosis in non-obese NAFLD
Systematic review with meta-analysis: non-invasive assessment of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease--the role of transient elastography and plasma cytokeratin-18 fragments
Pitfalls of liver stiffness measurement: a 5-year prospective study of 13,369 examinations
Performance characteristics of vibration-controlled transient elastography for evaluation of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Liver stiffness measurement using XL probe in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
The diagnostic accuracy of transient elastography for the diagnosis of liver fibrosis in bariatric surgery candidates with suspected NAFLD
Unified interpretation of liver stiffness measurement by M and XL probes in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Accuracy of liver stiffness measurement and controlled attenuation parameter using FibroScan® M/XL probes to diagnose liver fibrosis and steatosis in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a multicenter prospective study
The severity of steatosis influences liver stiffness measurement in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Improved noninvasive prediction of liver fibrosis by liver stiffness measurement in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease accounting for controlled attenuation parameter values
FibroScan-AST (FAST) score for the non-invasive identification of patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis with significant activity and fibrosis: a prospective derivation and global validation study
Enhanced diagnosis of advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis in individuals with NAFLD using FibroScan-based Agile scores
Noninvasive assessment of liver disease severity in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and type 2 diabetes
Evaluation of transient elastography, acoustic radiation force impulse imaging (ARFI), and enhanced liver function (ELF) score for detection of fibrosis in morbidly obese patients
Acoustic radiation force impulse elastography for the non-invasive evaluation of hepatic fibrosis in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease patients: A systematic review & meta-analysis
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: US-based acoustic radiation force impulse elastography
Meta-analysis: ARFI elastography versus transient elastography for the evaluation of liver fibrosis
Diagnostic accuracy of elastography and magnetic resonance imaging in patients with NAFLD: A systematic review and meta-analysis
The use of two-dimensional shear wave elastography in people with obesity for the assessment of liver fibrosis in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Early detection of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease by using MR elastography
Magnetic resonance elastography predicts advanced fibrosis in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a prospective study
Advanced fibrosis in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: noninvasive assessment with MR elastography
Magnetic resonance vs transient elastography analysis of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: A systematic review and pooled analysis of individual participants
Magnetic resonance elastography vs transient elastography in detection of fibrosis and noninvasive measurement of steatosis in patients with biopsy-proven nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Diagnostic performance of magnetic resonance elastography in staging liver fibrosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis of individual participant data
Magnetic resonance elastography for staging liver fibrosis in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: a diagnostic accuracy systematic review and individual participant data pooled analysis
Liver stiffness on magnetic resonance elastography and the MEFIB index and liver-related outcomes in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis of individual participants
Liver Stiffness measurements with MR elastography: Agreement and repeatability across imaging systems, field strengths, and pulse sequences
Test-retest repeatability of MR elastography for noninvasive liver fibrosis assessment in hepatitis C
Assessment of advanced hepatic MR elastography methods for susceptibility artifact suppression in clinical patients
Elastography in chronic liver disease: Modalities, techniques, limitations, and future directions
MRI-based (MAST) score accurately identifies patients with NASH and significant fibrosis
MRE combined with FIB-4 (MEFIB) index in detection of candidates for pharmacological treatment of NASH-related fibrosis
Magnetic resonance elastography plus Fibrosis-4 versus FibroScan-aspartate aminotransferase in detection of candidates for pharmacological treatment of NASH-related fibrosis
Diagnostic performance of MR elastography and vibration-controlled transient elastography in the detection of hepatic fibrosis in patients with severe to morbid obesity
Health care use and costs among patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis with advanced fibrosis using the fibrosis-4 score
Enhanced liver fibrosis test for the non-invasive diagnosis of fibrosis in patients with NAFLD: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Performance of unidimensional transient elastography in staging non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
Reliability of transient elastography for the detection of fibrosis in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and chronic viral hepatitis
Reliability of liver stiffness measurement in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: the effects of body mass index
Liver stiffness measurements in patients with different stages of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: diagnostic performance and clinicopathological correlation
Performance of transient elastography (TE) and factors associated with discordance in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
A novel 2-step approach combining the NAFLD fibrosis score and liver stiffness measurement for predicting advanced fibrosis
Noninvasive tests accurately identify advanced fibrosis due to NASH: Baseline data from the STELLAR trials
Diagnostic accuracy and prognostic significance of blood fibrosis tests and liver stiffness measurement by FibroScan in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Cytokeratin 18-Aspartate396 apoptotic fragment for fibrosis detection in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and chronic viral hepatitis
Prospective comparison among transient elastography, supersonic shear imaging, and ARFI imaging for predicting fibrosis in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Utility of transient elastography (fibroscan) and impact of bariatric surgery on nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in morbidly obese patients
Comparison of 2D shear wave elastography, transient elastography, and MR elastography for the diagnosis of fibrosis in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
A sequential approach using the age-adjusted fibrosis-4 index and vibration-controlled transient elastography to detect advanced fibrosis in Korean patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Meta-analysis of the diagnostic performance of serum markers for liver fibrosis in MASLD patients
Diagnostic performance of VCTE for liver fibrosis in MASLD patients
Meta-analysis of the diagnostic performance of VCTE, point SWE, 2D-SWE, and MRE for liver fibrosis in MASLD patients
Method	No. of patient	AUC (95% CI)	Cutoff Range	Sensitivity % (95% CI)	Specificity % (95% CI)	 	VCTE	 	F2	2,763	0.83 (0.80–0.87)	3.8–10.2	80.0 (76.0–83.0)	73.0 (68.0–77.0)	 	F3	4,219	0.85 (0.83–0.87)	6.8–12.9	80.0 (77.0–83.0)	77.0 (74.0–80.0)	 	F4	337	0.89 (0.84–0.93)	6.9–19.4	76.0 (70.0–82.0)	88.0 (85.0–91.0)	 	Point SWE						 	F2	805	0.86 (0.78–0.90)	1.18–1.81	69.0 (59.0–77.0)	85.0 (80.0–88.0)	 	F3	1,209	0.89 (0.83–0.95)	1.34–4.21	80.0 (70.0–88.0)	86.0 (82.0–92.0)	 	F4	759	0.90 (0.82–0.95)	1.36–2.54	76.0 (59.0–87.0)	88.0 (82.0–92.0)	 	2D-SWE						 	F2	488	0.75 (0.58–0.87)	8.3–11.6	71.0 (56.0–83.0)	67.0 (43.0–84.0)	 	F3	488	0.72 (0.60–0.84)	9.3–13.1	72.0 (65.0–78.0)	72.0 (52.0–86.0)	 	F4	372	0.88 (0.81–0.91)	14.4–15.7	78.0 (50.0–93.0)	84.0 (74.0–90)	 	MRE						 	F2	209	0.91 (0.80–0.97)	2.86–4.14	78.0 (67.0–85.0)	89.0 (83.0–94.0)	 	F3	214	0.92 (0.88–0.95)	2.99–4.8	83.0 (77.0–88.0)	89.0 (86.0–92.0)	 	F4	41	0.90 (0.81–0.95)	3.35–6.7	81.0 (66.0–90.0)	90.0 (85.0–94.0)
AUC, area under the curve; CI, confidence interval; SWE, shear wave elastography; MRE, magnetic resonance elastography.