Altered Bone Morphogenetic Protein 2 Signaling Causes Age-Dependent Decline in Gut Motility Independent of Muscularis Macrophages
Aging results in a decline of gut neuromuscular function that contributes to gastrointestinal (GI) disorders like constipation and fecal incontinence. We have found that age-dependent changes to muscularis macrophages (MMs), gut macrophages important for enteric nervous system (ENS) homeostasis, drive chronic, low-grade inflammation. This ‘geriatric’ state triggers enteric neuron inflammatory activation, apoptosis and neuronal loss, and delayed intestinal transit, indicating that gut neuroimmune interactions play a role in age-associated functional decline. Experimental depletion of MMs results in neuronal loss and delayed intestinal transit, like that observed in aged mice. This suggests that loss of macrophage-derived neurotrophic factors could be involved in age-related decline in gut motility. MMs perform several homeostatic functions including synaptic pruning and removal of neuronal debris. They also communicate with enteric neurons through the bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) signaling pathway. MMs express BMP2 which binds to enteric neuron Bone Morphogenic Protein Receptors Type 1a and 2 (BMPR1a and BMPR2) resulting in activation of SMAD signaling. Administration of recombinant BMP2 reverses gut motility effects of macrophage depletion, implicating this signaling axis in the regulation of gut neuromuscular function. Here, we explore macrophage-neuron communication and ask whether alterations in BMP2 signaling contributes to age-associated decline in gut motility.
Neuronal BMPR2 knockdown mirrors altered motility associated with age-dependent decline in BMP2 signaling. (A) Western blot analysis of SI muscularis tissue protein extract from young (3 months) and aged (22–24 months) male mice (n = 5) stained with antibodies to BMP2 and β actin. (B) BMP2 protein expression (based on pixel intensity normalized to β actin) is reduced in aged compared to young mice. (C) Staining of whole mount muscularis tissue (jejunum) from young and aged mice (n ≥ 7) with 4', 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (blue) and antibodies to Hu (anti-neuronal nuclear antibody, red) and phosphorylated-SMAD 1/5/9 (green). (D) The % MMs with nuclear pSMAD 1/5/9 was significantly higher in young compared to aged mice. (E) Whole mount SI muscularis tissue from SLICK-HWT and SLICK-HΔBMPR2 mice stained with antibody to BMPR2 (green) and Hu (red). Dotted white line represents border of ganglia used for calculation of ganglia neuron density. (F) Ganglia neuron density of SLICK-HWT, SLICK-Hhet and SLICK-HΔBMPR2 mice. Colonic transit as measured by bead expulsion (G) and WGTT (H) performed on SLICK-HWT, SLICK-Hhet and SLICK-HΔBMPR2 mice previously administered tamoxifen (n ≥ 15, 3 months age). (I) Colonic transit of aged mice is delayed compared to young mice (n ≥ 36). Open symbol represents female mice. Data are mean ± standard error of mean. ∗P < .05, ∗∗P < .01 by t-test (B, D, G) and 1-way analysis of variance, with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test (F). Scale bars 50 μm.
BMP2 expression (see Table A1 and Methods) in small intestine (SI) muscularis externa was significantly reduced (>25%, P < .05) in aged (22–24 months) compared to young (3 months) mice (Figure 1 A and B). To study BMP2 reduction on enteric neurons, we evaluated nuclear translocation of phosphorylated transcription factor Smad 1/5/9 (pSMAD 1/5/9), an indicator of BMP signaling. Aged mice exhibited decreased neuronal nuclear immunoreactivity for pSMAD 1/5/9 (P < .01) compared to young mice (Figure 1C and D) proportionate (∼25%) to the reduced BMP2 expression. To determine whether disruption of enteric BMP signaling can reproduce an “aged” phenotype in young mice, we generated neuron-specific inducible BMPR2 conditional knockout mice (SLICK-HΔBMPR2) by crossing BMPR2flox and Thy1creERT2 (SLICK-H) mice. Two weeks after tamoxifen treatment, selective BMPR2 knockdown was observed in enteric neurons of SLICK-HΔBMPR2 mice (3 months age) (Figure 1E) and ganglia density (# neurons/ganglia area) was increased in SLICK-HΔBMPR2 and SLICK-Hhet compared to SLICK-HWT mice (Figure 1E and F). Importantly, SLICK-HΔBMPR2 mice demonstrated significantly delayed colonic transit compared to SLICK-HWT (Figure 1G), a trend observed in both male and female mice. A trend toward longer whole gut transit times (WGTTs) was found in SLICK-Hhet and SLICK-HΔBMPR2 mice compared to SLICK-HWT mice (Figure 1H). Genetic deletion of neuronal BMPR2 mirrors the delayed colonic transit observed in aged mice (Figure 1I). Collectively, these data indicate that reduction of enteric neuron BMP signaling contributes to age-related GI dysmotility.
MM BMP2 production has no effect on ENS structure or gut motility. (A) MMs (F4/80+CD11b+) sorted from LysMΔBMP2 and LysMWT mice were examined for BMP2 expression by quantitative PCR and the results are expressed as relative expression, calculated using the Pfaffl method. (B) Whole mount SI muscularis tissue (jejunum) from LysMWT and LysMΔBMP2 mice (2–4 months age) stained with antibody to Hu. (C, D) Neuronal density (C) as expressed by Hu+ cells per mm2 and ganglia area (D) as measured by QuPath in LysMWT and LysMΔBMP2 mice (n ≥ 15). (E, F) SI muscularis tissue stained with antibodies to calretinin (Calr, green, top), neuronal nitric oxide synthase (NOS, green, bottom) and Hu (purple) revealed no difference in Calr+ (E) or NOS+ (F) neurons expressed as % of total Hu+ neurons. (G, H) WGTT (G) and colonic transit as measured by bead expulsion (H) in LysMWT and LysMΔBMP2 mice (2–4 months of age). (I, J) WGTT (I) and colonic transit (J) performed on CX3CR1WT and CX3CR1ΔBMP2 mice (3 months age, n ≥ 19) after tamoxifen administration. (K) BMP2 expression in F4/80+CD11b+ MMs sorted from young and aged mice (n ≥ 9) by quantitative PCR. Open symbol represents female mice. Data are mean ± standard error of mean. ∗∗∗P < .005 by t-test. Scale bars 100 μm.
Next, we asked whether disruption of macrophage BMP2 reproduces the effects of aging and MM experimental depletion. We generated myeloid BMP2 conditional knockout mice (LysMΔBMP2) by crossing LysMcre and BMP2flox mice. Compared to LysMWT littermates, LysMΔBMP2 offspring were viable without obvious growth defects. BMP2 expression was significantly lower (P < .01) in MMs (F4/80+CD11b+) sorted from LysMΔBMP2 compared to LysMWT mice indicating effective BMP2 knockdown (Figure 2A). SI muscularis tissue from LysMΔBMP2 and LysMWT mice (3–4 months) was stained with Hu antibody to analyze myenteric plexus structure (Figure 2B). Unlike SLICK-HΔBMPR2 mice, no differences in enteric neuron density (Figure 2C) or ganglia size (Figure 2D), were detected between LysMΔBMP2 and LysMWT mice. Muscularis tissue was also stained with antibodies to calretinin (Calr) and neuronal nitric oxide synthase (NOS) to assess differences in excitatory and inhibitory motor neuron subtypes. The numbers of Calr+ (Figure 2E) and NOS+ (Figure 2F) neurons (measured as % total Hu+ neurons) did not differ between LysMΔBMP2 and LysMWT mice. Next, we tested the effect of macrophage BMP2 knockdown on gut motility. No differences were observed in WGTT (Figure 2G) or colonic transit (Figure 2H). To confirm the lack of GI motility effects, we implemented an alternative genetic approach enabling acute knockdown of BMP2 expression using a tamoxifen inducible Cre recombinase under the CX3CR1 macrophage promoter. Similar to our findings in LysMΔBMP2 mice, we detected no differences in WGTT (Figure 2I) or colonic transit (Figure 2J) between CX3CR1ΔBMP2 and CX3CR1WT mice. Finally, we assessed the effect of aging on MM BMP2 levels. BMP2 expression did not differ between sorted MMs from young and aged mice (Figure 2K). Collectively, these data indicate that inhibition of macrophage BMP2 production does not affect ENS structure or gut motility, and that the age-dependent decline in tissue BMP2 levels (Figure 1A and B) and enteric neuron BMP signaling (Figure 1C and D) occurs independent of MMs.
There are several salient features of the data presented in this report. First, we show that BMP2 levels in SI muscularis decline with age which causes reduced enteric neuron BMP signaling. Furthermore, inhibiting neuronal BMP signaling via genetic deletion of BMPR2 recapitulates the delayed colonic transit observed in aged mice. We believe this finding is due BMPR2 knockdown in enteric neurons but cannot exclude possible contributions from extrinsic neurons since targets of SLICK-H are not exclusive to the ENS. Genetic deletion of BMPR2 results in increased ganglia density. This is similar to findings in transgenic mice that overexpress BMP antagonist noggin, supporting involvement of BMP signaling in ENS plasticity. Notably, increased ganglia density is opposite the observation in aged mice and indicates that other factors besides reduced BMP signaling, particularly inflammation, are likely responsible for neuron loss. It also suggests that therapies that augment enteric BMP signaling while potentially effective against age-related gut dysmotility, might adversely impact enteric neuron numbers. Second, we show that macrophage BMP2 expression does not decline with age. This indicates that the decline in tissue BMP2 is likely due to another cell type, which could include epithelial cells and fibroblasts. Whether these cells communicate with enteric neurons and account for age-dependent reduction in enteric neuron BMP signaling deserves further exploration. Finally, while experimental depletion of MMs results in loss of enteric neurons and disruption of gut motility, our findings indicate that macrophage BMP2 production is unlikely responsible for these effects. These findings highlight the need for a greater understanding of MM homeostatic functions and how neuroimmune interactions regulate gut physiology.

References

Supplementary Materials
Conflicts of Interest: The authors disclose no conflicts.
Funding: This work was supported by  grants  and  to L.B.
Ethical Statement: The research was performed in compliance with the National Institutes of Health Statement of Compliance with Standards for Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and approved by the Stanford University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees.
Data Transparency Statement: Data, analytic methods, and study materials will be made available to other researchers after contacting the corresponding author.
Reporting Guidelines: ARRIVE.
Material associated with this article can be found in the online version at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gastha.2025.100673.