Evaluation and treatment of sleep disorders in adolescents with depression; a scoping review
Background
Adolescent depression is a common and disabling disorder that is frequently associated with large-scale sleep disturbances. Adolescents with depression frequently experience poor sleep quality, insomnia, and delayed sleep phase syndrome, which intensify and prolong depressive symptoms. Since mood disorder and sleep disorder are bidirectional, early diagnosis and treatment of sleep disorders in adolescent with depression are clinically critical.
Objective
This scoping review aimed to synthesize existing evidence on the evaluation and intervention of sleep disorders among adolescents with depression. The objective was to describe assessment methods, synthesize evidence on both non-pharmacological (e.g., CBT-I, mindfulness) and pharmacological (e.g., melatonin) interventions, and identify key research gaps for clinical practice and future trials.
Methods
The review followed Arksey and O’Malley’s framework and PRISMA-ScR guidelines. Searches of PubMed, Web of Science, CINAHL, PsycINFO, and Scopus were conducted for studies published between January 2000 and January 2024. Twenty-six peer-reviewed studies meeting the inclusion criteria were analyzed.
Results
From the study, 26 papers met the inclusion criteria. 17 of these were considered CBT-I or CBT-I-based interventions, 3 examined mindfulness-based interventions, 3 evaluated the use of melatonin, 2 considered psychoeducation or sleep hygiene, and 1 focused on group treatment. CBT-I was able to produce consistent results regarding sleep behavior, and many research studies have reported improvements in depressive symptoms that accompany sleep behavior change. Mindfulness-based therapies proved potentially valuable, but the results were more diverse in their inter-population and intervention format. Online CBT-I tools like Sleep Ninja + were found to be feasible and accessible. Melatonin was commonly used as a complementary treatment and generated short-term effects on getting sleep; however, the evidence of long-term safety and sustained effectiveness was limited. Most studies depended on subjective sleep assessment (e.g., PSQI, ISI), while only a small fraction of studies used objective indicators of sleep such as actigraphy and polysomnography. Divergent comparability and different participant characteristics were the limitations of the methodological heterogeneity that hampered the comparability and prevented sound conclusions of any generalization.
Conclusion
Addressing sleep disturbances is essential for the effective treatment of adolescent depression. Studies indicates that combining CBT-I with other therapies can enhance treatment outcomes, but further studies are necessary to confirm long-term results, assess potential medication risks, and ensure the treatments are suitable for all individuals.
Relevance
This review provides a foundational synthesis for clinicians and researchers aiming to improve diagnostic precision and treatment outcomes in adolescents experiencing both sleep disorders and depression.
Clinical trial number
Not applicable.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12888-025-07652-z.

Introduction
Adolescence is a significant developmental transition, which is distinguished by the rapid changes in biological, psychological, and social factors and predetermines the future mental health paths. During this stage, the incidence of mental health disorders rises sharply, with depressive disorders being among the most common psychiatric conditions in adolescents globally. Depression in adolescents is typically characterized by persistent low mood, anhedonia, fatigue, irritability, and cognitive difficulties, which can severely impair academic performance, interpersonal relationships, and overall quality of life if left untreated.
Sleep disorders are a highly prevalent feature of adolescent depression, whereby over 70% of the afflicted young individuals experience them. Such disturbances are problems with the onset and continuation of sleep, early awakening in the morning, and non-restorative sleep. Disrupted sleep not only co-occurs with depressive symptoms but also contributes to their onset, severity, and recurrence, indicating a bidirectional relationship between sleep and mood dysregulation during adolescence. Preemptive diagnosis and management of sleeping issues can, thus, be a key factor in enhancing mental health.
Although increasingly accumulating evidence has investigated psychological and pharmacological treatments of sleep disturbances in depressed adolescents, studies remain to be disseminated, especially with respect to the type of intervention to apply, delivery mode, measure of outcome, and population sample. As a result, it remains unclear which approaches are best supported by evidence and how sleep-focused therapies are being incorporated into clinical practice for this population.
In light of these considerations, the present scoping review aims to systematically map the existing literature on the evaluation and intervention of sleep disorders in adolescents with depression. Specifically, it seeks to (i) identify and synthesize the assessment methodologies utilized in current research and clinical practice, (ii) delineate the range of therapeutic interventions applied, and (iii) highlight existing knowledge gaps that warrant further empirical investigation. Through this, the review aspires to inform clinical decision-making, refine research priorities, and ultimately contribute to improving the mental health and quality of life of adolescents grappling with the dual burden of sleep disturbances and depression (Fig. 1).
Conceptual model of the bidirectional relationship between sleep disturbances and depression in adolescents
What is known about the topic
Sleep disturbances are highly prevalent among adolescents with depression, significantly impacting emotional, cognitive, and social functioning.
Although various evaluation tools exist, there is no universally accepted standard for assessing sleep disorders in adolescent with depression.
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia (CBT-I) has shown strong evidence of efficacy. Although melatonin supplementation is commonly used, the long-term effectiveness and safety in adolescents remain under-researched and inconclusive.
Current research addressing sleep disorder interventions often focuses broadly on adolescents or depression separately, without adequately integrating the dual burden of comorbid sleep and mood disturbances.
What this paper adds
This scoping review uniquely maps evaluation methodologies and intervention strategies specifically for adolescents experiencing both depression and sleep disorders.
It synthesizes the existing evidence into thematic categories, highlighting clinical practices, gaps in assessment, and emerging therapeutic approaches.
It emphasizes the urgent need for integrated, targeted interventions and standardized evaluation protocols to optimize outcomes for this high-risk population.

Methods

Study design
This scoping review was done in line with the methodological framework developed by Arksey and O’Malley which has five phases; (i) establishing the research questions; (ii) sourcing of potential studies; (iii) determining the relevant studies to be included in the review; (iv) categorizing data from the studies deemed relevant; and (v) synthesizing and reporting the data. Such an approach was used to ensure that no aspect of the literature regarding the assessment and management of sleep disorders in adolescents with depression was overlooked and to also assess areas of knowledge that may still be lacking. The methods for scoping and selection of articles followed the guidelines proposed in the PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) released in 2018 and allowed for transparency, methodological rigor in conducting the review, and facilitating its reproducibility.
The review protocol was not prospectively registered on PROSPERO or Open Science Framework (OSF), as scoping reviews are not always required to undergo formal registration. Nevertheless, all methodological decisions have been clearly documented to ensure transparency and reproducibility.

Research question
Using the Population-Concept-Context (PCC) framework suggested by Arksey and O’Malley (2005), as well as the PRISMA-ScR statement, we attempted to map evidence that is related to the assessment and management of sleep problems in depressed adolescents or those with depressive symptoms. The population included adolescents aged between 10 and 19 years of age with depression or depressive symptoms; the concept was centered around assessment and intervention measures of sleep disorders, and the context was clinical, educational, and community mental health settings. This method was chosen to be inclusive and to gather a wide range of empirical data and clinical experience relevant to the subject. Using this framework, the main research question directing the research is, “What are the most effective evaluation and intervention strategies for managing sleep disorders in adolescents with depression?”

Search strategy
The method combining subject terms and keywords was adopted to search for publicly published articles in databases such as PubMed, Scopus, Taylor & Francis Online, CINAHL, and the Cochrane Library through computer retrieval. Each of these platforms was chosen to provide access to the wide range of research articles, systematic reviews, or clinical trials, as well as any potential grey literature pertinent to sleep disorders, depression, and adolescent mental health.
To ensure comprehensive coverage and consistency in data collection, literature retrieval and screening were conducted three times in the month of April 2025, with the final search on April 20th. The search strategy was deliberately designed to make the search terms as inclusive as possible while excluding any unnecessary articles at the same time. The PICOS was used to choose the keywords and controlled vocabulary terms. The search strings used for the database search as follows:
Scopus, Cochrane, CINAHL and Taylor and Francis: (“screening” OR “assessment” OR “evaluation” OR “monitoring”) AND (“major depressive disorder” OR “MDD” OR “depress*” OR “clinical depression” OR “unipolar depression” OR “low mood” OR “emotional distress” OR “dysthymia” OR “persistent depressive disorder” OR “sadness” OR “depressive symptoms” OR “mood disorder*” OR “affective disorder*”) AND (intervention OR mediation) AND (adolescent* OR teenager* OR teen* OR youth OR “young people” OR “young adult*” OR minors OR juvenile* OR “high school student*” OR “secondary school student*”).
The search strings used were:
PubMed: (“screening“[Title/Abstract] OR “assessment“[Title/Abstract] OR “evaluation“[Title/Abstract] OR “monitoring“[Title/Abstract]) OR (“Mass Screening“[MeSH] OR “Diagnosis“[MeSH: NoExp] OR “Psychological Tests“[MeSH] OR “Mental Status Schedule“[MeSH]) AND (“major depressive disorder“[Title/Abstract] OR “MDD“[Title/Abstract] OR “depress*“[Title/Abstract] OR “clinical depression“[Title/Abstract] OR “unipolar depression“[Title/Abstract] OR “low mood“[Title/Abstract] OR “emotional distress“[Title/Abstract] OR “dysthymia“[Title/Abstract] OR “persistent depressive disorder“[Title/Abstract] OR “sadness“[Title/Abstract] OR “depressive symptoms“[Title/Abstract] OR “mood disorder*“[Title/Abstract] OR “affective disorder*“[Title/Abstract]) OR (“Depressive Disorder“[MeSH] OR “Depressive Disorder, Major“[MeSH] OR “Dysthymic Disorder“[MeSH] OR “Depression“[MeSH: NoExp] OR “Affective Symptoms“[MeSH]) AND (“intervention“[Title/Abstract] OR “mediation“[Title/Abstract]) OR (“Intervention“[MeSH] OR “Early Medical Intervention“[MeSH] OR"Psychotherapy“[MeSH] OR “Therapeutics“[MeSH: NoExp]) AND (“adolescent“[Title/Abstract] OR “teenager*“[Title/Abstract] OR “teen*“[Title/Abstract] OR “youth“[Title/Abstract] OR “young people“[Title/Abstract] OR “young adult*“[Title/Abstract] OR “minors“[Title/Abstract] OR “juvenile*“[Title/Abstract] OR “high school student*“[Title/Abstract] OR “secondary school student*“[Title/Abstract]) OR (“Adolescent“[MeSH] OR “Minors“[MeSH] OR “Young Adult“[MeSH] OR “Students“[MeSH])
Two reviewers independently screened the titles and abstracts using a checklist of the inclusion criteria. A third reviewer was contacted to reach a consensus whenever there was doubt about the inclusion of a study. This approach made the process rapid and also ensured that all the eligibility criteria were met and reduced the chances of missing out on the available research.

Eligibility criteria
The criteria of eligibility were made clear so that the studies included in the study are of direct relevance to evaluating and treating sleep disorders among adolescents with the symptom of being depressed or displaying depressive signs. The parameters for inclusion and exclusion were based on the PCC framework, aligning with the scoping review design established by Arksey and O’Malley as well as the PRISMA-ScR recommendations.

Inclusion criteria
Studies were included if they met the following criteria:
Population (P): Adolescents (10–19 years), who were either with a clinical diagnosis of depression or presenting with depression-related symptoms. Studies including adolescents with comorbid conditions (e.g., concussion, autism spectrum disorder, anorexia nervosa) were also eligible if sleep disturbances were a primary outcome.
Concept (C): Studies evaluating screening, assessment, or intervention strategies (behavioral, pharmacological, or combined) for sleep disorders such as insomnia, delayed sleep phase disorder, or general sleep disturbances.
Context (C): Peer-reviewed studies in clinical or community settings. Both completed trials and relevant protocols were included when they addressed interventions directly targeting adolescent sleep and depression.
The studies were eligible if they had examined assessment tools, therapeutic interventions (behavioral/pharmacological/combined), or both of them, and the outcome measure had to be based on the sleep quality, the sleep duration, or the reduction of depressive symptoms.

Exclusion criteria
Studies were excluded if they:
Focused solely on adult populations (individuals older than 19 years) or young children (younger than 10 years).
Addressed depression without examining sleep disturbances as a primary or secondary focus.
Were editorials, opinion pieces, letters to the editor, commentaries, conference abstracts without full texts, case reports, or protocols.
Were non-peer-reviewed materials or studies where full-text versions could not be retrieved despite exhaustive efforts.

Assessment of reported efficacy
Due to the number of included studies presenting quantitative or qualitative data on the outcomes of interventions, a descriptive appraisal of the reported efficacy was carried out in order to synthesize findings in a systematized way. The study used a straightforward narrative rating scheme to assist in scoping reviews, following the recommendations of the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) Manual on Evidence Synthesis in scoping reviews through (1) the strength of study design (randomised, quasi-experimental, or observational); (2) the consistency of statistically significant improvement of the primary outcomes of sleep and depression; and (3) the adequacy of sample size and follow-up completeness.
The three qualitative ratings of high, moderate or limited / low were given to each type of intervention to determine the degree of reported efficacy as reported by the study authors; not as an actual effect-size estimate or a GRADE score.
High efficacy suggests several randomised controlled trials (RCTs) or large-scale studies (n > 100) with high consistency of significant improvements in both sleep and depressive outcomes.
Moderate efficacy referred to smaller RCTs or pilot studies showing significant sleep improvements but inconsistent or secondary effects on mood.
Limited efficacy described single-arm, qualitative, or feasibility studies with preliminary or mixed findings.
These narrative ratings were made purely to facilitate thematic synthesis and they were not supposed to be a risk-of-bias or GRADE assessment.

Study selection
To make the process clear and easy to repeat, the PRISMA-ScR flowchart (Fig. 2) illustrates the number of articles found, checked, left out, and included. Thus, this approach was specifically useful to avoid incorporating less-relevant studies into the review that do not meet the aims and objectives of the study conducted when extracting and synthesizing data.

Data extraction and charting
Key information extracted from each study included the following variables: author(s), year of publication, country of study, study design, type of sleep disorder evaluated, evaluation tools or methods used, intervention strategies implemented, outcomes assessed, and key findings related to sleep and depressive symptoms. The study also documented data on follow-up periods, adherence rates, and adverse events associated with interventions when available.
To organize the collected data, we used thematic analysis, which involved sorting the documents into categories like evaluation methods, non-drug therapies, drug treatments, and research gaps. This approach enabled a more ordered review of the narratives and better distinction between similarities and differences in the body of research. An authorization table has been created to clearly show the features of the studies included, helping readers understand the evidence, the population, the sample, the methods used, the main results, and the limitations of these studies.
In the course of extraction and charting, consultations were made frequently and continuously among the review team regarding the categorization of the studies and the synthesis to capture all the distinct intricacies in the existing literature. To comply with the PRISMA-ScR, a detailed list of the studies excluded at the screening stage is provided in Supplementary Table 1, along with the reasons why it was excluded. This helped improve the transparency and reproducibility of the selection process.
Screening methodology

Results

Overview of included studies
In the initial step of searching, a total of 1,485 articles were identified from the selected databases, which were PubMed, Scopus, Taylor & Francis Online, CINAHL, and the Cochrane Library. After the removal of 200 duplicate entries using EndNote 20.0 software and manual verification, 1,285 unique records remained for screening. Title screening led to the exclusion of 866 studies that did not meet the predefined eligibility criteria. Moreover, 419 papers were subjected to abstract screening, where 343 reports were excluded. The full texts of 76 articles were carefully reviewed for eligibility, leading to the exclusion of 50 studies because they involved the wrong population, focused too much on sleep or depression, or did not have adequate research methods. Ultimately, 26 studies were eligible for selection and included in the final synthesis. The whole process of choosing studies, along with the reasons for leaving some out at each step, is shown in the PRISMA-ScR flow diagram (Fig. 2), which helps make the review method clear and easy to repeat.
A total of 26 studies were included in the final synthesis after systematic screening. Study designs varied across randomized controlled trials, cohort studies, cross-sectional surveys, qualitative analyses, and pilot interventions. Most studies originated from North America (n = 11) and Europe (n = 6), with fewer contributions from Asia (n = 3), Africa (n = 1) and multination (n = 1), highlighting the dominance of high-income settings in this field. This geographical imbalance has implications for generalisability of findings to diverse adolescent populations. Sample sizes ranged widely, from single-case reports to multi-site randomized trials enrolling over 350 participants. Publication years spanned from 2015 to 2025, with a marked increase in publications after 2020, suggesting growing recognition of the importance of sleep interventions in adolescent depression. Most studies used DSM-5 guidelines to diagnose depression and relied on the PSQI, ISI, and actigraphy studies to measure sleep disorders.
Researchers mainly explored insomnia, providing treatments that included CBT-I, mindfulness approaches, education on sleep hygiene, taking melatonin, or using sedative antidepressant drugs. The study measured the changes that occurred in sleep, depressive feelings, or both. Most studies reported short-term outcomes (4–12 weeks), with only a few including follow-up periods extending to 6–12 months. The limited availability of long-term data restricts conclusions about sustained treatment effects, relapse prevention, and the durability of behavioral versus pharmacological interventions.
The reviewed studies have demonstrated considerable heterogeneity, including differences in the population of the studies, comorbidity patterns, and the way of delivering the intervention. An example is that although some studies only included adolescents with primary insomnia, others included youth with concomitant psychiatric disorders including anxiety disorders, autism spectrum disorders, or post-concussion syndrome. This kind of variability makes cross-study comparisons difficult and emphasizes the necessity to adopt more standardized evaluation protocols.
Table 1 provides a concise overview of each of the studies (study design, characteristics of participants, interventions, outcomes and limitations). The table identifies the methodological heterogeneity inherent in the discipline, highlighting the common use of limited pilot sample sizes and shortened follow-up times.
Although the main inclusion criteria were the presence of adolescents with depression, the review also included those that included the studies concerning the population with comorbid or secondary depressive symptoms, namely, individuals with autism spectrum disorder, concussion, anorexia nervosa, or atopic dermatitis. Such studies were included due to the fact that it tested sleep interventions that simultaneously assessed depressive effects or mood-related results. The use of such populations is in line with the aim of the research in terms of identifying the full range of evidence in relation to sleep-disturbance management among the adolescents whose depressive symptomatology is clinically relevant.
Characteristics of the literature
#	Author(s), year	Study design	Population	Intervention	Key sleep & mood outcomes	Main limitations	 	1	Åslund et al. (2020) 	Clinical pilot study	Adolescents with psychiatric comorbidities and insomnia symptoms (depressive symptoms measured)	CBT-I targeting sleep hygiene and stimulus control	Reduced insomnia severity and improved mood scores	Small sample; no control group	 	2	Tomfohr-Madsen et al. (2020) 	RCT	Adolescents with post-concussion symptoms and insomnia (depressive symptoms assessed)	CBT-I adapted for concussion	Improved sleep efficiency; reduced insomnia complaints	Short follow-up	 	3	Bahrami et al. (2021) 	RCT	Adolescent girls with depression, vitamin D deficiency, and insomnia	Vitamin D supplementation	Improved sleep quality and cognitive performance	Gender-specific sample	 	4	Quon et al. (2018) 	Observational	Youth presenting to mental health clinics with sleep complaints (depressive symptoms recorded for subsample)	Group therapy addressing sleep habits	High sleep-disturbance prevalence documented	No control group; self-report	 	5	Werner-Seidler et al. (2023) 	RCT	Adolescents with insomnia and depressive symptoms	Sleep-focused smartphone CBT-I	Reduced insomnia and depressive scores	Self-report; limited follow-up	 	6	Clarke et al. (2015) 	RCT	Adolescents with major depressive disorder and insomnia	CBT-I plus depression-focused therapy	Improved sleep and depression outcomes	Small sample	 	7	de Bruin et al. (2015) 	RCT	Adolescents with insomnia; subset with depressive symptoms	Group and internet CBT-I	Improved sleep onset latency and mood scores	Unequal group sizes	 	8	Barlow et al. (2021) 	RCT	Adolescents with post-concussion sleep disturbance (depression measured as secondary outcome)	Melatonin 3–10 mg	Reduced sleep-onset latency; improved sleep duration	Depression not primary outcome	 	9	Higson-Sweeney et al. (2020) 	Qualitative	Adolescents accessing mental health services with sleep complaints	Clinician-led sleep and fatigue management	Identified barriers to sleep care integration	Small qualitative sample	 	10	Okajima et al. (2021) 	RCT	Adolescents and young adults with insomnia	Email-delivered CBT-I	Improved sleep onset latency	Adult participants included	 	11	Chang et al. (2016) 	RCT	Children and adolescents with atopic dermatitis and sleep disturbance (depressive symptoms recorded)	Melatonin supplementation	Improved sleep duration; no significant change in mood	Small mixed-age sample	 	12	Cliffe et al. (2020) 	Open trial	Adolescents with mental health conditions and insomnia	Digital CBT-I	Feasible; reduced insomnia severity	No control group	 	13	Conroy et al. (2019) 	Pilot study	Adolescents with MDD and insomnia	Modified CBT-I	Improved sleep latency and depressive scores	Small sample	 	14	Clarke et al. (2020) 	Trial design paper	Adolescents with MDD and insomnia	CBT-I plus SSRI augmentation (plan)	Protocol only	Not completed	 	15	McMakin et al. (2019) 	RCT	Pre/early adolescents with anxiety and sleep problems (depressive symptoms tracked)	Anxiety treatment plus sleep enhancement	Improved sleep efficiency; reduced anxiety/depression scores	Mixed diagnoses	 	16	Hoyniak et al. (2021) 	RCT	Preschool-onset MDD with sleep problems	Parent-child interaction therapy	Improved sleep and emotion regulation	Younger age group	 	17	Dolsen et al. (2023) 	RCT	Adolescents with depression and circadian disturbance	Transdiagnostic sleep intervention + texts	Improved sleep and reduced depressive symptoms	Follow-up attrition	 	18	Palermo et al. (2017) 	Pilot study	Adolescents with psychiatric/medical comorbidities and insomnia	Brief CBT-I	Improved sleep and mood scores	No control group	 	19	Blake et al. (2016) 	RCT	At-risk adolescents with poor sleep and mild depression	CBT + mindfulness group program	Improved sleep and mood post-intervention	Attrition bias	 	20	Blake et al. (2018) 	RCT	Same as above (subgroup analysis)	CBT + mindfulness	Moderators of treatment efficacy identified	Secondary analysis	 	21	Schroder et al. (2019) 	RCT	Children/adolescents with autism and insomnia (depression not primary but mood assessed)	Prolonged-release melatonin	Improved sleep duration; caregiver quality of life ↑	Broader population	 	22	Subotic-Kerry et al. (2023) 	Protocol	Children using Sleep Ninja® app	CBT-I smartphone trial protocol	Study protocol only	No results	 	23	Egbegi et al. (2021) 	Controlled trial	In-school adolescents with insomnia symptoms	CBT-based group sessions	Improved sleep onset and duration	Cluster bias	 	24	Law et al. (2023) 	Protocol	Adolescents with migraine and insomnia	CBT-I for sleep and pain	Protocol only	No results	 	25	Crevits et al. (2024) 	Pilot study	Adolescents with anorexia nervosa and insomnia	CBT-I	Improved sleep continuity	Very small sample	 	26	Orchard et al. (2020) 	Case illustration	Adolescent with depression and insomnia	Brief CBT-I (“Sleeping Better” program)	Case-based improvement in sleep and mood	Single case
CBT-I: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia, PSQI: Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, ISI: Insomnia Severity Index, PCIT-ED: Parent–Child Interaction Therapy – Emotion Development, MDD: Major Depressive Disorder, K-SADS: Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia, SCID: Structured Clinical Interview for DSM Disorders, SH: Sleep Hygiene, TranS- C: Transdiagnotic Sleep and Cardian Intervention for Youth
Overall, the findings based on the incorporated studies depict a continuum of methods of dealing with sleep disorders in depressed youth. Although most of the reported interventions showed positive effects with regard to sleep parameters and in a few cases depressive symptoms, the heterogeneity in methodology, both population and outcome measures limits the ability to make direct comparative analyses between studies.

Evaluation methods for sleep disorders
Evaluation methods for sleep disorders in adolescents with depression
Domain	Commonly used measures	Frequency of use	Description / comments	 	Sleep assessment	Insomnia Severity Index (ISI)	16 studies	Most widely used self-report of insomnia severity; 7-item scale sensitive to treatment change.	 		Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI)	10 studies	Measures subjective sleep quality and latency over one month.	 		Actigraphy / Sleep diaries	8 studies	Objective or semi-objective daily sleep parameters; often used alongside ISI.	 		Polysomnography (PSG)	2 studies	Used primarily in clinical or pilot settings due to cost and complexity.	 	Depression / mood	Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II)	9 studies	Most frequent clinician-rated depressive symptom measure.	 		Children’s Depression Inventory (CDI)	6 studies	Common for younger adolescents.	 		Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES-D)	4 studies	Used mainly in community-based studies.	 		Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9)	4 studies	Employed in digital and mixed clinical samples.	 	Anxiety / comorbidity	State-Trait Anxiety Inventory for Children (STAIC), GAD-7	3 studies	Used when anxiety examined alongside depression.	 	Function / quality of life	Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL)	2 studies	Secondary outcome; measures overall well-being.
Across the papers used in the study, a significant amount of consistency in instruments used to assess sleep disturbances and depressive symptoms among adolescents was present. The most commonly used instrument turned out to be the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI), which was found in 11 studies as the primary outcome of insomnia severity and treatment response. The next most frequently utilized tool was the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) which was used in 8 studies and used to determine the subjective sleep quality and latency as well as over a one-month period. Sleep diaries or actigraphy were also used in 5 studies to give daily or objective information regarding the duration and efficiency of sleep while polysomnography (PSG) appeared in 2 small clinical trials because of its expensive nature and high practical impediments in outpatient teens. Collectively, the instruments indicate the use of a methodological bias toward validated self-report, in some cases, to enhance reliability and ecological validity.
In terms of measuring mood and emotional functioning, the most commonly used scale of depression was the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) that was stated in 9 studies and the Children Depression Inventory (CDI), which was mentioned in 6 studies. The Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) and the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) each featured in 4 studies. Few studies used anxiety or quality-of-life scales, including the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory-Children (STAIC) or the GAD-7, or Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL). The repeated use of these standardized scales promotes comparability of all literature, but timing, scoring and reporting of results remain inconsistent, thus restricting direct synthesis. The PHQ-9 reported in several included studies refers to the original, validated version developed by Kroenke et al.,. It is a standardized 9-item measure widely used to assess depressive symptom severity in both adolescent and adult populations. No adaptations or study-specific versions were developed in the included literature, and all uses refer to the previously published tool. Moreover, The CES-D scale used in the included studies corresponds to the original version developed by Radloff. This standardized self-report instrument has been widely validated and is commonly applied in adolescent mental-health research. Altogether, Table 2 reflects the prevailing instruments, especially ISI and PSQI to sleep and BDI-II or CDI to depression, with their focus on the methodological consistency but overall heterogeneity of the research on sleep-depression associations in adolescents (Table 3).
Comparison of non-pharmacological and pharmacological interventions for sleep disorders in adolescents with depression
Author(s) and year	Intervention type	Delivery mode / dosage	Key components / target symptom	Population / context	Reported outcomes / key clinical implications	 	Clarke et al. (2020) 	CBT-I (with SSRIs)	In-person + standard care	Sleep hygiene, stimulus control, cognitive restructuring	Adolescents with depression on antidepressants	Enhanced depression outcomes through insomnia treatment	 	Palermo et al. (2017) 	Brief CBT-I	In-person (pilot trial)	Sleep hygiene, cognitive restructuring, behavioral techniques	Adolescents with comorbid physical and psychiatric conditions	Improved sleep, psychological health, and quality of life	 	Blake et al. (2016) 	CBT/mindfulness group intervention	Group-based	CBT techniques + mindfulness practices	At-risk adolescents with anxiety and sleep issues	Significant improvements in sleep quality and mental health	 	Blake et al. (2018) 	CBT/mindfulness group intervention	Group-based	CBT + mindfulness with moderator analysis	Adolescents with elevated sleep difficulties	Identified treatment moderators; positive impact on sleep	 	Subotic-Kerry et al. (2023) 	CBT-I (Sleep Ninja® app)	App-based/mobile	Self-guided CBT strategies via smartphone	Adolescents with insomnia symptoms and at-risk for MDD	Reduced insomnia, depression, anxiety, and sleepiness	 	Crevits et al. (2024) 	CBT-I	In-person therapy	CBT strategies tailored to anorexia nervosa	Adolescents with anorexia nervosa	Effective in improving sleep disturbances	 	de Bruin et al. (2015) 	CBT-I (group and internet)	Group and online	Psychoeducation, sleep restriction, stimulus control, relaxation	Adolescents with DSM-5 diagnosed insomnia	Improved sleep onset, duration, and sleep efficiency	 	Orchard et al. (2020) 	CBT-I (adapted brief format)	Case-based	Sleep scheduling, cognitive restructuring, stimulus control	Depressed adolescent in a case illustration	Reduced insomnia symptoms and depressive complaints	 	Barlow et al. (2021) 	Melatonin	Oral; 3 mg and 10 mg nightly	Sleep disturbance	Children with post-concussion symptoms	Both dosages improved sleep; no added benefit with 10 mg	 	Goldman et al. (2021) 	Melatonin	OTC supplement; unspecified dose	Transient insomnia	Children with occasional sleeplessness	Safe and effective for short-term use; regulatory caution advised	 	Chang et al. (2016) 	Melatonin	3 mg daily before bedtime	Sleep disturbance	Children with atopic dermatitis	Improved sleep and reduced dermatitis symptoms	 	Schroder et al. (2019) 	Prolonged-release melatonin	Oral sustained-release formulation	Insomnia	Children with ASD or Smith-Magenis syndrome	Improved sleep and behavior; approved for specific populations

Pharmacological interventions for sleep disorders
Pharmacological therapies, primarily melatonin, are studied in a sequence of studies. Melatonin has frequently been shown to improve sleep onset latency and circadian rhythm regulation in adolescents; however, evidence regarding long-term efficacy and safety remains limited. However, the dose of melatonin had inconsistent effects on its therapeutic effect, allowing higher doses not to always offer better treatment. Besides, the efficacy of this drug seemed to be context-related, and specific benefits were observed in adolescents with neurodevelopmental conditions like autism spectrum disorder and in individuals with dermatological comorbidities like atopic dermatitis. Even though the short-term tolerability tends to be acceptable, there are still significant uncertainties about the long-term safety as well as the best dosage and the potential to develop physiological dependence. The heterogeneity of over-the-counter formulations further complicates the therapeutic environment by lack of control in the regulation and purity of products. Melatonin, therefore, ought to be considered as an adjuvant, and not as a first-line intervention, to be used with caution and preferably as a source of supplements alongside behavioural interventions. Beyond melatonin, the review identified a gap in the literature regarding the impact of other psychotropic medications on sleep. Commonly prescribed medications for treatment-resistant depression, such as sedating antipsychotics used in augmentation strategies, can significantly alter sleep architecture. Future studies should consider medication status as a key variable, as iatrogenic sedation can confound the interpretation of sleep-focused therapeutic outcomes.
Behavioral methods have received more focus compared to pharmacologic interventions, but also form an indispensable part of the study on adolescent sleep disturbances. Of the pharmacologic agents considered, melatonin was identified as the best studied and was found in six randomized controlled trials involving diverse populations, such as depressed adolescents, patients with post-concussion syndrome, autism spectrum disorder, and atopic dermatitis. The dosages ranged between 3 and 10 mg, which was usually taken between 30 and 60 min before bedtime lasting between two and twelve weeks. Most of the studies had reported statistically significant improvement on sleep-onset latency and total sleep time as compared to placebo or baseline levels. Nevertheless, comorbid advances in symptomatic decisions of depression remained uneven and were usually deemed as by-products of the sleep performance. Clinical trials of comorbid samples (e.g., autism or dermatologists) showed positive impact on sleep quality and caregiver-reported functioning, but depressive outcome was not always measured. The toxicity was little and was mostly temporary morning drowsiness or mild headache thus demonstrating that it has a satisfactory safety profile to use in the short term.
These promising results notwithstanding, there is still some limited evidence of pharmacologic intervention compared to non-pharmacologic interventions. Only a few RCTs assessed the efficacy of melatonin in depressed adolescents and the majority of them lacked long-term follow-up or standardised mood measures. None of the other hypnotic or antidepressant agents have been rated based on their sole effect of improving sleep, and even vitamin D supplementation (examined in 1 RCT) yielded encouraging results in the enhancement of sleep quality in vitamin-D deficient depressed adolescent but cannot be extended to wider groups. Given the small sample sizes, heterogeneity in dosage, and variability in outcome reporting, these studies provide preliminary rather than definitive evidence (Table 4).
Summary of reported outcomes of sleep interventions in adolescents with depression
Intervention type	Example studies	Delivery mode	Target outcome	Efficacy rating	 	CBT-I (Standard)	Clarke et al., Palermo et al. 	In-person	Insomnia + depressive symptoms	High	 	CBT-I (Digital/Sleep Ninja®)	Subotic-Kerry et al., Werner-Seidler 	App-based	Insomnia + mood symptoms	Moderate to High	 	CBT/Mindfulness Combined	Blake et al. 	Group-based	Sleep and anxiety symptoms	Moderate	 	Melatonin (Low dose)	Barlow et al., Chang et al. 	Oral nightly	Sleep onset/latency	Moderate	 	Prolonged-release Melatonin	Schroder et al. 	Oral SR tablet	Insomnia in neurodevelopmental cases	High	 	Brief CBT-I Adaptation	Orchard et al. 	Case-based	Mild to moderate insomnia	Moderate	 	CBT-I in Comorbid Conditions	Crevits et al. 	Individual therapy	AN + insomnia	Moderate	 	Combined SSRIs + CBT-I	Clarke et al. 	Hybrid/integrated care	Depression + insomnia	High
Note: Ratings were assigned using the same narrative criteria described in the Methods. “High” indicates consistent improvements across multiple RCTs; “moderate” reflects partial or secondary improvements; “limited” denotes preliminary or inconclusive findings

Discussion

Summary of key findings
This scoping review identified and depicted the existing body of research on the diagnosis and management of sleep disorders in adolescent with depression, revealing both notable trends and shortcomings in the research on the topic. Insomnia was the predominant sleep disturbance identified across the included studies. Although delayed sleep phase symptoms were occasionally described, few studies explicitly measured this as a separate diagnostic category. Largely, studies were based on subjective measures like the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) or Insomnia Severity Index (ISI), but few of them utilized objective measures like actigraphy or polysomnography. The in-person and online versions of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia (CBT-I) repeatedly were commonly reported as beneficial in augmenting sleep quality and mitigating depressive symptoms. Mindfulness-based treatments and guided sleep hygiene education proved advantageous as well, but with mixed results. Pharmacological agents and especially with melatonin therapeutic benefits of adjunct were observed. However, even in the short-term, the empirical basis is inconclusive. The differences in the development of studies, the period of follow-up, and demographic factors make it difficult to compare investigations with each other. In addition, cultural differences in sleep patterns and access to mental-health care have been given minimal attention, which creates issues of the generalizability of the results. A number of studies have also reported access-related barriers, heterogeneity of participants, and methodological inconsistencies.

Clinical implications
This review highlighted the dire clinical need to systematically consider sleep disturbances as part of the processes of treating adolescent depression. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia (CBT-I) was proven to be the most efficient type of non-pharmacological treatment, demonstrating the results of enhanced sleep quality and mood control in various settings of the study. The advantage of CBT-I is a multi-component design that encompasses cognitive restructuring, sleep scheduling, stimulus control, and relaxation training components. These elements enable a more specific intervention that can respond to the particular physiological and psychological disruptions that happen during the adolescent process.
Especially, the delivery format versatility of CBT-I which is notable. Face-to-face therapy has been proven to be very beneficial, and there are wonderful opportunities on the digital front with things like the Sleep Ninja app or other smartphone-based CBT programs offering amazing potential to promote accessibility, particularly in low-resource areas or adolescent populations who may be less willing to pursue face-to-face therapy because of stigma or logistic factors. These online interventions showed acceptable engagement, usability, and early-stage efficacy, with more testing needed to determine longer-term adherence and effect.
Along the same lines, mindfulness-based sleep interventions were also found to be moderately successful, especially when integrated with CBT elements. The methods were particularly useful with adolescents with high emotional reactivity, a characteristic trait in depressive disorders, because they enhanced emotion regulation and sleep hygiene.
Nonetheless, the reality is that, even in the face of such advances, sleep-based care has not yet been integrated into the currently available mental health services for adolescents. Sleep disturbances are discussed as secondary issues to focus on and not as primary targets in treatment; therefore, they create opportunities for early treatment to go unnoticed. The clinicians must be educated to appropriately evaluate sleep disturbances, together with integrating sleep management into usual psychiatric practice. This involves proper use of valid screening items like ISI or PSQI and, when available, caregiver reports to support subjective complaints.
Studies indicate that CBT-I can improve both sleep onset and sleep continuity in adolescents, with benefits observed in populations with neurodevelopmental disorders as well as those experiencing post-concussion sleep disturbances. However, there are complicated issues with using melatonin. Though it is usually safe and well-accepted in short-term studies, we don’t know how safe it is for long-term use, the best amount to take, or if teens might become dependent on it. Nevertheless, the clinical issue of melatonin is intricate. The long-term safety profile, ideal dosing, and possibility of physiological dependence among adolescents are not adequately determined despite being generally safe and well tolerated in short-term studies. Furthermore, the variability of over-the-counter melatonin supplements, because they lack consistent regulatory oversight, poses concerns regarding the quality and efficacy of the product. Hence, melatonin is not a first-line therapy but a supportive agent that can only be administered alongside behavioral treatment.
Collectively, these findings indicate that inconsistent clinical advances in treating adolescent depression focus on a multimodal approach that intentionally includes both psychological and sleep-specific treatments. To achieve the best outcomes for this at-risk subgroup, universal screening of sleep problems, formal CBT-I programming, conservative administration of melatonin, and care models that integrate multiple disciplines are essential.

Research gaps
Although the interest in the relationship between sleep and adolescent depression has been increasing, this review has determined some crucial gaps in the existing literature. To begin with, subjective measurements of sleep are overemphasized. Although the ISI and PSQI are low-cost and administratively straightforward, they might not identify the range of sleep pathology because adolescents underreport their sleep experience, leading to misinterpretation. Only a small number of studies used objective data collection methods, like actigraphy or polysomnography, which are important for confirming what people say about their sleep and understanding issues like circadian misalignment and changes in sleep structure.
Second, there is a significant lack of long-term follow-up data. Interventions were assessed by most within short periods of several weeks or a few months, and only some were assessed 6–12 months following interventions. This complicates determining treatment gains, sustainability, relapse of symptoms, or booster intervention.
Third, study populations lack diversity; thus, there is limited generalizability of findings. Studies were mostly done in the Western, high-income countries, with only a few representing low- and middle-income settings where the risk factors of the diseases can be even more acute in both depression and sleep disorders. These aspects, including socioeconomic factors, cultural sleep systems, and mental health care availability, can also affect the relationship between sleep and depression and sensitive responsiveness, yet they have not been well explored.
Fourth, studies examining the effectiveness of integrated interventions that target both sleep and depression symptoms concurrently were minimal. CBT-I and digital apps were promising, but there was little testing of comprehensive care models that combine pharmacological, psychological, and educational approaches. Additionally, the interaction between sleep and family processes, as well as environmental stressors, was often disregarded, although the existing literature indicates that these are key mediators of sleep quality and symptoms of depression.
Finally, melatonin, which was often studied, showed a lot of differences in dosage, product types, and how long it was used, making it hard to give consistent medical advice. Additionally, there was little to no research done on potential harms or individual insomnia in the long-term safety and optimal dosing.

Future directions
Longitudinal multimodal research studies will focus on understanding the long-term effects of sleep interventions on depression rates. These studies should include both subjective and objective evaluations of sleep, such as actigraphy or wearable digital technologies, which would provide a more precise and detailed view of sleep habits. In addition, randomized controlled trials of the use of mobile health (mHealth) and digital CBT-I tools, including the Leep Ninja® and others, are desirable to understand their feasibility, rates of engagement, and effectiveness in diverse, real-world populations at scale.
Moreover, greater focus on the diversity of participants, including those of various cultures, races, and classes, should be paid by future studies. The interventions should be modified to fit linguistic, cultural, and contextual norms to enhance accessibility and acceptability by groups that are different.
Another important area to explore is how brain biology and thinking skills affect sleep problems in depressed teenagers. By using biomarkers, brain scans, and tests of thinking abilities, we can learn more about how sleep and mood influence each other and how to create targeted treatments.
Lastly, there must be a use of implementation sciences to narrow down the chasm between research and practice. Research should consider evaluating not just efficacy, but also cost-effectiveness, scalability, training of clinicians, and integrating sleep interventions into the system at the level of mental health service delivery.

Limitation
The scoping review described here has a number of limitations that can have an impact on the interpretation and applicability of its results. Restricting the study to English-language research may have overlooked relevant studies from non-English-speaking regions, which could introduce language bias and limit cross-cultural understanding. The majority of the studies had their origins in high-income Western countries, limiting their interpretations due to a range of socioeconomic and cultural settings. The lack of longitudinal data contributes to the fact that evaluations regarding the long-term effectiveness of interventions are not firmly enabled due to the prevalence of cross-sectional and short-term designs. Moreover, substantial heterogeneity of assessment scales, diagnostic disorders, and sources and forms of interventions between the studies interferes with the comparison and combination. And the publication bias could also be carried through by not including grey literature or unpublished trials. Finally, no formal risk-of-bias analysis was performed, thus possibly presenting results related to studies with low-quality methodology. Such restrictions indicate that it is necessary to interpret the results of the review presented with caution and that future studies should potentially offer solutions to these deficits in more comprehensive, universal, and stringent design methodologies. Furthermore, this review primarily captured literature on insomnia and circadian delays. The assessment and treatment of hypersomnia—a common feature of atypical depression in adolescents—were notably absent from the identified literature, representing a significant gap in current research.

Conclusion
This research systematically mapped existing studies regarding assessment and treatment of sleep disorders in medically depressed adolescents with comorbidities. The studies show that sleep disturbances, especially those related to insomnia and, to a smaller degree, delayed sleep phase symptoms, are relatively common among this population and are often linked to the worse mood regulation, high level of functional impairment, and low response to treatment. Such results highlight the importance of maintaining interest in sleep health as a component of the assessment and management of the mental health of adolescents.
Non-pharmacological interventions such as cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I), mindfulness-based therapies, and structured sleep hygiene programs were the most frequently evaluated approaches. These interventions, across included studies, were shared as helpful in improving the quality of sleep and, with a few exceptions, depression symptoms. Pharmacological alternatives, predominantly of melatonin supplementation were at times reported to produce short-term sleep effects, however, lack of evidence due to small sample size, dosage variability, and insufficient long-term safety results. The existing literature underlines the significance of the individualized and multimodal interventions, which focus on both sleep and mood regulation, yet more research is needed to determine the most effective implementation options.
In conclusion, the management of sleep disorders must become a central component of comprehensive care for adolescents with depression. Early identification, continuous monitoring, and the delivery of integrated, evidence-based interventions can significantly improve clinical outcomes and quality of life for this vulnerable population. Addressing the existing research gaps will further strengthen the evidence base, guiding the development of more precise, equitable, and sustainable treatment strategies in adolescent mental health care.

Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
The original version of this article was revised: Yehong Wei has been added as the co-corresponding author.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Solomon Owusu Mensah and Xiaoqing Duan contributed equally to this work and can be recognised as co-authors.
Change history
1/30/2026
A Correction to this paper has been published: 10.1186/s12888-026-07811-w

Author contributions
OMS and XD contributed equally to this work. YH and XC are the corresponding authors.

Funding
The author(s) declare that financial support was received for the research and/or publication of this article. This work was supported by the “Pioneer” and “Leading Goose” R&D Program of Zhejiang (GRANT NUMBER 2024C03208).

Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Declarations

Ethical approval
Not applicable.

Consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Depression in adolescence: a review
Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia in adolescents with comorbid psychiatric disorders: A clinical pilot study
A pilot randomized controlled trial of cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia in adolescents with persistent postconcussion symptoms
High-dose vitamin D supplementation and improvement in cognitive abilities, insomnia, and daytime sleepiness in adolescent girls
Sleep-related issues in children and adolescents presenting at community mental health clinics
Efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia in adolescents: a randomized controlled trial with internet therapy, group therapy and a waiting list condition
Cognitive-behavioral treatment of insomnia and depression in adolescents: A pilot randomized trial
Pilot evaluation of the sleep ninja: a smartphone application for adolescent insomnia symptoms
Efficacy of melatonin for sleep disturbance in children with persistent post-concussion symptoms: secondary analysis of a randomized controlled trial
Anxiety treatment and targeted sleep enhancement to address sleep disturbance in pre/early adolescents with anxiety
Addressing sleep problems and fatigue within child and adolescent mental health services: A qualitative study
Enhancing sleep and mood in depressed adolescents: A randomized trial on nurse-led digital cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia
The effects of a Sleep‐Focused smartphone application on insomnia and depressive symptoms: a randomised controlled trial and mediation analysis
Myths and evidence regarding melatonin supplementation for occasional sleeplessness in the pediatric population
Melatonin supplementation for children with atopic dermatitis and sleep disturbance: a randomized clinical trial
Digital cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia for adolescents with mental health problems: feasibility open trial
Modified cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia in depressed adolescents: a pilot study
Augmenting usual care SSRIs with cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia to improve depression outcomes in youth: design of a randomized controlled efficacy-effectiveness trial
Sleep problems in preschool-onset major depressive disorder: the effect of treatment with parent–child interaction therapy-emotion development
Transdiagnostic sleep and circadian intervention for adolescents plus text messaging: randomized controlled trial 12-month follow-up
A single arm pilot trial of brief cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia in adolescents with physical and psychiatric comorbidities
The SENSE study: post intervention effects of a randomized controlled trial of a cognitive–behavioral and mindfulness-based group sleep improvement intervention among at-risk adolescents
Who benefits from adolescent sleep interventions? Moderators of treatment efficacy in a randomized controlled trial of a cognitive-behavioral and mindfulness‐based group sleep intervention for at‐risk adolescents
Pediatric prolonged-release melatonin for sleep in children with autism spectrum disorder: impact on child behavior and caregiver’s quality of life
Protocol for a randomised controlled trial evaluating the effect of a CBT-I smartphone application (Sleep Ninja®) on insomnia symptoms in children
A controlled trial of cognitive behavioural Therapy-based strategies for insomnia among in-school adolescents in Southern Nigeria
Intervention for sleep and pain in youth (ISPY-RCT): protocol for a two-phase randomized controlled trial of sequenced cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia and pain management in adolescents with migraine
Preliminary study: cognitive behavioural therapy for insomnia in adolescents with anorexia nervosa. Eating and weight Disorders-Studies on anorexia
Adapting brief CBT-I for depressed adolescents: A case illustration of the sleeping better program
The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression severity measure
The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the general population