A bibliometric analysis on drilling of composite materials using a systematic approach
The increasing use of composite materials across various industries necessitates a detailed understanding of the machining processes involved in their production. This study presents a comprehensive bibliometric analysis focused on the drilling of composite materials, aiming to identify key trends, advancements, and research gaps in this critical area. The novelty of this research lies in its systematic approach to mapping the intellectual landscape surrounding drilling processes, particularly emphasizing underexplored topics such as hybrid composites and alternative drilling techniques like laser and ultrasonic methods. An analysis of 927 relevant publications using the Scopus database and VOSviewer software revealed significant insights into the concentration of research on Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer (CFRP) and Glass Fiber Reinforced Polymer (GFRP), while highlighting a lack of focus on sustainable drilling practices and real-time defect detection methods. The results suggest that while optimization of traditional drilling parameters is well-covered, there is a pressing need for future research on tool wear mechanisms and environmentally friendly drilling approaches. These findings provide valuable guidance for improving the efficiency, precision, and sustainability of drilling processes, thereby enhancing the industrial application of composite materials.

Introduction
Drilling is frequently practiced machining process in modern industry owing to the need for component assembly in composite structures. Composite materials, composed of two or more distinct materials with different physical or chemical properties, offer a unique set of advantages, including high strength-to-weight ratio, corrosion resistance, and enhanced durability. The drilling of composite materials has emerged as a thrilling frontier in engineering and manufacturing, pushing the boundaries of what is possible in industries ranging from aerospace to automotive. However, the drilling of these materials is complicated due to their exceptional anisotropic. Drilling of composite materials is a challenging machining process that requires careful selection of cutting parameters, tool geometry, and material properties. Indeed, drilling of composite materials can cause problems such as delamination, fiber pull-out, thermal damage, hole oversize, and burr formation, which can compromise the structural integrity and performance of the composite parts (,). Therefore, many researchers have investigated the effects of different factors on the drilling behavior and outcomes of composite materials (). For instance, these studies have focused on traditional drilling techniques for Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer (CFRP) and Glass Fiber Reinforced Polymer (GFRP), identifying issues such as delamination, fiber pull-out, thermal damage, hole oversize, and burr formation, which compromise structural integrity and performance. While these studies have significantly contributed to understanding the challenges in drilling composite materials, there is still a need to explore how different material properties and drilling parameters interact to cause these defects. Other researchers have proposed various methods and strategies to improve drilling performance (). Also, significant focus has been placed on achieving delamination-free drilling, which is critical for maintaining the structural integrity of composites (). However, these strategies often focus on specific cases, and the generalizability of the findings across different composite materials remains underexplored. Moreover, while the optimization of drilling parameters is well-studied, the literature lacks a comprehensive approach to understanding tool wear mechanisms and their real-time detection, an area that is critical for enhancing process reliability and efficiency. On the other hand, other studies include the development of specialized drill bits and techniques to reduce drilling-induced damage (). Through these efforts, advancements have been made in enhancing hole quality and extending the application of composite materials in various industries (,,). More, recent studies have increasingly focused on the use of automation and real-time monitoring systems to optimize drilling processes and monitor tool wear. Barik et al. demonstrated the effectiveness of wavelet packet analysis in predicting the wear of TiAlN- and TiN-coated carbide tools during the drilling of bidirectional CFRP laminates. Their study highlights the potential of using thrust-torque signatures for real-time tool wear prediction and process optimization. Despite these advancements, there is a clear gap in integrating these systems with sustainable drilling practices, such as eco-friendly lubrication and recyclability of drilled composites, which are essential for the broader adoption of these technologies. Recently, sensor-based signal analysis has emerged as a crucial tool for monitoring the drilling process. The effectiveness of wavelet packet analysis in predicting the quality of drilled holes in carbon fiber-reinforced plastics has been demonstrated. By extracting significant features from force-torque signals, these methodologies enable real-time process adjustments, thereby reducing the risk of rework or rejection. Nevertheless, recent advancements in hybrid composite-metal stack drilling have significantly enhanced modern fabrication procedures. A notable study by Xu et al. investigates the effects of different cutting sequence strategies on temperatures, surface morphologies, and tool wear when drilling CFRP/Ti6Al4V stacks. Their findings reveal critical insights into optimizing drilling parameters to improve efficiency and surface quality in hybrid composite-metal stacks. Several authors investigated different factors on drilling hybrid composite-metals stacks (HCMS) such as high-speed cutting, cooled compressed air, and stack order (,). To investigate delamination during drilling of CFRP/metal stacks, analytical models are proposed to predict critical thrust force, considering the elastic deformation of both materials.
In this paper, a bibliometric analysis, that employs quantitative and qualitative methods to map the intellectual landscape surrounding drilling of composite material, is presented. This study aims to fill the above mentioned gaps by conducting a comprehensive bibliometric analysis of the drilling of composite materials. Key metrics such as citation counts, authorship patterns, and institutional collaborations are examined to identify influential contributors and collaborative networks within the field. By systematically analyzing 927 relevant papers, this study identifies key contributors, thematic trends, and research gaps, focusing on underrepresented areas such as hybrid composites, alternative drilling methods like laser and ultrasonic drilling, and the integration of environmental sustainability into drilling processes. Additionally, keyword co-occurrence and clustering analyses are employed to unveil thematic trends and emerging research directions. Unlike previous studies that primarily address specific aspects of drilling challenges, this analysis provides a holistic view, offering insights into optimizing drilling practices across a broader range of composite materials. Furthermore, the study highlights the need for future research on real-time defect detection, tool wear mechanisms, and sustainable drilling practices, thereby setting the stage for innovative advancements in this field. Through this bibliometric exploration, the paper aims to provide researchers, practitioners, and policymakers with valuable insights into the current state of knowledge in composite material drilling. The findings are expected to contribute to the identification of research gaps, inform future research agendas, and facilitate collaborative efforts in advancing the efficiency, precision, and sustainability of drilling processes applied to composite materials. This study identifies several blank spots in the existing literature. These include the need for more in-depth research on tool wear mechanisms, the development of real-time monitoring systems for defect detection, and the exploration of sustainable drilling practices. Addressing these gaps will be crucial for advancing the precision, efficiency, and environmental sustainability of drilling processes in composite materials. Ultimately, this bibliometric analysis seeks to foster a deeper understanding of the evolving landscape in composite material drilling and promote innovation in materials processing technologies. The study is useful for academics to understand the most influential research, countries, and journals on the topic of composite materials drilling.

Background of the study
Conventional drilling
Existing drilling technologies for drilling of composite materials may be grouped into four main categories namely conventional drilling using cutting tools, ultrasonic drilling, Abrasive Water Jet drilling (AWJ), and laser drilling.
Ultrasonic drilling
One of the main factors that influences the drilling of composite materials is the cutting tool. The tool material, geometry, and coating can affect the tool wear, cutting forces, heat generation, chip formation, and hole quality. Different types of tools, such as twist drills, step drills, core drills, spade drills, and special drills, have been used for drilling of composite materials, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. The tool material should have high hardness, wear resistance, and thermal conductivity to withstand the abrasive and heterogeneous nature of the composite materials. The tool geometry, such as point angle, helix angle, rake angle, chisel edge, and margin, should be optimized to reduce the thrust force, torque, and delamination (,). The tool coating, such as diamond, can enhance the tool life, reduce the friction and adhesion, and improve the surface finish (). Another important factor that affects the drilling of composite materials is the cutting parameters, such as spindle speed, feed rate, and drill diameter. The cutting parameters should be selected based on the tool geometry, material properties, and desired hole quality -. The spindle speed and feed rate can influence the cutting temperature, cutting forces, tool wear, chip evacuation, and hole accuracy. Generally, high spindle speed and low feed rate can reduce the delamination and improve the surface finish, but they can also increase the tool wear and thermal damage. Larger drill diameters can cause higher cutting forces, torque, and delamination, but they can also reduce the hole oversize and burr formation. The material properties, such as the fiber type, fiber orientation, fiber volume fraction, matrix type, and laminate stacking sequence, can also affect the cutting forces, delamination, and hole quality. There are other factors that can influence the drilling of composite materials, such as the drilling method, the cooling condition, and the tool wear.
Abrasive Water Jet drilling (AWJ)
Ultrasonic drilling has emerged as a promising technique for overcoming delamination challenges by utilizing high-frequency vibrations to facilitate material removal with minimal damage. Several authors have utilized ultrasonic vibration-assisted drilling to reduce defects in composite materials. Recent advancements in ultrasonic drilling techniques have focused on improving drilling efficiency, precision, and minimizing damage to composite materials. One approach involves optimizing the frequency, amplitude, and feed rate of ultrasonic vibrations to achieve better control over the drilling process,. Additionally, researchers have explored the use of advanced tool geometries, such as helical or serrated edges, to enhance material removal rates and reduce tool wear,. Moreover, the integration of real-time monitoring systems, such as acoustic emission sensors and thermal imaging, has enabled better process control and detection of potential defects during drilling. Several process parameters influence the drilling performance of composite materials using ultrasonic techniques. Studies have shown that optimizing these parameters can significantly affect hole quality, including surface finish, hole diameter accuracy, and prevention of defects such as delamination and fiber pull-out,. However, achieving the optimal combination of parameters often requires a thorough understanding of the material properties and the drilling environment. Despite its advantages, ultrasonic drilling of composite materials still faces challenges and limitations that need to be addressed for wider adoption in industrial applications. One major challenge is the selection of suitable tool materials and coatings that can withstand the high-frequency vibrations and abrasive wear encountered during drilling. Additionally, the complex nature of composite materials, with varying fiber orientations and matrix compositions, makes it difficult to predict and control the drilling process accurately,. Future research directions in this field include the development of advanced multi-axis ultrasonic drilling systems for complex geometries, optimization of tool designs for specific composite materials, and integration of artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques for process optimization and defect detection. Furthermore, efforts to reduce process costs, improve tool life, and enhance sustainability through eco-friendly cooling/lubrication methods will be crucial for the continued advancement and adoption of ultrasonic drilling technology.
Laser drilling
AWJ drilling is a non-traditional machining process that utilizes a high-pressure jet of water mixed with abrasive particles to precisely cut through composite materials, offering a cold and burr-free drilling process (). AWJ drilling has emerged as a promising machining technique for composites, offering advantages such as minimal thermal damage, high precision, no tool wear, and the ability to process complex geometries without the need for secondary operations (). Various parameters influence the effectiveness of AWJ drilling of composite materials, including abrasive type, abrasive concentration, standoff distance, traverse speed, and water pressure (,). Researchers have investigated the effects of these parameters on material removal rate, surface quality, and dimensional accuracy (). Optimization of these parameters is crucial to achieving efficient and precise machining of composites (,). Despite its advantages, AWJ drilling of composite materials faces challenges such as tapering, edge quality, and delamination, particularly in drilling thick composite stacks or laminates. To reduce drilling defects, Saini developed mathematical models for surface roughness and kerf taper of abrasive jet machined nanocomposite using artificial neural network. Future research directions include the development of advanced nozzle designs, adaptive control systems, and hybrid machining approaches to address these challenges and further enhance the efficiency and reliability of AWJ drilling for composites.
Laser drilling has emerged as a promising technique for machining composite materials due to its ability to provide precise and controlled material removal with minimal damage to the surrounding structure (,). The advantages of laser drilling, such as high precision, minimal thermal damage, and flexibility, are contrasted with challenges such as cost, processing time, and edge quality. Choi et al. demonstrated the application of laser drilling in the aerospace industry for producing high-quality holes in CFRP composite panels used in aircraft structures. Researchers have made significant advancements in laser drilling techniques to enhance efficiency and quality. Several authors investigated the use of lasers for drilling Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer (CFRP) composites (). Also, several studies investigate various factors influencing the efficiency of laser drilling in composite materials (). The application of picosecond lasers for drilling CFRP composites was explored, showing improved hole quality and reduced heat-affected zones (HAZ) compared to traditional nanosecond lasers (). Tao et al. investigated dual-beam laser drilling to reduce delamination in CFRP composites, achieving significant reductions in delamination and improved hole quality by controlling the distribution of laser energy.
Advantages and challenges of drilling composite materials in diverse categories.
Table 1
Advantages	Challenges	 	Conventional drilling (-)	SimpleWidely available equipment	DelaminationFiber damageHeat generation	 	Ultrasonic drilling (-)	Reduced heat generationMinimal fiber damageImproved precision	Limited to certain material thicknessesRequire specialized equipment	 	AWJ drilling (-)	Cold machining processMinimal heat-affected zoneAbility to cut through thick and hard composite materials, no tool wear	Complexity of equipmentMaintenancePotential for abrasive residueLimitations in achieving very fine details	 	Laser drilling (-)	High precisionMinimal physical contact with the materialAbility to create complex hole geometries	Potential for heat-affected zonesLimited effectiveness on certain materialsCost of laser equipment
Table 1 outlines the advantages and the challenges encountered in the literature when drilling composite materials via various drilling methods.

Methodology and approach for data collection
In this section, the methodology and approach for drilling composite materials data collection involve a systematic and comprehensive review of relevant literature. The primary objective is to identify and analyze scholarly publications that contribute to the understanding of drilling techniques applied to composite materials.
TITLE-ABS-KEY ((("composite materials" OR "CFRP" OR "GFRP" OR "thermosets" OR "thermoplastics")) AND (("drilling" OR "drill" OR "abrasive water jet" OR "laser" OR "ultrasonic")) AND (("damage") OR ("delamination") OR ("defects"))) AND (LIMIT-TO (SRCTYPE , "j")) AND (LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE , "ar") OR LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE , "re")) AND (EXCLUDE (PUBYEAR , 2024)) AND (LIMIT-TO (LANGUAGE , "English"))
In this paper, a rigorous and structured search strategy is employed in order to identify pertinent literature. Scopus academic databases are used. Indeed, a combination of keywords, including "composite materials," "drilling," and related terms, are used, ensuring a broad coverage of the research landscape. Clear criteria for including and excluding documents based on relevance are established. Also, the publications, that do not directly contribute to the understanding of drilling techniques or are not focused on composite materials, are excluded. Consequently, the following query has been used in scopus in order to identify a representative corpus of documents related to drilling of composite materials:
This query limits the results to the English language and the year of publication up to 2023. Also, the documents are limited to journal articles and reviews. Consequently, the papers published in international conferences are excluded. The research record included “Title, Author keywords, Abstract”. The total recorded results performed on January 11, 2024 are 1010 documents, after excluding 2 duplicated documents. After checking the titles and the abstracts of all found papers, 83 articles not directly related to the searched topic were filtered and removed from the list. The study is then made on 927 papers considered for the analysis and related to drilling of composite materials. Using these selected papers, the software “VOSviewer” is utilized as tool to quantitatively assess the literature. Metrics such as number of papers and citations are taken into consideration to provide insights into the impact and evolution of research in the field of drilling of composite materials. Also, network analysis techniques are applied to identify key authors, countries, and collaborations within the research domain. The quality of the selected publications is highlighted by considering the citation rates and the reputation of the authors. The extracted data are synthesized and the findings in the context of the research objectives are interpreted. The emerging trends and the gaps in the literature as well as the areas requiring further investigation in the field of drilling of composite materials are finally identified.

Results and discussion
Performance analysis
In this section, the results of the performance analysis conducted on the scientific papers related to drilling of composite materials are initially developed and analyzed. After that, the science mapping results of these papers are presented and discussed.
Evolution in yearly published papers on drilling of composite materials.
Fig. 1
Over time, scientific and research interest in the drilling of composite materials has surged. Fig. 1 tracks the trajectory of published scientific papers on this topic from 1985 to 2023. Notably, the total number of papers stays below five until 2003. However, from 2004 onwards, the publication count escalates, hitting a pinnacle of 116 papers in 2023. Approximately 79 % of these publications have emerged in the last decade, underscoring the field's contemporary relevance and the need for further inquiry. A notable increase in the number of publications is observed after 2010. This surge can be attributed to several factors. First, the period after 2010 saw a significant expansion in the application of composite materials across various industries, including aerospace, automotive, and renewable energy sectors. This increased demand for composite materials necessitated more in-depth research into their machining processes, particularly drilling, which is critical for component assembly. Additionally, advancements in composite materials, such as the development of new fiber-reinforced polymers and hybrid composites, created a need for updated drilling techniques and methodologies. This led to a higher number of research activities aimed at addressing the challenges associated with drilling these advanced materials, such as delamination and tool wear. Moreover, the global push towards more sustainable and efficient manufacturing processes has driven research into optimizing drilling techniques to minimize waste and energy consumption. This trend is reflected in the growing number of publications focused on sustainable drilling practices and the development of eco-friendly technologies in the machining of composites. The recent surge is largely attributable to the growing application of composite materials across multiple sectors, such as industry, aviation, automotive, and maritime (). In Fig. 1, the steady increase in published papers highlights the growing importance of drilling composite materials. Despite this increase, some areas remain underexplored. For instance, while CFRPs and GFRPs dominate research, hybrid composites and alternative drilling methods like laser or ultrasonic drilling are less represented. This indicates a potential research gap.
Total number of published papers per country on drilling of composite materials between 1985 and 2023.
Fig. 2
Fig. 2 illustrates the total number of published papers per country on drilling of composite materials between 1985 and 2023. It can be noticed that the highest number of papers is found in India and China, with 233 and 229 papers, respectively. For the other countries, the total number of papers varies from 64 in Turkey to 13 in Hungary. Both European countries and the United States have significant contributions to composite materials drilling research. Moreover, the far eastern countries have also published a substantial number of papers on this topic. Although countries like India and China lead in the number of publications, some regions such as Eastern Europe and Africa have fewer contributions. Future research could benefit from increased international collaboration and focus on these underrepresented regions.
It is important to note that the prevalence of publications from a particular country can be influenced by various factors such as the number of researchers, investment in research and development, the focus of academic institutions, government policies, and more. Indeed, Both India and China have large populations, which naturally leads to a larger pool of researchers and academics. More, over the past few decades, both countries have significantly increased their investment in research.
Contribution of authors to the publishing of papers on drilling of composite materials.
Fig. 3
On the contrary, Fig. 3 illustrates the collaborative effort of authors in the publication of research papers in this specific field. By 2023, Tsao C.C. has been a leading figure in this regard, having published 27 scientific papers relating to the drilling of composite materials, which stands as the highest number among the authors. Trailing behind Tsao C.C., Davim J. and Xu J. have contributed with 22 papers each. Krishnaraj V. and Landon Y. published 10 papers each. The collaborative network shows a concentration of key authors. However, the relatively low number of publications by other researchers suggests that expanding collaboration and diversifying research teams could enhance innovation and address the existing research gaps.
Top journals publishing on drilling of composite materials.
Fig. 4
On the other hand, Fig. 4 illustrates the top international journals publishing on the drilling of composite materials, based on the total number of published papers on this topic. The 'International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing' takes the lead in publications with a total of 116 published papers. 'Composite Structures' follows with 71 papers published, while 'Journal of Manufacturing Processes' published 43 papers. The journals 'International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture', 'Materials and Manufacturing Processes', 'Journal of Composite Materials', 'Journal of Materials Processing Technology', 'Materials', 'Journal of Reinforced Plastics and Composites', 'Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing', and 'Composite Part B: Engineering' each contributed between 13 and 32 papers, as shown on Fig. 4.
Most frequently utilized keywords by authors in published works.
Fig. 5
As for the keywords, Fig. 5 presents the most frequently used keywords by authors in the publication related to drilling of composite materials. “Drilling” keyword is the most used one with 376 papers.
Science mapping
The keywords associated with defects or surface quality in drilling composite materials such as “Delamination”, “Surface Roughness”, “Hole Quality”, “Delamination Factor”, “Burr” and “Damage” are commonly utilized. The term “Delamination” alone appears in over 327 scientific works. Conversely, keywords related to materials like “CFRP”, “Composite”, and “GFRP” are cited less frequently. It is noteworthy that keywords in relation with drilling methods other than traditional cutting drilling such as “Ultrasonic Drilling”, “Abrasive Water Jet”, and “Laser Drilling” are not widely employed. It is clear on Fig. 5 that most keywords focus on conventional tools, materials and defects. There is a significant gap in understanding the wear mechanisms of advanced tools used in alternative drilling methods. More, all drilling defects in the literature are identified after drilling and research lacks comprehensive studies on real-time defect detection techniques in advanced drilling. Finally, the analysis indicates a growing interest in sustainability. However, practical implementations in drilling composite materials are suggesting another research gap.
Bibliometric mapping is designed to assess academic outputs such as publication and citation information within a specific field using statistical methods. The most common units of analysis in science mapping are journals, documents and authors. The relationships among these units can be represented as a graph or network, where the units are depicted as nodes or circles, and the connections between them represent links. In this study, the VOSviewer software was utilized to generate bibliometric network maps illustrating relationships among keywords, documents, authors, and countries.
Cluster 1: Iran, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Spain and Sweden,
Cluster 2: Australia, Ethiopia, India, Saudi Arabia and Taiwan,
Cluster 3: Pakistan, Poland, Romania, Turkey and United Kingdom,
Cluster 4: Algeria, France, Lebanon and Tunisia,
Cluster 5: Canada, Egypt, United Arab Emirates and United States,
Cluster 6: Brazil, Hungary and Portugal,
Cluster 7: China, South Korea and Switzerland.
Bibliometric map based on the network of co-authorship relations among 30 countries.
Fig. 6
Fig. 6 shows the network of international co-authorship among 30 countries, represented by 30 nodes. Each country is represented by a label and a circle, with the size of the label and circle indicating its importance. The size of each circle corresponds to the number of papers written by authors from that country. 105 existing links between circles of different countries signify co-authorship between organizations in those countries. Among these countries, and as mentioned before, India ranks first in documents production on the drilling of composite materials, with 233 articles and 20 links. China ranks second with 229 documents. Among the European countries, France ranks first with 63 documents and 17 links. Finally, these 30 countries are divided into 7 clusters, as follow.
Cluster 1: An Quiglong, Chen Ming, El Mansori Mohamed, Hassan Muhammad Hafiz, Ji Min, Li Chao, Ren Fei, Xu Jinyang,
Cluster 2: Ko TJ, Li Changping, Li Pengnan, Li Shujian, Niu Qiulin, Qiu Xinyi,
Cluster 3: Bai Yu, Chen Chen, Fu Rao, Jia Zhenyaun, Wang Fuji, Zhang Chong,
Cluster 4: Abrao Alexandre Mendes, Davim JP, Latha B, Palanikumar, Reis Pedro,
Cluster 5: Barik Tarakeswar, Geier Norbert, Pal Kamal, Patra Karali, Pereszlai Csongor,
Cluster 6: Gururaja Suhasini, Krishnaraj, Kumar Dhiraj, Zitoune Redouane,
Cluster 7: Lachaud Frederic, Landon Yann, Piquet Robert, Rahme Pierre,
Cluster 8: Deng Zhaohui, Su Fei, Sun Fujian,
Cluster 9: Debnath Kishore and Singh Inderdeep.
Largest network of connected authors publishing on drilling composite materials.
Fig. 7
In the realm of publication on drilling composite materials, a total of 81 authors have been identified. Each author within the group of these authors has published a minimum of 5 papers. However, not all of them are interconnected. The largest interconnected group of authors comprises 43 individuals, as shown in Fig. 7. This group is further divided into 9 clusters, interconnected by 97 links. It is noteworthy that collaboration among authors in this field is relatively limited. The clusters of authors are presented below.
Bibliometric map based on the network of journals citation.
Fig. 8
On the other hand, Fig. 8 illustrates the bibliometric map network of journals citation in the field of drilling composite materials. It shows again that the “International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing” is the leading publication, indicating its prominent role in disseminating research and advancements in this domain. Following closely is “Composite Structures”, showcasing its significant involvement in the field. The “Journal of Manufacturing Processes” has also made a notable impact in publications. Additionally, several other journals have contributed considerably. This distribution indicates a well-dispersed interest and research activity across multiple reputable journals, underscoring the interdisciplinary and collaborative nature of research in the drilling of composite materials. The varied contribution across these journals also highlights the diverse aspects and applications being explored within this research area. These journals are divided into 10 clusters, with 438 links of connection citations between them. Four clusters out of ten include more than five international journals.
Keywords used by authors and their co-occurrence relationships.
Fig. 9
The illustration in Fig. 9 depicts the representation of mainstream research keywords and their co-occurrence relationships. This representation contains 42 nodes representing keywords utilized by authors, organized into 8 clusters interconnected by 337 links. It highlights the prevalent terms within the realm of drilling composite materials. Node size correlates with the frequency of occurrence for each keyword. Notably, “drilling” emerges as the most frequent keyword, occurring 376 times with 38 links, followed by “delamination” with 327 occurrences and 41 links. As anticipated, keywords associated with drilling, composite materials and related defects dominate. These keywords exhibit the highest values of Total Link Strength (TLS), indicating their strong associations with other nodes (,). Conversely, non-conventional drilling techniques such as “ultrasonic drilling”, “abrasive water jet”, “laser”, and “orbital drilling” are underutilized. Analysis reveals eight distinct clusters of authors keywords. The first cluster encompasses 12 keywords focusing on defects, hole surface quality, and method of analysis. The second cluster comprises 8 terms emphasizing ultrasonic drilling, hole quality, and tool wear. Similarly, the third cluster, with 8 keywords, centers on drilling defects, temperature, and wear. The fourth cluster consists of 5 items relating to “composite”, “cutting”, “finite element analysis”, “laser”, and “machining”. The remaining clusters, 5 through 8, contain 3, 3, 2, and 1 keyword(s), respectively.
Consequently, the field of drilling composite materials has advanced significantly, yet several research gaps persist. This bibliometric analysis reveals a concentration on specific composite types, such as CFRP and GFRP, with less emphasis on other composites like hybrid or natural fiber composites. More, studies predominantly focus on traditional drilling techniques, leaving alternative methods like laser or ultrasonic drilling underexplored. Also, the optimization of drilling parameters is well-studied, but the understanding of tool wear mechanisms and their effects on surface integrity needs further investigation. The influence of drilling-induced damage on long-term performance and the development of real-time monitoring systems for defect detection also remain inadequately addressed. On the other hand, future research should focus on the further development of automation-based systems for real-time monitoring and control of drilling processes. Investigations into advanced signal processing techniques, such as wavelet packet analysis, for predicting tool wear and optimizing process parameters are essential. The integration of these systems with sustainable drilling practices presents an exciting avenue for research, aiming to enhance both the efficiency and environmental friendliness of composite material drilling. The application of wavelet packet analysis and machine learning algorithms has shown promise in predicting drilling defects. Integrating such methodologies can significantly improve process monitoring and reduce quality control issues. Additionally, hybrid composite-metal stack drilling, particularly involving CFRP/Ti6Al4V stacks, is increasingly common in sophisticated fabrication processes. The literature provides valuable data on how varying cutting sequences can impact drilling outcomes, emphasizing the importance of selecting appropriate strategies to minimize tool wear and enhance surface integrity. Integrating such advanced drilling techniques can lead to significant improvements in the durability and performance of drilled composite materials.
Finally, the integration of environmental sustainability considerations, such as the recyclability of drilled composites and eco-friendly lubrication techniques, is an emerging yet insufficiently explored area. This analysis underscores the need for diversified research efforts to enhance the efficiency and applicability of drilling processes in various composite materials.

Conclusion
This study provides a thorough bibliometric analysis of drilling in composite materials, using a dataset of 927 publications to map out the current research landscape. The analysis identifies key contributors, thematic trends, and collaborative networks within the field, offering a comprehensive overview of the advancements and future directions. It provides a foundational understanding of the current state of research in drilling composite materials, identifying both existing achievements and areas ripe for future exploration. While CFRP and GFRP dominate the research focus due to their widespread industrial applications, there is a clear opportunity to explore other composite types, such as hybrid and natural fiber composites, which remain underrepresented in the literature. This gap highlights the potential for diversifying future research to uncover new applications and innovations. Traditional drilling techniques are well-studied, particularly in optimizing cutting parameters, tool geometries, and material properties. However, alternative drilling methods such as laser, ultrasonic, and AWJ drilling, which offer advantages in reducing delamination and improving surface quality, require further exploration. Future studies should assess the industrial applicability and benefits of these alternative methods. The study also underscores the importance of understanding tool wear mechanisms and their impact on surface integrity. While optimization of drilling parameters is crucial, there is a pressing need for advanced automation, real-time monitoring systems, and innovative cutting strategies, especially in hybrid composite-metal stack drilling, to enhance surface integrity and reduce tool wear. Furthermore, addressing drilling-induced damage remains a key challenge. Delamination, fiber pull-out, thermal damage, and other defects significantly affect the long-term performance of composite materials. Real-time defect detection systems are essential for improving quality control and ensuring the reliability of composite structures. Sustainability in drilling practices, including the recyclability of composites and eco-friendly lubrication techniques, is an emerging yet underexplored area. As industries push for more sustainable practices, research in this direction will be vital for future innovations. The bibliometric analysis reveals a concentration of research output in regions like India and China, indicating a need for broader global collaboration and knowledge exchange to leverage diverse expertise.

Data availability statement
The data that support the findings of this bibliometric review are derived from publicly available datasets. The primary sources of data include Scopus Database. Access to Scopus requires a subscription or institutional access. The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Ethics statement
All data used in this review were obtained from publicly accessible databases and sources. No proprietary or confidential information was used.
The authors declare no conflict of interest in the preparation and publication of this paper.
Proper attribution has been given to all original sources of data, and all intellectual property rights have been respected. The review cites all sources accurately and comprehensively.
Efforts were made to ensure the accuracy and integrity of the data analyzed. Any limitations or potential biases in the data sources or methods have been transparently reported.
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
The study complies with the ethical guidelines and standards set forth by the Lebanese American University (LAU), as well as relevant ethical standards in bibliometric research.
This bibliometric review was conducted with the highest ethical standards in mind. The following ethical considerations were adhered to throughout the research process.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Pierre Rahme: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Study of delamination in drilling carbon fiber reinforced plastics (CFRP) using desing experiments
Delamination evaluation in drilling of composite materials – a review
Challenges associated with drilling of carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) composites – a review
A review on CFRP drilling: fundamental mechanisms, damage issues, and approaches toward high-quality drilling
Experimental investigation on the effect of dry and multi-jet cryogenic cooling on the machinability and hole accuracy of CFRP composites
Delamination formation, evaluation and suppression during drilling of composite laminates: a review
Delamination-free drilling of thick composite materials
The path towards delamination-free drilling of composite materials
A novel approach for characterization of delamination and burr areas in drilling FRP composites
Analytical models of composite material drilling
Analytical study of delamination damage and delamination-free drilling method of CFRP composite
Drilling of thick composite material with a small-diameter twist drill
A delamination prediction model in ultrasonic vibration assisted drilling of CFRP composites
Effects of special drill bits on drilling-induced delamination of composite materials
Study into causes of damage to carbon epoxy composite material during the drilling process
Effects of exit back-up on delamination in drilling composite materials using a saw drill and a core drill
Drilling of thick composite structures state of the art
An experimental comprehensive analysis of drilling carbon fiber reinforced plastic tubes and comparison with carbon fiber reinforced plastic plate
The effects of support plate thickness on the drilling machinability of CFRP
Chisel edge effect on delamination when drilling thick composite materials with a twist drill
The effect of chisel length and associated pilot hole on delamination when drilling composite materials
The effect of pilot hole on delamination when core drill drilling composite materials
Study on chisel edge drilling behavior and step drill structure on delamination in drilling CFRP
Effect of adding a woven glass ply at the exit of the hole of CFRP laminates on delamination during drilling
A critical review of the drilling of CFRP composites: burr formation, characterisation and challenges
A critical review addressing conventional twist drilling mechanisms and quality of CFRP/Ti stacks
Drilling of thick composite materials using a step gundrill
Prediction of TiAlN-and TiN-coated carbide tool wear in drilling of bidirectional CFRP laminates using wavelet packets of thrust-torque signatures
Prediction of drilled hole quality in bidirectional woven carbon fiber reinforced plastic using wavelet packets of force–torque signals
On the analysis of temperatures, surface morphologies and tool wear in drilling CFRP/Ti6Al4V stacks under different cutting sequence strategies
Impact of cooled compressed air and high-speed cutting on the drilling of hybrid composite-metal stacks
Experimental analysis on drilling of Al/Ti/CFRP hybrid composites
Analytical model for delamination of CFRP during drilling of CFRP/metal stacks
Tool wear in drilling of composite/titanium stacks using carbide and polycrystalline diamond tools
A Review on drilling of fiber-reinforced polymer composites
Recent advances in drilling of carbon fiber-reinforced polymers for aerospace applications: a review
Investigation of wear mechanism in drilling of PPA composites for automotive industry
Exit delamination at the material interface in drilling of CFRP/metal stack
Delamination-free drilling of carbon fiber reinforced plastic with variable feed rate
Evaluation of boron-doped-microcrystalline/nanocrystalline diamond composite coatings in drilling of CFRP
Effect of PCD tool wear on surface morphology and material removal mechanisms in the micro-drilling of Cf/SiC composites: experiment and simulation
Drilling process of Cf/SiC ceramic matrix composites: cutting force modeling, machining quality and PCD tool wear analysis
Effect of tool wear on machining quality in milling Cf/SiC composites with PCD tool
Assessment of induced delamination drilling of natural fiber reinforced composites: a statistical analysis
Effect of drilling process parameters on delamination factor in drilling of pultruded glass fiber reinforced polymer composite
Influence of cutting parameters on tool wear and hole quality in composite aerospace components drilling
Effect of drilling parameters on hole quality and delamination of hybrid GLARE laminate
Machining GLARE fibre metal laminates: a comparative study on drilling effect between conventional and ultrasonic-assisted drilling
An experimental investigation on the influence of different surface curvatures in drilling machinability of carbon fiber reinforced plastic
The influence of drilling-induced damages and hole quality on hoop tensile and fatigue behavior of CFRP tubes
An Investigation of burrs, chip formation, hole size, circularity and delamination during drilling operation of GLARE using ANOVA
A review on CFRP drilling: fundamental mechanisms, damage issues, and approaches toward high-quality drilling
Drilling thick composite materials using large diameter drills
Influence of ultrasonic vibrations during drilling of carbon-fiber-reinforced polyetherimide composites
Study on the mechanism and performance of longitudinal-torsional ultrasonic vibration assisted drilling CFRP/Ti stack
Defect suppression mechanism of ultrasonic vibration-assisted drilling carbon fiber/bismaleimide composite
High performance drilling of T800 CFRP composites by combining ultrasonic vibration and optimized drill structure
Ultrasonic vibration and cryogenic assisted drilling of aluminum-CFRP composite stack – an innovative approach
Applying ultrasonic vibration to decrease drilling-induced delamination in GFRP laminates
High-frequency vibration effects on the hole integrity in rotary ultrasonic drilling of carbon fiber-reinforced plastic composites
Multi-objective optimization for the machining performance during ultrasonic vibration-assisted helical grinding hole of thin-walled CF/BMI composite laminates
Optimization of rotary ultrasonic drilling of optical glass using Taguchi method and utility approach
Tool wear prediction in ultrasonic vibration-assisted drilling of CFRP: a hybrid data-driven physics model-based framework
Tool wear reduction in ultrasonic vibration-assisted turning of SiC-reinforced metal-matrix composite
Acoustic emission signals analysis to differentiate the damage mechanism in the drilling of Al-5%B4C metal matrix composite
Process monitoring on drilling fiber-reinforced plastics and aluminum stacks using acoustic emissions
Static strength and damage evaluation of high speed drilled composite material using acoustic emission and finite element techniques
Analysis of damage mechanisms in drilling of composite materials by acoustic emission
Ultrasonic detection methods for mechanical characterization and damage diagnosis of advanced composite materials: a review
Investigation of force modeling in ultrasonic vibration-assisted drilling SiCf/SiC ceramic matrix composites
Delamination formation and suppression during rotary ultrasonic elliptical machining of CFRP
Evaluation of drilling by induced delamination of hybrid biocomposites reinforced with natural fibers: a statistical analysis by RSM
A study on strengthening and machining integrated ultrasonic peening drilling of Ti-6Al-4V
Experimental and theoretical investigation on critical cutting force in rotary ultrasonic drilling of brittle materials and composites
A finite element model of ultrasonically assisted drilling in carbon/epoxy composites
Assessment of ultrasonic drilling of C/SiC composite material
Effects of fiber orientations on fracture mechanisms in rotary ultrasonic drilling of carbon fiber reinforced plastic laminates
Multiscale modelling and experimental analysis of ultrasonic-assisted drilling of GLARE fibre metal laminates
“Optimization of ultrasonic machining (USM) parameters on micro hole drilling of graphene oxide/pineapple leaf filler reinforced epoxy hybrid composite using evaluation based on distance from average solution (EDAS) method
Prediction of temperature elevation in rotary ultrasonic bone drilling using machine learning models: an in-vitro experimental study
Abrasive Water Jet Machining process: a state of art of review
A review on recent progresses in machining methods based on abrasive water jet machining
Abrasive water jet machining of multidirectional CFRP laminates
A review on abrasive water jet machining process and its process parameters
Evaluation of hole quality to explore the influence of graphene nanoplatelets embedded in epoxy/carbon composite during abrasive water jet drilling
Geometric characteristics analysis of hole making through abrasive water jet drilling
Experimental investigation of delamination of carbon and glass fiber during abrasive water jet machining
Multi-scale analysis of the damage and contamination in abrasive water jet drilling of GLARE fibre metal laminates
Selection of optimal process parameters by Taguchi method for Drilling GFRP composites using Abrasive Water jet machining Technique
Sensitivity analysis of abrasive air-jet machining parameters on machinability of carbon and glass fiber reinforced hybrid composites
Experimental investigation on material removal rate during abrasive water jet machining of GFRP composites
Abrasive jet machining for micro-hole drilling on glass and GFRP composites
Delamination characterization and comparative assessment of delamination control techniques in abrasive water jet drilling of CFRP
An experimental and empirical assessment of machining damage of hybrid glass-carbon FRP composite during abrasive water jet machining
An investigation on machining characteristics in abrasive water jet machining of hybrid laminated composites with SiC nano particles
Optimization of machining parameters by Taguchi approach for machining of aluminium based metal matrix composite by abrasive water jet machining process
Optimization of process parameters on machining of graphene reinforced with magnesium based composite using abrasive jet machine
Response parameters modeling of abrasive jet machined composite using artificial neural network
Analytical modeling of subsurface damage in laser-assisted machining of metal matrix composites based on the reinforcement fracture probability
Understanding machinability improvements and removal mechanism of ceramic matrix composites during laser-ablating assisted grinding
Laser-assisted joining of carbon fiber reinforced polyetherketoneketone thermoplastic composite laminates
Improving hole quality of thick CFRP laminates through a laser-mechanical compound drilling process
Laser drilling in silicon carbide and silicon carbide matrix composites
Hole formation mechanisms in double-sided laser drilling of Ti6Al4V-C/SiC stacked materials
Micro-hole drilling of 2.5D C/SiC composite with picosecond laser: numerical modeling and experimental validation on hole shape evolution
Experimental investigation and parametric optimization of the hole-circularity and taper angle during laser drilling kevlar-29 fiber composite
Understanding factors affecting the process efficiency, quality and carbon emission in laser drilling of CFRP composite via tailored sequence multiple-ring scanning
Unraveling of the laser drilling of carbon/carbon composites: ablation mechanisms, shape evolution, and damage evaluation
Optimization of CO2 laser drilling process parameters of GFRP/Al2O3/perlite composites
Nd:YAG laser drilling in epoxy resin/AlN composites material
Low carbon high quality simultaneous laser and mechanical hybrid drilling of carbon fibre reinforced polymer composite
Optimization of process parameters in Nd:YAG laser micro-drilling of graphite/epoxy based polymer matrix composite using Taguchi based Grey relational analysis
High-capacity, low-tortuosity LiFePO4-Based composite cathode enabled by self-supporting structure combined with laser drilling technology
An experimental study on laser drilling and cutting of composite materials for the aerospace industry using excimer and CO2 sources
High-power picosecond laser drilling/machining of carbon fibre-reinforced polymer (CFRP) composites
Understanding the self-limiting effect in picosecond laser single and multiple parallel pass drilling/machining of CFRP composite and mild steel
Factors influencing the tensile strength of carbon fiber reinforced plastic laminates for laser machining method and the underlined mechanisms
Femtosecond laser drilling of cylindrical holes for carbon fiber-reinforced polymer (Cfrp) composites
Dual-beam laser drilling process for thick carbon fiber reinforced plastic composites plates
Review of composite sandwich structure in aeronautic applications
An industry 4.0 approach to the 3D printing of composite materials
Visualizing knowledge domains
Software survey: VOSviewer, a computer program for bibliometric mapping
A systematic literature review of green and sustainable logistics: bibliometric analysis, research trend and knowledge taxonomy
A scientometrics review on city logistics literature: research trends, advanced theory and practice