Allergic proctocolitis: Evaluation and management
Food protein–induced allergic proctocolitis (FPIAP) is a condition that causes rectal bleeding and mucous in stools, which typically presents in healthy infants within the first month of life and improves by 12 months of age. It can present in both breast- and formula-fed infants, with the most common implicated foods being cow’s milk and soy protein. Currently, there are no widely accepted diagnostic criteria, but it is considered a clinical diagnosis, with FPIAP symptoms resolving with removal of culprit food(s) and recurrence with food reintroduction. Although the duration of the elimination diet is not well studied, most current guidelines suggest rechallenging with the suspected food after 2–4 weeks because some patients will have spontaneous resolution. Recent studies have shown an increase in the development of immunoglobulin E–mediated food allergies in children with FPIAP, possibly due to prolonged avoidance of the culprit food, which has led to experts debating the risks and benefits of early food reintroduction in FPIAP. This review summarizes our current understanding of the condition and postulates additional mechanistic and outcome investigations needed to better understand the underlying pathophysiology of the condition and the long-term consequences of elimination diets.
Food protein–induced allergic proctocolitis (FPIAP), also known as eosinophilic proctocolitis and allergic proctocolitis, is a non–immunoglobulin E (IgE) mediated food allergy that occurs with exposure to specific food antigens, which leads to inflammatory changes in the distal colon. FPIAP typically presents with rectal bleeding and blood-streaked mucous in the stool of healthy, well-nourished infants that resolves within 72–96 hours after removal of the culprit food. Diarrhea can also be present but is not necessary for the diagnosis. Fussiness, gagging, and food refusal can also be common. More concerning symptoms of vomiting and failure to thrive generally signal a different underlying condition and additional workup is indicated.
FPIAP to cow’s milk was first described in 1940 by Rubin. Gryboski et al., Gryboski, and Powell described additional cases consistent with FPIAP to cow’s milk and soy in the 1960s and 1970s, although several patients described in these reports likely had other forms of gastrointestinal disease. Lake et al. further expanded our understanding of FPIAP in describing six pediatric patients who were exclusively breast-fed and who presented with acute and chronic inflammation with eosinophilic infiltration on a rectal biopsy specimen, fecal leukocyte values, and focal erosions and edema on sigmoidoscopic observation. Symptoms resolved when transitioned to hydrolyzed casein-based formula.
No consensus diagnostic criteria exists for FPIAP, but several international position papers and proposed guidelines have been published over the past decade.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
The prevalence of FPIAP greatly varies across studies, likely due to a lack of accepted and widely implemented diagnostic criteria, along with the absence of noninvasive biomarkers. Most studies to date are retrospective, which has notable limitations, particularly due to inconsistent documentation in medical charts. In addition, many parents may not seek medical care if symptoms are mild and self-resolving. One of the larger retrospective cohort studies from Turkey (N = 64,549) found a prevalence rate of 0.18% over a 10-year period, with a median age of symptom onset being 2 months of age and resolution by 12 months of age. A prospective cohort study from Israel (N = 13,019) followed up children from birth to 6 years of age and identified 21 children (0.16%) who had isolated rectal bleeding, which was based on self-reporting by the parents.
However, it is theorized that FPIAP has consistently been underreported. A prospective study by Martin et al. evaluated a large, suburban pediatric clinic in Massachusetts. Of the 903 infants included in the study, 17% met the inclusion criteria and were diagnosed with FPIAP, although a food trigger was not confirmed through food challenges, which likely overestimated rates. Unfortunately, additional large prospective studies have not been conducted in other populations.
Several additional risk factors have been identified, including premature birth; previous neonatal intensive care unit hospitalization; and a family history of food allergy, bloody stools, and diet intolerance in a first-degree relative. Furthermore, a personal history of atopic dermatitis and pets in the home at the time of birth may also increase the risk. These correlations need further investigation because the available data remain limited.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
The median age to symptom onset ranges from 26 to 60 days old but has been reported to occur up to 6 months of age. It most commonly involves blood-streaked and mucus-containing stools in generally healthy infants, although infants may have colicky behavior. FPIAP can be seen in both breast- and formula-fed infants, although not at the same incidence. Infants fed both breast milk and cow’s milk–based formula and those who were fed only breast milk were less likely to develop FPIAP (61% and 53% less likely respectively) compared with infants only fed formula over the first 2 months. Anemia has rarely been reported with FPIAP and can be generally managed with culprit food elimination and iron supplementation. Approximately half of patients with FPIAP had concurrent atopic dermatitis (52%), with atopic dermatitis often improving with avoidance of FPIAP-triggering foods compared with infants with IgE-mediated food allergies.

UPDATES IN PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Despite the relatively high prevalence of FPIAP, the underlying pathophysiology has yet to be determined. It is not an IgE-mediated food allergy, and inflammation is generally limited to the rectosigmoid colon for unclear reasons. A proposed hypothesis includes decreased oral tolerance from an insufficient innate immune response, which leads to failure to establish normal levels of transforming growth factor beta–producing cells and elevated tumor necrosis factor alpha levels. These immune imbalances may contribute to impaired intestinal barrier capacity and lead to mucus production and hematochezia.
Microbiome differences have also been noted in children with FPIAP compared with healthy controls, which were present when symptomatic and, in some cases, before symptom onset. Specifically, an elevated abundance of Enterobacteriaceae and lower abundance of Clostridiales were found in those with FPIAP. Compared with infants with necrotizing enterocolitis, infants with FPIAP have a lower proportion of Acinetobacter, Bifidobacterium, and Stenotrophomonas. Whether these microbiome differences are causative or in response to FPIAP has yet to be determined, but these variances could represent potential targets to better understand the pathophysiology of FPIAP in the future.
Evidence does exist that suggests that eosinophils play a key role in FPIAP development which has been verified through endoscopy. In a study by Machida et al., the researchers found that 89% of the 35 infants with FPIAP studied had colitis, with >20 eosinophils per high powered field. Similar results of eosinophilic infiltration of the colonic lamina propria and epithelium have been found in other studies. It should be noted, though, that normal colonic eosinophil counts have not been established in healthy cohorts, and eosinophilic infiltration should not be used as a diagnostic criterium for the diagnosis of FPIAP.

EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT

Diagnosis
Because FPIAP remains a clinical diagnosis, it should be considered in a generally healthy infant with bloody or mucoid stools that are not attributable to another etiology that resolves with removal of a culprit food. A stool guaiac can be considered to confirm rectal bleeding but is not necessary in the majority of cases, especially in the setting of grossly bloody stools. In a study by Concha et al., a stool guaiac had a sensitivity of 84% and specificity of 66% for FPIAP; however, 30% of healthy infants had a positive guaiac test as well. Other noninvasive biomarkers are not available at this time to assist with the diagnosis of FPIAP. When an endoscopy is performed, it frequently shows diffuse eosinophilic colitis, although endoscopy is not typically necessary or recommended in the majority of cases. Some guidelines recommend food challenge to confirm diagnosis approximately 1 month after symptom resolution, although this is infrequently completed in true clinical practice in the United States (Fig. 1).
Proposed management for food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis.
The differential diagnosis for rectal bleeding is not limited to FPIAP and includes but is not limited to infection, anal fissures, intussusception, necrotizing enterocolitis, and inflammatory bowel disease. Because FPIAP rarely is associated with failure to thrive or notable systemic symptoms, other diagnoses should be considered if these conditions are present. If symptoms do not improve despite removal of the likely culprit food antigens, further workup should also be considered.

General Management Considerations
Food elimination remains the most recommended management practice in guidelines today; however, there remains very limited data that support this practice, and theoretical risks exist due to prolonged avoidance of specific food proteins. In addition, many mild cases of FPIAP spontaneously resolve without intervention, which suggests that clinicians should not take a one-size-fits-all approach in these cases.
Parents expectedly experience distress with rectal bleeding in infants and seek to manipulate the diet immediately to alleviate these symptoms. No large randomized trials have been conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of elimination diets and their effects on the inflammatory patterns of the distal colon. Case series have shown that elimination of the culprit food often leads to resolution of the rectal bleeding within days, with mucosal inflammation also generally improving within a few weeks. It is important to note, however, that, in some infants, symptoms can take longer than a few days from removal of culprit food to resolve. We do not recommend trending a stool guaiac for resolution of FPIAP, given the unreliability of this testing, especially in those with clinical improvement.
Interestingly, there is growing evidence of early life inflammation of the intestinal mucosa may be associated with functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGID) later in life. Di Nardo et al. evaluated 80 consecutive patients in Italy with FPIAP, and assigned another 80 as matched controls. At a 4-year follow-up survey, 15% of those with FPIAP had developed symptoms consistent with FGID compared with only 5% in the control group. The duration of hematochezia was found to be significantly associated with the development of FGID in a multivariate analysis. It remains unclear if these children are inherently more prone to develop both FPIAP and FGID or if a causative element exists, and no studies have investigated elimination diets as a means to reduce this risk.
Elimination diets are not benign and can lead to significant distress to the family and can possibly increase the risk of developing subsequent IgE-mediated allergies, which is discussed in more detail later in this article. Studies have consistently shown that maternal elimination diets during breast-feeding can affect quality of life and are very difficult to adhere to long term. Cow’s milk elimination may not be enough in up to 35% of patients and may require additional foods eliminated from the diet, including egg, corn, and soy. Proposed guidelines and expert opinion recommend continued breast-feeding in infants with FPIAP and only transitioning to extensively hydrolyzed formula or amino acid–based formula if persistent rectal bleeding is causing infant or parental distress (Fig. 1).
In formula-fed infants who develop FPIAP, transitioning to extensively hydrolyzed formula or amino acid–based formula can be expensive and often cost-prohibitive in many populations. Evaluation of other causes should be considered when making this change because many conditions can present with bloody stools but not improve with a formula change, including anal fissures, viral or bacterial gastritis, and very early onset inflammatory bowel disease, but these conditions generally present with additional symptoms to rectal bleeding.
The use of probiotics, specifically Lactobacillus rhamnosus (LGG), has been studied with mixed results in FPIAP based on the previously mentioned microbiome changes noted in these patients. We do not recommend this approach at this time due to insufficient data.
Mesalamine was evaluated in a single study that involves severe refractory cases of FPIAP. A retrospective analysis reviewed the use of mesalamine at doses of 40–60 mg/kg/day in children who had persistent FPIAP-related symptoms despite the use of elemental formulas and found that, with an average duration of use of 100 days, the children receiving treatment had improved fussiness, spitting up, appetite, and gagging but not a statistically significant improvement in fecal blood or mucous. Nevertheless, the authors of this paper did note that those on mesalamine were less likely to be diagnosed with failure to thrive and had fewer reported problems with the reintroduction of cow’s milk or soy milk at 15 and 14 months of age, respectively. Additional prospective studies are needed before this can be more widely recommended.
Our general approach to FPIAP management is summarized in Fig. 1.

Risk of IgE-Mediated Food Allergy
Children with FPIAP are at risk of developing IgE-mediated food allergies. The prospective adjusted odds ratio between FPIAP and any IgE-mediated food allergy has been reported as 1.9 and to cow’s milk specifically at 5.4. A recently published case series described five children who developed an IgE-mediated allergy to cow’s milk after avoiding the food due to FPIAP in early childhood. This phenomenon is thought to be due to two potential and not mutually exclusive theories. The first being food elimination in infancy due to an FPIAP diagnosis may increase the risk of developing an IgE-mediated food allergy. FPIAP has been associated with eczema, and there is a clear risk of developing an IgE-mediated food allergy through food avoidance allergy, especially in those with underlying moderate-to-severe eczema. The second is that there could be a specific CD4 T-helper type 2 cell response from a shared immunopathogenic food allergic response between FPIAP and IgE-mediated food allergy. Therefore, FPIAP may be a first sign of the atopic march and children with FPIAP may be at increased risk of IgE-mediated food allergy as well. It is prudent to consider early reintroduction of culprit foods given these risks.

Early Reintroduction of Culprit Food
The duration of elimination diets and when to reintroduce foods remains understudied, with no large prospective randomized studies. Some experts recommend a “watch and wait” approach to rectal bleeding by continuing the food of concern in the diet for 2–4 weeks because up to 20% of infants will have spontaneous resolution. Most guidelines, however, do not recommend this approach globally due to high parental distress associated with infant rectal bleeding and the low likelihood of improvement in that time period.
Due to the concern for IgE-mediated food allergy development with delayed introduction of highly allergenic foods, it is reasonable to consider early introduction. In a small study with 14 total patients with FPIAP due to cow’s milk protein, 78.5% of the infants tolerated cow’s milk in the diet at 5–6 months of age. However, results of another study suggest that FPIAP can last much longer, with only 53% having remission after 1 year of age.
Most guidelines have traditionally recommended reintroduction 6 months after resolution of symptoms or at the age of 12 months, whichever is sooner. Interestingly, more recent guidelines by various international societies have transitioned to recommending a limited elimination trial of 2–4 weeks and then challenging with the antigen if symptoms did improve. We suggest that early reintroduction, with reintroduction in 2–4 weeks be considered through shared decision-making in those who lack severe FPIAP-associated symptoms and/or for those infants who are avoiding multiple foods with a short amount of time provided for symptom resolution in between. Food ladders for milk and egg can be helpful in some cases of introduction.

Risk Factors for Persistent Disease
There is a proportion of patients who will continue to have FPIAP past the age of 2 years (13%). A study by Buyuktriryaki et al. evaluated the risk factors of continued symptoms after the age of 1 year old and found multiple food allergies, IgE sensitization, feeding difficulty, and colic, and use of antibiotic in the first 6 months of age all statistically significantly associated with persistent disease. Additional factors found in other studies include neutropenia, eosinophilia, delayed complementary feeding, and comorbid atopic dermatitis.

Future Studies
FPIAP remains an overall poorly studied disease process compared with its prevalence. Future studies are needed to help better understand its pathophysiology and mechanistic development of tolerance to better direct the diagnosis and treatment of FPIAP. Although there are preliminary studies in the microbiome differences within individuals with FPIAP, further studies may help to identify targets to better understand the underlying pathophysiology. In addition, it is not well understood why the eosinophilic inflammation is isolated to the sigmoid colon and rectum in FPIAP compared with other eosinophilic gastrointestinal diseases.
Moreover, it would be helpful to determine noninvasive biomarkers and clearer diagnostic criteria for FPIAP. Currently FPIAP remains a clinical diagnosis, although biomarkers could better help to distinguish this condition from other disease mimics.
Future prospective trials should evaluate the “watch and wait” approach because some infants with mild symptoms may not need an elimination diet. It would also be valuable to understand if early reintroduction of culprit foods changes the development of IgE-mediated food allergies, and, if so, who may best benefit from early reintroduction of culprit foods.

CONCLUSION
FPIAP is likely much more prevalent than previous studies have suggested, and it can lead to significant distress to the parents or caregivers. A lack of information on the underlying pathophysiology of FPIAP remains a significant barrier in determining risk factors and predicting when resolution will occur. Some advancements in identifying differences in the microbiome do seem promising and may help identify features that could reduce the incidence or provide additional therapeutic options in patients with FPIAP. Because more studies in the food allergy literature have shown the importance of early food introduction to reduce the risk of IgE-mediated food allergy development, concern exists with prolonged elimination diets to manage FPIAP, which has been the standard of care for decades. Recent guidelines have shifted the management approach for patients with FPIAP and recommend earlier food reintroduction at 2–4 weeks if the patient has shown improvement with the elimination diet. Some children will have early spontaneous resolution of symptoms, and most will be able to tolerate the offending food by the age of 1-year, although some may take up to 3 years to gain tolerance.
S.R. Joshi was an advisor for Novartis, Sanofi, Genentech, Cogent, and Regeneron. K. Anstey has no conflicts of interest to declare pertaining to this article
Presented at the Eastern Food Allergy & Comorbidity Conference, Palm Beach, Florida, January 4, 2024

REFERENCES
Prospective assessment of pediatrician-diagnosed food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis by gross or occult blood
Allergic intestinal bleeding in the newborn: a clinical syndrome
Milk induced colitis in an infant
Gastrointestinal milk allergy in infants
Enterocolitis in low-birth-weight infants associated with milk and soy protein intolerance
Milk- and soy-induced enterocolitis of infancy. Clinical features and standardization of challenge
Dietary protein-induced colitis in breast-fed infants
Perspectives on non-IgE-mediated gastrointestinal food allergy in pediatrics: a review of current evidence and guidelines
World Allergy Organization (WAO) Diagnosis and Rationale for Action against Cow's Milk Allergy (DRACMA) Guideline update - VII - milk elimination and reintroduction in the diagnostic process of cow's milk allergy
Proposal for management of the infant with suspected food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis
Clinical features and clinical course of food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis: 10-year experience of a tertiary medical center
Cow's milk associated rectal bleeding: a population based prospective study
Non-IgE-mediated gastrointestinal food allergy
Food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis in infants: literature review and proposal of a management protocol
Longitudinal disease-associated gut microbiome differences in infants with food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis
Alterations of the gut microbiota and short chain fatty acids in necrotizing enterocolitis and food protein-induced allergic protocolitis infants: a prospective cohort study
Allergic colitis in infancy: clinical and pathologic aspects
Food protein induced proctocolitis: a benign condition with an obscure immunologic mechanism
Allergic proctitis and gastroenteritis in children. Clinical and mucosal biopsy features in 53 cases
Estudio de validez diagnóstica de la prueba de hemorragia oculta fecal en lactantes con proctocolitis alérgica inducida por proteína alimentaria [Diagnostic validity of fecal occult blood test in infants with food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis]
Diagnostic approach and management of cow's-milk protein allergy in infants and children: ESPGHAN GI Committee practical guidelines
Better recognition, diagnosis and management of non-IgE-mediated cow's milk allergy in infancy: iMAP—an international interpretation of the MAP (Milk Allergy in Primary Care) guideline
Prevalence and outcome of allergic colitis in healthy infants with rectal bleeding: a prospective cohort study
Food-induced eosinophilic proctocolitis
Cow's milk protein allergy in infancy: a risk factor for functional gastrointestinal disorders in children?
Allergic proctocolitis is a risk factor for functional gastrointestinal disorders in children
The impact on quality of life on families of children on an elimination diet for non-immunoglobulin E mediated gastrointestinal food allergies
Food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome and allergic proctocolitis
Allergic proctocolitis refractory to maternal hypoallergenic diet in exclusively breast-fed infants: a clinical observation
Presumed allergic proctocolitis resolves with probiotic monotherapy: a report of 4 cases
Lack of effect of Lactobacillus GG in breast-fed infants with rectal bleeding: a pilot double-blind randomized controlled trial
Outcomes of infants with severe refractory food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis treated with mesalamine
Increased IgE-mediated food allergy with food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis
Development of IgE-mediated food allergies in children with history of food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis: a series of five cases
Controversies in allergy: food testing and dietary avoidance in atopic dermatitis
Food allergy to previously tolerated foods: course and patient characteristics
Non-IgE- or mixed IgE/non-IgE-mediated gastrointestinal food allergies in the first years of life: old and new tools for diagnosis
To diet or not to diet this is the question in food-protein-induced allergic proctocolitis (FPIAP)—a comprehensive review of current recommendations
Characteristics and prognosis of allergic proctocolitis in infants
An update to the Milk Allergy in Primary Care guideline
Non-IgE-mediated cow's milk allergy: consensus document of the Spanish Society of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition (SEGHNP), the Spanish Association of Paediatric Primary Care (AEPAP), the Spanish Society of Extra-hospital Paediatrics and Primary Health Care (SEPEAP), and the Spanish Society of Paediatric ClinicaL Immunology, Allergy, and Asthma (SEICAP)]
Diagnosis and management of non-IgE gastrointestinal allergies in breastfed infants-an EAACI Position Paper
Consensus on the diagnosis and treatment of cow's milk protein allergy of the Latin American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition
World Allergy Organization (WAO) Diagnosis and Rationale for Action against Cow's Milk Allergy (DRACMA) guidelines update - X - breastfeeding a baby with cow's milk allergy
Risk factors influencing tolerance and clinical features of food protein-induced allergic proctocolitis