Key Factors for Quality End‐of‐Life Care for People With Intellectual Disabilities. A Critical Interpretive Synthesis Review Using a ‘Best‐Fit’ Framework Approach
ABSTRACT
Background
The aim of this review was to develop a theoretical framework to guide understanding of the key factors in quality end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities.
Method
A systematic review was conducted using a critical interpretive synthesis methodology and a ‘best‐fit’ framework approach to develop a new theoretical framework. Databases were searched using a wide‐ranging search strategy. Broad eligibility criteria were applied. Data were extracted from a purposive sample of relevant papers for the synthesis.
Results
Of 1270 retrieved records, 40 papers were selected for inclusion in the synthesis. From this, a new theoretical framework was developed comprising three themes—‘a personal approach to care’, ‘an involved network’ and ‘an enabling infrastructure’.
Conclusion
The theoretical framework presented reflects the integration of a range of perspectives and provides a more developed understanding of the key factors in quality end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities.
Lay Summary
Our new framework shows that, in end‐of‐life care, the wishes of the person with intellectual disability take priority. All caregivers should be involved, trained, and work together to provide care to the person according to their wishes.
Our framework includes the views of many groups of people who are interested in, and involved with, end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities.
This framework is important because it shows what good end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities should look like.
As a result of this work, we can identify the gaps and understand where further work is needed in terms of policy, research, and education.

Introduction
It is well documented that people with intellectual disabilities are more likely to have poorer health than those without intellectual disabilities (Brennan et al. ; Emerson ; Emerson et al. ; Hughes‐McCormack et al. ; Liao et al. ; McCarron et al. ). The poorer health of this population can be attributed in part to greater prevalence rates of health problems than exist in the general population (McMahon and Hatton ). Furthermore, there is a younger onset of chronic illness than in the general population (van den Bemd et al. ). Liao et al.  conclude that the health profile of people with intellectual disabilities is ‘complex’.
In addition to poorer health, people with intellectual disabilities are faced with other significant disadvantages which contribute to their poorer health outcomes. There is growing evidence that some of these inequalities in health are avoidable, such as the significant barriers faced in accessing effective healthcare (Chapman et al. ; Emerson ). These barriers can result from communication difficulties (Whittle et al. ); inequality in screening practices, particularly in relation to cancer (Cuypers et al. ); stigmatising attitudes among mainstream health professionals towards people with intellectual disabilities (Pelleboer‐Gunnink et al. ), and inadequate knowledge among doctors and other healthcare professionals about the health needs of people with intellectual disabilities leading to diagnostic overshadowing and ultimately delayed diagnosis and treatment (Iezzoni ).
Despite the complex health issues and disadvantages experienced, life expectancy in people with intellectual disabilities has been increasing for some time (Patja et al. ) and continues to increase (Landes et al. ; NHS Bristol North Somerset and South Gloucestershire ). This has been attributed to improved healthcare, including screening and other initiatives addressing lifestyle behaviours and health risks (O'Leary et al. ). However, as life expectancy increases, people with intellectual disabilities are living longer with more complex needs. The challenges experienced throughout life, such as physical and mental health comorbidities, hyper polypharmacy and communication difficulties, are often exacerbated by age (Brennan et al. ). In addition, there may be complex environmental and social issues associated with aging, such as the need for residential moves to meet increased care needs, often resulting in the fracturing of interpersonal relationships. Such challenges exist within the context of life‐long institutionalised care for many, with few opportunities to exercise personal choice in how they live their lives, let alone prepare for end‐of‐life (McCarron et al. ).
These multi‐faceted challenges associated with increased life expectancy highlight the complexities of providing this aging population with care at end‐of‐life. This period is defined as a time when death is imminent and life expectancy is limited (Health Service Executive ). The distinction between end‐of‐life care and palliative care must be noted as the latter encompasses a broader approach, encouraging early intervention to improve quality of life for people facing the challenges associated with a life‐limiting condition (World Health Organization ). End‐of‐life care should be viewed as a continuum of palliative care.
Compounding difficulties experienced by the person, some healthcare professionals—nurses, doctors and social care workers in particular (Bekkema et al. ; Gray and Kim ) have reported feeling inadequately trained to provide good end‐of‐life care to people with intellectual disabilities. These deficits have been confirmed more recently by professionals from various disciplines (Voss et al. ). A lack of understanding of the respective role of palliative care professionals and intellectual disability staff is also reported (Cross et al. ). The poorer quality end‐of‐life care reported for people with intellectual disabilities in comparison to the general population, notably in relation to hospital care, serves to underline these inequalities (Hunt et al. ).
As with the general population, compassionate and person‐centred care is required for people with intellectual disabilities at end‐of‐life (McCarron et al. ; McNamara et al. ) to ensure a ‘good death’ (McCarron et al. ; Tuffrey‐Wijne ). Good practice guidance and frameworks on dying, death and people with intellectual disabilities have started to emerge to guide the delivery of such care (Burke et al. ; NHS England PCPLD Network ; Tuffrey‐Wijne and Davidson ; Tuffrey‐Wijne and McLaughlin ). However, much of this evidence reflects the perspectives of individual stakeholder groups. There is an absence of a broader understanding of what the key factors are in quality end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities drawn from the integrated findings across all stakeholder groups. This review set out to address this deficit by appraising the evidence base to develop a comprehensive, systematic, well‐organised theoretical framework representing the views of a wide range of stakeholders. It is anticipated that the holistic framework developed will serve as a benchmark, providing guidance to support the implementation of best practice. From this, it will be possible to identify where policies, research and education are required to support the delivery of quality care.

Research Aim and Objectives
The research question which addressed the aim of this literature review was—What are the key factors in quality end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities?
The objective of the review was to develop a theoretically informed understanding of this research question.

Methods

Design
In the absence of a single, universally recognised guideline, this literature review sought the most suitable approach, informed by the findings of an initial review of the literature. The initial review was undertaken by the lead author and consisted of a search of the EMBASE electronic database based on the key concepts of ‘end‐of‐life’ and ‘people with intellectual disabilities’. The results of this review confirmed that the body of evidence in relation to end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities is diverse and complex. The evidence comprises empirical and non‐empirical works, including primary research, literature reviews, book chapters, reports and editorials. While conventional systematic review methodology is ‘ill‐suited’ (Dixon‐Woods et al. , 2) to the challenges presented by a review of such diverse material, a critical interpretive synthesis (CIS) approach allows for all evidence that offers insight into the topic under investigation to be considered (Dixon‐Woods et al. ). It is therefore compatible with research questions which are likely to draw on literature that is heterogenous in nature (Wilson et al. ), as in the current study. CIS supports an inclusive approach by promoting a method that is interpretive and incorporates an element of quality appraisal. This is in contrast to an aggregative approach found in traditional systematic reviews (Dixon‐Woods et al. ). Furthermore, CIS allows for iterative theory generation (Depraetere et al. ) which is compatible with the objective of the study to develop a theoretically informed understanding of the question under review. For these reasons, this literature review adopted a CIS approach to address the research question.
To support the study objective, principles from a ‘best‐fit’ framework approach were borrowed (Carroll et al. ). This entailed using an existing published model (Tuffrey‐Wijne and Davidson ) (Table S1) to guide the initial coding process. The a priori framework was based on examples of good practice proposed by healthcare professionals and this specific focus is acknowledged. It was selected as a basis for this study because of its potential to serve as a starting point from which to develop a new theoretical framework (Carroll et al. ) in response to findings emerging from the literature, rather than as an instrument from which to maximise opportunities for new theory generation.
To enhance transparency, this systematic review was registered with PROSPERO and is reported in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines (Page et al. ). Full details of the review methodology were outlined in the published protocol which was developed prior to the initiation of the review.

Eligibility Criteria
While conventional systematic reviews aim to identify and include all relevant literature meeting fixed inclusion criteria, interpretive reviews set out to identify potentially relevant papers close to the topic of interest (Dixon‐Woods et al. ). Though boundaries are less well‐defined in interpretive reviews, there is still a requirement to identify eligibility criteria to ensure the review remains focused on the topic under consideration, in this case end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities. Accordingly, broad eligibility criteria for this review were set at the outset. It was acknowledged that as the review progressed, these criteria may need to be refined to ensure that the insights emerging aligned with the aims of the review (Wilson et al. ).
Population—adults (aged 18 years and over) with intellectual disabilities and/or those providing care (family, formal and/or informal caregivers)
Language—English
Study design—any
Publication type—all types including primary research, reviews, reports, commentaries, editorials, and position papers
Content—must contain reference to care at end‐of‐life for people with intellectual disabilities
Timeframe—no restrictions
The criteria for inclusion of literature in the preliminary stage of the review, that is title and abstract screening, were as follows:

Search Strategy
In line with a CIS approach, conventional systematic principles were applied in the development and application of a search strategy. A broad search strategy, based on the key concepts of ‘care at end‐of‐life’, ‘people with intellectual disabilities’ and ‘end‐of‐life’ was developed in consultation with subject librarians. The Peer Review of Electronic Search Strategies (PRESS) checklist was utilised to improve the quality of the literature (McGowan et al. ). In line with the eligibility criteria, no restrictions were set on study design, publication type or time frame. Studies not written in English were excluded. The search utilised identified keywords with a combination of database specific control language. Similar search strings were performed across five electronic databases—CINAHL, EMBASE, MEDLINE, PsycINFO and Web of Science. Other sources were explored for grey literature. This involved searching supplementary databases including Cochrane Library, Global Index Medicus (WHO), Google Scholar and Proquest Dissertations and Theses. All papers identified as part of the systematic search were imported into EndNote X21 for deduplication. Details of the search strategies adopted, and subsequent results, are shown in Table S2.

Screening the Literature
The process for developing and/or evaluating end‐of‐life initiatives or resources for people with intellectual disabilities
The impact on caregivers of providing end‐of‐life care to people with intellectual disabilities
Decisions around medical interventions for people with intellectual disabilities at end‐of‐life
Barriers and facilitators to including people with intellectual disabilities in end‐of‐life research
Culturally specific issues relating to end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities
The impact of death on people with intellectual disabilities
Retrieved papers were exported to Covidence for title and abstract screening which was carried out by two members of the research team. As anticipated, and consistent with the iterative approach promoted by CIS (Wilson et al. ), preliminary assessment indicated that refinements to the initial eligibility criteria were necessary to exclude some papers returned which were not sufficiently specific to the topic in question. Exclusion criteria were introduced, namely where the focus of the literature was on any of the following topics:
From this screening process, papers which were identified as ‘eligible’, that is, classified as either meeting the inclusion criteria or unclear whether they should be included, were allocated for subsequent full‐text screening. Also included for full‐text screening were papers where the abstract was not available. Ongoing discussions took place between the reviewers on the eligibility of papers. Any uncertainty regarding inclusion was resolved by consultation.

Quality Appraisal
The full text of all non‐excluded papers was retrieved and reviewed independently by each reviewer to decide whether they should be included in the review. In line with CIS methodological guidance, a high tolerance was applied when conducting this ‘quality appraisal’ stage, the objective being to maximise the inclusion of a wide range of literature that provided conceptual insights, rather than to focus on ‘methodological specificities’ (Dixon‐Woods et al. ).
Are the aims and objectives of the research clearly stated?
Is the research design clearly specified and appropriate for the aims and objectives of the research?
Is a clear account provided of the process by which findings were reproduced?
Is sufficient data displayed to support interpretations and conclusions?
Is the method of analysis appropriate and adequately explained?
The preliminary step in the quality appraisal stage was to appraise empirical papers and to exclude any that may be classed as ‘fatally flawed’. These were papers which did not meet the following criteria (Dixon‐Woods et al. ).
As the final decision about inclusion in the review depended on a subsequent assessment of relevance, a low threshold was maintained when applying the above criteria. This was because some ‘weak’ papers were considered to have potentially high relevance and warrant further examination (Dixon‐Woods et al. ).
All remaining empirical papers, that is those found not to be ‘fatally flawed’, and other material which included grey literature, were then appraised for their relevance. This process constituted the second step in the quality appraisal stage. Relevance was based on the ability of each paper to generate concepts, theories or insights in relation to the research question (Dixon‐Woods et al. ). The following broad question was used to guide this stage of the appraisal process: Does the paper provide a clear understanding of what is good quality end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities? This approach adhered to the aim of a CIS review ‘to treat the literature as warranting critical scrutiny’ (Dixon‐Woods et al. , 6). It is this critical approach which is a key feature of the CIS process, and one that distinguishes it from other types of interpretive synthesis.
As with any qualitative analysis, the ‘creative, interpretive processes involved’ (Dixon‐Woods et al. , 6) limit full transparency. To address any potential bias based on a single perspective, the steps outlined above to appraise each paper were completed by two research team members. Papers deemed by consensus to be ‘relevant’ were considered for inclusion in the synthesis.

Data Extraction and Synthesis
The quality appraisal stage identified a sizeable body of relevant papers. Unlike traditional systematic reviews, CIS does not require all relevant literature which meets inclusion criteria and minimum quality standard to be included in the analysis (Wilson et al. ). Rather than aiming for comprehensive identification and inclusion of all relevant literature, the purpose of the searching phase in a CIS approach is to identify potentially relevant literature to provide a ‘sampling frame’ from which literature is selected for analysis (Dixon‐Woods et al. ). Sampling is justified as the focus in an interpretive synthesis is on the development of concepts and theory rather than on an exhaustive summary of all data (Wilson et al. ).
Following the approach set out by Bullock et al. , a sample was drawn from this sampling frame for the initial data extraction and critique. A purposive sampling approach was used to select papers, based on the unique insights they provided to the topic under investigation (Wilson et al. ). These papers were identified from the quality appraisal stage as having a clear and unambiguous focus on quality end‐of‐life care. A broad range of material was selected to ensure that a variety of publication types, methodology, study design, and publication year were represented in the purposive sample.
An excel file served as the tool for data extraction and analysis. Descriptive data were extracted from each paper within the purposive sample as a first step. Further data were extracted and subsequently analysed using the Framework Method (Ritchie and Spencer), adapting the process set out by Gale et al. as required. Both deductive and inductive approaches were adopted for the purpose of data analysis following the steps set out below.
An in‐depth familiarisation process was undertaken with all papers repeatedly read. The next step involved initial coding to identify the overarching main themes. Where possible, the a priori framework (Tuffrey‐Wijne and Davidson ) acted as the analytical framework with data for analysis extracted from the findings of each paper and coded deductively according to the categories and constituent codes contained within the four themes of the framework. These themes were ‘individual and organisational commitment’; ‘working together in collaboration’; ‘the person's story is at the heart of care’ and ‘developing tools and staff training’ (further details of these themes and constituent codes are contained in Table S1). A separate excel worksheet was created for each of the four themes. Data was organised as a framework matrix, with each row of the excel spreadsheet representing a paper and each column a code within the theme. For data which did not ‘fit’ within a pre‐defined code, but which added greater understanding to other key factors necessary in the provision of end‐of‐life care, additional codes were identified inductively using data‐driven thematic analysis (Braun and Clarke ). This data was captured in a framework matrix contained in a fifth spreadsheet.
From this emergent coding scheme, common themes and concepts were identified and a synthesising argument emerged in the form of a new theoretical framework. This framework, developed from the a priori framework, included both original and modified sub‐themes and those generated by the inductive thematic analysis of the extracted data (Carroll et al. ). Evidence from the literature comprising the purposive sample continued to be integrated into the developing theoretical framework until all evidence had been examined and a final coding scheme was established (Carroll et al. ). In line with CIS methodology, the processes of data extraction, critique and synthesis were conducted as ‘iterative, interactive, dynamic and recursive rather than as fixed procedures’ (Dixon‐Woods et al. , 9).
To ‘test’ the framework and assess if further detail was required, three additional papers were drawn from the sampling frame and data extracted. When examined, it was evident that these papers yielded no further insights into the framework, indicating that saturation had been reached (Bullock et al. ).
Data was extracted by the primary author who developed and presented a proposed framework. This was critically considered by all reviewers and adapted until agreement was reached.

Results

Literature Selection
The literature selection process is outlined in Figure 1. The figure shows that a total of 1270 records were retrieved for title and abstract screening. This process resulted in 171 papers being retrieved for full text review. This ‘quality appraisal’ stage of the process excluded 120 papers. These excluded papers were comprised of two papers deemed to be ‘fatally flawed’, as per the criteria set out earlier; 65 papers which were considered not relevant to the research question in that they did not provide a clear understanding into what is good quality end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities; and 53 conference abstracts or poster presentations which did not provide sufficient insight into the topic under investigation. Details of these 120 excluded papers are contained in Table S3.
PRISMA flow diagram.
Following the exclusion of these papers, 51 relevant papers remained which constituted the ‘sampling frame’. A sample of 40 papers was selected from this sampling frame for extraction and synthesis, purposively drawn to reflect the diverse nature of the overall body of evidence.

Literature Characteristics
Details of the 40 papers included in the synthesis are summarised in Table 1. Twenty‐six related to empirical studies. These were conducted by researchers based in Ireland (n = 8), Australia (n = 8), the United Kingdom (UK) (n = 7), the Netherlands (n = 2), and the United States (US) (n = 1). Included studies adopted a range of approaches—quantitative, qualitative, and mixed‐methods. The studies explored a range of topics centred on end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities. Though efforts were made to ensure that a variety of participants were represented in the selected studies, this was constrained by the published evidence. For example, none of the participants with intellectual disabilities were themselves receiving end‐of‐life care. Furthermore, most of the bereaved caregivers were staff members, with few family members participating.
Selected characteristics of the studies included in the critical interpretive synthesis.
No.	Author, year, country	Aim of study	Sample size and participant type	Study design	Analysis	Key findings	 	1	Adam et al. N/A	To identify the palliative care needs of adults with intellectual disabilities and their access to palliative care.	52 studies from high income countries	Systematic review	Narrative synthesis approach	Issues providing equitable access to PC for adults with intellectual disabilities are identified. Research into strategies to improve practice should be prioritised using methods that include people with intellectual disabilities and families.	 	2	Amara UK	N/A	N/A	Feature article	N/A	Nurses play a key role in ensuring that the need for EOL care is identified and care is delivered according to the wishes of the person.	 	3	Bailey et al. Ireland	To describe the PC/EOL care needs of people with intellectual disabilities and how community nursing support is provided.	94 nurses including Public Health Nurses, Community Nurses, Practice Nurses, Hospice at Home Nurses and Palliative Care Nurses	Self‐complete questionnaire	Descriptive statistics and thematic analysis	Participants had limited experience and lacked key knowledge and skills required to care for people with intellectual disabilities. Findings highlight that teamwork, collaboration, advance planning and knowing the person are important when providing care.	 	4	Bekkema et al. Netherlands	To explore the beliefs of professionals regarding the place of EOL care for people with intellectual disabilities.	718 professionals ‐ 196 care staff, 145 intellectual disability physicians and 377 general practitioners	Self‐complete survey questionnaire	Quantitative analysis	All efforts should be made to ensure that EOL care is received at home. Insufficient expertise and a lack of adequate equipment were the main factors in decisions to move a client. The wishes of the person should take priority when deciding on the place of EOL care.	 	5	Bailey et al. Netherlands	To explore relationships at EOL from the perspectives of people with a mild intellectual disability.	33 people with mild intellectual disability comprising seven groups	Group interviews using nominal group techniques	Inductive thematic analysis	Two dimensions of care relationships emerged: (1) Understanding, documenting and honouring the wishes of the person and (2) Being there for the person in every way ‐ practically, emotionally and socially.	 	6	Cithambaram et al. Ireland	To explore the perceptions of people with intellectual disabilities and families about disclosure and EOL care planning.	19 participants ‐ 11 people with mild and moderate intellectual disability and eight family members of people with severe/profound intellectual disability	Individual face‐to‐face semi‐structured interviews	Constant comparative data analysis	To allow for future care planning, people with intellectual disabilities wished to know about what was happening in their lives. This included any life‐limiting conditions they may be diagnosed with.	 	7	Cithambaram Ireland	To explore what comprises good quality EOL care from the perspectives of people with intellectual disabilities and their families.	19 participants ‐ 11 people with mild and moderate intellectual disability and eight family members of people with severe/profound intellectual disability	Individual face‐to‐face semi‐structured interviews	Constant comparative data analysis	Essential elements of good quality EOL care for people with intellectual disabilities include providing personalised care, being with and communicating with the person and meeting their spiritual needs.	 	8	Cross et al. UK	To implement and evaluate practical approaches towards improving EOL care for people with intellectual disabilities.	Steering group and stakeholders comprising project manager, trainers, link workers, delegates of the training programs, hospice and care home staff and managers.	Face‐to‐face and telephone interviews	Not specified	Lack of understanding was found among PC professionals and intellectual disability staff of respective roles of each. Recommendations include introducing EOL training for intellectual disability care staff and ensuring that senior management is proactively involved in initiatives and accountable.	 	9	Dalton Ireland	To explore end‐of‐life care supports and decision‐making practices in specialist intellectual disability residential services.	Nine participants with intellectual disabilities	A multiple‐embedded case study design was used, drawing on a range of data sources and multiple perspectives	Qualitative content analysis	Intellectual disability services are committed to supporting people with intellectual disabilities at EOL. This is also reflected in the support by family members and intellectual disability staff. Issues nevertheless arose in relation to the provision of EOL care at organisational and individual levels. People with intellectual disabilities are not included in decision making about their EOL care.	 	10	Diaz et al. Ireland	To investigate the perceived barriers and facilitators to good care at EOL from the perspective of people with intellectual disability.	Four people with intellectual disabilities comprising two groups	Online focus groups	Reflexive thematic analysis	Keeping things as unchanged as possible at EOL was highlighted as an ideal. This was reflected in the themes ‘Unsettling Transitions’ and ‘Maintaining Familiarity’. The third theme of ‘Respecting People's Wishes’ was identified as a facilitator to good EOL care.	 	11	Dunkley and Sales N/A	To explore the challenges of providing palliative care for people with an intellectual disability.	90 publications from North America, Europe, and the UK	Literature review	Not specified	Understanding the training needs of those involved with EOL care is crucial. Collaborative working is required to ensure access to appropriate referrals between professional groups. The perspectives of people with intellectual disabilities need to be understood to overcome their marginalisation. They need to be supported to be involved in decisions about their EOL care.	 	12	Egan et al. Ireland	To describe symptoms experienced by people with intellectual disabilities at EOL and to identify strategies to promote comfort when caring for this population.	N/A	Peer reviewed article	N/A	A holistic and respectful approach to symptom management is presented.	 	13	Ferretti et al. N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A ‐ book chapter	N/A	Building shared EOL supports and cross‐training for hospice/palliative and intellectual disability service providers is mutually beneficial.	 	14	Forrester‐Jones et al. UK	To explore the case for specialist care for people with intellectual disability who are dying.	Nine residents and 15 staff members of the specialist service	Mixed methods approach—interviews with two staff members about residents and focus groups with staff members.	Descriptive statistics for quantitative data and thematic analysis for qualitative data	Positive results regarding overall quality of life were found, despite individuals having limited social networks. Findings indicated good financial management by organization under review.	 	15	Grindrod and Rumbold Australia	To develop an organisational capacity‐building model from public health principles to manage end‐of‐life care in community living services.	179 disability support staff (survey respondents); 25 staff members comprising five focus groups and seven individual interviews	Mixed‐methods approach—self‐complete questionnaire followed by focus groups and individual interviews.	Descriptive statistics for survey data and thematic analysis for qualitative data	Organisational structure and culture are closely related and both influence EOL practice. Conflicting attitudes of paid carers and uncoordinated approaches can result in barriers to good practice.	 	16	Grindrod Australia	To develop a disability and PC intersectoral partnership framework to provide guidance on good EOL care for people with intellectual disabilities.	23 participants; 12 representing disability and 11 from PC	Modified Delphi technique with focus groups	Delphi study techniques	This research has produced an evidence‐based intersectoral disability and PC policy and practice partnership framework which addresses the challenges associated with achieving quality practice in EOL care for people with intellectual disabilities.	 	17	Kingsbury US	N/A	N/A	Peer reviewed article	N/A	With increasing life expectancy, there is greater need for advance care planning for people with intellectual disabilities. Existing person‐centred plans could be enhanced to allow people to communicate their EOL wishes.	 	18	Kirkendall et al. US	To explore staff perspectives on the provision of EOL care for adults with developmental disabilities living in community residences.	Eight participants representing three frontline workers, four managers, and one registered nurse	In‐person semi‐structured interviews	Descriptive statistics and grounded theory techniques	Five key elements of EOL care were identified (1) influence of relationships, (2) expression of individuality, (3) contribution of hospice, (4) grief and bereavement and (5) challenges to EOL care.	 	19	McCallion et al. N/A	To address the challenge of identifying the EOL phase for individuals with advanced dementia and intellectual disabilities and to offer care guidance.	N/A	N/A	N/A	Recommendations: collaboration between intellectual disability and PC providers, specialised training for carers on EOL care and supports, and timely involvement of adults with intellectual disabilities in the advance care planning process.	 	20	McCarron et al. Ireland	To understand carer concerns and essential pre‐requisites when supporting people with intellectual disabilities and advanced dementia at EOL.	57 staff—50 from six intellectual disability service providers and seven from an SPC service	Focus group interviews	Thematic analysis	Two core themes were identified: building upon services' history and personal caring, and supporting comfort and optimal death. Challenges to service systems identified included aging in place, person‐centred care and interservice collaboration.	 	21	McCarron et al. Ireland	To understand the role and timing of SPC in supporting persons with intellectual disability and advanced dementia.	57 staff ‐ 50 from six intellectual disability service providers and seven from an SPC service	Focus group interviews	Thematic analysis	SPC and intellectual disability staff were not clear about the role of PC at early stage‐ dementia. The contributions of SPC in supporting challenges to pain and symptom management were recognised.	 	22	McCarron et al. Ireland	To develop a demographic, health status, and healthcare utilisation profile of deceased IDS‐TILDA participants and to explore the experiences at EOL as reported by their careers.	Nine bereaved caregivers (survey respondents); 28 bereaved caregivers (individual interviews)	Mixed methods approach—self complete paper‐based questionnaire and individual semi‐structured interviews	Descriptive statistics for survey data; thematic and content analysis for qualitative data	Three sub‐themes emerged: ‘Joining up the dots’ highlighted gaps in EOL care; ‘living the life desired in one's last days’ confirmed the value of involving familiar carers at EOL; ‘dealing with death and beyond’ related to post‐death rituals and impact of loss.	 	23	McCarron et al. N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A ‐ book chapter	N/A	People with intellectual disabilities should be supported to be involved in decision‐making at the EOL as much as possible. The support network at EOL should be as broad as possible.	 	24	McLaughlin et al. UK	To develop a model for best practice partnership between SPC and intellectual disability services.	47 service representatives (survey); 30 health and social care professionals comprising 15 working in intellectual disability and 15 in PC services (interviews)	Mixed methods approach—self‐complete questionnaires and individual semi‐structured interviews	Descriptive statistics and thematic analysis	Four themes emerged: challenges and issues in EOL care; sharing and learning; supporting and empowering; and partnership in practice.	 	25	McNamara et al. Australia	To explore the unmet needs of people with intellectual disabilities at the EOL and identify strategies to support them.	26 experienced health professionals and carers	Semi‐structured interviews	Thematic analysis and constant comparison	Unmet needs at EOL include: (1) residential setting i.e., dying ‘at home’; (2) personal factors and support networks; (3) medical care and decision making. A range of strategies to facilitate good EOL care are identified.	 	26	Morton‐Nance and Schafer UK	To identify ways to improve EOL care for people with a learning disability by exploring the experiences of learning disability and district nurses caring for them.	Three community learning disability nurses and three district nurses	Descriptive phenomenological approach using semi‐structured interviews	Collaizzi's seven‐stage process of thematic analysis	A person‐centred approach is required for the delivery of effective PC to people with a learning disability. Formal guidelines and support are also needed as is collaborative working.	 	27	NHS England PCPLD Network UK	To reduce inequalities in the provision of PC and EOL care to people with a learning disability by providing guidance to commissioners, providers and clinicians	N/A	N/A	N/A	Resources and tips for commissioners, service providers and health and social care staff.	 	28	Ryan N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A ‐ book chapter	N/A	To provide quality care to people with intellectual disabilities at EOL, staff must have the necessary expertise. Timely recognition of needs is required as well as collaboration. The needs of family members, peers and carers must also be addressed.	 	29	Todd UK	To understand the experiences of staff dealing with the death of a person with intellectual disabilities and the factors that influenced their experiences.	22 intellectual disability service staff members	Individual semi‐structured interviews	Qualitative thematic analysis	Staff felt providing good quality EOL care was an important part of their role, but this was not recognised. Being there for the person was an important component of EOL care.	 	30	Tromans et al. UK	To establish the level of compliance with key standards in EOL care standards for a group of patients with intellectual disabilities and severe dementia.	32 patient records of adults with intellectual disability	Patient record audit	Not specified	Compliance with EOL care standards was found to be highly variable. This could be due to limited awareness of standards among health professionals and difficulties identifying imminent EOL.	 	31	Tuffrey‐Wijne UK	To explore the unique needs of people who have intellectual disabilities and a terminal illness.	Seven participants ‐ one person with intellectual disability and six health professionals providing care	Case study using face to face semi‐structured interviews	Categorical analysis	Five themes emerged‐ challenges in making a diagnosis, consent issues, conflicts between carers and family, disclosure, and the need for professional support.Close collaboration between stakeholders and the person is essential.	 	32	Tuffrey‐Wijne UK	To identify the PC needs of people with intellectual disabilities.	Not specified	Literature review	Not specified	Further research into the PC needs of people with intellectual disabilities must be conducted to ensure equitable access to mainstream palliative care services. Inter‐disciplinary training materials and evaluated information must also be available.	 	33	Tuffrey‐Wijne UK	N/A	N/A	Feature article	N/A	Dying at home may not necessarily be the best option for people with learning disabilities. The person's wishes must be understood and evaluated against the realistic options. No assumptions can be made about where is the ‘best’ place to die.	 	34	Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. N/A	To define consensus norms for PC of people with intellectual disabilities in Europe.	80 experts from 15 European countries	Delphi study in four rounds	Delphi study techniques	Thirteen norms defined: equity of access, communication, recognising the need for PC, assessment of total needs, symptom management, EOL decision making, involving those who matter, collaboration, support for family/carers, preparing for death, bereavement support, education/training and developing/managing services.	 	35	Voss et al. Australia	To explore health practitioners' perspectives and practices relating to provision of EOL care for people with profound intellectual and multiple disability.	Seven health practitioners	Semi‐structured interviews	Inductive thematic analysis	Four themes emerged: limited participation, bias, dignity, and quality of death. Additional support is required to enable practitioners provide care for people with profound intellectual and multiple disability. An emphasis on physical rather than emotional and spiritual well‐being at EOL was noted.	 	36	Wark et al. Australia	To understand staff perceptions of the facilitators and challenges associated with health service access to EOL care for people with intellectual disabilities.	35 direct‐care staff from four rural and two metropolitan locations comprising seven groups	Focus group interviews using semi‐structured interview guide.	Thematic analysis	Four key areas were identified ‐ isolation, support from doctors, general health support access and internal staffing issues.	 	37	Wark et al. Australia	To examine the issues that impact on quality of end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities in rural Australia as perceived by direct‐care staff.	22 rural disability support workers comprising four groups	Focus groups using semi‐structured interview guide	Thematic analysis	Thematic categories and associated concerns were identified in relation to unavailability of health services, inflexibility of funding support, government barriers and untreated pain.	 	38	Watchman Australia	To explore practitioners' perceptions of issues relating to EOL care for people with intellectual disabilities.	Eight practitioners from residential services for people with intellectual disabilities and two from PC settings all with experience of adults with Down syndrome affected by dementia.	One‐on‐one semi‐structured interviews.	Not specified	Need for people with Down syndrome to be more involved in planning EOL care; lack of communication between PC and intellectual disability staff; evidence of need for change in approaches to care and deficits in training involving EOL care. Further research is needed around EOL care for people with Down syndrome and dementia.	 	39	Welch and Moreno‐Leguizamon N/A	To identity best practices in care for individuals with intellectual disabilities encountering the EOL.	30 articles	Literature review	Not specified	Health professionals lack communication skills, experience of dealing with death, appropriate training and formal support leaving them unprepared to provide care at EOL. Lack of collaborative working was found. An absence of guidance on dying and intellectual disability was noted.	 	40	Wiese et al. Australia	To explore the issues raised by staff in community living services supporting people with intellectual disabilities at EOL.	33 community living services staff; 25 staff members comprising four focus groups followed by 20 individual interviews.	Focus groups and individual interviews using semi‐structured interview guides	Constant comparative data analysis	Five ‘issues’ were identified: knowledge of dying, ethical values, the where of caring, the how of caring and post‐death caring. These co‐existed with relationships between partners who included the dying person, peers, staff, family, and external health services.
Abbreviations: EOL, end‐of‐life; PC, palliative care; SPC, specialist palliative care.
In addition to empirical studies, the following papers were also included in the synthesis—four literature reviews, four feature articles, three book chapters, a Delphi study, a consensus statement and a guide for delivering quality end‐of‐life care. This wide range of literature was purposively selected for inclusion in the synthesis to reflect the diversity of the overall body of evidence on this topic. This literature was also selected to acknowledge and to include the original contributions made by the authors. This is in keeping with key principles of CIS, which supports the inclusion of a theoretically rich sample of heterogeneous literature. Likewise, some early literature was purposively included to examine whether trends over time emerged. The inclusion of this literature also allowed for seminal works to be considered.

Developing the Framework
Data was extracted from the literature and coded initially according to the categories and codes contained within the four themes of the a priori framework (Tuffrey‐Wijne and Davidson ). In line with CIS methodology (Dixon‐Woods et al. ), analysis and synthesis were conducted simultaneously and iteratively, as recurring themes were identified. During this process, it became clear that while there was evidence to support the inclusion of some a priori sub‐themes in an emerging framework, there was little or no evidence to support others and thus they were not included. This lack of evidence may have been because these topics were not considered to play an important role in the delivery of good end‐of‐life care or because exploration of these topics has yet to occur. Findings from this deductive analysis, outlining the a priori sub‐themes which justified inclusion (some in a revised manner), are summarised in the following sub‐section. The subsequent sub‐section includes details of the new inductive sub‐themes. These were created thematically from extracted data which did not ‘fit’, but which provided valuable insights.
Table 2 lists the a priori and new sub‐themes and the literature types from which these findings were derived.
Sub‐themes and source types from which findings derived.
Subthemes	Book chapter	Care guide	Consensus statement	Empirical studies	Feature article	Delphi study	Literature review	 	A‐priori sub‐themes	 	Physical care	✓		✓	✓✓✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Advance care planning	✓	✓	✓	✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓	✓✓	✓		 	Enabling to live as desired		✓	✓	✓✓✓✓✓✓	✓			 	Continuity of care	✓	✓		✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓	✓			 	Regular training	✓		✓	✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓		✓	✓✓✓	 	Collaboration between intellectual disability service staff and PC staff	✓✓		✓	✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓			✓✓	 	Collaboration between all health care professionals	✓	✓		✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Collaboration with families	✓✓	✓		✓✓✓✓		✓	✓	 	Supporting families	✓	✓		✓✓		✓		 	Collaboration with peers		✓		✓✓✓✓		✓	✓	 	Leadership	✓	✓		✓✓✓✓✓✓				 	Policies	✓✓	✓	✓			✓	✓	 	New sub‐themes	 	An empowered partner	✓		✓	✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓			✓✓	 	Emotional support				✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓			✓	 	Spiritual care	✓	✓		✓✓✓✓✓				 	Communication	✓	✓		✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓	✓	✓	✓✓	 	Supporting staff	✓	✓		✓✓✓✓✓	✓	✓		 	Supporting peers	✓	✓		✓✓✓		✓		 	Capacity to care	✓			✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓		✓	✓

A Priori Sub‐Themes

Physical Care
The primary objective of end‐of‐life care was identified as the promotion of comfort (Egan et al. ). One aspect of this multi‐factorial phenomenon was symptom management (Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ), with pain management identified as a priority (McNamara et al. ; Wark et al. ). Physical care also included effective management of nutrition and hydration (McCallion et al. ; McCarron et al. ; McNamara et al. ). Those well known to the person were identified as being important to support understanding of expressions of discomfort (Tuffrey‐Wijne ; Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ).

Advance Care Planning
Advance care planning, encompassing all aspects of the person's care wishes, was reported to be an important component of end‐of‐life care and was evident from an early point in the literature (Amara ; Bailey et al. ; Bekkema et al. ; Diaz et al. ; Kingsbury ; McCallion et al. ; McCarron et al. ; McNamara et al. ; Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ). Planning was noted to be particularly important where transfer to another care setting was required (Cithambaram et al. ). Early discussions and recording of wishes were advised to ensure wishes were known before any deterioration (Morton‐Nance and Schafer ; NHS England PCPLD Network ; Watchman ) and to avoid having to make important decisions later at a potentially more stressful time (Voss et al. ). Opportunities for end‐of‐life decision making were particularly valued by people with intellectual disabilities (Cithambaram et al. ; Diaz et al. ) who felt that they should be supported to engage in the process (McCallion et al. ; Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ).

Enabling to Live as Desired
Allowing the person to live as desired was promoted as a means of providing end‐of‐life care (Amara ; Forrester‐Jones et al. ; McCallion et al. ; NHS England PCPLD Network ; Tromans et al. ). Among the strategies suggested included fulfilling the person's last wishes (Bekkema et al. ) and maintaining previously valued experiences, such as going for a walk (Wark et al. ), listening to favourite music (McCarron et al. ), and putting on make‐up (McCarron et al. ).

Continuity of Care
Continuity of care—not to be confused with ‘dying in place’ (Tuffrey‐Wijne )—emerged as fundamental to quality of end‐of‐life care (Bekkema et al. ; Diaz et al. ; Grindrod and Rumbold ; McCarron et al. ; McLaughlin et al. ; McNamara et al. ; Voss et al. ; Wiese et al. ). This extended to keeping links with familiar people and possessions, especially when transitions for the purpose of care were involved (NHS England PCPLD Network ; Todd ). Continuity of care was noted to be of particular importance to those living with dementia (McCarron et al. ; Watchman ).

Regular Training
Training for intellectual disability service staff, particularly in relation to pain and symptom management (McCarron et al. ; McLaughlin et al. ; Tromans et al. ), was a consistent theme emerging (Adam et al. ; Bekkema et al. ; Diaz et al. ; Dunkley and Sales ; Grindrod and Rumbold ; Ryan ; Voss et al. ). This was also found in early works (Tuffrey‐Wijne ). Where there was end‐of‐life training, intellectual disability service staff felt more confident in their ability to provide high‐quality care (McCarron et al. ). Upskilling palliative care staff to be able to provide end‐of‐life care to people with intellectual disabilities was also encouraged (McCallion et al. ; McNamara et al. ; Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ).

Collaboration Between Intellectual Disability Service and Palliative Care Staff
The value of intellectual disability service and specialist palliative care staff working together in the provision of end‐of‐life care was acknowledged in recent literature (Adam et al. ; McCarron et al. ; McNamara et al. ; Ryan ; Tuffrey‐Wijne ; Wark et al. ) and in earlier works (Tuffrey‐Wijne ). This collaboration helped to address gaps in service provision (Grindrod ), facilitated the sharing of expertise (Bailey et al. ; Ferretti et al. ; Kirkendall et al. ; McCallion et al. ), and enabled the person to remain in their place of care (McLaughlin et al. ). Collaboration was also beneficial in ‘dispelling fear and providing mutual support’ (McLaughlin, 2014, 1217). High satisfaction levels with the care provided were reported where collaboration occurred (McCarron et al. ). One important outcome of services working together was enabling the person to remain in their place of care, with continuity of care by familiar people (McLaughlin et al. ).

Collaboration Between All Healthcare Professionals
Collaboration between healthcare professionals across all care settings emerged as a pre‐eminent theme (Bailey et al. ; Cithambaram ; Dalton ; McCarron et al. ; McLaughlin et al. ; Morton‐Nance and Schafer ; NHS England PCPLD Network ; Tuffrey‐Wijne ; Voss et al. ; Welch and Moreno‐Leguizamon ). This was identified as key to the successful provision of palliative care (Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ), particularly when end‐of‐life care was being given in the home (Tuffrey‐Wijne ). Communication was identified as being key to effective collaboration (McNamara et al. ; Wiese et al. ).

Collaboration With Families
The importance of involving the family in all aspects of end‐of‐life care, including post death rituals (McNamara et al. ), was recognised (McCarron et al. ; Ryan ; Tuffrey‐Wijne ; Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ; Welch and Moreno‐Leguizamon ). The family should be viewed as important informants considering that they may know the person best (Bailey et al. ; McCarron et al. ). They should be considered as part of the ‘team’ (NHS England PCPLD Network ).

Supporting Families
Emotional support must be provided to families as part of quality end‐of‐life care (McNamara et al. ; Ryan ; Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ) and built into end‐of‐life care planning (Tromans et al. ). Providing post‐death, bereavement support to families was also identified as a key consideration in good practice (NHS England PCPLD Network ).

Collaboration With Peers
Peers should be encouraged to participate in end‐of‐life care (Grindrod and Rumbold ; McCarron et al. ; Welch and Moreno‐Leguizamon ) to provide information on the care needs of the person at end‐of‐life (NHS England PCPLD Network ) and to identify important relationships (McCarron et al. ; Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ). People with intellectual disabilities recognised the importance of being involved with their friends' care (Cithambaram ).

Leadership
Leadership was identified as being key to successful end‐of‐life care (Bailey et al. ; Forrester‐Jones et al. ; Grindrod and Rumbold ). Effective leadership was described as creating an environment which supported people to develop their own end‐of‐life plan (Cithambaram et al. ) and creating opportunities for choice (McNamara et al. ). Furthermore, leadership promoted a collaborative environment (McCarron et al. ; NHS England PCPLD Network ) and ensured adequate resources in terms of funding (McNamara et al. ) and appropriately trained intellectual disability service staff (Ryan ).

Policies
Evidence in relation to policies for quality end‐of‐life care centred on the importance of equity of access to palliative care (McCallion et al. ; McCarron et al. ; NHS England PCPLD Network ; Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ). This has long been called for (Tuffrey‐Wijne ). Equitable access to mainstream palliative care services would support people with intellectual disabilities to remain in their own home at the end of life, should they wish (Ryan ).

New Sub‐Themes

An Empowered Partner in Care
Having the person involved, to the extent that they can influence their own end‐of‐life care, emerged strongly from the literature as a pre‐requisite for quality end‐of‐life care (Bekkema et al. ; Cithambaram et al. ; Diaz et al. ; Dunkley and Sales ; Kirkendall et al. ; McCallion et al. ; Welch and Moreno‐Leguizamon ). People with intellectual disabilities should be supported to enable their values and preferences to play a central role in end‐of‐life planning (McCarron et al. ; McNamara et al. ; Ryan ; Tromans et al. ) even if their capacity to make decisions is limited or communication is difficult (Voss et al. ). The introduction of the Assisted Decision Making (Capacity) Act 2015 in Ireland reflects this move towards empowerment as it promotes the inclusion of people with intellectual disabilities in decision making across all aspects of their lives, including end‐of‐life care (Dalton ).

Emotional Support
Providing emotional support to the person to offer reassurance was identified as vital to quality end‐of‐life care (Cithambaram et al. ; Diaz et al. ; McCarron et al. ; McNamara et al. ; Wark et al. ; Welch and Moreno‐Leguizamon ). The importance of ‘being there’ for the individual through the dying journey was noted (Todd ). Providing words of comfort (Bekkema et al. ), reading to the person (Wiese et al. ), and watching television together (Bekkema et al. ) were other examples of emotional support. People well known to the person were identified as being best placed to provide this emotional support (Cithambaram ).

Spiritual Care
Understanding and addressing the spiritual needs was observed as an essential component of end‐of‐life care (McCarron et al. ; McNamara et al. ; NHS England PCPLD Network ; Ryan ; Tromans et al. ; Voss et al. ), bringing peace and reducing fear (Bekkema et al. ). This could involve looking back on the person's life or preparing for imminent death (Bekkema et al. ).

Communication
There must be open communication with the person, and those identified as being important to them, for end‐of‐life care to be effective (Adam et al. ; Cithambaram ; Cithambaram et al. ; McCarron et al. ; Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ; Voss et al. ; Welch and Moreno‐Leguizamon ). Appropriate communication regarding diagnosis and treatment options was highlighted as a means of empowering the person (Morton‐Nance and Schafer ). There should also be opportunities to participate in conversations about death and dying (Morton‐Nance and Schafer ) to help the person prepare for their own death (NHS England PCPLD Network ). It is important to remember that because a person does not speak, they do not communicate (Voss et al. ). Appropriate support measures should be put in place where necessary, for example by involving people well known to the person (Amara ; Kirkendall et al. ; McNamara et al. ; Ryan ; Tuffrey‐Wijne ).

Supporting Staff
The literature indicated that quality end‐of‐life care extended to appropriate support being put in place, both for intellectual disability service and palliative care staff (Bailey et al. ; Grindrod and Rumbold ; Ryan ). This included emotional and practical support (Bekkema et al. ; McCarron et al. ; Tuffrey‐Wijne ), training on self‐care (Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ), and bereavement support (McNamara et al. ; NHS England PCPLD Network ).

Supporting Peers
Similarly, support for peers was recommended (NHS England PCPLD Network ). Strategies included acknowledging the importance of the relationship (McCarron et al. ) and supporting peers to participate in all aspects of the dying process (Ryan ), such as post‐death rituals (Watchman ; Wiese et al. ) and bereavement support (Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ).

Capacity to Care
Appropriate resources (in terms of staff and equipment) were identified as pre‐requisites for quality end‐of‐life care (Bekkema et al. ; Cithambaram ; McCarron et al. ; McNamara et al. ; Ryan ; Voss et al. ; Wiese et al. ). These were particularly important if care were to be provided in the home (Bekkema et al. ; Grindrod and Rumbold ; McCarron et al. ). Capacity to care applied both to intellectual disability services (Grindrod ) and to palliative care organisations (Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ). Staff must have the required training, expertise (Dunkley and Sales ; Welch and Moreno‐Leguizamon ), inter‐personal skills (Bailey et al. ), and dedication (Forrester‐Jones et al. ; Grindrod and Rumbold ; Todd ).

Theoretical Framework
During the framework synthesis, synergies emerged between the sub‐themes allowing over‐arching themes to be identified. The first theme reflected the need for a personal approach to care, addressing all aspects of care required to maintain comfort. This entailed treating the person holistically, by attending to their physical, emotional, social, and spiritual needs. With the person supported to express their will and preference, care should be delivered in a person‐centred manner. The second theme highlighted the need for an involved network around the person. These networks should be as extensive as possible, comprising staff from intellectual disability services, palliative care, the wider healthcare professional network, family and friends, all working together to provide care to the dying person, with they themselves supported. The third theme noted the importance of an enabling infrastructure with adequate capacity to care. This brought together all elements necessary for care, including the need to have an appropriately trained workforce. In addition, policies should be in place to enable equity of access to palliative care for people with intellectual disabilities. To co‐ordinate and implement these inter‐dependent factors, effective leadership is required.
The synthesising argument that emerged during this process led to the development of a new theoretical framework outlining the key characteristics in the provision of quality end‐of‐life care to people with intellectual disabilities (Figure 2).
Key characteristics in the provision of quality end‐of‐life care to people with intellectual disabilities (new framework).
To confirm the robustness of the framework, three additional papers (Cole ; The National End of Life Care Programme ; Voss et al. ), which had not been selected for the purposive sample but were included in the sampling frame, were examined and data extracted. This exercise did not yield any further insights, confirming that no amendments were required to the framework, and saturation had been reached with the purposive sample of 40 papers.

Discussion
This CIS review used principles from a ‘best‐fit’ framework approach to address the question: ‘What are the key factors in quality end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities?’ Using an a priori framework as a scaffold (Carroll et al. ) to integrate a diverse body of evidence, a theoretical framework was developed which provides additional clarity to the question under review.
In addition to empirical studies in which participants were healthcare professionals, studies in which participants were people with intellectual disabilities and family members were also included in the synthesis. In these studies, the following sub‐themes emerged strongly, implying a desire for autonomy and a focus on the softer aspect of caring—‘an empowered partner in care’ (Bekkema et al. ; Cithambaram et al. ; Diaz et al. ), ‘emotional support’ (Bekkema et al. ; Cithambaram ; Diaz et al. ), ‘spiritual care’ (Bekkema et al. ; Cithambaram ) and ‘communication’ (Cithambaram ; Cithambaram et al. ). These new sub‐themes reflect the broader focus of this new framework which was not previously present (Tuffrey‐Wijne and Davidson ).
As with the introduction of evidence from people with intellectual disabilities and family members, including the evidence of acknowledged leaders in the field, with their awareness of structural needs, has also contributed to the addition of new sub‐themes. The value of this material, represented in book chapters, a consensus statement and Delphi study, is evident from the new ‘enabling infrastructure’ theme, specifically in the modified sub‐theme relating to policies for ‘equity of access’ (McCallion et al. ; McCarron et al. ; Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ) and the new, all‐encompassing sub‐theme called ‘capacity to care’ (McCallion et al. ; Ryan ; Tuffrey‐Wijne et al. ). Furthermore, the practical solutions to real‐world challenges, found in the feature articles and care guide, complement the value offered by empirical studies and expert insights. The addition of these perspectives extends the depth and breadth of the framework providing a more complete overview of the factors necessary for quality end‐of‐life care.
Some of the original sub‐themes, where evidence was present in the literature but not to a significant degree, for example ‘going beyond the call of duty’ and ‘mutual learning’, were integrated into other sub‐themes, namely ‘capacity to care’ and ‘collaboration between intellectual disability service staff and palliative care staff’ respectively. Where no evidence was found to justify inclusion, for example ‘charisma’, ‘working groups’, ‘professionals open to being challenged’ and ‘conferences’, these sub‐themes were not included. It is worth noting that the sub‐themes that were either excluded or amalgamated due to their secondary importance applied to staff providing end‐of‐life care. The wider range of contributors to this new framework, which led to other important factors emerging, may have diluted the significance of these staff‐related factors.
A key strength of this review is the methodological approach adopted. A critical interpretative synthesis has the advantage of being inclusive of all types of research. This allowed a broad sample of literature to be considered and resulted in a balance of perspectives being represented in the new, more inclusive, framework. In promoting the concept of sampling (Dixon‐Woods et al. ), the CIS approach supported the creation of a purposive sample to concentrate on the development of concepts and theory rather than on an exhaustive summary of all data. Furthermore, the simultaneous and iterative approach promoted by CIS (Dixon‐Woods et al. ) was utilised in the development of the synthesis allowing for a more insightful interpretation of the evidence. An additional strength of this review was the integration of key principles from the ‘best‐fit’ framework approach. The a priori framework selected provided a solid base from which to develop the emerging theory. The result is a theoretical framework, developed from the literature, which positively contributes to policy, research and practice.
By presenting a framework that incorporates key factors for quality end‐of‐life care, guidance is provided regarding best practice. This sets a benchmark against which end‐of‐life care in practice can be measured, highlighting where gaps may occur and improvements are required. The literature identified some shortcomings, particularly in relation to training (Diaz et al. ; Grindrod and Rumbold ; Voss et al. ). These deficits need to be confirmed and others identified by exploring the extent to which everyday end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities aligns with the key principles set out in the theoretical framework. This will indicate where progress is needed and policies, research, and education are required to support the delivery of quality care.
As is clear from this review, most of the evidence in relation to end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities is from the perspective of healthcare providers. While some research involving people with intellectual disabilities as active participants has been conducted (Bekkema et al. ; Cithambaram ; Cithambaram et al. ; Diaz et al. ), there is a paucity of research exploring the experiences of this cohort who are themselves approaching end‐of‐life. The inclusion of this cohort in future research may provide a deeper understanding of the challenges experienced by this population and of their priorities and perspectives regarding what constitutes quality end‐of‐life care. Additionally, a more comprehensive research agenda, which includes families as bereaved caregivers, is required. It is unclear whether the current dearth of evidence is due to a lack of family involvement in end‐of‐life care, or whether this is an under‐explored area of research.

Limitations
As not all relevant literature was included in the synthesis, there is a possibility that a key component of the new framework may have been missed. However, by testing whether additional material yielded further insights into the framework, the risk of this occurring was reduced. Furthermore, the suggestion that CIS lacks transparency (Depraetere et al. ), particularly around the methods used to generate the synthesising argument, has been addressed by clearly outlining how these stages of the review were conducted. In addition, the contribution of each relevant paper in the generation of the synthesising argument has been clearly noted in the development of the synthesis.

Conclusion
The present work is a major contribution to the knowledge base around quality end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities, providing a more developed understanding of the requirements. It provides an opportunity to examine the adequacy of, and to build upon, current practice, thus improving understanding of where further work is needed in terms of policy, research, and education. This new theoretical framework unites a range of perspectives from a variety of sources, meeting the needs of a cross‐section of stakeholders. This development of a cohesive framework demonstrates that the value offered by this integrated structure exceeds the sum of its individual parts.
The development of the framework was facilitated by adopting a methodology which supported the inclusion of a theoretically rich sample of heterogeneous literature and allowed for a critical approach to existing evidence. This review has demonstrated how a novel approach can use research‐based evidence to develop a framework, supporting guidance to the implementation of best practice.
The new framework contains three new well‐defined themes—‘a personal approach to care’, ‘an involved network’ and ‘an enabling infrastructure’. This demonstrates that quality end‐of‐life care for people with intellectual disabilities is multi‐faceted and is broader than ensuring that dedicated, well‐trained professionals are in place. It requires the involvement of all caregivers, appropriately supported and working together in an enabling environment to provide personalised care according to the wishes of the individual.

Funding
This work was supported by the Health Research Board ‐ ‘IDS‐TILDA‐2021‐001’. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

Ethics Statement
This review used publicly available data. Therefore, no ethical approvals were required.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
Data not reported in the paper or Supporting Information may be available upon request from the corresponding author.

References
The Palliative Care Needs of Adults With Intellectual Disabilities and Their Access to Palliative Care Services: A Systematic Review
End of Life Care Planning for People With Learning Disabilities: Nurses Are Key to Ensuring That Service Users' Wishes on End of Life Care Are Not Rushed or Missed
Surveying Community Nursing Support for Persons With an Intellectual Disability and Palliative Care Needs
Training Needs of Nurses and Social Workers in the End‐of‐Life Care for People With Intellectual Disabilities: A National Survey
Perspectives of People With Mild Intellectual Disabilities on Care Relationships at the End of Life: A Group Interview Study
To Move or Not to Move': A National Survey Among Professionals on Beliefs and Considerations About the Place of End‐of‐Life Care for People With Intellectual Disabilities
Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology
“Longitudinal Dynamics in the Ageing of People With an Intellectual Disability: Evidence From the Intellectual Disability Supplement to the Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing (IDS‐TILDA) Wave 5.”
Understanding the Implementation of Evidence‐Informed Policies and Practices From a Policy Perspective: A Critical Interpretive Synthesis
“Glancing Back, Planning Forward. A Guide for Planning End of Life Care With People With Intellectual Disability.”
A Worked Example of “Best Fit” Framework Synthesis: A Systematic Review of Views Concerning the Taking of Some Potential Chemopreventive Agents
Best Fit Framework Synthesis: Refining the Method
The Case for More Action and More Research Into Healthcare Provision and Health Inequalities for People With Intellectual Disabilities
What Constitutes Good Quality End‐of‐Life Care? Perspectives of People With Intellectual Disabilities and Their Families
Disclosure and Plan of Care at End of Life: Perspectives of People With Intellectual Disabilities and Families in Ireland
Facing Death? But Enjoying Life to the Full: How End of Life Care Package Doing It My Way Supports Having a Good Death
Practical Approaches Toward Improving End‐of‐Life Care for People With Intellectual Disabilities: Effectiveness and Sustainability
Cancer‐Related Mortality Among People With Intellectual Disabilities: A Nationwide Population‐Based Cohort Study
“End‐of‐Life Care Supports and Decision‐Making Practices in Specialist Intellectual Disability Residential Services.”
The Critical Interpretive Synthesis: An Assessment of Reporting Practices
Perceived Barriers and Facilitators to Good End of Life Care: Focusing on People With Intellectual Disabilities
Conducting a Critical Interpretive Synthesis of the Literature on Access to Healthcare by Vulnerable Groups
The Challenges of Providing Palliative Care for People With Intellectual Disabilities: A Literature Review
Symptom Management at the End of Life for People With Intellectual Disabilities
The Physical Health of British Adults With Intellectual Disability: Cross Sectional Study
People With Intellectual Disabilities at the End of Their Lives: The Case for Specialist Care?
Using the Framework Method for the Analysis of Qualitative Data in Multi‐disciplinary Health Research
Palliative Care Needs of Direct Care Workers Caring for People With Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities
Dying With Disability: A Disability and Palliative Care Intersectoral Partnership Framework
Providing End‐of‐Life Care in Disability Community Living Services: An Organizational Capacity‐Building Model Using a Public Health Approach
“Palliative Care Programme, Clinical Strategy and ProgrammesDirectorate.”
Prevalence and General Health Status of People With Intellectual Disabilities in Scotland: A Total Population Study
End‐of‐Life Care in Intellectual Disability: A Retrospective Cross‐Sectional Study
Cancer Detection, Diagnosis, and Treatment for Adults With Disabilities
Person‐Centered Planning and Communication of End‐of‐Life Wishes With People Who Have Developmental Disabilities
Caring for People With Intellectual Disabilities and Life‐Limiting Illness: Merging Person‐Centered Planning and Patient‐Centered, Family‐Focused Care
Evidence of Continued Reduction in the Age‐At‐Death Disparity Between Adults With and Without Intellectual and/or Developmental Disabilities
Prevalence and Incidence of Physical Health Conditions in People With Intellectual Disability ‐ A Systematic Review
Consensus Statement of the International Summit on Intellectual Disability and Dementia Related to End‐of‐Life Care in Advanced Dementia
“‘He'd Mind You, You Mind Him.’ Experiences of End of Life Care for People With an Intellectual Disability as Perceived by Staff Carers.”
Staff Perceptions of Essential Prerequisites Underpinning End‐of‐Life Care for Persons With Intellectual Disability and Advanced Dementia
The Role and Timing of Palliative Care in Supporting Persons With Intellectual Disability and Advanced Dementia
Patterns of Multimorbidity in an Older Population of Persons With an Intellectual Disability: Results From the Intellectual Disability Supplement to the Irish Longitudinal Study on Aging (IDS‐TILDA)
PRESS Peer Review of Electronic Search Strategies: 2015 Guideline Statement
Developing a Best Practice Model for Partnership Practice Between Specialist Palliative Care and Intellectual Disability Services: A Mixed Methods Study
A Comparison of the Prevalence of Health Problems Among Adults With and Without Intellectual Disability: A Total Administrative Population Study
Creating Person‐Centred Support for People With Intellectual Disabilities at the End of Life: An Australian Qualitative Study of Unmet Needs and Strategies
End of Life Care for People With a Learning Disability
“Learning Disabilities Mortality Review (LeDeR) Annual Report: Learning From Deaths of People With a Learning Disability.”
“Delivering High Quality End of Life Care for People Who Have a Learning Disability.”
Early Death and Causes of Death of People With Intellectual Disabilities: A Systematic Review
The PRISMA 2020 Statement: An Updated Guideline for Reporting Systematic Reviews
Life Expectancy of People With Intellectual Disability: A 35‐Year Follow‐Up Study
Mainstream Health Professionals' Stigmatising Attitudes Towards People With Intellectual Disabilities: A Systematic Review
“The Route to Success in End of Life Care: Achieving Quality for People With Learning Disabilities.”
‘Being There’: The Experiences of Staff in Dealing With Matters of Dying and Death in Services for People With Intellectual Disabilities
The ELCIDD Project: An Audit of End‐of‐Life Care in Persons With Intellectual Disabilities and Dementia
The Palliative Care Needs of People With Intellectual Disabilities: A Case Study
The Palliative Care Needs of People With Intellectual Disabilities: A Literature Review
The Preferred Place of Care for People Who Are Dying
Excellence in Palliative and End‐of‐Life Care Provision for People With Intellectual Disability
“Consensus Norms for Palliative Care of People With Intellectual Disabilities in Europe EAPC White Paper.”
Defining Consensus Norms for Palliative Care of People With Intellectual Disabilities in Europe, Using Delphi Methods: A White Paper From the European Association of Palliative Care
Chronic Diseases and Comorbidities in Adults With and Without Intellectual Disabilities: Comparative Cross‐Sectional Study in Dutch General Practice
Improving Palliative Care for People With Intellectual Disability: A Self‐Assessment of Policies, Practices and Competencies in Care Services
It Was One of Those Complicated Cases: Health Practitioners' Perspectives and Practices of Providing End‐of‐Life Care for People With Profound Intellectual and Multiple Disability
Maintaining Quality of Life for People With Intellectual Disabilites During End‐of‐Life in Rural Areas of Australia
Challenges in Providing End‐of‐Life Care for People With Intellectual Disability: Health Services Access
Practitioner‐Raised Issues and End‐of‐Life Care for Adults With Down Syndrome and Dementia
Literature Review of Best Health and Social Care Practices for Individuals With Intellectual Disabilities Encountering the End of Life
Barriers and Enablers to Accessing Mental Health Services for People With Intellectual Disability: A Scoping Review
End‐of‐Life Care and Dying: Issues Raised by Staff Supporting Older People With Intellectual Disability in Community Living Services
Processes, Contexts, and Rationale for Disinvestment: A Protocol for a Critical Interpretive Synthesis
“Palliative Care Fact Sheet.”