A review of vaccinology and ex vivo antigen-loaded dendritic cells: A different approach to infectious disease vaccines
ABSTRACT
Vaccinology originated with 18th century efforts to prevent smallpox by injecting healthy individuals with the infectious contents of cutaneous lesions from smallpox patients (variolation) or from individuals afflicted with cowpox (vaccination). In the late 19th century, vaccination was extended to other diseases after the development of chemical methods to kill pathogens (inactivation) and cell-culture passaging to decrease their virulence (attenuation). Since 1970, advances in immunology, cell subunit purification, and recombinant-DNA genetic engineering have enabled antigen-specific vaccines. During the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, mRNA and DNA-based vaccines were introduced. Vaccinating with ex vivo-antigen-loaded autologous dendritic cells (DC) is appealing because DCs rapidly induce an adaptive immune response by circumventing the need for in vivo antigen-presenting cells to migrate to the injection site to load antigens. DC vaccines against HIV/AIDS, hepatitis B, and Herpes simplex have yielded encouraging results. During the SARS-CoV-2 COVID-19 pandemic, DC vaccines emerged as a viable vaccine platform against infectious diseases.

Introductory statement
Before the SARS-CoV-2 COVID-19 pandemic, there were six categories of infectious disease vaccines. Preventive use of these vaccines was so effective in reducing the health risks associated with various viral and bacterial infections that most people have never experienced or observed the morbidity and mortality associated with diseases such as smallpox, typhoid fever, polio, and influenza. The COVID-19 pandemic brought vaccines to the forefront of television news coverage and newspaper front pages in a manner unprecedented since vaccinations for polio in the 1950s. Interest in vaccinology spread well beyond public health and infectious disease specialists. Although SARS-CoV-2 infected more than 700 million individuals and caused more than seven million deaths worldwide, there is no question that vaccines saved many more millions. Although vaccine hesitancy is not a new issue, during the COVID-19 pandemic, it was a major obstacle to public health policy. Disagreement and controversy continue over vaccine type, boosters, safety and efficacy, risks and benefits, individual rights versus authoritarian mandates based on societal needs, and medical science versus ignorance and misinformation. This article reviews the origins of vaccinology, the current live and attenuated vaccines, toxoids, antigen-specific vaccines, and mRNA vaccines, as well as the current understanding of the immunologic basis for vaccines, the rationale for dendritic cell vaccines (DCVs), and the clinical data for DCV against various infectious diseases. During the recent pandemic, personal DCV emerged as a viable vaccine platform for infectious diseases.

Origins of vaccinology
Vaccinology originated from efforts to reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with the viral infection known as variola and smallpox. In the sixth century, the term “variola,” derived from the Latin masculine, feminine, and neuter adjectives varius, varia, and varium, was first used to denote smallpox because of the various and changing cutaneous spots associated with the infection. The term “pox” is derived from the Middle English word “pocke,” meaning pustule. After syphilis became prevalent in Europe in the late 15th century, the term smallpox was introduced to distinguish it from syphilis, which was known as the great pox.
It had long been recognized that survivors of non-lethal smallpox infection were protected against subsequent exposure, which led to techniques to produce lower-grade infections that might provide similar protection. The earliest documentation of such efforts dates back to 16th century China, depicting the nasal insufflation technique, which involved blowing dried, powdered smallpox material into the nostrils. By the 18th century, scarification, which involved lancing a smallpox pustule from an infected patient and then introducing the pustular material via skin puncture into a healthy individual, was being practiced in the Far and Middle East to prevent smallpox. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, the wife of the British ambassador to the Ottoman Empire, learned of the technique while living in Constantinople during 1717–1721. She herself had been permanently disfigured by smallpox infection in 1715, which prompted her to direct embassy surgeon Charles Maitland to inoculate her 5-year-old son. When she returned to London in 1721, she had Maitland demonstrate the procedure on her 4-year-old daughter in the presence of other physicians. Subsequently, Maitland publicly performed variolation on small numbers of prisoners and orphans, which accelerated England’s adoption of the practice that became known as “inoculation” or “variolation.” However, live variola smallpox viruses were transferred in this process; so, there was an inherent risk of causing life-threatening smallpox infection or other transmissible infections, such as syphilis. The risk-to-benefit assessment estimated that 2% to 3% of inoculated individuals died from infection after smallpox inoculation compared to the 15% to 30% risk of death from natural smallpox infection.
In 18th century rural England, it was believed that milkmaids who handled the udders of infected cattle and developed cutaneous cowpox lesions were not susceptible to smallpox. The Gloucestershire physician Edward Jenner submitted a short paper to The Royal Society of London describing his personal observations of this association and hypothesized that subcutaneous injection of material from a cutaneous cowpox lesion might prevent human smallpox. The paper was rejected, so during 1796–1797 he tested his concept on local human subjects, then published his results in 1798 in a booklet entitled An inquiry into the Causes and Effects of the Variolae Vaccinae, in which he noted his observations that milkmaids who had contracted cowpox were generally immune to smallpox, and presented case reports of children and adults whom he had vaccinated with cowpox material and then did not contract small pox despite documented exposure, including injections of smallpox. He termed the procedure “vaccination” for vacca, the Latin word for cow, and for vaccinia, the medical term for cowpox. Jenner widely promoted this safer and highly efficacious procedure, which had a vastly improved risk-to-benefit ratio compared to variolation. Vaccination was increasingly adopted during the 19th century, and in the mid-20th century, worldwide subcutaneous injections of live vaccinia cowpox virus effectively eradicated smallpox.

Advances in vaccinology: attenuation and inactivation of pathogens
A major advancement in vaccinology was the development of laboratory procedures by the French chemist and microbiologist Louis Pasteur to attenuate or kill infectious organisms and to demonstrate their use as vaccines. In the late 19th century, he and his Parisian colleagues developed attenuated anthrax vaccines for farm animals, an attenuated rabies virus vaccine that was administered to a human being, and an inactivated vaccine (killed organisms) to treat chicken cholera. Shortly thereafter, inactivated vaccines were developed for humans by Waldemar Haffkine using Vibrio cholerae for cholera (1892) and Yersinia pestis for plague (1897), and Almroth Edward Wright using Salmonella Typhi for typhoid fever (1896). The use of cell culture to decrease virulence was developed further by Calmette and Guérin, who reported passaging the bacterium Mycobacterium bovis more than 200 times to yield an attenuated strain for their Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine that was developed in 1921 to prevent tuberculosis. Similar to the classic smallpox vaccine, the antigen source for BCG was a related bovine pathogen, Mycobacterium bovis, rather than the actual human pathogen, Mycobacterium tuberculosis. BCG is still in use today. Building on these concepts and clinical experiences, in the 20th and 21st centuries, many additional live-attenuated and killed pathogen vaccines were produced.

Live-attenuated vaccines
Attenuated vaccines.
Disease/Vaccine (brand)	Organism/Target	Antigen source	Propagation	Route	 	Chikungunya (IXCHIQ/VLA1553)	Chikungunya virus	Live attenuated Chiungunya virus	Vero cells	SC	 	Cholera (Vaxchora)	Vibrio cholerae CVD 103HgR (O1 Inaba)	Live attenuated bacteria	Bacterial culture	Oral	 	Dengue (Dengvaxia)	CYD YF17D backbone expressing dengue prM/E (1–4)	Live attenuated chimeric viruses	Vero cells	SC	 	Dengue (Qdenga/TAK003)	DENV2 backbone + prM/E of DENV1/3/4	Live attenuated tetravalent viruses	Vero cells	SC	 	Influenza A/B (FluMist)	Influenza viruses	Live attenuated reassortants	Chicken embryos or cell culture	Nasal	 	Japanese encephalitis (IMOJEV)	JEV prM/E on YF17D backbone	Chimeric YF17D-JE virus	Vero cells	SC	 	Japanese encephalitis (SA14142)	JEV SA14142	Live attenuated virus	Primary hamster kidney cells	SC	 	MMR (MMR II) Measles, Mumps, Rubella	Measles virus (Edmonston), Mumps (Jeryl Lynn), Rubella (Wistar RA 27/3)	Live attenuated viruses	Chick embryo cell cells (M & M); human diploid WI38 (R)	SC	 	Poliomyelitis (bOPV/mOPV/nOPV2)	Poliovirus types 1 & 3 (bOPV); type 2 (mOPV2, nOPV2)	Live attenuated Sabin strains (or genetically stabilized nOPV2)	Vero cells	Oral	 	Rotavirus (Rotarix)	Human G1P[8] strain (8912)	Live attenuated virus	Vero cells	Oral	 	Rotavirus (RotaTeq)	Bovinehuman reassortants (WC3 backbone)	Live attenuated reassortants	Vero cells	Oral	 	Smallpox (ACAM2000)	Vaccinia small pox virus	Live replicationcompetent vaccinia virus	Vero cells	SC	 	Tuberculosis (BCG vaccines, various strains)	Mycobacterium tuberculosis	Live-attenuated Mycobacterium bovis	Bacterial culture	ID	 	Smallpox/monkeypox (Jynneos/Imvanex/Imvamune)	Smallpox & monkeypox viruses	Live Modified Vaccinina Ankara-Bavarian-Nordic (MVABN)virus	Chicken embryo fibroblasts	SC	 	Typhoid Fever (Vivotif Ty21a)	Salmonella. Typhi Ty21a	Live attenuated bacteria	Bacterial culture	Oral	 	Varicella Chickenpox (VARIVAX)	Varicellazoster virus (Oka/Merck)	Live attenuated VZV	Human diploid cells (MRC5/WI38)	SC	 	Yellow fever (YFVAX)	YF 17D204	Live attenuated virus	Chicken embryos	SC
CVD = Center for Vaccine Development; CYDYF17D = Chimeric Yellow-Fever Dengue; DENV = Dengue virus, JEV = Japanese encephalitis virus; OPV = oral polio vaccine; prM/E = pre-membrane envelope; Vero cells = African green monkey kidney cells; YF17D = Yellow Fever 17D strain; SC = subcutaneous; IM = intramuscular; ID = intradermal.
Live-attenuated vaccines are produced mostly by reducing an organism’s virulence by repeated passaging during long-term cell culture to select for less virulent strains, but genetic engineering and gene editing to delete or modify genes associated with virulence could be used, and the natural exchange of genomic sequences between viruses (reassortants) is used for live-attenuated influenza vaccines and some rotavirus vaccines. There currently are 16 attenuated vaccines in use, 13 anti-viral, including smallpox and polio, and three bacterial, including typhoid fever, as well as BCG for tuberculosis (Table 1). Live-attenuated vaccines can be highly immunogenic and provide long-term sustained immunity and protection. In healthy individuals, they are safe because there is minimal risk of virulence, but using a live-attenuated virus introduces some risk of producing infection, which makes them unsuitable for people with compromised immune systems.

Inactivated vaccines
Inactivated vaccines.
Disease/Vaccine (brand)	Organism/Target	Antigen source	Propagation	Route	 	Cholera (Dukoral)	Vibrio cholerae O1 whole cells + rCTB	Killed V. cholerae; recombinant cholera toxin B subunit	Bacterial culture	Oral	 	Cholera (Shanchol/EuvicholPlus)	Vibrio cholerae O1/O139 whole cells	Formalin/heatkilled V. cholerae (no Bsubunit)	Bacterial culture	Oral	 	Hepatitis A (Havrix)	Hepatitis A virus (HM175)	Formalininactivated HAV	Human diploid cells (MRC5)	IM	 	HepAHepB (Twinrix)	HAV + HBsAg Combination (inactivated + recombinant)	HAV (MRC5); HBsAg (yeast)	MRC5 cells; yeast	IM	 	Influenza A/B (cellbased)	Influenza viruses	Whole virus antigens	Madin–Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cells	IM	 	Influenza A/B (eggbased)	Influenza viruses	Whole virus antigens	Fertilized chicken eggs (allantoic cavity)	IM	 	Japanese encephalitis (IXIARO)	JEV SA14142	Inactivated whole virus	Vero cells	IM	 	Poliomyelitis (IPV, IPOL)	Poliovirus types 1/2/3	Formalininactivated polioviruses	Vero cells	IM	 	Rabies (HDCV, Imovax)	Rabies virus (PM15033M)	βpropiolactoneinactivated virus	Human diploid cells (MRC5)	IM	 	Rabies (PCECV, RabAvert)	Rabies virus (Flury LEP)	βpropiolactoneinactivated virus	Purified chick embryo cells	IM	 	Tickborne encephalitis (TBE) (FSMEIMMUN/Encepur)	TBE virus (European/FarEastern subtypes)	Formalininactivated virus	Primary chick embryo fibroblasts	IM
HAV = hepatitis A virus; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; JEV = Japanese encephalitis virus; Vero cells = African green monkey kidney cells; IM = intramuscular.
Inactivated vaccines are derived from pathogens that have been killed or weakened by chemical or physical means so that they cannot replicate and are no longer virulent. Formalin treatment (a 40% formaldehyde liquid solution) is most widely used for this purpose, as well as beta-propiolactone (BPL), heat, and irradiation. There are currently 11 attenuated vaccines in use, nine for viruses, including polio and influenza, and two bacterial, both for cholera (Table 2). Note that the HepA-HepB vaccine combines inactivated hepatitis A and recombinant Hepatitis B antigens. Inactivated vaccines generally provoke a weaker immune response than live-attenuated vaccines, and therefore often require adjuvants to enhance the immune response and repeated booster doses to maintain immunity.

Advances in vaccinology: purified antigens and recombinant proteins
In the early 20th century, the role of antigen/antibody immune responses was appreciated, which led to identifying the antigens responsible for the immune response. Improvements in cell culture technique and purification systems for proteins and polysaccharides yielded antigenic preparations that provided an alternative to injecting attenuated or inactivated pathogens. By the mid-20th century, vaccines were being developed that contained antigens secreted by cells into culture medium, including what today are referred to as toxoid and subunit vaccines. In the 1970s, the advent of recombinant DNA technology and genetic engineering provided efficient methods for manufacturing specific antigens for recombinant protein vaccines.

Toxoids and subunit vaccines
Toxoid vaccines.
Disease/Vaccine (brand)	Organism/Target	Antigen source	Propagation	Route	 	Anthrax (BioThrax/AVA)	Bacillus anthracis protective antigen (PA)	Protective antigen from culture filtrate	Bacterial culture	IM	 	Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis DTaP (Infanrix etc.)	Tetanus & diphtheria toxoids; acellular pertussis antigens	Detoxified toxins; pertussis proteins	Bacterial culture	IM	 	Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis DTwP(wholecell pertussis)	Wholecell Bordetella pertussis + diphtheria/tetanus toxoids	Formaldehydeinactivated B. pertussis cells; detoxified toxins	Bacterial culture	IM	 	Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis Tdap(Boostrix/Adacel)	Tetanus & diphtheria toxoids; PT, FHA, PRN, FIM from B. pertussis	Toxins detoxified; purified pertussis antigens	Bacterial culture	IM	 	Tetanus, diphtheria Td (Tenivac)	Tetanus & diphtheria toxoids	Formaldehydeinactivated toxins	Bacterial culture	IM
FHA = filamentous hemagglutinin; FIM = Fimbriae; PRN = pertactin; PT = pertussis toxin; IM = intramuscular.
Subunit vaccines.
Disease/Vaccine (brand)	Organism/Target	Antigen source	Propagation	Route	 	Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) (ActHIB, PRPT)	Polyribosylribitol phosphate capsular polysaccharide	PRP from Hib strain 1482 conjugated to tetanus toxoid	Bacterial culture	IM	 	Meningococcal ACWY (Menveo)	Neisseria meningitidis capsular oligosaccharides	oligosaccharides + CRM197	Bacterial culture	IM	 	Meningococcal polysaccharide(A/C/Y/W-135)	Neisseria meningitidis capsular polysaccharides A/C/Y/W-135	capsular polysaccharides	Bacterial culture	IM	 	Pneumococcal conjugate (Prevnar 20)	Streptococcus pneumoniae capsular polysaccharides	Polysaccharides conjugated to CRM197	Bacterial culture	IM	 	Typhoid fever (Typhim Vi)	Salmonella Typhi Vi capsular polysaccharide (S. Typhi Ty2)	Vi polysaccharide	Bacterial culture	IM	 	Typhoid fever conjugate (Typbar TCV)	Salmonella Typhi Vi capsular polysaccharide	Vi polysaccharide conjugated to CRM197	Bacterial culture	IM
CRM = cross-reacting material; Vi = virulence; IM = intramuscular.
Toxoids (detoxified toxins) are vaccines designed to neutralize bacterial toxins with antibodies rather than targeting the bacteria. For over a century, diphtheria, tetanus, and anthrax toxins have been detoxified using formalin. For more than 30 years, hydrogen peroxide has been used to detoxify pertussis toxin. Genetic engineering and DNA mutation methods can also be used to detoxify such toxins. There are currently five toxoid vaccines in clinical use, including the well-known DPT vaccines (Table 3). Subunit vaccines consist of polysaccharides or proteins derived from the pathogen. Five such anti-bacterial vaccines were introduced during the past 50 years, including pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccines (Table 4).

Recombinant protein vaccines
Recombinant antigen vaccines.
Disease/Vaccine (brand)	Organism/Target	Antigen source	Propagation	Route	 	Hepatitis B (EngerixB)	Hepatitis B Surface Antigen (HBsAg)	HBsAg expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast)	Yeast	IM	 	Hepatitis E (Hecolin/HEV 239)	HEV capsid protein (ORF2, aa 368–606) VLP	Recombinant ORF2 fragment forming VLPs	Escherichia coli	IM	 	Herpes Zoster Shingles (Shingrix)	Varicella Zoster virus glycoprotein E	Glycoporotein E expressed in Chinese Hamster Ovary cells	Chinese Hamster Ovary cells	IM	 	Human papillomavirus HPV (Gardasil 9)	L1 VLPs (HPV types 6/11/16/18/31/33/45/52/58)	L1 proteins expressed in yeast; selfassemble into VLPs	Yeast	IM	 	Influenza A/B (recombinant)	Hemagglutinin (HA)	Recombinant HA produced in insect cells via baculovirus	Sf9 (Spodoptera frugiperda) insect cells	IM	 	Malaria Plasmodium falciparum (R21/MatrixM)	CSPHBsAg fusion VLP	Protein expressed in Pichia pastoris yeast	Yeast	IM	 	Malaria Plasmodium falciparum (RTS,S/AS01, Mosquirix)	CSPHBsAg fusion (RTS) + HBsAg (S) VLP	Proteins expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast	Yeast	IM	 	Meningococcal B (Bexsero)	Recombinant fHbp, NadA, NHBA + OMV (PorinA P1.4)	Proteins expressed in Escherichia coli; OMV from Neisseria meningitidis NZ98/254	Escherichia coli; Neisseria Meningitidis	IM	 	Meningococcal B (Trumenba)	Recombinant lipidated fHbp (A05 & B01)	Proteins expressed in Escherichia coli	Escherichia coli	IM	 	Respiratory syncytial virus RSV (Abrysvo)	Prefusion Fusion Protein (A & B strains)	preF A and preF B expressed in Chinese Hamster Ovary cells	Chinese Hamster Ovary cells	IM	 	Respiratory syncytial virus RSV (Arexvy)	Prefusion Fusion Protein (RSVPreF3)	RSV F (preF) expressed in Chinese Hamster Ovary cells	Chinese Hamster Ovary cells	IM
CSP = malarial circumsporozoite protein; fHbp = Factor H binding protein; NadA = Neisserial adhesin A; NHBA = Neisserial Heparin Binding Antigen; OMV = Outer Membrane Veiscle; ORF = open reading frame; RTS = specific portion of the CSP protein; VLP = virus-like particle; IM = intramuscular.
Viral vector vaccines (non-Covid).
Disease/Vaccine (brand)	Organism/Target	Antigen source	Propagation/substrate	Route	 	Ebola virus Zaire (Ervebo)	surface glycoprotein Ebola Zaire Kikwit-1995)	live attenuated vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)	Vero cells (African green monkey kidney)	IM	 	Ebola virus Zaire (Zabdeno, Mvabea)	surface glycoproteins from Zaire Ebola, Sudan & Marburg viruses +Tai Forest nucleoprotein	Adenovirus Ad26.ZEBOV & Modified Vaccinia Ankara (MVA)-BM-Filo.	HEK293, Chick embryo fibroblasts	IM
Vaccines widely used in combating the SARS-CoV-2 COVID-19 pandemic.
Vaccine & Manufacturer	Vaccine Type	Antigen	Propagation	Route	 	Comirnaty Biontech/Pfizer)	mRNA	SARSCoV2 Spike Protein (mRNA)	Chemically synthesized, in vitro transcribed mRNA	IM	 	Spikevax Moderna	mRNA	SARSCoV2 Spike Protein (mRNA)	Chemically synthesized, in vitro transcribed mRNA	IM	 	(Novavax Nuvaxovid)	Recombinant Protein	SARSCoV2 Spike Protein	Recombinant Spike produced via baculovirus insect cells	IM	 	Jcovden Janssen	Viral Vector DNA	SARSCoV2 Spike Protein (DNA)	Replication-deficient Human Adenovirus serotype 26 (AD26)	IM	 	Vaxzevria Astra-Zeneca	Viral Vector DNA	SARSCoV2 Spike Protein (DNA)	Replication-deficient chimpanzee adenovirus (ChADOx1)ChAdOx1 grown in producer cell lines	IM	 	Sputnik V Russia	Viral Vector DNA	SARSCoV2 Spike Protein (DNA)	Replication-deficient Human Adenovirus serotypes 26 & 5 (AD26, AD5) grown in producer cell lines	IM	 	CoronaVac China	Inactivated Virus	whole virus	Vero African Green Monkey Kidney cells	IM
IM = intramuscular.
Specific genetically engineered recombinant proteins, such as hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAG), have been used for immunization for 40 years. There are 11 recombinant vaccines in use, seven for viruses, including respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), human papilloma virus (HPV), and Herpes Zoster, two for the meningococcus bacteria, and two for the Plasmodium falciparum parasite that causes malaria (Table 5). Viral vector vaccines utilize viruses that have been modified to render them harmless, and then transfected with DNA encoding the target antigen. Two Ebola virus vaccines are summarized in Table 6. Viral vector vaccines targeting SARS-CoV-2 are included in Table 7 along with the two mRNA vaccines and other COVID vaccines. Protein and polysaccharide vaccines are typically weakly immunogenic and usually require adjuvants and booster doses.

Adjuvants
Because injecting killed pathogens, polysaccharides, and peptide antigens is not as effective as natural infection in preventing future infections, various adjuvants have been co-administered with them to enhance their efficacy. Adjuvants increase the local immune response to vaccination, particularly attracting antigen-presenting cells such as dendritic cells to initiate the immune response. Calcium phosphate has been given as an adjuvant with BCG, yellow fever, polio, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, measles, and hepatitis B vaccines. Aluminum salts, including aluminum hydroxide, aluminum phosphate, and potassium aluminum sulfate (alum) have been administered with diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, human papilloma virus (HPV), measles, hepatitis A and B, pneumococcal, meningococcal, and Haemophilus influenza vaccines. Many vaccines are conjugated to protein carriers that also enhance immunogenicity. Examples include tetanus toxoid and its genetically modified cross-reactive material (CRM197), diphtheria toxoid, Haemophilus protein D, and Meningococcal outer membrane protein complex. Vaccines combined with CRM197 include Haemophilus influenzae, pneumococcus, and meningococcus. In mRNA vaccines, the lipid nanoparticle carrier acts not only to encapsulate and protect the mRNA, but also facilitates transmembrane crossing, enables slow release, and has adjuvant effects, including the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines.

Covid vaccines
In response to the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, vaccine formulations using mRNA, viral-vector DNA, and nanoparticle proteins were widely disseminated in addition to more conventional vaccines utilizing inactivated viruses. The vaccines most commonly used during the pandemic are summarized in Table 7. These vaccines, especially the mRNA and DNA vaccines, were instrumental in controlling the pandemic and saved millions of lives. However, there was a perception that these vaccines could be improved upon. Despite the “warp-speed” efforts to develop and mass-produce these vaccines, it still took several months of formulation, preclinical safety testing, and clinical testing before they could be delivered widely. Although the intramuscular injections were generally well-tolerated, many subjects experienced bothersome local and regional adverse events and/or flu-like symptoms. Theoretical concerns over injecting mRNA or DNA genetic material and the frequency of side effects led to significant anti-vaccine sentiment, especially in the undereducated, making it difficult to reach the goal of vaccinating 70% or more of the general population. The requirement for extremely cold conditions (−80°C) for storage and shipping was problematic in some areas, especially in low- and moderate-income countries. Some Islamic populations resisted vaccination because of halal religious tenets that forbid introducing foreign substances into the body. These vaccines were associated with a relatively brief duration of prevention (more than 50% became infected within four months after vaccination), which necessitated booster injections to maintain protection. In addition, rapid mutation of the SARS-CoV-2 virus meant that different vaccines might be needed to target new mutated antigens on the spike protein.

Advances in vaccinology: adaptive immunity and antigen-presenting cells
In the latter half of the 20th century, differences between cellular and cytokine components of the innate and adaptive immune systems were appreciated. It was established that vaccines afforded long-term protection due to the adaptive immune system based on antigen recognition and immune memory, including both humoral antibody immunity from B lymphocytes and cellular immunity from T lymphocytes. Furthermore, in the 1990 s, it was recognized that another class of mononuclear immune cells, antigen-presenting cells, especially dendritic cells, play a crucial role at the nexus of antigen processing, presentation, initiation, and coordination of adaptive immune responses.
During the early 20th century, it was believed that B-cell immunity and neutralization by antibodies were the most important aspects of preventive immunization, but now the role of T-cell immunity is recognized for clearing subclinical infection and providing long-term immunosurveillance. Demonstrating neutralization by antibodies is still considered a good surrogate to predict the eventual clinical efficacy of a vaccine, even though safety and clinical benefit typically must be proven in animal models, often including non-human primates, and ultimately humans. Antibody binding to surface antigens on non-viral pathogens, termed “opsonization,” can inhibit their virulence by interfering with cell surface ligand-receptor interactions and signal transduction, and/or facilitate their removal by phagocytosis. The Fc portion of the heavy chains of such antibodies may interact with complement to facilitate complement-mediated cytotoxicity (CMC), and with receptors on effector cells in the process of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) to eliminate bacterial pathogens. We now know that natural immunity also involves T cells, and not just helper T cells for antibody production to facilitate CMC and ADCC, but rather for memory and cytotoxic T cell activity based on recognizing foreign proteins in the context of self-histocompatibility proteins. This enables T-cell identification and elimination of infected cells.
It is generally believed that humoral B-cell immunity and antibodies are needed for a preventive vaccine, while a therapeutic vaccine to control active infections requires cytotoxic T cells to eliminate infected cells; therefore, effective vaccines are now expected to engage both B and T cell immunity. Furthermore, it is not always possible to distinguish infection prevention from rapid control of infection. If a vaccinated individual never develops symptoms of infection that lead to serologic proof of the causative agent, then we assume that the infection was prevented. However, it is possible that the individual had a subclinical infection without symptoms because the immune system eliminated the infection so efficiently. An infection might be eradicated so quickly that the level of pathogenic antigen is below the threshold for detection in immunologic assays. Similarly, there may be such a limited humoral response that no significant difference in antibody levels can be detected. When testing for disease control in a population, it is useful to determine the frequency of asymptomatic infection (antigen or antibody proof of infection in individuals who had no symptoms), symptomatic infection, symptomatic infection of such severity that it requires hospitalization, and symptomatic infection that results in death. The last three are readily defined medically, but testing for asymptomatic disease is costly because it requires repeated diagnostic clinical testing of asymptomatic individuals. Furthermore, the incidence of asymptomatic infection is predicted to be low except during a pandemic, and the frequency of positive testing will only be high if limited to individuals known to have been exposed to the disease.
Just before his untimely death in 2011, it was announced that Ralph M. Steinman was to receive the Nobel Prize in Medicine for his pioneering work establishing the importance of dendritic cells in the immune system. This included the discovery of dendritic cells with their characteristic dendrites, showing that they are necessary to initiate immune responses and for clonal expansion of T cells, defining their role in as the most potent antigen-presenting cell for initiating and orchestrating immune responses, describing how dendritic cells ingest and process antigen for presentation to other immune cells, summarizing their function in connecting the innate and adaptive immune systems, anticipating their use in clinical medicine, including demonstrating how they might be targeted in vivo, or antigen-loaded ex vivo to enhance antigen-specific immune responses. Dendritic cells are crucial for initiating and/or priming immune responses to bacterial and viral antigens. The first step in initiating an immune response is for dendritic cells to phagocytose and process proteins for presentation to lymphocytes in lymph nodes to see if the 9 to 25-length amino acid peptides are interpreted as “foreign.” If they are, then there is an expansion of the relevant B-cell and T-cell clones stimulated by the interaction of dendritic cells with antigen-specific B-cell and T-cell receptors. All of the vaccine approaches summarized in Tables 1–7 rely on in vivo exposure of dendritic cells to the pathogen and/or antigens of interest to initiate an immune response.

Dendritic cell vaccines
Steinman’s observations provided a rationale for targeting antigens to dendritic cells in vivo or loading them with antigens ex vivo as vaccine strategies. Possibilities for targeting antigens in vivo include making monoclonal antibodies conjugated to antigens and designed to target dendritic cell surface molecules, or fusing antigens to nanoparticles that bind to dendritic cell surface receptors. Some examples of such surface targets include the DC205 receptor DEC-205, the chemokine receptor XCR1, the CD206 mannose receptor, the integrin molecule CD11c, and the dendritic cell-activation receptors CD40 and CLEC9A. Although none of these targets are specific for dendritic cells, none would be expected to induce off-target toxicity. In mice, targeting dendritic cells in this manner is associated with enhanced antigen uptake, dendritic cell maturation, and increased antigen presentation compared to injecting antigen alone, resulting in more potent and durable T cell immune responses. To date, few human studies of such constructs have been reported. In cancer patients, safety, induction of immune responses, and some suggestion of efficacy were demonstrated in a 45-patient trial of infusing CDX-1401, which consisted of an antibody targeting DEC-205 and conjugated to the oncofetal antigen NY-ESO-1, but Celldex Therapeutics decided not to pursue additional clinical testing. Regarding infectious disease vaccines, in a 5:1 randomized, placebo-controlled phase I trial conducted in 72 HIV-negative volunteers, three doses over a one-log range of a humanized anti-CD40 antibody encoding the HIV envelope antigen proteins gp140/Gag and 97CN54 Pol/Nef 96ZM651 (DNA-HIV-PT123, Hiltonol®) were well-tolerated and induced antigen-specific immunoglobulin responses.
It has been suggested that vaccines should be more individualized or personalized for acceptance, to minimize toxicity, and to optimize efficacy. An alternative approach to classical vaccination is a personal vaccine consisting of an individual’s autologous dendritic cells loaded ex vivo with the antigens of interest. Steinman’s observations provided a rationale for ex vivo antigen-loading of dendritic cells as a vaccine strategy against infectious diseases. For 30 years, it has been known that dendritic cells can be readily and reliably generated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), specifically from monocytes. These manufactured dendritic cells have phenotypes and functions similar to naturally occurring cells, including antigen cross-presentation, that is, the expression of antigen in the context of HLA-I histocompatibility proteins. Naturally occurring human dendritic cells are characterized as DC1, DC2, plasmacytoid, Langerhans cells, follicular, and monocyte subtypes. The first three circulate in the blood and are found in lymphoid tissue and various organs; Langerhans cells are found in the skin; follicular dendritic cells are found in the germinal center of lymph nodes; monocyte dendritic cells are found in inflammatory fluids. Despite these designations, all dendritic cells are derived from CD34+ bone marrow cells, and there is tremendous overlap in their functions and phenotypes, as well as evidence of plasticity.
Monocytes derived from PBMC can be differentiated into dendritic cells by incubating for a few days in the presence of the cytokines interleukin-4 (IL-4) and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Dendritic cells differentiated from PBMC lose the expression of CD14 and express high levels of CD206 and CD209, which are not expressed by DC1, DC2, or plasmacytoid dendritic cells. Antigen loading is accomplished by incubating dendritic cells with the pathogenic organism, or antigen, most commonly purified protein produced using recombinant technology. However, antigens can also be manufactured inside the dendritic cells by transfecting with DNA or mRNA sequences that encode the protein’s amino acids. During incubation with antigen, dendritic cells upregulate chemokine receptors such as CCR7, produce cytokines that support T-cell activation and differentiation, and undergo some degree of maturation, but not so much that it inhibits their migratory ability, which is critical since migration to lymph nodes is a crucial step for immune activation. The antigen-loaded dendritic cells are usually admixed with saline or lactate-buffered Ringer’s solution and injected subcutaneously or intradermally to facilitate lymphatic drainage. In mouse models, the subcutaneous route resulted in better immune protection of animals than intravenous or intraperitoneal approaches. In preclinical and early clinical studies, dendritic cell vaccines (DCV) loaded with antigens of interest consistently induced antigen-specific immune responses. Of note, dendritic cells pulsed ex vivo with antigens of interest elicit a stronger immune response compared to directly injecting antigens.
The type of immune response elicited depends on the HLA class matching with the antigen. Mature dendritic cells are specialized to present Class II antigens (HLA-DR) through the MHC-II complexes to naïve CD4+ T cells to activate them and to facilitate B cell interaction with the activated CD4+ T cells. Dendritic cell-induced T cell and B cell responses are critical for the antibody-mediated immune response. Dendritic cells can present Class I antigens through MHC-I complexes directly to CD8+ T cells in the process of cross-presentation. This type of antigen presentation is crucial for a rapid effector T cell response against virally infected cells and cancer cells. However, the cross-presentation is limited to partially mature dendritic cells and is susceptible to toleration. As they mature, the MHC-II presentation is favored while the MHC-I presentation is suppressed.
The use of DCV against infectious diseases has been limited to a few hundred subjects, but thousands of cancer patients have been treated with therapeutic DCVs. In cancer patients repeated DCV injections have been associated with minimal toxicity, mostly local injection site reactions, variable immune responses to tumor cells and/or tumor-associated antigens, and inconsistent clinical benefit. Tumor immune responses are mostly CD8+T cell-mediated. Considering Class-I antigen presentation is suppressed during advanced dendritic cell maturation, failure to expose dendritic cells in ex vivo cultures to pro-inflammatory cytokines and TLR-4 ligands may have limited the potency of some cancer DCV.

Influenza
More than 25 years ago, it was reported that subcutaneous injections of dendritic cells loaded with influenza matrix peptide antigen induced antigen-specific T-cell responses in healthy humans. Dendritic cells loaded ex vivo with recombinant influenza hemagglutinin induced antigen-specific immune responses in vitro, and in mice, a single nontoxic DCV injection induced humoral and cellular immune responses that prevented serious infection following a lethal challenge of influenza virus. It was argued that such a patient-specific approach could be cost-effective in certain patient populations, such as those who are immunocompromised and exhibit poor responses to traditional influenza vaccines. However, there has been no significant clinical experience with DCV for the prevention or treatment of influenza.

HIV/AIDS
DCVs have been studied more extensively in HIV/AIDS than any other infection. In one study, 18 previously untreated subjects with chronic HIV-1 and high but stable viral loads were treated with three subcutaneous injections of autologous dendritic cells pulsed with autologous aldrithiol-2-inactivated HIV-1. The DCV was safe, well-tolerated, and associated with a substantial decrease in plasma viral load that was sustained for at least one year in 44% of the subjects. In another single-arm study, 19 subjects receiving anti-retroviral therapy (ART) for chronic HIV were treated with autologous dendritic cells pulsed with HIV lipopeptides. The DCV was safe and well-tolerated, associated with antigen-specific immune responses, and associated with a 50% decrease in plasma viral load. There have also been several small, randomized trials in patients with chronic HIV infection. In an open-label 2:1 randomized trial, 12 subjects with chronic HIV-1 who were receiving ART were randomized to receive autologous dendritic cells loaded with autologous heat-inactivated HIV-1. This DCV was well-tolerated, and plasma viral load decreased significantly in 33%. There were HIV-1-specific T cell changes in those receiving the vaccine that were not seen in the control group, but serum levels of neutralizing antibodies were unchanged. In a subsequent 24-subject double-blinded, 1:1 randomized trial, 10 previously untreated subjects with chronic HIV-1 received injections of dendritic cells pulsed with autologous heat-inactivated virus. Compared to the 12-subject control group, in the DCV-treated cohort, there was a modest but significant decrease in plasma viral load 24 weeks after the first injection, but there were no significant changes in T-cell-subset numbers or neutralizing antibody levels. 29 subjects with chronic HIV on ART were randomized to receive three subcutaneous injections of canarypox virus carrying HIV genes for env, gag, nev, and pol antigens (n = 15) or dendritic cells pulsed with the canarypox-HIV vector. Both cohorts were also injected with autologous dendritic cells pulsed with keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH) as a positive control for dendritic cell-induced immunity to a new antigen. There was no difference between arms in the numbers of interferon-gamma enzyme-linked immunospots (ELISpots), but the HIV viral load was transiently lower in 4/13 DCV-treated patients compared to 0/13 control patients. Subjects injected with dendritic cells pulsed with KLH had a much greater KLH-specific immune response than subjects who were injected directly with KLH. In another 2:1 randomized trial, 10 subjects with chronic HIV on ART were assigned to receive four intradermal injections of autologous dendritic cells transfected with HIV-1 Gag and Nef antigens by electroporation, and five were injected with non-transfected autologous dendritic cells. Subjects in both cohorts were also injected with autologous dendritic cells pulsed with KLH as a positive control for dendritic cell-induced immunity. There were 2.5-fold increases in CD4 and CD8 proliferative responses to KLH in both arms after vaccination. There were no differences between the two arms in ELISpot numbers in response to stimulation with HIV-1 Gag or HIV-1 Nef, but there were short-lived increases in CD4 proliferative responses to HIV-1 Gag (p = .054) and to HIV-1 Nef (p = .009) in the DCV-treated cohort compared to the control arm. The largest study was a double-blinded, 2:1 randomized trial that enrolled 54 patients who were receiving ART for chronic HIV-1. Treatment consisted of four intradermal injections at four-week intervals of a DCV consisting of autologous dendritic cells transfected with autologous HIV-1 mRNA for Gag, Nef, Rev, and Vpr antigens in the treatment arm or autologous dendritic cells in heat-treated autologous plasma in the placebo arm. More T-cell antigen-specific responses were observed in the active treatment arm, but there was no difference between the two arms in the change in viral load. In summary, in these trials, regardless of the method of HIV antigen loading, HIV DCV were safe and well-tolerated, associated with various degrees of antigen-specific immune responses, and somewhat efficacious based on decreases in HIV viral load. Repeated vaccination over many months was not tested.

Hepatitis B and C
DCVs have been safe and well-tolerated in patients infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) or the hepatitis C virus (HCV). 19 subjects with chronic HBV infection received subcutaneous injections of dendritic cells that had been pulsed with HBsAg. 58% had a clinical response, with 53% eventually testing negative for the HBeAg that is associated with active infection. In a large, single-arm study, 380 subjects with chronic HBV were injected with autologous dendritic cells pulsed with HBsAg. Hepatic transaminase levels normalized, and 50% of all subjects eventually tested negative for HBV DNA. The experience has not been as encouraging in patients with HCV infection. Six subjects received intradermal and intravenous injections of autologous dendritic cells that had been pulsed with HLA2.1-restricted lipopeptides. Antigen-specific responses were detected, but there was no change in HCV viral load or antibody levels to HCV core antigen. Ten subjects received four weekly and then six monthly subcutaneous injections of dendritic cells pulsed with recombinant core and NS3 proteins. Antigen-specific T-cell responses were detected, but viral elimination was not achieved.

Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV)
In animal models, dendritic cells loaded ex vivo with viral antigens were effective in preventing Herpes simplex infections. 14 human subjects who were averaging about one recurrent HSV-1 infection per month were injected subcutaneously with dendritic cells pulsed with HSV-1 recombinant viral glycoprotein D (HSV1gD). This DCV was safe and well-tolerated, associated with antigen-specific T-cell responses, and associated with a 50% decrease in the frequency of recurrent HSV genital infections. Unlike most human studies, the dendritic cells for this DCV were generated from PBMC by incubation in GM-CSF and interferon alpha rather than GM-CSF and IL-4.

Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)
Infection from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (mTB) continues to be a major cause of death worldwide. Murine studies have shown that dendritic cells loaded with various mTB antigens can elicit antigen-specific immune responses, but more importantly, prevent TB infection, or ameliorate active infection. However, to date, there have been no compelling human studies.

Leishmaniasis
Leishmaniasis is a mucocutaneous or visceral disease that can result from infection by the Leishmania parasite transmitted by sand flies. Enthusiasm for vaccination against this disease is based on observations that asymptomatic infection or successful treatment of visceral disease generally confer lifelong immunity. There has been a substantial amount of investigation of DCV against leishmaniasis. Various DCV have been produced using whole antigen, protein, peptides, and transfecting with plasmid DNA from the parasite. Over the past 20 years, immunizing with various antigen-loaded DCV has consistently produced protective immunity in murine models, even though injecting antigen alone was ineffective.

SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19)
The recent pandemic provided an opportunity to test various vaccine platforms. In addition, to the widely reported trials, there was an experience with COVID-19 DCV that yielded very interesting results. These COVID-19 DCV clinical trials were conducted in Indonesia, where a weakly effective attenuated vaccine was the most widely used vaccine. As detailed previously, personal COVID-19 DCV were generated from 40 ml blood samples obtained from each subject, and monocytes were differentiated into dendritic cells by incubating with IL-4 and GM-CSF for five days. For antigen loading, dendritic cells were incubated for 24 to 36 hours with 0.10, 0.33, or 1.0 micrograms of recombinant spike protein. Gradient density centrifugation was used to enrich for monocytes; therefore, the final DCV product was about 7–15% dendritic cells and 85–93% lymphocytes, in contrast to cancer vaccines that utilized elutriation, which were 98% to 100% dendritic cells and 0 to 2% lymphocytes. After washing the cells of the media components and residual antigen and following quality testing, the individual vaccines were refrigerated overnight. To simplify scheduling to facilitate compliance, subjects came to the clinic on the same day of the week for a blood draw as for the vaccine injection. A single DCV dose was injected subcutaneously into the upper arm eight days after the original blood draw.
The investigational effort was divided into three parts based on an adaptive phase IB-2 trial design: (1) safety and antigen-specific antibody response, (2) confirmation of safety and suggestion of efficacy and antigen-specific T-cell response, and (3) efficacy based on 1-year follow-up for symptomatic COVID-19 infection and hospitalization for COVID-19 infection. Initially, safety was tested in 30 subjects who were randomized into nine different cells based on a 3 × 3 design to explore the effects of adjuvant GM-CSF at doses of 0, 250 mcg, or 500 mcg, and incubation of dendritic cells with 0.10, 0.33, or 1.0 mcg of the spike protein. The DCVs were safe and well-tolerated; the most common adverse events were mild local injection site reactions. There was no increased toxicity associated with the quantity of adjuvant GM-CSF admixed with the vaccine, or the quantity of spike protein used in vitro. Increased production of IgG antibodies to the receptor-binding domain of the spike protein was demonstrated for 70% of subjects, but there was no difference based on the quantity of GM-CSF or COVID antigen. Based on these results, adjuvant GM-CSF was dropped from further testing. In the phase 2 trial, 149 healthy subjects were randomized, 145 had blood drawn, DCVs were manufactured for 100%, 145 subjects were vaccinated, 138 were evaluable for safety, 139 were evaluated for vaccine efficacy in preventing symptomatic COVID-19, and 135 had blood testing for T-cell immune response. Safety was confirmed; again, there were no differences in adverse events based on the amount of antigen during incubation. The T-cell immune response was similar in all three arms, with 95% of subjects having increased gamma interferon ELISpots based on in vivo stimulation at day 14. Compliance with long-term follow-up was excellent. 139 subjects had a baseline assessment one week after injection, and all were evaluated 3 months later, 138 six months later, 137 nine months later, and 127 after 12 months. 42 eventually had a symptomatic COVID-19 infection; only six were hospitalized. Again, there was no difference in adverse events among the three vaccine formulations, and also no difference in the subsequent SARS-CoV-2 infection rates. At three and six months after vaccination, 85% remained free of symptomatic COVID-19 infection. Even nine months after injection, 83% remained infection-free. In contrast, a meta-analysis of mRNA vaccines revealed that protection was diminished in some after two months, only 70% of vaccinated subjects were still infection-free after three months, and the proportion was below 50% by six months. Such data led to the recommendation for booster doses of mRNA vaccines at six-month intervals for those at high risk of medically complicated COVID-19 infection. A 1600-subject, double-blind, 1:1 randomized phase 3 trial was proposed to Indonesian collaborators in August 2021, based on a projected 60% reduction in the risk of symptomatic infection, but because of declining infection numbers, the randomized phase 3 trial was not initiated.
In the 176 subjects who were injected, this personal COVID-19 DCV was safe and well-tolerated, induced desired antigen-specific immune effects, and was associated with excellent prevention of symptomatic infection and hospitalization from the SARS-CoV-2 virus during a year when there were two large spikes in case numbers in Indonesia. The data suggest this may be the least toxic and most effective COVID-19 vaccine clinically tested during the pandemic. While these results are very encouraging, optimism and enthusiasm for these results must be tempered by the lack of double-blinding or a contemporary placebo-control group, and the relatively small number of subjects who were injected. Nevertheless, this is an attractive approach for rapidly introducing a vaccine for specialized populations such as healthcare providers, and those at highest risk for becoming infected, or those at higher risk for complications associated with clinical infection.
Many aspects of the DCV approach are attractive. The final product consists of autologous dendritic cells and lymphocytes; there is no residual live or attenuated pathogen and no measurable antigen remaining after co-incubation with dendritic cells. There are no excipients other than autologous material in the final preparation. The toxicity profile is favorable compared to other vaccine approaches because there is no toxic adjuvant needed to enhance the immunity of the preparation, and it does not require a painful intramuscular injection. Presentation and particularly dendritic cell-cross-presentation mean there is immediate initiation of an immune response rather than needing time to attract host dendritic cells to the vaccine injection site. The peptide sequences presented with a subject’s MHC-I are not necessarily expressed on the pathogen’s surface and may be less susceptible to mutational pressure and therefore less variable between viral serotypes. Thus, the use of such immunogens could protect against multiple serotypes of the same virus. It should be emphasized that at present, there is insufficient clinical data to establish that an infectious disease DCV should be preferred to an existing conventional vaccine that has been approved for clinical use. However, in certain situations, local authorities may wish to offer such personal vaccines because of extenuating circumstances such as halal religious convictions, cost and feasibility issues due to cold-storage requirements, or the need for rapid protection of healthcare workers because of a pandemic caused by a new pathogen.
Another perceived advantage of this personal DCV approach is that antigens from multiple pathogens might be loaded at the same time, such that a single vaccination might provide significant protection against numerous diseases. This might also be accomplished using mRNA or DNA vaccines, but there are theoretical concerns that this might increase the risk of integrating vaccine DNA into a subject’s genome, directly from DNA, or from DNA produced by reverse transcriptase of mRNA. Individuals who exhibit vaccine hesitancy may be more likely to accept a personal vaccine rather than an off-the-shelf product and are more likely to accept a single injection rather than multiple injections necessary for booster effects or to cover various pathogens. DCV optimized for cross-presentation by using antigens presented by MHC-1 as immunogens could avoid serotype mismatches and thereby increase efficacy and limit the possibility of antibody-dependent enhancement of the disease. With no anticipated safety issues, a personalized DCV with antigens designed for a T cell-mediated response could be rapidly deployed. Between 1–3 months are required to produce the recombinant sequence and to validate in vitro the immunogenicity by mixed dendritic cell and lymphocyte cocultures.
This approach is definitely feasible for relatively small numbers of individuals, but scaling manufacturing capacity to provide personal autologous DCV to millions of people for a mass prevention strategy against influenza or a pandemic such as COVID would not be practical compared to an off-the-shelf vaccine. At this time, there are insufficient data to identify infections where the cost-to-benefit or risk-to-benefit would favor a personal ex vivo vaccine over a conventional vaccine. On the other hand, a ring vaccination strategy that limits vaccination to healthcare providers and individuals who have been in close contact with a confirmed or suspected case is perfectly suitable for a personalized DCV, as it would address the population at highest risk first, then immediate contacts, then the next layer of traced contacts, then expansion to the population at lowest risk. This could protect healthcare providers, could enhance the quarantine capabilities in the areas of epidemic outbursts, and could provide an anti-epidemic bridging tool besides quarantine and other preventive methods. Meanwhile, a product for mass vaccination could be developed using a traditional approach.
In terms of facilities, small designated laboratories in existing clinic or hospital space, and/or mobile laboratories could suffice. In terms of equipment, a sterile hood, incubator, and centrifuge are needed. The materials and supplies needed to manufacture each personal infectious disease vaccine include (1) needles, syringes, and anti-coagulated tubes for blood collection; (2) tubes and density-gradient media, and a centrifuge for density-gradient centrifugation to isolate PBMC, (3) media, cytokines, and plastic flask, tube, or bag and an incubator to differentiate monocytes into dendritic cells, and (4) antigen or antigens to incubate with dendritic cells antigen-loading, (5) needle and syringe for injection of the DCV, (6) a refrigerator for overnight storage of the final product before injection. During manufacturing, the processing and transfer of cells must occur in a sterile environment to avoid contamination. Careful standard operating procedures are necessary to preserve the unique product identity assigned to each subject to ensure that each receives only his/her own personal vaccine. Personnel are needed to draw blood and the current approach requires three minimally trained laboratory technicians. It is estimated that such a team can process up to 100 blood samples a day and prepare vaccines for administration. A closed manufacturing system and automation could optimize the approach for vaccinating large numbers of subjects.

Summary
The historical clinical success of vaccination against smallpox was followed by a series of successful vaccine strategies that are still in use. Advances in understanding adaptive immunity and utilizing recombinant DNA technology resulted in several vaccines featuring specific antigens rather than attenuated or inactivated pathogens. Injections of mRNA and viral vectors encoding DNA for in vivo production of antigens were effective during the recent SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Personal vaccines consisting of autologous dendritic cells loaded with antigens from multiple pathogens may be an even better platform for vaccines because they immediately initiate the adaptive immune response and circumvent the requirement for in vivo antigen-presenting cells to migrate to the injection site and load antigen. To date, there have been few clinical studies of this approach, but clinical experience during the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated the feasibility of this approach in small numbers of individuals. A single DCV injection was associated with a paucity of mild adverse events, rapid antigen-specific immune responses were detectable, and excellent protection from symptomatic infection during the year after injection was demonstrated. This appears to be a viable approach for small populations, especially as a rapid response for front-line medical personnel, but more work is needed if personal DCVs are to be used against infectious diseases in large populations.

Disclosure statement
HS Keirstead, GI Nistor, and RO Dillman are employees of AIVITA Biomedical, Inc.

References
COVID-19 epidemiological update, edition 169
Looking beyond the origin of SARS-CoV-2: significant strategic aspects during the five-year journey of COVID-19 vaccine development
Principal controversies in vaccine safety in the United States
The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on vaccination hesitancy: a viewpoint
Edward Jenner and the history of smallpox and vaccination
History of vaccination
A guide to vaccinology: from basic principles to new developments
After 100 years of BCG immunization against tuberculosis, what is new and still outstanding for this vaccine?
100 years of Mycobacterium bovis bacille Calmette-Guérin
Emerging concepts and technologies in vaccine development
Vaccine development: current trends and technologies
Emerging concepts in the science of vaccine adjuvants
Developments in vaccine adjuvants
Recent developments of vaccines for older adults: adjuvants and beyond
Protein-based antigen presentation platforms for nanoparticle vaccines
An mRNA vaccine against SARS-CoV-2—preliminary report
Efficacy and safety of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
Safety and immunogenicity of two RNA-based COVID-19 vaccine candidates
Safety and efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 vaccine
Safety and immunogenicity of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2: a preliminary report of a phase 1/2, single-blind, randomised controlled trial
Safety and efficacy of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine (AZD1222) against SARS-CoV-2: an interim analysis of four randomised controlled trials in Brazil, South Africa, and the UK
Safety and efficacy of single-dose Ad26.CoV2 vaccine against COVID-19
Phase 1-2 trial of a SARS-CoV-2 recombinant spike protein nanoparticle vaccine
Safety and immunogenicity of an rAd26 and rAd5 vector-based heterologous prime-boost COVID-19 vaccine in two formulations: two open, non-randomised phase 1/2 studies from Russia
Safety and efficacy of an rAd26 and rAd5 vector-based heterologous prime-boost COVID-19 vaccine: an interim analysis of a randomised controlled phase 3 trial in Russia
Safety and efficacy of NVX-CoV2373 COVID-19 vaccine
Safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine in healthy adults aged 18–59 years: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1/2 clinical trial
Sharia (Islamic law) perspectives of COVID-19 vaccines
Vaccine hesitancy within the Muslim community: Islamic faith and public health perspectives
Antigen presentation by dendritic cells and their instruction of CD4+ T helper cell responses
Unboxing dendritic cells: tales of multi-faceted biology and function
Review of dendritic cells, their role in clinical immunology, and distribution in various animal species
Challenges in the development of an HIV-1 vaccine
Correlates of protection induced by vaccination
Identification of a novel cell type in peripheral lymphoid organs of mice. I. Morphology, quantitation, tissue distribution
Clonal expansion of human T lymphocytes initiated by dendritic cells
The dendritic cell system and its role in immunogenicity
Dendritic cells and the control of immunity
Dendritic cells as antigen presenting cells in vivo
Antigen capture, processing, and presentation by dendritic cells: recent cell biological studies
Dendritic cell maturation by innate lymphocytes: coordinated stimulation of innate and adaptive immunity
Dendritic cells: translating innate to adaptive immunity
Exploiting dendritic cells to improve vaccine efficacy
Taking dendritic cells into medicine
Exploiting dendritic cells for active immunotherapy of cancer and chronic infections
Dendritic cells in vivo: a key target for a new vaccine science
In vivo targeting of antigens to maturing dendritic cells via the DEC-205 receptor improves T cell vaccination
Rapid generation of broad T-cell immunity in humans after a single injection of mature dendritic cells
Dendritic cells in anticancer vaccination: rationale for ex vivo loading or in vivo targeting
In vivo targeting of dendritic cells for activation of cellular immunity using vaccine carriers based on pH-responsive microparticles
Targeting dendritic cells: a promising strategy to improve vaccine effectiveness
Therapeutic liposomal vaccines for dendritic cell activation or tolerance
Structure-function relationship of XCL1 used for in vivo targeting of antigen into XCR1+ dendritic cells
The mannose receptor ligands and the macrophage glycome
Multifaceted, unique role of CD11c in leukocyte biology
Cd40 and dendritic cell function
Exploring Clec9a in dendritic cell-based tumor immunotherapy for molecular insights and therapeutic potentials
Induction of antigen-specific immunity with a vaccine targeting NY-ESO-1 to the dendritic cell receptor DEC-205
Safety and immunogenicity of CD40.HIVRI.Env, a dendritic cell-based HIV vaccine, in healthy HIV-uninfected adults: a first-in-human randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-escalation study (ANRS VRI06)
Restoring trust: the need for precision medicine in infectious diseases, public health and vaccines
A novel vaccine for the novel corona virus
Efficient presentation of soluble antigen by cultured human dendritic cells is maintained by granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor plus interleukin 4 and downregulated by tumor necrosis factor alpha
Molecular and functional characteristics of dendritic cells generated from highly purified CD14+ peripheral blood monocytes
Dendritic cell-targeted vaccines
Human dendritic cell subsets: an update
Human dendritic cell subsets: an updated view of their ontogeny and functional specialization
Extensive phenotype of human inflammatory monocyte-derived dendritic cells
mRNA-based dendritic cell vaccines
Formulation and delivery technologies for mRNA vaccines
A randomized therapeutic vaccine trial of canarypox-HIV-pulsed dendritic cells vs. canarypox-HIV alone in HIV-1-infected patients on antiretroviral therapy
Modeling dendritic cell vaccination for influenza prophylaxis: potential applications for niche populations
Variations in MHC class II antigen processing and presentation in health and disease
Cross-presentation of exogenous antigens on MHC I molecules
Randomized phase II trial of autologous dendritic cell vaccines versus autologous tumor cell vaccines in metastatic melanoma: 5-year follow up and additional analyses
A randomized double-blind placebo-controlled phase II trial of dendritic cell vaccine ICT-107 in newly diagnosed patients with glioblastoma
Results of the ADAPT phase 3 study of rocapuldencel-t in combination with sunitinib as first-line therapy in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma
Phase 2 trial of personal dendritic cell vaccines in newly diagnosed glioblastoma: 3-year follow-up and correlations with survival
Efficacy and safety of autologous dendritic cell-based immunotherapy, docetaxel, and prednisone vs placebo in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer: the VIABLE phase 3 randomized clinical trial
Association of autologous tumor lysate-loaded dendritic cell vaccination with extension of survival among patients with newly diagnosed and recurrent glioblastoma: a phase 3 prospective externally controlled cohort trial
Autologous dendritic cells loaded with antigens from self-renewing autologous tumor cells as patient-specific therapeutic cancer vaccines
Cd8+ T cells in the cancer-immunity cycle
Dendritic cell vaccines for the immunocompromised patient: prevention of influenza virus infection
Therapeutic dendritic-cell vaccine for chronic HIV-1 infection
Dendritic cell-based therapeutic vaccine elicits polyfunctional HIV-specific T-cell immunity associated with control of viral load
Therapeutic immunization with dendritic cells loaded with heat-inactivated autologous HIV-1 in patients with chronic HIV-1 infection
A therapeutic dendritic cell-based vaccine for HIV-1 infection
Immunization of HIV-1-infected persons with autologous dendritic cells transfected with mRNA encoding HIV-1 Gag and Nef: results of a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial
Dendritic cell immunotherapy for HIV-1 infection using autologous HIV-1 RNA: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial
Therapeutic effect of autologous dendritic cell vaccine on patients with chronic hepatitis B: a clinical study
Autologous dendritic cell vaccine for chronic hepatitis B carriers: a pilot, open-label, clinical trial in human volunteers
A phase I clinical trial of dendritic cell immunotherapy in HCV-infected individuals
Immunotherapy with interferon-α-induced dendritic cells for chronic HCV infection (the results of pilot clinical trial)
Dendritic cell vaccination protects mice against lethality caused by genital herpes simplex virus type 2 infection
Induction of potent protection against acute and latent herpes simplex virus infection in mice vaccinated with dendritic cells
Dendritic cell-based vaccines in treating recurrent herpes labialis: results of pilot clinical study
Protection against aerosol Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection using Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette Guérin-infected dendritic cells
Induction of high levels of protective immunity in mice after vaccination using dendritic cells infected with auxotrophic mutants of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Specificity and efficacy of dendritic cell-based vaccination against tuberculosis with complex mycobacterial antigens in a mouse model
Immunization with dendritic cells retrovirally transduced with mycobacterial antigen 85A gene elicits the specific cellular immunity including cytotoxic T-lymphocyte activity specific to an epitope on antigen 85A
Overview of dendritic cell-based vaccine development for leishmaniasis
Not all antigens are created equally: progress, challenges and lessons associated with developing a vaccine for leishmaniasis
Translating observations from leishmanization into non-living vaccines: the potential of dendritic cell-based vaccination strategies against Leishmania
Dendritic cells pulsed with peptides of gp63 induce differential protection against experimental cutaneous leishmaniasis
Vaccination with plasmacytoid dendritic cells induces protection against infection with Leishmania major in mice
Immunization strategies against visceral leishmaniosis with the nucleosomal histones of Leishmania infantum encoded in DNA vaccine or pulsed in dendritic cells
Cellular vaccination with bone marrow-derived dendritic cells pulsed with a peptide of Leishmania infantum KMP-11 and CpG oligonucleotides induces protection in a murine model of visceral leishmaniasis
Vaccination with Leishmania histone H1-pulsed dendritic cells confers protection in murine visceral leishmaniasis
Antigen-pulsed CpG-ODN-activated dendritic cells induce host-protective immune response by regulating the T regulatory cell functioning in Leishmania donovani-infected mice: critical role of CXCL10
Sla-pgn-primed dendritic cell-based vaccination induces th17-mediated protective immunity against experimental visceral leishmaniasis: a crucial role of PKCβ
Leishmania infantum FML pulsed-dendritic cells induce a protective immune response in murine visceral leishmaniasis
Nh36 and F3 antigen-primed dendritic cells show preserved migrating capabilities and CCR7 expression and F3 is effective in immunotherapy of visceral leishmaniasis
A personal COVID-19 dendritic cell vaccine made at point-of-care: feasibility, safety, and antigen-specific cellular immune responses
Prevention of symptomatic COVID-19 infection by personal dendritic cell vaccine
Safety and efficacy of dendritic cell vaccine for COVID-19 prevention after 1-year follow-up: phase I and II clinical trial final result
SARS-CoV-2 vaccine effectiveness against infection, symptomatic and severe COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis
The MHC class I antigen presentation pathway: strategies for viral immune evasion
Potential DNA vaccine integration into host cell genome
Potential health risks of mRNA-based vaccine therapy: a hypothesis