Evaluation of marginal bone level, technical and biological complications between screw-retained and cement-retained all-ceramic implant-supported crowns on zirconia abutment: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Purpose:
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the difference in marginal bone level, technical and biological complications between screw-retained and cemented all-ceramic implant-supported crowns fabricated on zirconia abutment at different follow-up periods.
Materials and Methods:
Independent search was conducted in Cochrane Library, EBSCO, and PubMed/PubMed Central/MEDLINE databases and the Google Scholar search engine for prospective studies and randomized controlled trials published between January 2014 and June 2023 evaluating the marginal bone level, technical and biological complications between screw-retained and cemented all-ceramic implant-supported crowns fabricated on zirconia abutment. Meta-analysis was conducted to assess the quantitative data on the marginal bone level and biological complications.
Results:
A total of eight studies were included for qualitative synthesis and six studies for quantitative synthesis. For marginal bone level, no statistically significant difference was observed (P = 0.83 and P = 0.69, respectively) during the follow-up period of 3 years and 5 years. For probing depth, the cemented group showed more amount of probing depth than the screw-retained group at a follow-up period of 3 years (P < 0.05) whereas no statistically significant difference was observed at a follow-up period of 5 years (P = 0.73). For bleeding on probing, the cemented group showed more probing depth than the screw-retained group at a follow-up period of 5 years (P = 0.10).
Conclusion:
The evidence suggests that the screw-retained group showed no statistically significant difference in marginal bone level, comparatively fewer biological complications, and relatively higher technical complications than the cemented group at different follow-up periods.

INTRODUCTION
Prosthetic rehabilitation of single missing teeth with implant-supported fixed prosthesis became a predictable ideal treatment option for long-term successful clinical results. Titanium implants restored with either cemented or screw-retained porcelain fused to metal crown was economical, durable successful treatment but had drawbacks of display of metal hue, ceramic chipping, and unaesthetic outcomes. To overcome these limitations, custom-made computer-aided design (CAD)-computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) zirconia abutments are popularly used due to enhanced esthetic and mechanical properties, increased peri-implant emergence profile, reduced soft-tissue inflammation, reduced bacterial adhesion, enhanced soft-tissue integrity, and stabilization of marginal bone around the implant-supported restoration. However, Dini et al. in their systematic review concluded that zirconia abutment can be a favorable choice of implant abutment in the esthetic zone with the presence of unpredictable risk of fracture. All-ceramic implant-supported crowns on zirconia abutment can either be screw retained or cement retained. Cement-retained all-ceramic implant-supported crowns are cemented as a separate unit on the zirconia abutment. Screw-retained all-ceramic implant-supported crowns are fabricated as a one-piece hybrid-abutment-crown unit with a screw channel for screw tightening and loosening. Both types of reconstructions can be used for the single unit as well as for multiple unit prosthesis. Few studies reported that cement-retained all-ceramic implant-supported crowns showed the ease of fabrication and clinical and technical resemblance to tooth-borne reconstruction procedures but caused biological complications and peri-implantitis due to excess cement residue. To overcome certain disadvantages of cement-retained implant crowns, one-piece screw-retained all-ceramic implant crowns were used due to easy accessibility through the screw hole and elimination of luting cement. Few studies reported that marginal bone loss, biological, and technical complications was clinically more with cemented implant crowns. Few studies reported that cement-retained showed more marginal bone loss and biological and technical complications. Few studies reported no statistically significant difference between cement and screw-retained crowns on zirconia abutment in terms of biological, technical, and marginal bone level.
This systematic review aimed to evaluate the available evidence on the difference in marginal bone level and technical and biological complications between screw-retained and cement-retained all-ceramic implant-supported crowns fabricated on zirconia abutment. The results obtained from this review would help the clinicians to make an appropriate decision for prosthetic rehabilitation of a single implant with zirconia abutment with either screw-retained or cement-retained all-ceramic implant-supported crowns for esthetically durable outcomes based on the clinical situations. The null hypothesis was that there would be no difference in the marginal bone level, technical and biological complications between screw-retained and cement-retained all-ceramic implant-supported crowns fabricated on zirconia abutment.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses guidelines and Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews registration
The protocol registration with the CRD42021261601 code was done at the Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) database, and the present systematic review and meta-analysis followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) 2020 guidelines.

Review question
The following review question was formulated according to the Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome, and Study design (PICOS) framework: “Is there a difference between marginal bone level, technical and biological complications between screw-retained and cement-retained all-ceramic implant-supported crowns fabricated on zirconia abutment? The population was patients with single implant restored with screw-retained or cement-retained all-ceramic crown on zirconia abutment. The intervention was screw-retained all-ceramic implant-supported crown fabricated on zirconia abutment. The comparison was cement-retained all-ceramic implant-supported crown fabricated on zirconia abutment. The outcome was marginal bone level, technical and biological complications. The study design was randomized control trials and prospective studies.

Study selection criteria
Inclusion criteria included randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and prospective studies that evaluated marginal bone level, technical and biological complications between screw-retained and cement-retained all-ceramic implant-supported crowns fabricated on zirconia abutment. Full-text human studies published in English between January 2014 and June 2023 were included. Exclusion criteria were clinical reports, in vitro studies, reviews, online surveys, and questionnaires not in English published before 2014. Studies done on single implant restored with screw-retained or cement-retained all-ceramic crown on titanium abutment were excluded.

Search strategy
Based on PICOS selection criteria and Cohen kappa inter-reliability score of 0.92 between the two independent reviewers (S. P. and J. I.), the advanced search for relevant studies was conducted with the presence of a third reviewer (J. N.). The advanced electronic search was conducted in the Cochrane Library, EBSCO, and PubMed/PubMed Central/Medline databases and the Google Scholar search engine using the following keywords, MeSH terms, and phrases coupled with Boolean operators (AND, OR, and NOT) [Table 1]. For PubMed, Cochrane and EBSCO database search strategy used was ((((((zirconia abutment) AND all ceramic implant crown) AND screw retained) AND cement-retained) AND technical) AND biological) AND marginal bone) AND randomized controlled trial)))))). The terms used for advanced search in Google Scholar were zirconia abutment, all ceramic implant crown, cement-retained implant crown, screw-retained implant crown, technical, biological, complications, marginal bone level, and randomized controlled trial.
Search terms used in search strategy as per Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome, and Study design framework
Population	Intervention	Control	Outcome	Study design	 	Adult	Zirconia abutment, all ceramic implant crown, screw-retained implant crown	Zirconia abutment, all ceramic implant crown, cement-retained implant crown	Technical, biological, complications, marginal bone level	Randomized control trials, clinical studies, prospective studies

Study selection and data extraction
Two reviewers (S. P. and J. I.) independently reviewed and assessed all the titles and abstracts of studies to remove the duplicates. The irrelevant articles from the remaining titles and abstracts were examined and deleted. The remaining full-text articles were examined for the degree of compliance and the irrelevant articles were excluded. The relevant eight studies were included from all the databases according to the selection criteria. Two reviewers (S. P. and J. I.) individually performed data extraction and mentioned the characteristics of eight included studies for all primary outcomes: study identification, sample size, intervention group, control group, marginal bone level, biological complication, technical complication, follow-up, and conclusion in the Google Excel sheet.

Risk of bias assessment, quality assessment, and meta-analysis
The risk of bias (ROB) assessment for RCTs was done using the Cochrane ROB 2 tool and graded as high, low, or unclear from the scores of different domains of random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding of patients, outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data, and other biases. The Newcastle–Ottawa quality assessment scale of three domains selection, comparability, and exposure was used for prospective study design using Review Manager (RevMan) Version 5.4. The Cochrane Collaboration, 2020. The Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluations (GRADE) assessment tool was used for the quality assessment of included studies. Based on the reported quantitative data from the included studies, a meta-analysis was performed.

RESULTS

Literature search
From different electronic database searches, a total of 195 articles were procured and 35 were duplicates among them. The remaining 160 abstracts were examined and 140 irrelevant articles were excluded. Full-text assessment of twenty eligible studies was done. Twenty full-text articles were screened, and 12 studies were excluded due to inappropriate outcomes. For the systematic review, eight studies were included. For meta-analysis, six studies were included [Figure 1].
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses flow diagram

Characteristics of included studies
The detailed characteristic data of eight included studies are listed in Table 2. Seven of the included studies were RCTs and one study was a prospective study. Six studies have reported data on marginal bone loss in terms of millimeters. Seven studies reported biological complications in terms of probing depth and bleeding on probing. Eight studies reported technical outcomes for ceramic chipping, loss of retention, loss of marginal adaptation, abutment fracture, and screw loosening. In this review, 362 participants with a mean age of 49 years received 362 implants, of which 167 were restored with screw-retained all-ceramic implant crown and 195 with cement-retained all-ceramic implant crown on zirconia abutment. The follow-up period varied between 6 months and 11 years.
Data extraction table for included studies
Study ID	Study design	Duration of the study	Sample size	Number of screw-retained crowns on zirconia abutment (intervention group)	Number of cement-retained crowns on zirconia abutment (control group)	MBL (mm) mean and SD	Biological complications	Technical outcomes	Follow-up	Conclusion	 	Mean probing depth (mm) mean and SD	Mean bleeding on probing mean and SD	Ceramic chipping	Marginal Adaptation	Abutment fracture	Screw loosening	 	Zembic et al., 2015	Prospective	11 years	27	0	27	NR	CR: 3.4±1.1	CR: 0.3±0.3	NR	NR	SR: 17%CR: 17%	NR	11 years	BC: No significant biological complications were reported at implant site between test and control group	 	Cacaci et al., 2017	RCT	36.9 months	114	53	61	NR	NR	SR: 0.5±0.1CR: 0.7±0.1	NR	NR	NR	NR	36 months	Screw retained showed better clinical performance than cement retained in regards of technical and biological outcomes	 	Thoma et al., 2018	RCT	5 years	33	16	17	SR: 0.48CR: 0.55	SR: 3.08CR: 3.00	SR: 17%CR: 17%	SR: NoneCR: Two crown	SR: NoneCR: One crown	NR	NR	6 months	BC: No statistically significant difference was observed between the two groups	 	Amorfini et al., 2018	RCT	10 years	32	16	16	SR: −0.29±0.23CR: −0.15±0.09	SR: 3.3±0.4CR: 3.1±1	SR: 0.4±0.3CR: 0.4±0.4	SR: One case 3%CR: None	SR: NoneCR: One crown 3%	SR: NoneCR: One case 3%	SR: One case 3%	BC: 5 yearsMBL: 5 yearsTC: 10 years	BC: No statistically significant difference was observed between the two groupsMBL: No statistical difference	 	Heierle et al., 2019	RCT	3 years	34	17	17	SR: 0.5±0.35CR: 0.7±0.34	NR	NR	SR: One minorCR: One major case 3%	SR: One case 3%CR: None	SR: One case 3%CR: None	SR: One case 3%CR: None	3 years	MBL: No statistical difference 11% of overall technical complications was observed in both groups	 	Kraus et al., 2019	RCT	3 years	44	24	20	SR: −0.4±0.3CR: −0.7±0.4	SR: 3.2±0.7CR: 3.3±0.6	SR: 0.18CR: 0.18	SR: NoneCR: One case minor	SR: Four caseCR: Two case	SR: Four caseCR: Two case	SR: NoneCR: None	3 years	MBL: No statistically significant difference was seen in the two groupsBC: Catastrophic BC occurred in the CR group onlyHigh rate of catastrophic technical complications was seen more with screw retained than cement retained (15%)	 	Lamperti et al., 2022	RCT	5 years	34	17	17	SR: −0.20±0.4CR: −0.34±0.31	SR: 3.2±0.5CR: 3.2±0.6	SR: 33.3%CR: 37.2%	SR: One minorCR: Four minorOne major	SR: NoneCR: One case minor	SR: Two casesCR: One case minor		5 years	MBL: CR more than SR groupBC: No statistically significant difference was observed between the two groupsTO: 15.4% for both the groupsRelatively high in both groups	 	Kraus et al., 2022	RCT	5 years	44	24	20	SR: −0.4±0.4CR: −0.4±0.4	SR: 3.5±0.6CR: 3.5±0.8	SR: 27±15%CR:43±36%	SR: One minorCR: Three minor	SR: Four caseCR: Two case	SR: Four caseCR: Two case		5 years	MBL: No statistical differenceBC: PD showed no statistically significant difference between the two groupsFor BoP cement retained showed a higher value than screw retainedTO: CR showed a higher rate 68.4%SR 22.7%
BC: Biological complications, CR: Cement retained, MBL: Marginal bone level, NR: Not reported, RCT: Randomized control trial, SR: Screw-retained, TO: Technical outcomes, SD: Standard deviation, PD: Probing depth

Risk of bias assessment
According to the Cochrane ROB 2 tool for RCTs, three studies showed a moderate ROB and four studies showed a low ROB [Figure 2]. The quality of one prospective study by Zembic et al. was good with a score of seven following the Newcastle–Ottawa assessment tool. GRADE assessment for marginal bone level, biological complications, and technical outcomes was done showing high quality for all the outcomes.
Graph for risk of bias and risk of bias summary

Meta-analysis
Heterogeneity measurement among the studies was done by the I2 statistic method, where for >50% I2 value random effect model was used, and for <50% I2 value fixed effect model was used. Meta-analysis was conducted for six studies at two different follow-up periods of 3 years and 5 years from the quantitative outcomes of mean, standard deviation, and the total number.

Meta-analysis for marginal bone level
The meta-analysis of marginal bone level comprised five studies. At follow-up period of 3 years, two studies were included and reported no statistically significant difference between both the groups (I2 = 90%, P = 0.83, confidence interval [CI] = 95%, pooled mean difference = 0.05 [−0.44, 0.54]), as depicted in the forest plot [Figure 3]. At follow-up period of 5 years, three studies were included and reported no statistically significant difference between both the groups (I2 = 77%, P = 0.69, CI = 95%, pooled mean difference = 0.05 [−0.19, 0.29]), as depicted in the forest plot [Figure 4].
Forest plot for marginal bone level, probing depth, and bleeding on probing at 3-year follow-up period. SD: Standard deviation, CI: Confidence interval, IV: Intravenous
Forest plot for marginal bone level, probing depth, and bleeding on probing at 5-year follow-up period. SD: Standard deviation, CI: Confidence interval, IV: Intravenous

Meta-analysis for probing depth
For biological complications, two subgroups of probing depth and bleeding on probing were analyzed. For probing depth, five studies were included. At follow-up period of 3 years, two studies were included and reported a statistically significant difference between both the groups (I2 = 0%, P < 0.00001, CI = 95%, pooled mean difference = −0.20 [−0.24, −0.16]), as depicted in the forest plot [Figure 3]. The positive association stated that the cement-retained group showed more amount of probing depth than the screw-retained group. At follow-up period of 5 years, three studies were included and reported no statistically significant difference between both the groups (I2 = 0%, P = 0.73, CI = 95%, pooled mean difference = 0.04 [−0.20, 0.29]), as depicted in the forest plot [Figure 4].

Meta-analysis for bleeding on probing
For meta-analysis of bleeding on probing, two studies were included and a statistically significant difference was observed between both the groups at a follow-up period of 5 years (I2 = 0%, P = 0.10, CI = 95%, pooled mean difference = −11.06 [−24.05, 1.92]), as depicted in the forest plot [Figure 4]. The positive association stated that the cement-retained group showed more amount of bleeding on probing than the screw-retained group.

Meta-analysis for technical outcomes
For technical outcomes, no quantitative data was obtained.

DISCUSSION
The developing era comprises different implant systems, implant-abutment connections, types of implant abutment, abutment to superstructure connection, and various prosthetic materials. Due to the constant advancements in dental materials, zirconia has become an esthetic material of choice for implant abutments and superstructures. Titanium abutment along with porcelain fused to metal implant crowns either cement or screw-retained was the clinician's choice. With the growing attribute of conversion into esthetic dentistry, zirconia abutments with all-ceramic cemented or screw-retained implant crowns are evolved and been used as a treatment option. However, the success of any treatment depends on its response to the surrounding mucosa, bone, opposing tooth, forces, and integration. After the evaluation of marginal bone level, technical and biological complications outcomes among all-ceramic cement or screw-retained implant crown on zirconia abutment, the type of retention to be used based on the clinical success rate can be decided. The present study analysis was conducted to compare the marginal bone level, technical and biological complications between screw-retained and cement-retained all-ceramic implant crowns fabricated on zirconia abutment.
The mean marginal bone level is the distance measured from the implant shoulder to the bone crest at the mesial and distal aspects of the implant on radiographs in millimeters and calculated as a difference from the time of crown insertion till the follow-up period. For the marginal bone level, the null hypothesis was accepted. At 3 and 5 years of follow-up, there was no statistically significant difference in the marginal bone level between the two groups. This result was in accordance with the studies done by Thoma et al., Amorfini et al., Heierle et al., Kraus et al., and Kraus et al. reported no difference between the marginal bone level for cement-retained and screw-retained implant-supported all-ceramic crown on zirconia abutment measured at baseline and different follow-up period. Lemos et al. conducted a study to evaluate the role of plaque index in marginal bone loss between cement-retained and screw-retained implant crowns and stated no difference between both the groups. However, Lamperti et al. reported that marginal bone loss was more for the cement-retained group compared with the screw-retained group. No statistically significant difference was reported due to high heterogeneity, small sample size, shorter follow-up period, less number of included studies, biomechanics of prosthesis, and level of prosthesis.
Biological complications included probing depth and bleeding on probing. These parameters were recorded using a periodontal probe at six sites and mean values were calculated. For probing depth, the null hypothesis was rejected. At a follow-up period of 3 years, a statistically significant difference was observed with the cement-retained group showing more amount of probing depth than the screw-retained group. This result was in accordance with studies done by Kraus et al. and Cacaci et al. who reported more amount of probing depth for the cement-retained group than the screw-retained group at a follow-up period of 3 years. However, Lamperti et al., Amorfini et al., and Kraus et al. reported no statistically significant difference at a follow-up period of 5 years. The higher probing depth occurred due to cement remnants in the peri-implant sulcus leading to excessive tissue growth as a natural reaction to tissue irritation and the type of cement used.
For bleeding on probing, the null hypothesis was rejected. A statistically significant difference was observed with the cement-retained group showing more amount of bleeding on probing than the screw-retained group. This result was in accordance with the studies done by Kraus et al., Kraus et al., and Cacaci et al. who reported higher biological complications with the cement-retained group than with the screw-retained group. However, studies done by Lamperti et al., Thoma et al., Amorfini et al., and Zembic et al. reported no statistically significant difference between both the groups. The higher bleeding on probing occurred due to the presence of cement residues causing increased cellular response leading to gingival inflammation and a tendency to ooze out blood on probing.
Eight studies reported technical outcomes in terms of ceramic chipping, loss of retention, loss of marginal adaptation, abutment fracture, and screw loosening. A study done by Zembic et al. reported no technical complications with the cement-retained group. Studies done by Thoma et al., Kraus et al., and Cacaci et al. reported a higher rate of technical complications with the cement-retained group (68.4%) than with the screw-retained group (22.7%). A study done by Amorfini et al. reported the same rate of technical complications for both the groups (one case of ceramic chipping, one case of screw loosening in screw-retained crown, one case of abutment fracture, and one case of decementation in the cement-retained group). Studies done by Lamperti et al. and Heierle et al. reported an overall higher rate of technical complications in both the groups (11% at a follow-up period of 3 years and 15.4% at a follow-up period of 5 years). A study done by Kraus et al. reported higher catastrophic technical complications (>15%) for the screw-retained group than the cement-retained group at follow-up period of 3 years.
Screw-retained all-ceramic implant crown on zirconia abutment can be a choice of retention for prosthetic rehabilitation of the single implant which provides enhanced esthetic and successful outcomes by reducing marginal bone loss and less amount of biological complication due to direct veneering to zirconia abutment. However, frequent follow-up and care need to be undertaken to minimize technical complications. Thus, a clinician can opt for all-ceramic esthetic treatment options for a single implant crown with either screw-retained or cement-retained type of retention on an esthetic zirconia abutment. However, the choice of cement, proper removal of excess cement, and postcementation maintenance should be taken care of while opting for cement-retained all-ceramic implant crown for successful long-term results.
The limitations of this review and meta-analysis were the inclusion of fewer RCTs with varying follow-up periods and the lack of quantitative data in any included studies for technical outcomes. To overcome these limitations, more RCTs should be included with results mentioned during the same follow-up periods. Thus, consideration should be given to recording the results at specific and different time intervals, and more clinical trials should be conducted on the current study topic.

CONCLUSIONS
The findings from this systematic review and meta-analysis can be concluded into the following:
For marginal bone level, no statistically significant difference was observed between the cement-retained and screw-retained groups at a follow-up period of 3 years and 5 years
Statistically higher amount of probing depth was observed for the cement-retained group than the screw-retained group at a follow-up period of 3 years
No statistically significant difference was observed for the cement-retained and screw-retained groups for probing depth at a follow-up period of 5 years
Statistically higher amount of bleeding on probing was observed for the cement-retained group than the screw-retained group at a follow-up period of 5 years
The evidence obtained for technical outcomes concludes that the cement-retained and screw-retained groups showed relatively higher rates of technical complications.

Financial support and sponsorship
Nil.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
Comparison of survival and complication rates of tooth-supported fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) and implant-supported FDPs and single crowns (SCs)
Occlusion for implant-supported fixed dental prostheses in partially edentulous patients: A literature review and current concepts
Systematic review of the survival rate and the incidence of biological, technical, and aesthetic complications of single crowns on implants reported in longitudinal studies with a mean follow-up of 5 years
Metal-free materials for fixed prosthodontic restorations
Translucency and wear of pressable lithium disilicate and zirconia-reinforced lithium silicate glass-ceramics: An in-vitro study
Titanium base abutments in implant prosthodontics: A literature review
Zirconia ceramics in metal-free implant dentistry
Long-term survival and success of zirconia screw-retained implant-supported prostheses for up to 12 years: A retrospective multicenter study
Current status on lithium disilicate and zirconia: A narrative review
A review on CAD/CAM Yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia polycrystal (Y-TZP) and polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) and their biological behavior
Stock versus CAD/CAM customized zirconia implant abutments – Clinical and patient-based outcomes in a randomized controlled clinical trial
Peri-implant and esthetic outcomes of cemented and screw-retained crowns using zirconia abutments in single implant-supported restorations-a systematic review and meta-analysis
One-piece internal zirconia abutments for single-tooth restorations on narrow and regular diameter implants: A 5-year prospective follow-up study
Esthetic, mechanical, and biological outcomes of various implant abutments for single-tooth replacement in the anterior region: A systematic review of the literature
A systematic review and meta-analysis of the influence of abutment material on peri-implant soft tissue color measured using spectrophotometry
Zirconia-based screw-retained prostheses supported by implants: A retrospective study on technical complications and failures
A retrospective analysis of biological complications of dental implants
Marginal discrepancy of screw-retained and cemented metal-ceramic crowns on implants abutments
Retention failures in cement- and screw-retained fixed restorations on dental implants in partially edentulous arches: A systematic review with meta-analysis
A systematic review of screw versus cement-retained fixed implant supported reconstructions
Clinical evaluation of cement-retained implant-supported CAD/CAM monolithic zirconia single crowns in posterior areas: Results of a 6-year prospective clinical study
A comparison of marginal bone loss, survival rate, and prosthetic complications in implant-supported splinted and nonsplinted restorations: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Factors influencing early marginal bone loss around dental implants positioned subcrestally: A multicenter prospective clinical study
Standardizing failure, success, and survival decisions in clinical studies of ceramic and metal-ceramic fixed dental prostheses
PROSPERO: An international register of systematic review protocols
Registration of systematic reviews in PROSPERO: 30,000 records and counting
The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. Rev Esp Cardiol (English Ed
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA statement
Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 6.3
PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): Checklist and explanation
Scoping reviews: Reinforcing and advancing the methodology and application
Formulating a researchable question: A critical step for facilitating good clinical research
PICO, PICOS and SPIDER: A comparison study of specificity and sensitivity in three search tools for qualitative systematic reviews
Defining the process to literature searching in systematic reviews: A literature review of guidance and supporting studies
Determining the scope of the review and the questions it will address
How to do a systematic review
Five steps to conducting a systematic review
A step by step guide for conducting a systematic review and meta-analysis with simulation data
Single screening versus conventional double screening for study selection in systematic reviews: A methodological systematic review
Identifying and removing duplicate records from systematic review searches
Find duplicates among the PubMed, EMBASE, and Cochrane Library Databases in systematic review
The Cochrane Collaboration's tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials
QUADAS-2: A revised tool for the quality assessment of diagnostic accuracy studies
Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment form for Cohort Studies
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale: Comparing reviewers' to authors' assessments
Evaluation of implant stability and increase in bone height in indirect sinus lift done with the osseodensification and osteotome technique: A systematic review and meta analysis
A checklist designed to aid consistency and reproducibility of GRADE assessments: Development and pilot validation
Wear resistance of CAD/CAM zirconia reinforced lithium silicate versus CAD/CAM lithium disilicate glass ceramics: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Cemented versus screw-retained zirconia-based single-implant restorations: 5-year results of a randomized controlled clinical trial
Randomized controlled clinical study of veneered zirconia abutments for single implant crowns: Clinical, histological, and microbiological outcomes
Comparison of cemented versus screw-retained, customized computer-aided design/computer-assisted manufacture zirconia abutments for esthetically located single-tooth implants: A 10-year randomized prospective study
Randomized controlled clinical trial comparing cemented versus screw-retained single crowns on customized zirconia abutments: 3-year results
Cemented versus screw-retained zirconia-based single implant reconstructions: A 3-year prospective randomized controlled clinical trial
Five-year randomized controlled clinical study comparing cemented and screw-retained zirconia-based implant-supported single crowns
Clinical performance of screw-retained and cemented implant-supported zirconia single crowns: 36-month results
Eleven-year follow-up of a prospective study of zirconia implant abutments supporting single all-ceramic crowns in anterior and premolar regions
A comparative evaluation of malocclusion and associated risk factors in patients suffering with temporomandibular disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies
The heterogeneity statistic I(2) can be biased in small meta-analyses
Evaluation of accuracy between extraoral gothic arch tracing and various other methods assessing horizontal condylar guidance angle in completely edentulous patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Evaluation of cement-retained versus screw-retained implant-supported restorations for marginal bone loss: A systematic review and meta-analysis