Life Course Approach for Managing Familial Hypercholesterolemia
Treatment of familial hypercholesterolemia is directed toward the moment of the medical encounter. However, risk for heart disease as a consequence of having familial hypercholesterolemia is related to lifelong exposure to elevated low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol, rather than low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol level at a specific time point. The purpose of this review is to reassess contemporary research on treatment of familial hypercholesterolemia and current evidence‐based guidelines, to present an approach that emphasizes treatment across the life course, and to recognize the importance of family experiences to care. To accomplish this, we review the changing treatment needs that emerge across the life course, from birth through childhood, adolescence, young adulthood, peripregnancy, middle age, and late in life. Special attention is paid to improving adherence to treatment, the potential role of monitoring atherosclerosis in a lifelong model of care, and medical issues related to care transitions: from pediatric to internal medicine care, peripregnancy, after a cardiac event, and care after age 70 years in the absence of a cardiac event. Novel considerations related to treatment of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia are discussed. The summary identifies research gaps that need to be closed to move from the current point‐of‐care model to one that considers treatment over the life course.

Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms
CIMT
carotid intima‐media thickness
FH
familial hypercholesterolemia
HeFH
heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
HoFH
homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
PCSK9
proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an inherited condition that causes lifelong exposure to elevated low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL‐C) and consequent risk of premature coronary artery disease (CAD). About 1:200 to 1:500 individuals in any population are typically affected, with higher rates in populations with founder effects. Current recommendations emphasize the need for cholesterol‐lowering therapy from a young age to prevent CAD, starting earliest for those with homozygous (HoFH) and heterozygous FH (HeFH) with severe elevations of LDL‐C, as events are directly related to the duration of chronic LDL‐C exposure. Patients who initiate treatment in childhood have the best long‐term outcomes. Fortunately, many medications to lower LDL‐C have now been approved for prescribing to children and adolescents, with new medications currently being tested in clinical trials. Initiating care at a young age is cost effective. The ability to lower LDL‐C to concentrations not previously achievable together with improved capacity to detect subclinical atherosclerosis by vascular imaging provides a unique opportunity to better understand the natural history of FH and develop optimal therapeutic strategies.
While current guidelines are useful for guiding the initiation of treatment in youth and provide treatment targets at various ages on the basis of LDL‐C, many questions remain regarding lifelong management. Should risk stratification beyond LDL‐C level guide intensity of treatment? Is there a role for atherosclerosis imaging to monitor treatment outcomes? What happens during pregnancy when many lipid‐lowering medications are contraindicated and suspended, and should women who choose to breastfeed remain off lipid‐lowering therapy for as long as they breastfeed? Can there be “drug holidays” where treatment can be deferred (or less intense) for a period of time? In the future, when newborn screening may identify children at birth, what should be done with regard to prevention in the first decade of life? How do personal circumstances and the family's experience with FH impact care? How do you manage the older patient with FH without a prior heart attack and no atherosclerosis? And how does the diversity of international health care resources impact the earliest possible initiation of FH care?
The purpose of this review is to translate new knowledge about treatment for FH into a lifelong care model, overcoming the limitations of the current approach, which provides guidance at a single time point: the medical encounter. We will discuss the resources required to create a lifelong FH care model, special considerations related to HoFH, current treatments and relevant guidelines, atherosclerosis imaging, special considerations in a life course approach (adherence to medications, pregnancy, care transitions associated with aging), and evidence gaps, concluding with some recommendations for future research.

Diagnosis
An FH diagnosis may be made if a genetic variant associated with FH is present, or phenotypic criteria using scoring algorithms such as Dutch Lipid Clinics, Simon–Broome, Make Early Diagnosis to Prevent Early Death, or American Heart Association. It should be remembered that patients with a genetic variant may not meet phenotypic criteria, and, conversely, many patients who meet phenotypic criteria will not have a positive genetic test. While genetic testing is optimal for accurate diagnosis, it is also important for the initiation of cascade testing of relatives, and in the presence of severe hypercholesterolemia, in distinguishing between HeFH and HoFH. Testing may not be available in many places worldwide and may be too expensive for many families. Except for countries where cholesterol screening programs are in place, most children worldwide are diagnosed on the basis of cascade testing of index cases or a known positive family history of FH, premature CAD, or severely elevated cholesterol.

Caring for FH
Families and affected family members living with FH must interact not only with multiple components of local health care systems but also the social consequences of the diagnosis. The medical aspects of care across the life course are shown in Figure 1, and social interactions are shown in Figure 2.
Optimizing recognition and management of familial hypercholesterolemia across the life span.
Typical medical treatments and considerations by life stage. CAD indicates coronary artery disease; CV, cardiovascular; and LDL‐C, low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol.
Factors contributing to life with familial hypercholesterolemia.
At each point in the life course, interactions with family, society, and the health care system impact familial hypercholesterolemia care.
At the health care system level, this begins with an array of primary care and specialty physicians seen over the life course and includes additional expertise provided by specialist nurses, pharmacists, dietitians, genetics counselors, rehabilitation care, and psychologists. At the societal level, financial support for health care costs and negotiating educational and workplace needs will be complicated by an FH diagnosis. Importantly, families must also navigate within themselves, as they address issues such as finding providers with FH expertise, living with an inherited condition, logistical support to provide for medical care, pregnancy, morbidity related to the condition, and grieving for lost loved ones.
At the physician level, the predominant skills required to treat FH change during the lifetime of a person living with FH. For example, for an infant, genetic diagnosis and family counseling may be most important, while adherence support (which could be provided by pediatricians, family medicine specialists, pharmacists, or nurse practitioners) is often crucial for adolescents and young adults. Older adults may require input from internal medicine specialists or cardiologists if they have other cardiovascular risk factors or established CAD. Despite these complexities, it is possible to identify a few general principles that would be applicable to most health care systems. For instance, children without comorbidities and at LDL‐C target could be followed up readily within primary care, while patients with established CAD not at LDL‐C goal may require input from both cardiologists and lipidologists. In general, the level of care provided should match the complexity of medical needs and may thus change several times during a person's lifetime. For instance, a young woman with well‐managed HeFH on a statin alone may be followed up in primary care, seek specialist care before and during pregnancy and then ultimately seek an initial assessment of her child at a specialist level, with both ultimately returning to primary care for ongoing treatment and monitoring. Ideally, a patient with HeFH treated to goal with statins over the life course will never have clinically overt atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease requiring significant additional specialty care.
Health care systems face formidable challenges related to family‐based FH care; these include providing effective screening and cascade testing, overcoming limited availability of genetic diagnostic services, drug availability and cost, adherence support, and managing safe transitions between different levels of care. Many physicians also have limited knowledge of FH and lack the skills and confidence to manage a person with FH. Finding physicians experienced in the treatment of children with FH is particularly challenging in many countries. The need for further improvements in FH care becomes clear when considering that in most countries, the majority of persons living with FH remain undiagnosed and that LDL‐C control often remains inadequate because of a failure to prescribe adequate therapy in many of those receiving treatment. As the structure of health care systems differs so much between, and at times within, countries (eg, public versus private funding, access to specialist care, individual practitioner versus clinic‐based care), there is no single model of care that will be suited to all situations.
Social determinants of health will further impact care for FH. Access to genetic testing, medications, and lipoprotein apheresis vary by country. Government health and insurance coverage for health care expenditures vary by country as well; cost may be a barrier to many patients. Attitudes toward genetic testing and diagnosis will be impacted by cultural factors. Discrimination may impact health equity. Food security could impact dietary choices. Diverse factors such as air pollution, environmental stress, and violence may impact access to care, adherence, and heart disease risk. Advocacy groups have emerged as an important force in improving care for those with FH.
One of the largest care gaps with respect to FH is the failure to address the “familial” part of an FH diagnosis. Health care systems should ideally plan for “a family living with FH” rather than “a person living with FH,” providing unified multidisciplinary services that can address the needs of the entire family. For example, genetic testing should be conducted at specialized centers with access to an accredited genetic laboratory. Centers offering genetic testing should be able to provide genetic counseling, have expertise in the interpretation of genotyping results (eg, dealing with variants of unknown significance), and be able to coordinate and manage cascade testing. Special arrangements, for example, telemedicine or cooperation with local primary care services, may be necessary for patients unable to access specialized centers. All individuals with FH should receive culturally appropriate information and education enabling them to participate actively in their own care, ultimately sharing responsibility with their family and health care providers for FH care. Health care systems should identify individuals not receiving therapy or those with adherence challenges in addition to monitoring and reporting outcomes on a regular basis.

HoFH: Special Considerations
Although HoFH is rare, early recognition and prompt aggressive intervention are extremely important because HoFH may rapidly lead to juvenile onset of cardiovascular disease and premature death. If left untreated, HoFH often results in fatal and nonfatal myocardial infarctions or significant aortic stenosis as early as in the first 2 decades of life. Lifestyle optimization and maximum statin therapy (and other lipid‐modifying therapies) do not result in a sufficient reduction in LDL‐C in most individuals. Advocacy for considering HoFH as a special situation that requires government funding within a rare disease program may be needed in many countries.
HoFH is thus best managed in centers with multidisciplinary teams with expertise in lipidology, cardiology, genetics, and lipid apheresis. Multidisciplinary teams should also include allied health care professionals such as nurses, dietitians, pharmacists, and counselors who all play important roles in ensuring good treatment outcomes. Treatment begins at diagnosis and specialized medications and resources (lipoprotein apheresis, rarely liver transplantation) are typically required. Due to the early onset of atherosclerotic plaques and risk for aortic or supra‐aortic stenosis, imaging is crucial for monitoring the presence and growth of atherosclerotic burden. The introduction of computed tomography (CT) scanning with low‐dose radiation has made coronary CT angiography more suitable for routine use in children. An initial study can be done after age 3 years, at least before LA therapy is initiated, whereas follow‐up coronary CT angiography should be based on the achievement of LDL‐C treatment goal, presence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, and results from previous coronary CT angiography. An annual echocardiogram to assess for aortic stenosis should also be done. Performing genetic testing and identifying the type of underlying genetic variant is of added value to distinguish between pediatric patients with higher risks of premature CAD and to identify those that will benefit most from new types of lipid‐lowering therapies.

Treatment Overview and Available Medications
Therapy for FH is a lifelong endeavor; therefore, medications need to be efficacious, safe, easy to use, and affordable for health systems and patients. A table of medications in current use is provided (Table 1).
Medications Approved for and Undergoing Studies for Pediatric Patients With FH
Class/drug(s)	Mechanism of action	Administration	Effect on lipoprotein concentrations	Tolerability/main adverse effects	 	StatinsAtorvastatin, fluvastatin, lovastatin, pitavastatin, pravastatin, rosuvastatin, simvastatin	HMG‐CoA reductase inhibition—reduced cholesterol synthesis, upregulation of LDL receptors, increased LDL particle clearance	Oral tablet, daily	Reduce LDL‐C concentrations by ≈20%–50%, depending on drug, dose, and underlying LDL receptor activity; variable beneficial effect on HDL‐C, triglycerides	Usually well tolerated.Increased hepatic transaminases, myopathy and muscle symptoms, rhabdomyolysis, increased risk of incident diabetes, drug interactions	 	Ezetimibe	Inhibition of intestinal NPC1L1—inhibition of cholesterol absorption in the small intestine	Oral tablet, daily	Reduce LDL‐C concentrations by ≈15%–20%	Well tolerated, usually used as an adjunct to statinsIncreased risk of hepatic transaminitis and myopathy with statin; arthralgia, diarrhea, sinusitis, fatigue, upper respiratory infection	 	Monoclonal PCSK9 inhibitorsAlirocumab, evolocumab	Inhibitory binding of PCSK9 (monoclonal antibody)—inhibition of degradation of LDL receptors increasing expression, increased LDL particle clearance	Subcutaneous injection, every 2–4 wks	Reduce LDL‐C concentrations by ≈30%–40%	Well tolerated, usually used as an adjunct to statin or alternative to statin for intolerant patientsInjection site reaction; arthralgia, back pain, nasopharyngitis, upper respiratory infection, nausea	 	Inclisiran	Inhibition of synthesis of PCSK9 (small interfering RNA)—inhibition of degradation of LDL receptors and increase expression, increased LDL particle clearance	Subcutaneous injection, 3 injections in the first year, then every 6 mo	Reduce LDL‐ C concentrations by ≈40%–60% in adults (not yet approved for pediatric patients)	Well toleratedInjection site reactions	 	Bempedoic acid	Inhibition of ATP–citrate lyase, inhibition of cholesterol synthesis, upregulation of LDL receptors and increased LDL particle clearance	Oral tablet, daily	Reduce LDL‐C concentrations by ≈17%–28% in adults (not yet approved for pediatric patients)	Well tolerated, usually used as an adjunct to statin, or alternative to statin for intolerant patientsMuscle spasm, back pain, extremity pain, hyperuricemia, gout, cholelithiasis, renal impairment, abdominal pain or discomfort, anemia, transaminitis, tendon rupture	 	Bile acid sequestrantsCholestyramine, colestipol, colesevelam	Binding of bile acids (synthesized from cholesterol) in the intestine, preventing enterohepatic reuptake and removing them from the cholesterol pool, results in increased bile acid synthesis resulting in increased LDL particle uptake and clearance	Oral powder or tablet, daily	Reduce LDL‐C concentrations by ≈10%–20%; may increase triglycerides	Cholestyramine may be poorly tolerated (palatability, bloating, constipation); colestipol requires large number of large tablets; colesevelam well tolerated.Gastrointestinal symptoms, fat‐soluble vitamin deficiency, drug interactions	 	Medications for HoFH	 	Evinacumab	Inhibition of angiopoetin‐like 3; —reduced inhibition of lipoprotein lipase and endothelial lipase	Intravenous infusion, every 4 wks	Reduce LDL‐C concentrations by ≈50%; reduce non–HDL‐C, HDL‐C, lipoprotein (a)	Well tolerated, reserved for HoFHInfusion reactions; nasopharyngitis, rhinorrhea, flulike illness, dizziness, fatigue, nausea	 	Lomitapide	Inhibition of MTP—decreased assembly of apolipoprotein B containing particles	Oral tablet, daily	Reduce LDL‐C concentrations by ≈40%–60% depending on dose achieved, pediatric study showed a 54% reduction in patients with homozygous FH (not yet approved for pediatric patients)	Variably tolerated due to restrictive diet requirement and gastrointestinal symptoms, reserved for HoFHGastrointestinal symptoms, nutritional deficiencies, increases in hepatic transaminases, hepatic steatosis
ATP indicates adenosine triphosphate; FH, familial hypercholesterolemia; HDL, high‐density lipoprotein; HMG‐CoA, 3‐hydroxy‐3‐methylglutaryl–coenzyme A; HoFH, homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia; LDL, low‐density lipoprotein; LDL‐C, low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol; MTP, microsomal triglyceride transport protein; NPC1L1, Niemann–Pick C1‐like protein 1; and PCSK9, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9.
Dietary management is an important component of treatment. Reduction in the amount of saturated fats with increased increments in mono‐ and polyunsaturated ones and avoidance of trans fatty acids are recommended. Dietary choices should meet nutritional needs across the life course. There is a suggestion that a Mediterranean‐style diet is superior to a saturated fat restricted one, not only for LDL‐C reduction, but also to improve inflammatory biomarkers. The diet should include consumption of fruits, vegetables, and consequently higher fiber and plant stanols. Avoidance of smoking, adoption of regular physical activity, and maintenance of a healthy body weight are also essential.
Considering the high LDL‐C concentrations in individuals with FH, high‐intensity statin therapy often needs to be combined with other nonstatin lipid‐lowering therapies. Statin and ezetimibe combinations are safe and affordable and are now frequently available in single‐pill combinations, lessening the pill burden for individuals with FH. Another nonstatin lipid‐lowering therapy is bempedoic acid, a small‐molecule inhibitor of adenosine triphosphate citrate lyase. Bempedoic acid reduces LDL‐C by 17% to 28% in adults and can be used as monotherapy or in combination with statins and/or ezetimibe. It is well tolerated and is particularly useful in patients with statin intolerance and is currently being studied for pediatric use. Monoclonal antibodies against PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9) (ie, alirocumab and evolocumab) are approved for pediatric use and are highly efficacious therapies for heterozygous FH. These medications have a good posology (ie, subcutaneous self‐administered injections every 2 or 4 weeks), are well tolerated, and currently have a reasonable cost for health systems, at least for high‐income countries. However, access is still a challenge in middle‐/low‐income countries due to their high cost relative to stains and ezetimibe. Inclisiran is a small interfering RNA that reduces LDL‐C by ≈50% by inhibiting hepatic PCSK9 synthesis. It is approved for adults with heterozygous FH but not yet for pediatric patients. The drug has a revolutionary posology of 3 injections in the first year (0, 3, and 9 months) and every 6 months thereafter, which may increase adherence to therapy.
Pharmacological therapy of homozygous FH remains challenging due to the extremely high baseline LDL‐C encountered in most patients and the impact of genetic variants on LDL receptor function. Statins and ezetimibe should be initiated in every patient but are usually insufficient. PCSK9 inhibitor response is variable; they are effective in patients with at least some LDL receptor function. LDL receptor–independent treatments offer new hope. Lomitapide, an oral microsomal triglyceride transfer protein inhibitor reduces LDL‐C by ≈50% in homozygous adult and pediatric patients with HoFH. Evinacumab is a monoclonal antibody against angiopoetin‐like 3 and reduces LDL‐C by 50% in adults and pediatric patients with HoFH independently of the genetic defect that caused the FH phenotype. Since conventional therapy often does not reduce LDL‐C to acceptable concentrations in patients affected by HoFH, lipoprotein apheresis, which physically removes LDL‐C from the circulation, should be added. However, lipoprotein apheresis is not available in every country. Liver transplantation is reserved for resistant cases with advanced atherosclerosis.
A gap in treatment for FH is the period from birth to childhood. Some medications are approved for use in children as young as age 6 years, as children between ages 6 and 10 years have been included in clinical trials. For HoFH, younger children are now being included in current trials; however, there are limited reported pharmacologic data on those aged <5 years.

Current Treatment Guidance
Therapeutic goals for LDL‐C concentrations vary by age in adults and children with FH. For children, the target is 135 mg/dL (3.5 mmol/L). For adults, the targets are as follows: without CAD, 100 mg/dL (2.5 mmol/L); with measured atherosclerosis or other risk factors, 70 mg/dL (1.8 mmol/L); with CAD, 55 mg/dL (1.4 mmol/L); and with recurrent CAD, 40 mg/dL (1.0 mmol/L).
LDL‐C goals are based on circumstantial evidence and expert opinion. Potential toxicity of medications needs careful consideration, given that most adult patients with FH will be on ≥2 drugs, so that monitoring of clinical response and laboratory safety is required. Comorbidities, such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and psychological issues should be managed in patients with FH according to the relevant guidelines. Lipoprotein (a) should be measured, and, if elevated, treatment of LDL‐C and other CAD risk factors should be escalated. In those with established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, management should also follow standard guidelines for secondary prevention.
The safety and efficacy of treating HeFH and HoFH in children has been shown in clinical trials of statins, ezetimibe, colesevelam, and PCSK9 inhibitors. While high‐intensity statin therapy can lower LDL‐C by ≈50%, the LDL‐C lowering of nonstatin therapies is colesevelam (−12%), ezetimibe (−27%), and PCSK9 inhibitors (−44%). Clinical trials of statins as primary first‐line therapy also demonstrated reductions in carotid intima‐media thickness (CIMT). Open‐label extension studies show that monoclonal PCSK9 inhibitors are safe and well tolerated in up to 2 years’ exposure in children and adolescents. Longer‐term observational studies also confirm minimal adverse effects of statins, without evidence of muscle injury, liver dysfunction, or incident diabetes.
A landmark study of patients with HeFH and statin therapy starting in youth, with follow‐up to age 40 years, showed substantially lower rates of CAD and death compared with the affected parents (1% versus 26% for CAD; 0% versus 7% for death). This was despite the achieved LDL‐C of 4.16 mmoL/L (161 mg/dL) being higher than current pediatric targets. This study also confirmed the long‐term safety of treatment and showed that CIMT in those treated with statins was like that in unaffected siblings.
Not included in current guidelines is a consideration of the lifelong cholesterol burden. Middle‐aged people with FH still have substantial subclinical atherosclerosis despite treatment from a young age, likely due to chronic exposure to elevated LDL‐C, below untreated concentrations but still well above typical concentrations in the general population. Current guidelines are based on LDL‐C concentrations at the time of a medical appointment, but do not account for the impact of chronic exposure to higher concentrations of LDL‐C. Patients with FH may require more intense lipid lowering if treatment is begun later in life to overcome this chronic exposure.

Adherence to Treatment
Adherence to long‐term pharmacotherapy is complex and depends on several factors related to patients, health care providers, therapies, and health care systems. Small molecules (statins, ezetimibe, lomitapide and bempedoic acid) and resins must be administered daily, a fact that may predispose to low adherence to these therapies in pediatric patients who are otherwise healthy except for high concentrations of LDL‐C (Table 1). Novel therapies like monoclonal antibodies may be used every 15 days (monoclonal PCSK9 inhibitors) or monthly (monoclonal PCSK9 inhibitors and evinacumab). Inclisiran is administered at 0, 3, and 9 months in the first year and every 6 months thereafter.
Poor adherence to lipid‐lowering therapy is frequently overlooked and a major challenge in clinical practice. Social determinants of nonadherence are underexplored and may include an understanding of the importance of prevention (as opposed to treatment of acute illness), and disinformation campaigns related to certain medications and cholesterol as a cause of heart attacks. Physicians' concerns about a patient's willingness to pay out‐of‐pocket costs for medication may contribute to treatment inertia.
Improving treatment adherence should be fundamentally patient‐centered and based on shared decision making, a process whereby health care providers and patients (and their families) collaborate to make treatment decisions that align with a patient's needs, goals, preferences, and values. This requires a tailored, personalized treatment plan that addresses recognized enablers and barriers to adherence as well as social determinants. Implementation strategies for improving the management of patients with FH, including adherence to treatment, are given in Table 2. These should be used with other adaptive, complex interventions shown to be effective in chronic conditions beyond FH.
Selected Implementation Strategies for Optimizing Management of FH
Develop a personalized treatment plan using shared decision making: consider age, all risk factors for CAD, psychological and sociocultural factors, and economic status, as well as personal and family values and preferences.Use clear and salient information (written, diagrammatic, electronic) that addresses age‐related, sociocultural, psychological, language and health literacy barriers.Design personalized treatment plans for children and adolescents using shared decision making with parents; with adolescents, use a developmentally appropriate approach.Children and adolescents with HoFH should be managed by a multidisciplinary team in centers with pediatric expertise in lipidology, cardiology, and apheresis.Management of children and adolescents should focus on the nuclear or immediate family, with annual reviews in general practice and/or pediatric services to assess well‐being, mental health issues, and safety of and adherence to therapy.Carefully plan transition of care of adolescents to adult services; facilitate and sustain self‐management and involvement in shared management into adulthood.Before prescribing medication and other interventions in children or adolescents with FH, engage in a patient‐centered and family‐centered discussion that uses shared decision making and cover the following: risk stratification; expected CAD risk‐reduction benefit; potential adverse effects and drug interactions; sociocultural and economic factors; and values and preferences. At subsequent reviews, use a behavioral counseling approach (eg, the 5A model: assess, advise, agree, assist, arrange) to address and promote adherence to medication and other treatments.Identify and address multifactorial barriers (eg, related to patients; clinicians; drugs; health care systems; and sociocultural, psychological, and financial circumstances) to medication adherence in adult patients.Clinicians, health systems, and health care plans should identify patients who are not receiving guideline‐directed medical therapy and facilitate the initiation of corresponding treatment using multifaceted strategies.Use multiple interventions for improving adherence to medication, including the following:Provision of free or subsidized medication, ensuring affordability of established drugs and special access to new drugsTelephone, mobile text, e‐mail, and calendar remindersUse of single‐pill combination drug therapiesExpanded role of allied health care provider interventions, such as simplified dosing by pharmacists and motivational counseling by skilled nurses and pharmacists, and comprehensive multidisciplinary education programsPatient tools for improving knowledge and understanding of medication and self‐careDecision support aids to empower patients and improve the patient–provider relationshipClinical decision support system‐based interventions to improve the quality and safety of prescribingFinancial incentives and rewards for attainment of treatment goals
CAD indicates coronary artery disease; FH, familial hypercholesterolemia; and HoFH, homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia.
Clinical trials should be designed to include strategies to improve adherence. For example, unblinded trials could allow patients the opportunity to choose from among available medications to get to a specific treatment goal. A broad array of medications and dosing options now exist to allow for trials to identify optimal adherence strategies. Multifactorial interventions for addressing nonadherence can be expensive and their cost effectiveness needs confirmation.

Potential Roles of Atherosclerosis Imaging in Management
Atherosclerosis imaging has assumed increased importance in understanding the natural history of CAD. The presence of subclinical atherosclerosis has been linked to risk factor burden. Presence of coronary artery calcium improves risk stratification in those with mild to moderate risk; conversely, the absence of subclinical atherosclerosis in adults (coronary artery calcium score of 0) has been linked to freedom from cardiovascular events for a meaningful time. Atherosclerosis regression has been demonstrated in clinical trials and has been associated with improved cardiovascular outcomes. Noncoronary vascular beds have been used in many imaging studies, the most important being the carotid for both presence/absence of plaque and intima‐media thickness. Atherosclerosis in the abdominal aorta, visible on magnetic resonance imaging, has shown a strong correlation with coronary atherosclerosis in the Pathobiological Determinants of Atherosclerosis in Youth study. Atherosclerosis imaging has been proposed as a valid end point of clinical trials of preventive therapy early in life. In FH, CIMT measurement has demonstrated that late childhood is the time at which meaningful atherosclerosis development can be detected, that CIMT reflects atherosclerosis burden, and that changes in CIMT are directly linked to change in LDL‐C in a dose‐dependent fashion. Coronary artery calcium has been demonstrated in adolescents with FH. In adults, coronary CT imaging has been used to demonstrate atherosclerosis burden in FH and has been shown to independently predict cardiovascular outcomes. In HoFH, current guidelines recommend that imaging be included as part of regular care both for atherosclerosis and for monitoring of aortic stenosis by echocardiography. Regression of atherosclerosis in children with HoFH has been shown in 2 children with a dramatic response to lipid‐lowering treatment.
While imaging research has led to a much better understanding of the natural history of FH, how to incorporate imaging into FH care remains unknown. It is understood that despite risk stratification, there are many patients with FH with calculated risk but a lower atherosclerosis burden than expected; conversely, some patients will have more advanced atherosclerosis than predicted from risk assessment. Atherosclerosis imaging could theoretically inform initiation of treatment (presence of atherosclerosis above a specific threshold), intensification of treatment (excessive atherosclerosis), and deescalation of therapy (substantial regression of atherosclerosis in response to therapy).
A key limitation is lack of a “perfect” imaging marker, that is, one with low cost, high reproducibility, ease of use, and lack of radiation or contrast exposure. Each of the candidate markers falls short of these criteria. In heterozygous FH, CT imaging either for coronary artery calcium or coronary angiography may be suitable for middle‐aged adults but not children or young adults. Before age 40 years, important atherosclerotic lesions may not be calcified or big enough for visualization. CT angiography requires contrast injection and has higher radiation exposure. CIMT does not have the same predictive value in adults as CT measures and normal values for children are not well established. The presence, number, and size of plaques on carotid ultrasound in adults may, however, be useful in risk stratification. Measures of abdominal atherosclerosis have also not been well studied. CIMT requires considerable experience for measurement accuracy and reproducibility; therefore, it may not be widely available.
To achieve the goal of atherosclerosis monitoring as a component of long‐term care, further progress is needed. This includes establishment of thresholds for advanced atherosclerosis using CIMT in those aged <30 years, incorporation of imaging into clinical trials in a way that informs practice, and continued research to identify biomarkers of advanced atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis markers could be used in randomization schemes of trials to assess response to treatment on the basis of baseline atherosclerotic burden. Understanding of the amount of atherosclerosis regression that can be achieved at younger ages versus older ages must be understood. Developing criteria for CT angiography to assess atherosclerosis burden in high‐risk individuals, including lifetime LDL‐C exposure, should be considered.

Transitions
From pediatric to internal medicine care: Transition in pediatrics has been described as: “The purposeful, planned process that addresses the medical, psychosocial and educational/vocational needs for young people and young adults with chronic physical and medical conditions as they move from child‐centered to adult‐oriented healthcare systems.” Table 3 provides a brief overview of issues to be addressed in adolescence as part of transition. Although not frequent in children and adolescents, CAD events may rarely occur, especially in those with HoFH. Education about the symptoms and signs of CAD events to promptly recognize them and seek adequate care is extremely important. The transfer of care occurs at the last transition clinic, but preparation should begin earlier. Children should be taught about their condition and its management as early as age 6 to 8 years. From about 14 years of age onward, adolescents should be seen partly on their own if they wish, and joint clinics with an adult lipidologist should be considered. Children with FH should be transferred to an adult lipid clinic at age 16 to 21 years. Aspects of care to be considered during transition, include the timing of transition, transitioning young people with HoFH to an adult center of excellence, and self‐directed management and autonomy in those with HeFH (Table 3).
Managing Transition of Care From Pediatrics to Internal Medicine
Issues	Strategies	 	Education regarding FH	Knowledge of the condition, natural history, inheritance, treatments, and new treatments	Graphs and illustrations to visualize lipid‐lowering goals such as the Starr Chart (Starr et al, 2008),10 of which provides a graphic illustration of expected values in the presence or absence of FH‐causing mutationsFamily‐based counseling regarding inheritance	 	Empowerment/independence/adherence	Feeling comfortable managing care, able to navigate health care systemsUnderstanding the importance of medication and monitoring of lipid concentrations, side effects, and heart disease risk and dietary interventions	Discussions around the importance of diet, healthy lifestyle, and the avoidance of smoking/vapingAge‐appropriate digital communications regarding treatment and goalsAdolescent girls on statin therapy should be given advice on contraception as appropriate	 	Social awareness	Understand implications of an FH diagnosis with regard to the near future including further education, employment, marriage, and insurabilityMaintain medical care after transitions to higher education or work	Provide clear and age‐appropriate understanding of how sustaining preventive cardiology care is an important lifestyle choiceDevelop strategies to make continuity of care easier including introductions to internal medicine care providers	 	Psychological support	Children and young people with HeFH may feel confused by medical appointments and testing when they feel healthyYoung adults feel peer pressure regarding having to take medications and having to consider different lifestyle choices on diet, alcohol, smoking compared with their peersPatients with HoFH have a chronic lifelong condition that may require lipid apheresis from a young age and has an adverse impact on their physical and mental well‐being	Teach about the difference between preventive treatment to live a long healthy life vs acute disease treatmentHave resources available for personal support related to an FH diagnosis, including psychology consultation if neededUse family support to teach coping mechanisms
FH, familial hypercholesterolemia; HeFH, heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia; and HoFH, homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia.
Research on care transition in FH has identified barriers but also strategies to facilitate transition. There are many transition pathways that are used by health professionals. One example is the Ready, Steady, Go transition pathway. The need for psychological support at the time of care transition to address issues related to peer pressure and lifestyle choices should be recognized. A survey of parents and young adults reported that young people were considered “novice” decision makers. A perceived lack of understanding of their disease was highlighted. Five of the young adults interviewed in this study reported challenges in understanding the reason for compliance with statin therapy while feeling well and without symptoms. Peer pressure and feeling different was also highlighted as a concern for young adults who had been treated as children. Enabling young people to be decision makers and empowering them with meaningful and measurable guidance on LDL‐C target concentrations for example is likely to improve adherence to statin therapy. The Starr Chart has been shown to be useful in diagnosis, defining age‐ and sex‐specific distribution of LDL‐C and total cholesterol derived from mutation‐negative relatives.
Pregnancy and peripregnancy: Pregnancy is a stressful time for patients with FH, particularly HoFH. Families will have differing perspectives on critical issues including genetic testing, lipid‐lowering management during pregnancy, and pregnancy termination if a genetic abnormality is identified.
Family planning should be addressed early in both women and men and should involve LDL‐C testing of the partner and counseling; preconception counseling and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing with counseling of couples known to have FH should always be offered. Safe and effective methods of contraception are important to avoid unplanned pregnancies, especially in women and adolescent girls with HoFH. Pregnancy and lactation in women with FH results in prolonged exposure to elevated LDL‐C due to both the discontinuation of cholesterol‐lowering medication and the changes in lipoprotein metabolism during pregnancy. Cumulative loss of years on statin treatment during pregnancy and breastfeeding may have a bearing on CAD outcomes in mothers and progeny; early detection and treatment of FH and judicious family planning advice will minimize this potential risk. Children born to a parent with HoFH and a parent without FH are obligate heterozygotes and should be formally diagnosed and offered treatment by the age of 8 years.
A summary of the management of FH in and around pregnancy is given in Table 4. The risks and benefits of statin and other lipid‐lowering therapies during pregnancy should be discussed, and the continued use of statin therapy, or the introduction of statin and other lipid‐lowering therapies during the second and third trimesters, advised carefully. The Food and Drug Administration has acknowledged the net benefits of statins during pregnancy in women at high risk of CAD, particularly those with HoFH. No safety data are available on the use of bempedoic acid, PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies, inclisiran, lomitapide, or evinacumab in patients with FH during pregnancy. Women with HoFH at high risk of CAD, or with established CAD or aortic valve disease, offer the greatest challenge and should be offered weekly or fortnightly lipoprotein apheresis, if feasible.
Clinical Recommendations on the Treatment of FH During Pregnancy
All women and adolescents of childbearing potential should be counseled on the risks of pregnancy. Advice on contraception with minimal cardiovascular risk, and the importance of contraception regimens should be reinforced to prevent unplanned pregnancy.	 	Reinforcement of optimal heart‐healthy behaviors, including diet, physical activity, and mental well‐being, should be prioritized before, during, and after pregnancy and breastfeeding.	 	Prepregnancy counseling should be offered to and reinforced in all women before starting a statin, ezetimibe, PCSK9 inhibitor, or other cholesterol‐lowering medication.	 	Assessment of CAD using imaging (eg, CT angiography for coronary artery disease or echocardiography for aortic stenosis) should be offered to women with HoFH or high‐risk HeFH before a planned pregnancy.	 	Bile acid sequestrants may be considered to treat hypercholesterolemia, ideally 3 mo before a planned pregnancy, as well as during pregnancy and lactation; malabsorption of fat‐soluble vitamins (particularly vitamin K) and folate should be monitored.	 	Statins and other systemically absorbed cholesterol‐lowering drugs should be discontinued 3 mo before planned conception, and during pregnancy and lactation. If a woman with FH becomes pregnant while taking a statin, ezetimibe, a PCSK9 inhibitor, or other cholesterol‐lowering medication, treatment should be stopped and some reassurance given that the treatment was unlikely to have harmed the fetus.	 	In women with HoFH and clinical CAD, the continued use of statin therapy should be considered. The use of statins, ezetimibe, PCSK9 inhibitor, or other lipid‐modifying therapy should also be considered after the first trimester, particularly if the LDL‐C goal is not achieved and lipoprotein apheresis is not feasible.	 	Lipoprotein apheresis should be continued or initiated during pregnancy in women with HoFH or severe HeFH, especially in those with established CAD and in whom LDL‐C is not at goal and lipoprotein (a) is elevated.
CAD indicates coronary artery disease; CT, computed tomography; FH, familial hypercholesterolemia; HeFH, heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia; HoFH, homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia; LDL‐C, low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol; and PCSK9, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9.
Experiencing a CAD event: CAD events are defined as acute coronary syndromes (myocardial infarction or unstable angina), stable angina needing or not needing coronary revascularization, and atherothrombotic strokes. People with FH also have a higher chance of developing aortic valve disease. Due to exposure to high LDL‐C since birth, CAD may occur earlier in those with FH than in the general population. The severe FH phenotype characterized not only by higher LDL‐C concentrations but also by the presence of other risk factors for atherosclerosis (male sex, higher lipoprotein (a), smoking, early family history of CAD in first‐degree relatives, and elevated burden of subclinical atherosclerosis) is associated with a higher risk of event onset early in life.
Having a CAD event, especially an acute coronary syndrome, implicates the need for invasive coronary angiography, percutaneous coronary intervention, dual antiplatelet therapy, and more intensive LDL‐C–lowering therapy. More frequent medical visits will be required. There will be a need for physical rehabilitation and possible limitations related to work and general activity. Insurance denial or cost overcharge may become an issue. For stable coronary heart disease, revascularization, either percutaneous or surgical, will depend on atherosclerotic plaque burden and ventricular function. The fear of event recurrence and death may have a negative psychological impact, depending on disease severity. All these changes will require a reorientation of the family, both those with and without FH, to the new circumstance of prevalent heart disease.
Resilient FH: Patients who survive to an advanced age (eg, beyond 70 or 75 years) without experiencing CAD events are now being referred to as resilient. It appears that these patients are more likely to be women and have fewer CAD comorbidities, lower plasma lipoprotein (a) concentrations, larger‐size high‐density lipoprotein particles, and reduced immune‐mediated vascular inflammation compared with patients with HeFH who experience a CAD event. Resilient patients with FH may be predicted by lower scores using an FH‐specific CAD risk prediction equation or by a low or absent burden of subclinical coronary atherosclerosis. Identification of resilient FH at an early stage would improve risk stratification, inform better use of resources, and enhance personalized management plans for patients with FH. Detailed studies of resilient FH patients may point to new therapeutic opportunities for treating higher‐risk patients, as suggested by findings relating to high‐density lipoprotein functionality and inflammation.

Evidence Gaps With Regard to a Life Course Approach to FH Care
A fundamental difference between FH and other tier 1 genetic conditions, which include genes for breast cancer and colon cancer, is that in the latter, models of care are based on early detection and treatment while for FH, the goal is to prevent the occurrence of the adverse outcome, CAD. The prior discussion highlights the complexity of this lifelong prevention effort. While existing clinical trials tell us a lot about care at a single point in the life course, they do not address issues related to transitions in care or the lifelong monitoring of risk and atherosclerosis burden required to prevent CAD. These include decision making about when to start treatment, how intensively to treat, how to monitor treatment outcomes, when treatment can be interrupted (eg, pregnancy, in the absence of atherosclerosis), and the best ways to implement these preventive interventions. A summary of the evidence gaps identified by a life course approach to treatment are provided in Table 5.
Evidence Gaps in Caring for FH Over the Life Course
Age to initiate treatment	 	Should be initiated in relation to atherosclerosis developmentAccount for cumulative LDL‐C burdenRisk stratification	 	Sex/genderTraditional risk factors (smoking, diabetes, hypertension, morbid obesity)Lipoprotein (a)Family historyTreatment goal	 	Achieve optimal LDL‐C concentrations for prevention in the general populationTreat to lower goals to overcome chronic lifetime exposure and prior undertreatmentPregnancy managementRole of atherosclerosis imaging in monitoring care	 	Identify atherosclerosis severity measures for treatment intensificationIdentify atherosclerosis thresholds where medication can be discontinued safely for periods of timePrediction of resilient FH (living to beyond age 70 years without an event)Implementation	 	Society	 	Understanding the value of preventionEquitable care delivery including lack of genetic discriminationHealth care systems	 	Family‐based careEfficient FH care deliveryAdherence	 	Teaching the importance of preventionChoice of medicationCostCare transitions	 	Optimal strategies for transition of care from childhood to adulthoodPregnancy managementCare protocols for those aged >70 years without an event
FH indicates familial hypercholesterolemia; and LDL‐C, low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol.
To address these evidence gaps, clinical trials with innovative designs will be needed. Considerations in designing these trials should include patient‐centered outcomes, incorporation of imaging in ways that inform how to integrate imaging into practice, and consideration of lifetime LDL‐C exposure as opposed to LDL‐C level at the time of trial initiation, as an entry criterion. Qualitative research will be needed to identify the best strategies for efficiently providing FH care within diverse health care contexts around the world, improving the public's perception about the value of preventive care, improving medication adherence, and implementing family‐based care. Registries will be needed to establish and monitor metrics related to FH clinical outcomes.

Summary
In this review for patients with FH, we have suggested a change from a focus on the moment of care at the time of the physician encounter to a consideration of the burden of CAD prevention over the life course. This will require personalization of care with attention to key points of care transition, and consideration of medical and aspects of treatment: increased attention on the medical side to atherosclerosis burden and risk exposure, and on the social side to each person's and each family's circumstances, goals, and interests regarding FH care. Personalization will require consideration of the diverse social determinants of health worldwide. Included in this are resources within individual countries, social class, cultural beliefs, and race and ethnicity, all of which could impact availability and affordability of health care providers, pharmacologic treatments, and genetic testing. Moving to this new paradigm will require substantial research and advocacy, including implementation science. The outcome, optimally, will be a CAD‐free life for those with FH.

Disclosures
Dr Gidding is a consultant for Esperion. Dr Blom reports research grants from Amgen, Amryt, AstraZeneca, Sanofi, and Regeneron; lecture fees and personal fees from Amgen, Amryt, AstraZeneca, Cipla, MSD, Organon, Sanofi‐Aventis, and Novartis. He is a consultant for Esperion. Dr McCrindle reports being a consultant for Amryt Pharma, Chiesi, Esperion, J&J/Janssen, and Ultragenyx. Dr Ramaswami reports being a consultant for Esperion. Dr Santos reports receiving research support from Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico Pesquisa (CNPq) grant number 303771/2023–2; and has received honoraria related to consulting, research, and/or speaker activities from Amryt, Amgen, Aché, AstraZeneca, Biolab, Esperion, Eli Lilly, Kowa, Libbs, Novo‐Nordisk, Novartis, PTC Therapeutics, and Sanofi/Regeneron. Dr Watts reports grants and/or honoraria from Amgen, Novartis, Arrowhead, Esperion, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Novo‐Nordisk, Silence Therapeutics, CSL Seqirus, and Sanofi‐Regeneron. Dr Wiegman reports grants and/or honoraria from Amgen, Chiesi, Esperion, Merck, Novartis, Sanofi‐Regeneron, Silence Therapeutics, and Ultragenyx.

References
International atherosclerosis society guidance for implementing best practice in the care of familial hypercholesterolaemia
2023 update on European atherosclerosis society consensus statement on homozygous familial Hypercholesterolaemia: new treatments and clinical guidance
Cost‐effectiveness and return on Investment of a Nationwide Case‐Finding Program for familial hypercholesterolemia in children in the Netherlands
Addressing knowledge gaps in the primary prevention of atherosclerotic heart disease
The agenda for familial hypercholesterolemia: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association
Familial hypercholesterolaemia: evolving knowledge for designing adaptive models of care
Barriers, facilitators, and solutions to familial hypercholesterolemia treatment
World heart federation cholesterol roadmap 2022
Reducing the clinical and public health burden of familial hypercholesterolemia: a global call to action
Worldwide experience of homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia: retrospective cohort study
Contemporary homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia in the United States: insights from the CASCADE FH registry
Marked plaque regression in homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
Clinical practice recommendations on lipoprotein apheresis for children with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia: an expert consensus statement from ERKNet and ESPN
Special commentary
Adherence to a Mediterranean diet, dyslipidemia and inflammation in familial hypercholesterolemia
Paediatric patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia treated with evolocumab for 80 weeks (HAUSER‐OLE): a single‐arm, multicentre, open‐label extension of HAUSER‐RCT
Alirocumab in pediatric patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia: a randomized clinical trial
Harnessing RNA interference for cholesterol lowering: the bench‐to‐bedside story of Inclisiran
Evinacumab for homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
Cardiovascular outcomes in patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia on lipoprotein apheresis initiated during childhood: long‐term follow‐up of an international cohort from two registries
Intima‐media thickness in treated and untreated patients with and without familial hypercholesterolemia: a systematic review and meta‐analysis
20‐year follow‐up of statins in children with familial hypercholesterolemia
LDL‐cholesterol goal achievement, cardiovascular disease, and attributed risk of Lp(a) in a large cohort of predominantly genetically verified familial hypercholesterolemia
Beyond early LDL cholesterol lowering to prevent coronary atherosclerosis in familial hypercholesterolaemia
Statin non‐adherence and residual cardiovascular risk: there is need for substantial improvement
Evaluation of a multidisciplinary lipid clinic to improve the care of individuals with severe lipid conditions: a RE‐AIM framework analysis
Strategies of improving adherence to lipid‐lowering therapy in patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
Pathobiological determinants of atherosclerosis in youth (PDAY) risk score in young adults predicts coronary artery and abdominal aorta calcium in middle age: the CARDIA study
Role of coronary artery calcium score in the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease
Association of Statin Treatment with Progression of coronary atherosclerotic plaque composition
Risk scores predict atherosclerotic lesions in young people
Earlier treatment in adults with high lifetime risk of cardiovascular diseases: what prevention trials are feasible and could change clinical practice? Report of a National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) workshop
Coronary artery calcium and cardiovascular events in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia receiving standard lipid‐lowering therapy
Coronary artery and carotid artery plaques in patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
The added value of coronary calcium score in predicting cardiovascular events in familial hypercholesterolemia
Usefulness of electron beam tomography in adolescents and young adults with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
Transition to adult health care for adolescents and young adults with chronic conditions: position paper of the Society for Adolescent Medicine
Transition of care to adult congenital heart centres: what do patients know about their heart condition?
Current management of children and young people with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia ‐ HEART UK statement of care
HEART UK statement on the management of homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia in the United Kingdom
Ready, Steady, Go
Transitioning from pediatric to adult health care with familial hypercholesterolemia: listening to young adult and parent voices
Development of sensitive and specific age‐ and gender‐specific low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol cutoffs for diagnosis of first‐degree relatives with familial hypercholesterolaemia in cascade testing
Counseling couples at risk of having a child with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia—clinical experience and recommendations
It is time to screen for homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia in the United States
Marked changes in plasma lipids and lipoproteins during pregnancy in women with familial hypercholesterolemia
Familial hypercholesterolaemia in pregnancy: Australian case series and review
Young women with familial hypercholesterolemia have higher LDL‐cholesterol burden than men: novel data using repeated measurements during 12‐years follow‐up
Update on statin use in pregnancy
Defining severe familial hypercholesterolaemia and the implications for clinical management: a consensus statement from the international atherosclerosis society severe familial hypercholesterolemia panel
2023 ESC guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes
Familial hypercholesterolemia and cardiovascular disease in older individuals
A resilient type of familial hypercholesterolaemia: case‐control follow‐up of genetically characterized older patients in the SAFEHEART cohort
What characterizes event‐free elderly FH patients? A comprehensive lipoprotein profiling
Gene expression profiling in elderly patients with familial hypercholesterolemia with and without coronary heart disease
Predicting resilience in heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia: a cohort study of octogenarian patients