Critical Appraisal of Guidelines for Daytime Urinary Incontinence in Children: Evaluation of Quality and Recommendations on Diagnostics
ABSTRACT
Aims
This study aimed to evaluate the quality of currently available guidelines on non‐neurogenic daytime urinary incontinence (DUI) in children and compare their content regarding the assessment of a child with DUI.
Methods
We conducted a systematic search for guidelines on non‐neurogenic DUI in children. A multidisciplinary team assessed the quality using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II (AGREE) instrument, which contains 23 items organized into six domains. Besides, each member evaluated if they would recommend using the guidelines. We extracted diagnostic recommendations from all guidelines for a descriptive comparison.
Results
Eight guidelines were included. Overall quality scores ranged from 2.6 to 5.8 on a 7‐point scale, (1 for lowest and 7 for highest quality). Three guidelines were rated as good, four as moderate, and one as low quality. The AGREE‐II domain Clarity and Presentation received high scores across all guidelines, while Rigour of Development and Applicability received the lowest scores. Recommendations for diagnostics were generally similar, with variations observed in guidelines targeting primary and secondary healthcare.
Conclusions
This study is the first to assess the quality of guidelines on non‐neurogenic DUI in children. The quality varies, only two out of eight guidelines were recommended by the review team without adjustments. Guideline developers could improve the quality of their guidelines by using tools like AGREE II. Clinicians should consider the findings of our study when selecting a guideline to use in their daily practice.
Clinical Trial Registration
As this is a review, no clinical trial registration was conducted. The review protocol has been registered in PROSPERO (CRD42021149059).

Introduction
Daytime urinary incontinence (DUI) is a common problem amongst children and stems from either a neurological condition or a non‐neurogenic cause. Depending on the healthcare system, various healthcare professionals may be involved in the evaluation and treatment of this bothersome condition. To guide professionals, numerous (inter)national organisations have created guidelines. It has been proven that the use of guidelines improves outcomes and the process and structure of care. However, the potential benefits of a guideline depend on its quality. As healthcare professionals rely on guidelines as the cornerstone of their practice, it is important to know the quality of these guidelines. Additionally, being aware of the existence and variations among guidelines enables healthcare professionals to make informed decisions.
We aimed to evaluate the quality of the current guidelines on DUI in children and to compare the content regarding the assessment of children with non‐neurogenic DUI.

Materials and Methods
We performed a systematic assessment of quality and content of guidelines regarding non‐neurogenic DUI in children using the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II (AGREE II) instrument. The review protocol was registered in PROSPERO (CRD42021149059).

Search Strategy
Search of all relevant scientific associations’ websites.
Inquiry about any national guidelines among international experts in pediatric urology.
Search of PUBMED, EMBASE, The Cochrane Library, Health Technology Assessment Database, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Web of Science, Guidelines International Network, and Translate Research into Practice, using both MeSH terms [“urinary incontinence”, “child”, “pediatrics”, “practice guidelines as topic” and “guidelines as topic”], and free text (all fields) terms [“urinary”, “incontinence”, “diurnal”, “enuresis”, “child(ren)”, “paediatric(s)”, “pediatric(s)”, “adolescent”, “practice guideline”, “guideline”, “CPG”].
Google search in English, Dutch and German and assessment of the first 50 results per search attempt.
The search strategy included four pathways (full details in Supporting information Part A):

Guideline Selection
The first search was performed in March 2020. Guidelines regarding non‐neurogenic DUI, published from January 2000 onwards were included, when written in a language the review members could comprehend or one that could be translated accurately. Only the most recent guideline of each organization was used. Two investigators (JML and IH) independently pre‐selected potentially eligible publications based on title and abstract. Next, the full texts of the selected articles were examined for usability. When they disagreed, a third investigator (MHB) issued a judgment.
To ascertain whether any new guidelines were published or existing ones updated, we repeated the searches in May 2024.

Quality Assessment and Data Collection
The quality of each guideline was assessed with the AGREE tool version II, that contains 23 items organized into six domains. The review team consisted of six physicians, including a paediatric urologist, a paediatrician, a professor in (paediatric) urology, a researcher, a urologist in training/epidemiologist, and a general practitioner/epidemiologist. They independently assessed each guideline, excluding team members involved in guideline development to prevent conflicts of interest. When guidelines covered multiple topics, only chapters related to DUI were assessed. Quality scores were calculated for each AGREE domain as a percentage. Finally, reviewers rated the overall quality of the guideline on a 7‐point scale (1 for lowest and 7 for highest quality) and provided recommendations for its use. Afterwards, a group meeting was held to discuss the results.
Next, the diagnostic process was extracted from all guidelines for a descriptive comparison of recommendations. In a second part of this review, we will evaluate recommendations on the treatment of DUI.

Data Analysis
We categorized the domain scores in low, moderate or high quality with cut offs set at, respectively, < 30%, 30%–60%, and > 60%. Overall quality was presented as scores from 1 (low) to 7 (high) and categorized as low (1.0–2.9), moderate (3.0–4.9) or high quality (score 5.0–7.0).
In the analysis we observed certain discrepancies due to the different approaches of the reviewers. To test the influence of these discrepancies and the robustness of quality scores, we compared three scores: The first score represents the ‘raw scores’ as calculated after completion of the tool by every team member. To overcome the influence of outliers, the second score represents the calculation by omitting the lowest and highest grade. For the third score, we had a group discussion about those scores where major differences (i.e. > 3 points) between two or more investigators were seen. The meeting aimed to identify information sources and clarify interpretations of the AGREE II tool, rather than reaching a consensus. After the team meeting, each member had the opportunity (but not the obligation) to adjust scores for the discussed items.

Results

Guideline Selection
We retrieved four guidelines from websites of known associations (Figure 1).
Flowchart of inclusion. CPG, clinical practice guideline; DUI, daytime urinary incontinence.
Fifteen colleagues from 12 different countries additionally suggested four national guidelines, of which three were included. Due to language barriers, a Japanese guideline was excluded. Colleagues from countries without a national guideline stated they used the guidelines from the International Children's Continence Society (ICCS) or the European Association of Urology (EAU).
No new eligible guidelines were found through the search of scientific databases, that included 1316 records. The Google search led to 1 new eligible guideline.
Overall, we included 8 guidelines published between 2010 and 2019, from Europe (n = 5), Australia (n = 2), and one international. For an extensive overview of the included guidelines see Table 1.
Summary of included guidelines.
Organisation, country	Year	Target users	Red flagsa	 	NVU/NVK, the Netherlands	2008	Pediatricians, (pediatric) urologists, urotherapists	Not mentioned specifically	 	NCJ, the Netherlands	2011	Youth healthcare professionals (primary care) treating children < 5 years	Reasons for referral to general practice/secondary care are mentioneda	 	AWMF, Germany	2015/2021	Healthcare physicians who treat children with UI	Not mentioned specifically	 	ICCS, international	2017	Not mentioned specifically	Reasons for referral to other specialist are mentioneda	 	RCH, Australia	2018	Clinicians, not further specified	Reasons for referral to general practice/secondary care are mentioneda	 	NSW Government, Australia	2018	Non specialist clinicians (community health practitioners)	Reasons for referral to general practice/secondary care are mentioneda	 	SEA, Sweden	2019	Nurses, doctors, other health practitioners who see children with DUI	Reasons for referral to other specialist are mentioneda	 	EAU, Europe	2019	Not mentioned specifically	Not mentioned specifically
Abbreviations: AWMF, Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Wissenschaftlichen Medizinischen Fachgesellschaften; DUI, daytime urinary incontinence; EAU, European Association of Urology; ICCS, International Children's Continence Society; NCJ, Nederlands Centrum Jeugdgezondheid; NVU/NVK, Nederlandse Vereniging van Urologie/Nederlandse Vereniging van Kindergeneeskunde; NSW, New South Wales; RCH, Royal Children's Hospital; SEA, Svenska Enuresakademien.
Specific red flags are mentioned in Supporting information Part B.

Second Search
No additional guidelines were identified during the subsequent literature search in May 2024, just before the final analysis. Although the guideline published by the EAU had been updated, evaluation revealed that the section on DUI remained unaltered. The Association of the Scientific Medical Societies in Germany (Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Wissenschaftlichen Medizinischen Fachgesellschaften (AWMF)) updated their guideline in 2021. The methodological approach used for the updated guideline was identical to the previous guideline. Consequently, we did not reassess this guideline using the AGREE II tool. When comparing the content of the guidelines, we used the most recent version.

Quality Assessment (Table 2)
Standardized scores across guidelines per domain (AGREE II), sorted on overall quality.
Guideline	Domain 1 Scope and purpose	Domain 2 Stakeholder involvement	Domain 3 Rigour of Development	Domain 4 Clarity and Presentation	Domain 5 Applicability	Domain 6 Editorial independence	Overall quality (min 1‐max 7)	Overall recommendation on use	 	NVU/NVK	91	66	64	87	60	94	5.8	Yes	 	AWMF	69	72	49	91	25	57	5	Yes	 	NCJ	87	86	57	72	58	31	5	Yes with modifications	 	SEA	41	53	9	64	15	11	3.7	Yes with modifications	 	EAUa	44	13	38	66	13	60	3.6	Yes with modifications	 	ICCS	53	29	24	69	13	60	3.5	Yes with modifications	 	NSW	56	75	12	72	35	19	3.3	Yes with modifications	 	RCH	35	27	16	63	15	36	2.6	No
Note: Domain scores are presented as %. Colors are assigned as follows: green > 60% high quality, yellow 30%–60% moderate quality, orange < 30% low quality. For grades: green 1.0–2.9, yellow 3.0–4.9, orange: 5.0–7.0.
Abbreviations: AWMF, Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Wissenschaftlichen Medizinischen Fachgesellschaften; EAU, European Association of Urology; ICCS, International Children's Continence Society; NCJ, Nederlands Centrum Jeugdgezondheid; NVU/NVK, Nederlandse Vereniging van Urologie/Nederlandse Vereniging van Kindergeneeskunde; NSW, New South Wales; RCH, Royal Children's Hospital; SEA, Svenska Enuresakademien.
Scores based on 5 reviewers.
The overall quality assessed was highest in the Dutch Urological Association/Dutch Association of Paediatrics (Nederlandse Vereniging van Urologie/Nederlandse Vereniging van Kindergeneeskunde (NVU/NVK)) guidelines (5.8/7) and lowest in the Royal Children's Hospital (RCH) guideline (2.6/7). Three guidelines were considered good quality, and one of low quality. The guidelines of the NVU/NVK and AWMF were recommended for use in daily practice by the review group. The guideline from RCH was not recommended and the other guidelines only after modifications.

Raw Domain Scores
Scope and purpose: Range 35% to 91%. High quality in three, and moderate quality in five guidelines.
Stakeholder involvement: Range 13% to 86%. High, moderate, and low quality in respectively four, one, and three guidelines.
Rigour of development: Range 9% to 64%. High quality in one guideline, moderate in three, and low quality in four.
Clarity of presentation: Range 63% to 91%. All guidelines were rated high quality.
Applicability: Range 13% to 60%. High quality in one, moderate in two, and low quality in five guidelines.
Editorial independence: Range 11% to 94%. High, moderate and low quality in respectively three, three, and two guidelines.

Processed Scores
Overall, no major differences were observed between the raw and processed domain scores (Supporting information Part C). In the group discussion new information emerged on the development of one guideline, causing the score on domain 2 to rise from 27% to 55%.
Removing the highest and lowest grades for each guideline did not cause noteworthy changes in scores.

Comparison of Content
Some guidelines lacked clarity regarding their target users (Table 1). Most guidelines focused on either primary or secondary care. Guidelines targeting primary care (e.g., general practitioners, youth healthcare professionals), provided a list of ‘red flags’ for symptoms that warrant referral to specialized physicians (Supporting information Part B).
All guidelines mentioned an overactive bladder (OAB) as possible cause for urinary incontinence (UI). Other causes of UI, such as an underactive bladder (UAB), dysfunctional voiding (DV) and voiding postponement were mentioned in all guidelines, except for UAB (not mentioned by the government of New South Wales (NSW)), and voiding postponement (not mentioned by the Swedish Enuresis Academy (Svenska Enuresakademien (SEA))). The importance of recognizing the coexistence of bowel dysfunction, such as constipation or fecal incontinence, was emphasized in all guidelines.

Recommendations on Diagnostic Evaluation

History Taking and Voiding Diary
Medical history taking, with or without the use of specific questionnaires, and the use of a voiding diary for 2 or 3 days, were stated as primary evaluation in all guidelines (Table 3). Two did not specify a timespan for the voiding chart, and one advised to keep an incontinence diary as well for 14 days.
Recommendations on diagnostic evaluation of a child with DUI.
Guideline	Voiding diary (duration)	Analyze bowel function	Physical exam	Urinalysis	Urine culture	Ultrasound	Uroflow	Invasive examination	 	NVU/NVK	All children w/UI (at least 3 days)	All children w/UI	All children w/UI (genital investigation, lumbosacral spine, lower extremities, gait, signs of constipation)	All children w/UI	When urinalysis shows signs for UTI	Abdominal US: All children w/UI for rectum diameterRenal US: only necessary when suspicion of comorbidity	All children w/UI, including PVR. At least one, preferably more.	On suspicion of comorbidities or anatomical abnormalities, refractory UI or before invasive/surgical treatment	 	NCJ	All children w/UI	All children w/UI	All children w/UI (ano‐genital examination, lumbosacral spine, abdomen, length/weight)	All children w/UI (primary care)a	Not mentioned	Renal US: all children w/UI (secondary care)a	All children w/UI in (secondary care)a	Refer to GP or hospital when: red flags, suspicion of OAB, overactive pelvic floor, wrong micturition habits or refractory to usual treatment by healthcare professionals, secondary incontinence	 	AWMF	All children w/DUI (at least 2 days) + incontinence diary (14 days)	All children w/DUI	All children w/DUI (genital inspection, lumbosacral spine, lower extremities, gait)	All children w/DUI	When suspecting UTI	US of upper urinary tract, bladder, rectum diameter and PVR in all children w/DUI	When signs of organic cause of UI, PVR or abnormality on US	On suspicion of neurogenic bladder dysfunction, urethral valves	 	ICCS	All children w/intermittent UI (3 days)	All children w/intermittent UI	All children w/intermittent UI (not further specified)	All children w/intermittent UI	All children w/intermittent UI	Bladder US in all children w/intermittent UI	All children w/intermittent UI, including PVR	When refractory to urotherapy	 	RCH	All children w/DUI (no duration mentioned)	All children w/DUI	All children w/DUI (height, weight, blood pressure, abdominal examination, genital inspection, lumbosacral spine, lower extremities, gait)	All children w/DUI	All children w/DUI	Renal tract US + PVR when failing initial behavioral management/red flags	Not mentioned	Not mentioned	 	NSW	All children w/DUI (no duration mentioned)	All children w/DUI	All children w/DUI (abdominal, spine, neurological, genitalia)	All children w/DUI	Not specified	± Renal US + PVR	In case of complicated DUI (specialized clinics)	Refractory cases and when surgery is contemplated	 	SEA	All children w/DUI (for some days)	All children w/DUI	All children w/DUI (Lower extremities, lumbosacral spine, rectal examination)	All children w/DUI	Not mentioned	US upper urinary tract only when UTI w/fever or pathologic urodynamic studies.US abdomen (rectal diameter when need to rule out constipation)	If refractory to standard urotherapy, bladder emptying problems or boys w/UTI (all w/PVR)	On suspicion of neurogenic bladder dysfunction or other serious conditions w/upper urinary tract at risk	 	EAU	All children w/LUT conditions, including defecation habits (at least 2 days)	All children w/LUT conditions	All children w/LUT conditions (genital inspection, lumbosacral spine and lower extremities)	All children w/LUT conditions	All children w/LUT conditions	Upper urinary tract US in all children w/LUT conditions	All children w/LUT conditions, including PVR	Reserved for therapy resistant DV or before invasive treatment
Abbreviations: AWMF, Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Wissenschaftlichen Medizinischen Fachgesellschaften; DUI, daytime urinary incontinence; DV, dysfunctional voiding; EAU, European Association of Urology; GP, general practitioner; ICCS, International Children's Continence Society; LUT, lower urinary tract; NCJ, Nederlands Centrum Jeugdgezondheid; NSW, New South Wales; NVU/NVK, Nederlandse Vereniging van Urologie/Nederlandse Vereniging van Kindergeneeskunde; OAB, overactive bladder; PVR, post void residual; RCH, Royal Children's Hospital; SEA, Svenska Enuresakademien; UI, urinary incontinence; US, ultrasound; UTI, urinary tract infection.
NCJ summarizes NVU/NVK guideline.

Physical Examination
Physical examination was always advised, but its extensiveness varied. The ICCS did not specify what must be examined. Congruous advice was to investigate at least the abdomen, spine, and genitals. Neurological examination (with or without gait) was mentioned in five guidelines.

Urinalysis
Urinalysis using dipstick was advised in every guideline. A urine culture was recommended for all children in three, and only for those with suspicion of a urinary tract infection (UTI) based on history or urinalysis in two. Urine cultures were not mentioned in two guidelines. The NSW did not specify when to perform a urine culture.

Uroflowmetry
There was no consensus on the routine use of uroflowmetry. Three guidelines recommended at least one measurement in each child. Other guidelines only demanded uroflowmetry in case of refractory or complicated UI. One guideline did not mention uroflowmetry, and another (primary care guideline) referred to uroflowmetry as a diagnostic tool for secondary care.

Ultrasound (Us)
One guideline advised an US of the bladder, one an US of the upper urinary tract, and three advise both in all children with DUI. Two guidelines recommended a renal US only when there is suspicion of comorbidities such as co‐existing UTIs, but an abdominal US to determine the diameter of the rectum in all children. One guideline referred to the secondary care for US.

Invasive Examination
More invasive examinations such as cystoscopy or urodynamic studies were reserved for a select group of patients with UI. All guidelines, except the RCH, recommended this when the UI was refractory to prior treatment, when there was a suspicion of anatomical abnormalities or before invasive treatment was started.

Level of Evidence
Three associations mentioned levels of evidence or strengths of recommendations. The AWMF rated their recommendations as strongly recommended (should), recommended (could) or open (can be considered), without specifying the level of evidence. Additionally, they indicated the strength of consensus within the guideline group. Other guidelines did not mention the quality of the evidence on which their recommendations were based.

Discussion
This review is the first to assess the quality of guidelines on DUI in children with the AGREE II tool. Of the eight guidelines assessed, only two were deemed to be of high enough quality to be recommended by the review team without adjustments. Five others were recommended when adjustments are made. The guidelines scored low on the domains Rigour of Development and Applicability. As such we see a need for improvement in these domains. Recommendations are mostly consistent among the guidelines, with slight differences between the guidelines aimed at primary and secondary healthcare professionals.

Quality of Guidelines
When assessing the overall quality only three of the eight reviewed guidelines obtained a high score. The overall quality‐score corresponded with a recommendation to use the guideline. However, the AWMF and Dutch Center for Youth and Family (Nederlands Centrum Jeugdgezondheid (NCJ)) both had an overall quality score of 5/7, but the AWMF was recommended, while the NCJ needed modifications. This may be explained by the fact that the NCJ was written for primary care givers (youth healthcare), while the review team mostly consisted of physicians who work in secondary care. It is possible that therefore they did not feel like the NCJ guideline was usable in daily practice.
Only one guideline (NVU/NVK) was appraised as high‐quality in all domains while the others scored moderate or low in at least three domains. The ICCS’ overall score was moderate (3.5/7) with low quality on three domains. It has to be mentioned that the ICCS document is not written as guideline, but as standardization document and therefore it is understandable that it scored lower. However, we deemed it important to illustrate that this widely utilized standardization document is not developed in the same rigorous manner as a formal guideline. It is essential for users to recognize this distinction.
Reviews on guideline appraisal studies in general showed that the quality of guidelines increased over time. The publishing dates in our study did not seem to influence the AGREE scores, with the oldest guideline scoring the best. This can be explained by the short time period of our study, while the reviews analyzed guidelines differing more than 20 years in their studies and the fact that we only included eight guidelines.
Alonso‐Coelloe et al. showed that most guidelines scored acceptable on the domains Scope and purpose and Clarity and presentation, moderate for domain Rigour of development, and low for the other domains. However, they did not mention their thresholds for their rating. Armstrong et al. had similar findings and this is mostly in line with our findings as well.
No previous review of guidelines on DUI in children was performed. However, others have assessed guidelines on other topics of pediatric urology. For example, Chua et al. found higher ratings on domain 1 and 4 among all guidelines on pediatric UTIs, and low ratings on domain 2, 3 and 5. This is in line with our findings and the reviews on reviews.
Only three guidelines included levels of evidence or strengths of recommendations. The AWMF rated their recommendations without detailing the level of evidence, while other guidelines did not mention evidence levels at all. In our opinion, specifying details on the level of evidence is crucial, as it allows readers to effectively assess and evaluate the recommendations.

Processed Scores
During the review process, we encountered discrepancies among the reviewers. Although a calibration meeting was not implemented as this is not mentioned in the AGREE II tool manual, more experienced users suggested its potential value. To study its impact, we recalculated scores(removing highest and lowest score and before and after group discussions), finding no relevant changes in the average scores. Thus, we conclude that a calibration meeting is not strictly necessary with a large reviewer team. However, arranging one beforehand may promote assessment homogeneity.
The most important change in scores after the meeting was seen with the RCH guideline. This received a higher Stakeholder involvement score due to new insights emerging during the group discussion. In our assessment, we noted that important guideline information was sometimes relegated to supplementary documents without proper referencing. The need for guideline users to search for additional information, particularly without specified references, poses a significant concern. Ensuring easy access to and explicit mentioning of supplementary information is crucial for guideline transparency and accurate assessment.

Comparison of Recommendations on Diagnostic Evaluation
All guidelines recommend history taking and the use of voiding diaries, with most suggesting a duration of at least two to 3 days. This is in line with two studies confirming that a 2‐day registration accurately estimates nocturnal urine production, bladder capacity, and fluid intake in children.
There is a lack of consensus among the guidelines on the necessity of urine culture. ICCS, RCH, and EAU recommend it for all children with DUI. NVU/NVK and AWMF suggest it when urinalysis indicates a UTI. NCJ, NSW, and SEA do not address urine culture specifically. Literature review suggests urine dipstick testing without a urine culture is recommended for UTI diagnosis in children aged 2 and older, potentially reducing the need for urine culture and providing cost‐saving opportunities.
All guidelines recommend ultrasound (US), but the target organ varies (e.g., only bladder, only upper urinary tract or both). Considering cost and limited resources, the need for a kidney US should be carefully considered based on individual patient context. NCJ and NSW guidelines, targeting primary care, suggest referral to specialized clinics for resistant cases or red flags due to limited access to diagnostic tools like US and uroflowmetry.
Overall, differences were observed between guidelines aimed at primary care professionals (such as general practitioners, youth healthcare) and specialized clinicians. This is a reasonable difference because some of the diagnostic and therapeutic options require more expertise than is available in primary care, while other options (such as history taking, voiding diaries or physical examination) can decently be executed by primary care professionals.

Strengths and Limitations of the Study
The main strength of this study lies in the composition of the multidisciplinary review group, and the utilization of the validated AGREE II tool to assess the quality of current guidelines. Moreover, we did not only judge the quality of the guidelines but compared the recommendations as well.
A limitation of our study is the potential exclusion of existing guidelines, as some guidelines may be unpublished or restricted to in‐house use. Additionally, our search terms were limited to English, Dutch, and German, possibly omitting guidelines in other languages. We mitigated this by consulting colleagues worldwide, of which many cited reliance on ICCS or EAU guidelines, which were already accounted for in our study. Another limitation is that most research group members had a urology background. While reviewer background is less relevant for most of the AGREE II assessment, it may influence the recommendation for use.
Moreover, it is essential to acknowledge that although the AGREE II tool assesses many aspects of guideline quality, it does not encompass all factors that contribute to an optimal guideline.

Recommendations From This Study
Notably, the NVU/NVK refers to the AGREE II tool in their chapter on guideline development, which could explain why this guideline scores high on all domains. The EAU also employed the AGREE II tool but attained moderate scores for domains 1 and 3, and low scores for domains 2 and 5. Conversely, other guidelines did not reference AGREE. This suggests that AGREE‐based guidelines may be more complete. While utilizing AGREE II could enhance “quality,” its impact may only superficially improve the guideline rather than substantially enhance its quality.
Although it is a general finding that the scores on domain 2, 3 and 5 are low, they are important for the quality of a guideline. Especially the involvement of stakeholders can be crucial for the usefulness of guidelines. This involves ensuring that the development group consists of individuals from all relevant professional groups, that the views and preferences of the target population are taken into account, and that the target users are clearly defined.

Conclusion
The quality of guidelines on DUI in children is diverse, with only two out of eight to be recommended without adjustments by the review team. Mainly in the domains Rigour of Development and Applicability there is room for improvement. Guideline developers could improve the quality of their guidelines by using tools, such as AGREE II. Clinicians should consider the findings of our study when selecting a guideline to use in their daily practice.

Author Contributions
The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: Study conception and design: J. Marleen Linde, Marco H. Blanker; data collection: all authors; analysis and interpretation of results: J. Marleen Linde, Ilse Hofmeester; draft manuscript preparation: J. Marleen Linde. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of the manuscript.

Ethics Statement
This review did not involve human or animal subjects, data, or tissue; therefore, no ethical approval was required.

Consent
The authors have nothing to report.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
The authors confirm that the data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and its supplementary materials. Raw data can be obtained from the corresponding author [JML] upon request.

References
Prevalence of Urinary Incontinence and Other Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms In Children In the Netherlands
The Prevalence of Diurnal Urinary Incontinence and Enuresis and Quality of Life: Sample of School
Does Standardization of Critical Care Work?
Effect of Clinical Guidelines on Medical Practice: A Systematic Review of Rigorous Evaluations
Effects of Evidence‐Based Clinical Practice Guidelines on Quality of Care: A Systematic Review
Translating Guidelines Into Practice. A Systematic Review of Theoretic Concepts, Practical Experience and Research Evidence in the Adoption of Clinical Practice Guidelines
,” The AGREE II Instrument, accessed April 4, 2018, http://www.agreetrust.org.
, , , et al. “EAU Guidelines on Pediatric Urology,” accessed 5, 2024, https://uroweb.org/guidelines/paediatric-urology.
Treatment of Daytime Urinary Incontinence: A Standardization Document From the International Children's Continence Society
, “Richtlijn Urine incontinentie bij kinderen,” accessed 5, 2024, https://richtlijnendatabase.nl/richtlijn/urine-incontinentie_bij_kinderen/urine-incontinentie_kinderen_-_korte_beschrijving.html.
, , , , , and  “NCJ zindelijkheid van urine en feces,” accessed 5, 2024, https://www.jgzrichtlijnen.nl/alle-richtlijnen/richtlijn/zindelijkheid-van-urine-en-feces.
,” Handläggning av urininkontinens datid hos barn, accessed 5, 2024, https://www.svenskaenures.se/files/V%C3%A5rdprogram%202019/Daginkontinens-VP%20slutversion.pdf.
,” Urinary Incontinence ‐ Daytime Wetting, accessed 5, 2024, https://www.rch.org.au/clinicalguide/guideline_index/Urinary_Incontinence_-_Daytime_wetting/.
,” Young People With Urinary Incontinence ‐ Health Professional Guide, accessed 5, 2024, https://aci.health.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/404793/ACI-Urology-Young-people-incontinence-guide.pdf.
The Quality of Clinical Practice Guidelines over the Last Two Decades: A Systematic Review of Guideline Appraisal Studies
Improvement Evident but Still Necessary in Clinical Practice Guideline Quality: A Systematic Review
A Critical Review of Recent Clinical Practice Guidelines for Pediatric Urinary Tract Infection
Intra‐Individual Variability in Voiding Diaries of Children With Enuresis
A Two‐Day Bladder Diary for Children: Is It Enough?
Diagnostic Performance of Urine Dipstick Testing in Children With Suspected Uti: A Systematic Review of Relationship With Age and Comparison With Microscopy