Bites and Stings: Exotic Causes of Stroke in Asia
Abstract
Background
Many unusual and fascinating causes of stroke are seen in Asia. Although rarely encountered in the Western world, such cases are seen not so infrequently by neurologists, physicians, and other healthcare workers in Asian countries. This article highlights some of these intriguing causes of stroke such as snakebite, scorpion stings, and bee and wasp stings.
Summary
Snakebite is a neglected tropical disease of global importance affecting over 5 million people each year, and scorpion stings and bee and wasp stings affect over a million people worldwide every year. Strokes due to these uncommon causes predominantly affect young males in their most productive years, and many victims die or remain with residual disability with significant socioeconomic consequences to the affected families and society. Both ischaemic and haemorrhagic strokes are seen, with ischaemic strokes being more common. Many unanswered questions remain regarding the pathophysiological mechanisms, clinical spectrum, and the natural history of stroke due to these causes. Antivenom is effective in snake envenoming, antivenom and prazosin are effective in scorpion envenoming, and treatment of anaphylaxis and allergy is recommended in systemic reactions due to bee or wasp stings. However, there are no treatment guidelines or expert recommendations to guide the management of stroke in these patients, and there are no data on the safety and efficacy of stroke-specific treatments such as antiplatelet therapy, thrombolysis or endovascular treatment.
Key Messages
More research is clearly needed to unravel the complexities related to stroke following snakebite, scorpion envenoming, and bee and wasp stings, and to guide the development of optimal stroke treatment strategies in these unusual situations. Awareness of these exotic stroke aetiologies is important in early recognition and appropriate management of patients presenting with stroke symptoms in Asian countries, and in global travellers from the region. International collaborations would go a long way in improving our understanding of these rare but fascinating causes of stroke.
Plain Language Summary
Many unusual causes of stroke are seen in Asia, which are rarely encountered in the Western world. This article highlights some of these intriguing causes of stroke such as snakebite, scorpion stings, and bee and wasp stings. Snakebite is a neglected tropical disease of global importance affecting over 5 million people each year, and scorpion stings and bee and wasp stings affect over a million people worldwide every year. Strokes due to these uncommon causes predominantly affect young males in their most productive years. Many unanswered questions remain regarding the underlying mechanisms, clinical features, and the natural history of stroke due to these causes. Management of these cases is challenging as diagnostic and treatment facilities are limited in the regions where these cases are usually seen. There are no treatment guidelines or expert recommendations to guide the management of stroke in these patients. More research is clearly needed to better understand the complexities related to stroke following snakebite, scorpion envenoming and bee and wasp stings and to guide the development of optimal stroke treatment strategies in these unusual situations.

Introduction
Stroke remains a major health problem worldwide. The burden of stroke is especially high in Asia which is home to more than 60% of the world’s population, contributes an estimated 10 million strokes annually to the global stroke caseload, and accounts for a large proportion of stroke-related death and disability worldwide. While the majority of strokes are related to the well-known cardiovascular risk factors, many unique and fascinating causes of stroke, rarely encountered in the Western world, are seen in Asia, especially in the tropical South and Southeast Asian regions. These include tropical infections and toxins from various animals among several other unusual causes. This article reviews stroke due to some of these rare causes: snakebite, scorpion stings, and wasp and bee stings.
This review is based on a literature survey conducted by a single author (U.K.R.) by searching MEDLINE through PubMed with varying combinations of the search terms “snake bite,” “snake envenoming,” “snake venom,” “scorpion sting,” “scorpion envenoming,” “scorpion venom,” “bee sting,” “wasp sting,” “bee venom,” “wasp venom,” and “stroke,” “cerebrovascular disease,” “cerebral infarction,” “intracerebral haemorrhage,” “intracranial haemorrhage.” Only English language articles were acquired. Original articles, case series and case reports from Asian countries were identified. Case reports or case series from outside Asia, non-English language articles, articles without even minimum details on stroke, and those without full text were excluded. Additional related articles were obtained from citation tracking of retrieved articles and tracking of “Related citations” in PubMed.

Snakebite and Stroke
Snakebite is a neglected tropical disease (NTD) of global importance, and is believed to cause more deaths than all other NTDs combined. A study on the global burden of snakebite estimated that 421,000–1,841,000 snake envenomings occur each year worldwide, with incidence ranging from 6.3 to 27.5 per 100,000 per year. The highest number of envenomings is thought to occur in South Asia (121,000/year) and Southeast Asia (111,000/year). Deaths due to snakebite are estimated to range from 20,000 to 94,000 per year worldwide, with South Asia having the highest number of deaths (14,000/year). Neuromuscular paralysis and other neurological manifestations cause significant morbidity and mortality after snakebite. Stroke, however, is a rare neurological complication. Venomous snakes belong to four families: Viperidae, Elapidae, Colubridae, and Atractaspididae. Vipers and elapids are responsible for most of the venomous snakebites in Asia. Vipers (family Viperidae) are the most advanced snakes in evolutionary terms; they are believed to have evolved following the separation of the Australia/Oceania/Antarctica landmass from the rest of Asia and are therefore not seen on these continents. The majority of snakebite-related strokes are seen following viper bites. Russell’s viper (Daboia russelli) is the commonest snake species associated with stroke, and lanceheads in the pit viper family (Bothrops spp.) are considered the second most common snake type reported with stroke. Incidence of stroke following snakebite is unclear, as the available data from the few published case series is limited by a lack of prospective data collection and poor emphasis on stroke identification. Available data suggest an incidence ranging from 15.3 to 25.9 per 1,000 cases. Strokes due to snakebite are commonly seen in young males, with a mean age of ∼40 years and ∼2/3rd of victims being men; this is to be expected as snakebite is usually an occupational hazard among young rural agricultural workers. A spectrum of cerebrovascular injury is seen following snakebite. Mishra et al. reviewed 35 cases of snakebite-associated stroke in the global literature; 33 of them were ischaemic strokes, with 2 cases of intracerebral haemorrhage (ICH). In a review of 83 cases of stroke due to snakebite by Al-Sadawi et al., 77.1% were ischaemic strokes and 20.5% intracranial haemorrhages. It would be natural to expect ICH to be more common than ischaemic stroke following snakebite as coagulopathy and bleeding are well recognized complications. However, the above data indicate that most of the snakebite-related strokes reported worldwide are ischaemic in nature. This apparent paradox may well be related to several factors, including the offending snake species and the geographical location of the victim.
The majority of strokes following snakebites reported from outside Asia are intracranial haemorrhages. Mosquera et al. reported 8 strokes in 309 patients with pit viper (Bothrops spp.) bites in Ecuador: six of them had ICH, one had SAH, and only one had infarction. Haemorrhagic strokes are considered more likely following bites by Bothorps spp., which are mainly seen in Central and South America. In contrast, the majority of the strokes following snakebite reported from Asia are ischaemic strokes. The first report of snakebite-associated stroke was by Ameratunga from Sri Lanka who described middle cerebral artery occlusion following a suspected Russell’s viper bite. In a series of ∼500 cases of Russell’s viper bites in central Sri Lanka, Gawarammana et al. reported 9 cases of ischaemic strokes and one ICH. Many of the other reports of ischaemic stroke following Russell’s viper envenoming are from Asia, such as those by Narang et al., Pothukuchi et al., and Gupta et al.. Other snake species associated with ischaemic stroke in Asia include the hump-nosed pit viper (Hypnale hypnale), Indian tree viper (Trimeresurus gramineus), and Korean viper (Agkistrodon blomhoffii brevicaudus). Reports of intracranial haemorrhages following snakebite are less common from Asia.
Stroke following snakebite is usually seen in young adults without traditional vascular risk factors. The underlying pathophysiological mechanisms in stroke following snakebite remain poorly understood, especially in ischaemic stroke. Time from snakebite to onset of stroke symptoms appears to vary widely from 2 h to 2 weeks, suggesting that different underlying mechanisms are likely to contribute to stroke pathogenesis. Cortical involvement, bilateral infarcts, multiple infarcts and involvement of multiple arterial territories are common in ischaemic strokes related to snakebite. This distribution suggests the possibilities of large arterial occlusion due to a generalized prothrombotic state or cardiogenic embolism as likely aetiological mechanisms. Large artery occlusion in the circle of Willis has been well documented in angiographic and autopsy studies. Snake venom is a complex cocktail of compounds with varying chemical properties, and both procoagulant and anticoagulant activity is seen in venom constituents. Procoagulant factors such as snaclecs (snake C-type lectin-like proteins), SVSPs (snake venom serine proteases), SVMPs (snake venom metalloproteases) and aggregoserpentin promote coagulation and platelet aggregation, and lead to thrombotic occlusion of multiple arteries. Snake venom is also postulated to have a direct effect on vascular endothelium leading to vasospasm. Immune-mediated vasculitis has been proposed as a possible mechanism, but most strokes occur within a few hours after the bite which makes this unlikely. Cardiac dysfunction results from several mechanisms such as myocarditis, ischaemia and arrhythmias, but this has been only rarely documented in patients with snakebite-related stroke. Systemic hypotension can occur following snakebite due to many causes, such as toxin-mediated vasodilatation, myocardial dysfunction or anaphylaxis to antivenom, and may lead to ischaemic stroke. However, watershed infarctions which would be associated with hypotensive episodes are rarely seen following snakebite. Haemorrhagic strokes result from the procoagulant effects leading to consumption coagulopathy, anticoagulant effects, antiplatelet effects and endothelial damage caused by venom components. Snake venom produces a venom-induced consumptive coagulopathy (VICC) due to activation of the coagulation pathway by different toxins such as factor V activators, factor X activators, prothrombin activators and thrombin-like enzymes. This leads to multiple factor deficiencies and low fibrinogen levels. Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) in snake venom promotes fibrin degradation and coagulopathy. SVMPs, snaclecs and SVSPs, in addition to their procoagulant effects, produce depletion of fibrinogen, factors V, X and XIIIa, plasminogen and platelets.
Management of snakebite-related stroke poses many challenges. Stroke can be easily missed in the setting of snakebite as stroke symptoms and signs may be overlooked in the presence of other life-threatening features of envenoming such as neuromuscular failure, AKI or coagulopathy. Neuroimaging facilities, especially MRI evaluation, are not routinely available in settings where snake envenoming is common. Many of the cases reported have been treated with antivenom, but the effect of antivenom on stroke is not clear. There are no data on the safety and efficacy of routine stroke treatments such as antiplatelets, anticoagulants and thrombolysis in patients with snakebite. Outcome following stroke due to snakebite can vary and factors that determine outcome remain unclear, but venom dose, stroke type, stroke location, other systemic involvement and comorbidity are likely to be important.

Scorpion Stings and Stroke
Scorpions have survived more than 400 million years and are considered the most primitive arachnids in existence. They are distributed in all continents except Antarctica, and are more frequently seen in tropical and subtropical climates. There are over 2,500 scorpion species, but only about 30 species are believed to produce human envenomation. Approximately 1.5 million cases of scorpion envenoming and 2,600 deaths due to envenoming are estimated to occur worldwide every year. Envenoming rates are high in Asia, with an estimated 250,000 envenomings and 650 deaths annually. Only about 5% of envenomings are severe, and only 0.3% of cases are fatal. Envenomations are more severe and case fatality is higher in children. In some countries (e.g., Brazil), scorpion stings are more common and produce more deaths than snakebites. Systemic envenomation is more common with scorpions of the family Buthidae, and the genus Mesobuthus is more prevalent in Asia, especially India. The clinical syndrome of scorpion envenomation varies with the scorpion species. The majority of reports of stroke are following stings by the Indian red scorpion (Mesobuthus tamulus).
Neurological manifestations such as fasciculations, muscle spasms and disordered eye movements are well described after scorpion stings, but stroke is a rare complication. Bouaziz et al. reported neurological complications in 78% among 951 patients with severe scorpion envenomation, but stroke was not seen. Previous literature surveys have reported stroke incidence rates of 4–8% in scorpion envenomation. However, strokes are more frequent in several case series of scorpion envenomation from India: Sarkar et al. reported strokes in 3 out of 42 cases of scorpion stings, Chaurasia et al. reported stroke in 6 out of 30 cases, and Udayakumar et al. reported strokes in 4 out of 50 cases. These indicate higher incidence rates ranging from 7.1% to 20%. Strokes are more commonly reported in young males: 63–71% are males and the mean age is 25–33 years. This is likely to be due to outdoor occupational exposure in tropical regions, especially occupational exposure.
Scorpion venom is a complex mix of low-molecular-weight peptide neurotoxins that act on sodium, potassium and calcium ion channels in mammals and insects. Alpha-toxins inhibit the inactivation of voltage-gated sodium channels and beta toxins enhance their activation, whereas potassium channel-specific toxins are potent blockers of the voltage-gated potassium channels. Together, they synergistically produce prolonged depolarization and neuronal excitation. Excitation of postganglionic nerve endings of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system and the adrenal medulla leads to a massive release of catecholamines and acetylcholine, resulting in sympathetic and parasympathetic overactivity. Parasympathetic excitation occurs early and is transient, whereas sympathetic overactivity is prolonged. The sympathetic overactivity and the catecholamine excess trigger an “autonomic storm” which leads to tachycardia, a hypertensive surge, cardiac arrhythmias, myocarditis, myocardial ischaemia due to coronary vasoconstriction, systemic hypotension, pulmonary oedema and cardiogenic shock. In addition, the toxins mediate the release of many inflammatory mediators (interleukin-1, tumour necrosis factor-alpha, platelet-activating factor) and vasoactive peptides (neuropeptide Y and endothelin-1). Activation of the complement system and the coagulation cascade results in systemic inflammation, thrombosis and DIC, and direct neuronal damage. Multiorgan failure, coma, and death may ensue.
The pathophysiological mechanisms leading to stroke following scorpion envenomation are poorly understood. Several possible mechanisms have been postulated for the development of ischaemic stroke; these include cardiogenic embolism secondary to arrhythmias, myocarditis, and myocardial ischaemia, border zone infarction due to systemic hypotension, hypertensive surge following autonomic storm, cerebral vasospasm, endothelial dysfunction, thrombosis and DIC. Intracranial haemorrhages are believed to primarily result from the hypertensive surge associated with autonomic storm. Ischaemic strokes are more common (53–65%), and multiple infarcts (47%) and bilateral infarcts (29%) are frequently seen. Cortical involvement is described in many cases. The occurrence of multiple, bilateral and cortical infarcts suggest that cardiogenic embolism is a more important mechanism. Border zone infarcts are less frequently described, suggesting that systemic hypotension may be of less significance. Haemorrhagic strokes have been located in both cortical regions and basal ganglia, and multiple haemorrhages are rare (seen in only 8%). Hemiparesis and altered consciousness are the main clinical features described. Clinical manifestations are more severe in children and immunocompromised adults. Mishra et al. reported a case fatality rate of 28%. The majority of scorpion stings produce only mild envenomation and may not require specific treatment. There is no consensus on the recommendations for antivenom therapy. It is possible that the response to treatment may be species-specific. A meta-analysis has shown benefit of antivenom treatment in envenomation by Centruroides spp., but no benefit was shown in envenomation by other species. Prazosin has been widely used to mitigate the cardiopulmonary effects of the catecholamine surge. The combination of antivenom and prazosin leads to more rapid recovery of symptoms compared to prazosin alone in envenomation by the Indian red scorpion (M. tamulus). Intensive care management with the treatment of cardiogenic shock and pulmonary oedema is important in reducing deaths following severe envenomation.

Stroke due to Honeybee Stings and Wasp Stings
Bees and wasps are winged insects that belong to the order Hymenoptera. Bees (honeybees and bumblebees; family Apidae) feed on nectar and pollen; they are usually not aggressive but attack humans when provoked. They sting once with a barbed stinger that remains in the victim’s skin and continues injecting venom. Wasps, including hornets and yellowjackets (family Vespidae), feed on other insects, fruits and leftover human food; they are more aggressive and attack even without provocation. They sting multiple times with smooth, retractable stingers (Fig. 1, 2). Bee and wasp stings lead to substantial morbidity and mortality, but reliable global or regional estimates of incidence and case fatality are lacking.
Hymenoptera venom is a mix of peptide toxins (melittin, mast cell degranulating peptide, mastoparan), vasoactive amines (histamine, serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine) and enzymes (phospholipases, hyaluronidase). Many of these compounds have multiple interrelated actions. Phospholipases (PLA1, PLA2) hydrolyse cell membrane phospholipids leading to cell lysis and bind to IgE resulting in anaphylaxis and other allergic reactions. Wasp venom predominantly contains PLA1, whereas bee venom contains more PLA2. Hyaluronidase disrupts the extracellular matrix, facilitating the local spread and entry into blood vessels of venom. Byproducts resulting from the activity of phospholipases and hyaluronidase produce cytotoxicity, inflammation, and stimulation of the immune system. Melittin is the major component in bee venom; it hydrolyses cell membranes, stimulates histamine and catecholamine release, and together with PLA2 produces intravascular haemolysis. Mast cell degranulation peptide in bee venom and mastoparan in wasp venom stimulate mast cell activation and histamine release resulting in allergy and anaphylaxis. Serotonin, histamine, and catecholamines have varying effects on the vasculature producing vasospasm, vasoconstriction, and increased vascular permeability. Histamine, leukotrienes, and thromboxane cause platelet aggregation and predispose to intravascular thrombosis. Clinical effects of Hymenoptera stings are largely due to allergy and anaphylaxis, rather than direct venom-induced toxicity. Systemic manifestations include shock, haemolysis, coagulopathy and DIC, acute kidney injury, liver failure, myocarditis, and multiorgan dysfunction. Kounis syndrome (acute coronary syndrome due to hyper-sensitivity-mediated coronary artery vasospasm) is well described following Hymenoptera stings. The pathophysiology of stroke following Hymenoptera stings is not clearly understood, and multiple overlapping mechanisms are likely to be involved in cerebral ischaemia. These include hypotension and shock following anaphylaxis, platelet aggregation and thrombosis, cerebral vasoconstriction, and cardiogenic embolism secondary to myocardial dysfunction, cardiac arrhythmias, and Kounis syndrome. Exogenous epinephrine used during treatment of anaphylaxis can provoke further vasoconstriction. Intracranial haemorrhage is likely to be the result of hypertensive surges (Fig. 3). Neurological manifestations following Hymenoptera stings are rare. In a case series from Sri Lanka, Witharana et al. described local reactions in 78.9% and anaphylaxis in 4.6% of 322 victims of wasp and bee stings, but neurological complications were not reported. The majority of the case reports of stroke following Hymenoptera stings are from Asia, especially India and Sri Lanka. In a review of 26 cases of ischaemic stroke following Hymenoptera stings, Yang et al. reported an age range of 1–71 years, male: female ratio of 4.2:1, and stroke onset occurring between 15 min and 14 days following the sting. Main symptoms were hemiparesis, dysarthria, seizures, involuntary movements, and altered consciousness. Cortical involvement, multiple infarcts and bilateral infarcts were common. Vascular imaging data were available in 11 cases, with carotid, vertebral or intracranial arterial stenosis or occlusions reported in seven of them. Five patients died, and complete recovery was reported in only 5 patients. Treatment following symptomatic Hymenoptera stings is mainly related to the management of allergic reactions and anaphylaxis with antihistamines, steroids, and adrenaline. No specific antivenom is available. Removing the stinger following a bee sting is important to minimize continued exposure to venom; this is not relevant in wasp stings as the stingers are detached following injection. Optimal management of stroke following Hymenoptera stings is unclear. Thrombolysis has been successfully used in a few cases of ischaemic stroke.
Specimen of Giant honeybee (Apis dorsata) (image courtesy: Dr. Rohitha Witharana, Consultant Physician, Sri Lanka).
Specimen of Greater banded hornet (Vespa tropica) (image courtesy: Dr. Rohitha Witharana, Consultant Physician, Sri Lanka).
CT scan showing brainstem haemorrhage in a patient following wasp sting (image courtesy: Dr. Ajantha Keshavaraj, Consultant Neurologist, Sri Lanka).

Conclusion
Snakebite, scorpion stings and Hymenoptera stings are rare and intriguing causes of stroke in Asia. Their contribution to the stroke burden in the region is unclear as the reported incidence rates are likely to be gross underestimates due to many reasons: lack of systematic data collection, available data being mainly from case reports and small case series, retrospective data collection, lack of neuroimaging facilities in areas where these strokes would be more likely, etc. The available data suggest variations in stroke types and clinical manifestations with different species of snakes, scorpions and bees or wasps, but this is an interesting area that needs further study. The pathophysiological mechanisms of stroke associated with these toxins need further elucidation. Management of these cases can be challenging as stroke can be easily missed when faced with other life-threatening complications such as respiratory failure, AKI or coagulopathy, and diagnostic and treatment facilities are likely to be deficient in the tropical regions of Asia where these causes are commonly encountered. Although the non-stroke management of these conditions is well described, there is no consensus on optimal stroke-specific treatment. More research is clearly needed to better understand the complex mechanisms leading to stroke with these unusual causes, and would likely pave the way for more targeted treatment approaches. More global attention is clearly needed for these NTDs.

Acknowledgments
I thank Dr. Rohitha Witharana, Consultant Physician, Sri Lanka, and Dr. Ajantha Keshavaraj, Consultant Neurologist, Sri Lanka, for providing unpublished images.

Conflict of Interest Statement
The author has no conflicts of interest to declare.

Funding Sources
This study was not supported by any sponsor or funder.

Author Contributions
U.K.R. conceptualized the paper, did the literature survey, and wrote the first draft and the subsequent revisions of the manuscript.

References
Stroke in Asia
The burden, risk factors and unique etiologies of stroke in South-East Asia Region (SEAR)
The global burden of snakebite: a literature analysis and modelling based on regional estimates of envenoming and deaths
Venomous bites, stings, and poisoning: an update
Neurotoxicity in snakebite-the limits of our knowledge
Neurological complications of venomous snake bites: a review
Cerebrovascular accident and snake envenomation: a scoping study
Cerebrovascular injury following scorpion sting and snake envenomation: a case series
Stroke following Bothrops spp. snakebite
Acute ischemic strokes due to bites by Daboia russelii in Sri Lanka - first authenticated case series
Middle cerebral occlusion following Russel’s viper bite
Acute ischemic infarct in the middle cerebral artery territory following a Russell’s viper bite
A rare case series of ischemic stroke following Russell’s viper snake bite in India
Cerebellar infarct with neurogenic pulmonary edema following viper bite
Acute ischemic stroke following Hump-nosed viper envenoming; first authenticated case
Acute ischemic stroke: a rare complication of hump-nosed pit viper (Hypnale spp.) bite: a case report
A case of bilateral occipital lobe infarcts following Indian tree viper bite
Brainstem infarction following Korean viper bite
Cerebral infarction in a young female following snake bite
Cerebral complications of snakebite envenoming: case studies
Current treatment for venom-induced consumption coagulopathy resulting from snakebite
Snakebite envenomation and heart: systematic review
Emerging options for the management of scorpion stings
Neurological and systemic manifestations of severe scorpion envenomation
Scorpion envenomation
Scorpion stings: focus on cerebrovascular complications of envenoming
Epidemiological, clinical characteristics and outcome of severe scorpion envenomation in South Tunisia: multivariate analysis of 951 cases
Cerebrovascular manifestations and alteration of coagulation profile in scorpion sting: a case series
Spectrum of neurological manifestations in scorpion sting
Cerebrovascular manifestations in scorpion sting: a case series
Clinical update on scorpion envenoming
Management of scorpion envenoming: a systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled clinical trials
Hymenoptera stings
Massive cerebral infarct following multiple honeybee stings
Clinical manifestations of wasp stings: a case report and a review of literature
Thrombolysis in ischemic stroke after bee sting: a rare scenario
Clinical consequences of toxic envenomations by hymenoptera
Africanised honey bee sting-induced ischaemic stroke
Bee and wasp stings in Deniyaya; a series of 322 cases
Cerebral infarction following bee stings: case report and literature review
Ischemic stroke after wasp sting