Simulation-based training for fascial plane blocks: A scoping review mapped to the Kirkpatrick evaluation framework
Fascial plane blocks are integral components of multimodal analgesia, and ultrasound guidance improves the precision and safety. Simulation-based training is a promising approach to improvise procedural performance. However, evidence suggesting translation to patient-level outcomes is limited. This scoping review aimed to explore the available evidence on the impact of simulation based training for fascial plane blocks, mapping outcomes to the Kirkpatrick (KP) evaluation framework. A systematic search was conducted per PRISMA-ScR guidelines from standard databases. Eligible studies involved physicians, residents, or certified registered nurses from anaesthesiology and emergency medicine undergoing simulation-based fascial plane block training. Data were extracted on study characteristics, training modalities and duration, block type, assessment tools, feedback from participants, and outcomes. Fourteen pre-/post-interventional studies involving 458 participants were included. Most interventions combined didactic sessions, video demonstrations, and simulation-based training using commercial or custom models. Transversus abdominis plane, serratus anterior plane, erector spinae plane, and fascia iliaca compartment blocks were studied. Outcomes assessment predominately targeted lower KP levels, focussing on learners’ confidence, knowledge, or improved performance in the simulated or clinical environment, immediate post-training. Long-term follow-up was limited, with most evaluations conducted within 3 months of training. Patient-centred outcomes such as complication, infection rate, or patient satisfaction were rarely assessed. Future research should employ validated assessment tools, isolate the impact of simulation from other modalities, and evaluate higher KP levels, including patient outcomes and system-level changes, to establish its true clinical value.

INTRODUCTION
Fascial plane blocks have emerged as essential components of multimodal analgesia in various surgical settings. The advent and integration of ultrasound guided (USG) techniques into regional anaesthesia practice have been shown to significantly enhance the precision, safety, and efficacy of these blocks. However, these blocks require real time needle visualisation, patient positioning, probe orientation, appropriate drug calculation, and skills of the clinician to improve the block proficiency.
Literature on simulation based regional anaesthesia training has shown promising findings, such as improved success rates of blocks and reduced block-related complications. However, this link is often implied rather than empirically validated as a few studies have evaluated the translation of educational gains into real world clinical practice and improvements in patient outcomes, limiting its external validity. The lack of uniformity and consistent validation in assessment methods and outcome measures like skill performance, knowledge retention, self-efficacy, and patient outcomes makes cross-study comparisons challenging and also difficult to establish standardised benchmarks. The Kirkpatrick (KP) model of training evaluation is widely adopted for assessing the impact of training and learning programs, progressing from immediate participant feedback to higher levels that focus on patient outcomes.
In the Indian context and other low resource settings, the implementation of simulation based training faces certain challenges. The high cost of commercial phantoms remains a major barrier to widespread adoption in many teaching institutions. However, innovative approaches using low-cost, custom-made resources such as gelatin, corn starch, olives, mucilage, and raisins have shown utility as feasible alternatives to teach ultrasound-guided procedures in recent studies. While a recent review appraised the outcomes of simulation based educational modalities in regional anaesthesia, to the best of our knowledge, no review has specifically evaluated the impact of simulation based training on fascial plane blocks; these are volume-dependent blocks that require precision injections and accurate drug dosing for optimal patient outcomes.
Therefore, this scoping review aimed to explore the available evidence on the impact of simulation-based training for fascial plane blocks. The primary objective of this scoping review was to systematically map the available evidence on simulation-based training for fascial plane blocks and to evaluate reported outcome measures as per the KP evaluation framework. Secondary objectives were to identify the utility of low-cost custom-made simulators in facilitating such training and existing gaps in the literature and provide directions for future research.

METHODS
The review was carried out in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) 2018 statement. The research question was framed according to the PCC format, where “P” refers to Population, (physicians, resident doctors, and certified registered nurse anaesthetists undergoing simulation-based training for fascial plane blocks), “C” refers to Concept (effectiveness of teaching method on learners evaluated as per KP framework), and “C” refers to Context (simulation-based teaching modalities used for teaching fascial plane blocks).

Literature search
Standard indexing databases, including Medline (PubMed), Medline (Embase), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), and Google Scholar, were searched using both medical subject headings (MeSH) terms and free-text search terms to identify relevant studies. Search terms included a combination of Medical Subject Headings terms and free-text keywords such as “fascial plane block”, “erector spinae plane (ESP) block”, “transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block”, “serratus anterior plane (SAP) block”, “quadratus lumborum (QL) block”, fascia iliaca compartment (FIC) block”, “simulation-based training”, “confidence”, “learning outcomes”, and “skill acquisition”. The references of all eligible studies were also reviewed for possible inclusion of additional studies. A complete search strategy is provided in Supplementary Table 1.
Detailed search strategy
Search entry PubMed	 	MeSH		Medical subject headings			 	Search		Entry terms		Result	 	#1		Simulation		1,011,007	 	#2		TAP BLOCK		1,936	 	#3		#1 AND #2		32	 	#4		Fascial plane block		774	 	#5		#1 AND #4		14	 	#6		Erector spinae plane block		1,948	 	#7		#1 AND #6		11	 	#8		Quadratus lumborum block		784	 	#9		#1 AND #8		1	 	#10		Fascia iliaca compartment block		367	 	#11		#1 AND #10		11	 	#12		Serratus anterior plane		583	 	#13		#1 AND #12		9	 	#14		#3 OR #5 OR #7 OR #9 OR #11 OR #13		78	 	Search entry Embase	 	exp		Emtree keyword with explosion			 	Search		Entry terms		Result	 	#1		Simulation		749,573	 	#2		TAP AND block		3759	 	#3		#1 AND #2		42	 	#4		Fascial plane block		1263	 	#5		#1 AND #4		19	 	#6		Erector spinae plane block		3573	 	#7		#1 AND #6		22	 	#8		Quadratus lumborum block		1670	 	#9		#1 AND #8		6	 	#10		Fascia iliaca compartment block		725	 	#11		#1 AND #10		8	 	#12		Serratus anterior plane		1210	 	#13		#1 AND #12		13	 	#14		#3 OR #5 OR #7 OR #9 OR #11 OR #13		89	 	#1		external oblique intercostal block’/exp OR ‘external oblique intercostal block’		32	 	#2		‘postoperative analgesia’		31,224	 	#3		#1 AND #2		13	 	#4		Abdominal AND surgery		444334	 	#5		#3 AND #4		7	 	Search entry Cochrane	 	MeSH		Medical subject headings			 	Search		Entry terms		Result	 	#1		Simulation		17780	 	#2		TAP BLOCK		2230	 	#3		#1 AND #2		5	 	#4		Fascial plane block		624	 	#5		#1 AND #4		0	 	#6		Erector spinae plane block		2396	 	#7		#1 AND #6		0	 	#8		Quadratus lumborum block		1243	 	#9		#1 AND #8		2	 	#10		Fascia iliaca compartment block		562	 	#11		#1 AND #10		2	 	#12		Serratus anterior plane		777	 	#13		#1 AND #12		1	 	#14		#3 OR #5 OR #7 OR #9 OR #11 OR #13		9	 	Search entry Google Scholar	 			Simulation-based training for fascial plane blocks and educational outcomes		1080	 	Summary	 	Combined search results from all search engines		1174

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Studies reporting educational outcomes, including learner confidence, knowledge, skill, or patient-centric outcomes, following simulation-based teaching of the fascial plane block until 30 June 2025 were included. Included studies were randomised controlled trials, non-randomised experimental studies, randomised crossover studies, and pre-post intervention studies, without any restrictions imposed on setting, languages, or ethnicity. Research reporting non-simulation based interventions, opinion articles, letters, editorials, conference abstracts, commentaries, and reviews were excluded from the study.

Data extraction
Titles and abstracts of retrieved citations were initially independently screened by a pair of authors (NP, PB) to assess suitability for potential inclusion. This was followed by full text evaluation, which was independently conducted by three authors (NP, PB, SG). Disagreements regarding the eligibility of a study were discussed and resolved by mutual agreement and discussion with the senior author (DP). Duplicates were removed after discussion by all the authors. A manual search from the reference list supplemented the inclusion of relevant studies. Data were extracted into two pre-designed spreadsheets. This was done by two authors (RJ, DD) who initially extracted and synthesised information from the eligible studies. Conflicts were resolved by another author (SM).
Extracted data included study type, authors, year of publication, country, number and characteristics of participants, intervention/control groups, block location, simulation teaching–learning model, type of simulator, duration of intervention, duration of follow-up, feedback from participants, and learner outcomes.

Operational definitions
For all outcomes assessed, we accepted the range of definitions and criteria as reported by the included studies. Performance improvement was described in terms such as needling time, number of punctures, number of re-directions, visualisation of needle tip, both in-plane and out-of-plane techniques, fascial plane separation visualisation with drug deposition, and number of attempts. Improvement in confidence was measured using a 5-point or 10-point Likert scale, where 1 indicated no improvement and 5 or 10 showed the most significant improvement. The minimum passing score was defined as answering at least 17 questions correctly out of a total of 19 questions in the questionnaire. Block success rate was defined as achieving 50% or more of analgesia as reported by the patients.
Behaviour change refers to the observable alteration in clinical practice by trainees following educational intervention, demonstrated through improved procedural performance, adherence to safety protocols, clinical decision-making, or communication skills. These changes are typically assessed after a period of time using objective measures such as direct observation, audits, or performance metrics, and reflect the application of acquired knowledge and skills in real or simulated clinical environments.
For this review, we mapped the outcome measures in accordance with the KP evaluation model, in which outcomes were categorised as follows: KP 1 reflected self-reported improvement in confidence, satisfaction, knowledge, and skills; KP 2 referred to observed improvements in knowledge; KP 3 included behaviour changes that reflect the application of acquired knowledge, skills, and attitudes either in simulated settings (KP 3S) or in real clinical environments (KP 3C); and KP 4 represented system change, improvements in patient outcomes, reduction in complications, or financial benefits.

RESULTS
The initial search identified 1186 potentially eligible articles. After duplicate articles removal, 991 articles were screened. Of these, 26 articles underwent full-text evaluation. After the removal of 12 articles, a total of 14 studies were included in the final review [Figure 1]. Relevant descriptive characteristics of the studies are summarised in Tables 1 and 2. The 14 studies involved 458 participants, of whom 398 participants responded for outcome assessment. All the studies were pre-post interventional studies.
Preferred reporting items in systematic reviews and meta-analysis extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR) flow chart
Detailed characteristics of the included studies
Author, year; country		Study design		Population (Pre/post); speciality		Sim model		Instructional design		Fascial plane block		Timing of outcome assessment		Feedback from participants	 	O’Driscoll et al., 2018; USA		Pre-post intervention		13/13 certified registered nurse anaesthetist and anaesthesiologists		Blue phantom ultrasound training model		Didactics, demonstration and practice on blue phantom sim model		TAP block		Immediate and 2 months post-training			 	Park et al., 2019; Korea		Pre-post intervention		23/23 anaesthesia residents		20–30 kg live anaesthetised swine		Didactics, demonstration and practice sim-based TAP block training		TAP block		Post-training (timing not specified)		Challenges- lack of practice and lack of foundational knowledge facilitators- simulation-based training over apprenticeship methods to learn procedural skills and to be included in the residency curriculum	 	Rider et al., 2020; California		Pre-post intervention		28/28 emergency medicine residents		Customised SAP block task trainer simulation model		One day (Didactics and demonstration on human volunteer and practice on sim task-trainer model		SAP block		Immediate post-training		Barrier- learner confidence in performing procedure	 	Torrano et al., 2022, Italy		Pre-post intervention		52/52 anaesthesia residents		BlockSim™Onvision® technology		4 h (Didactics, demonstration on human volunteer and practice on sim model)		ESP		Immediate post-training			 	Arulprakasam et al., 2023; India		Pre- post intervention		15/15; anaesthesia residents		Blue phantom training model		20 minutes per day for 1 week (video-based lecture, live demonstration on human volunteers and needling practice on blue phantom)		TAP block		Immediate post training			 	King et al., 2023; USA		Pre- post intervention		16/9 emergency medicine residents		Cadaver patient		e-module, cadaveric instructional session followed by cadaveric examination session 3 months later		FICSAPTAP block		3 months post- training			 	Paulson et al., 2023; USA		Pre-post intervention		59/59 emergency medicine residents and physicians		Human volunteerUltrasound gel phantom		One h(Didactics, video demonstration and needling practice)		FIC block		Immediate post- training			 	Walsh et al., 2023; USA		Pre-post intervention		36/8 emergency medicine physicians and residents		Pork simulation model		2 h (Didactics, demonstration on human volunteer, needle visualisation, manipulation, hydro-location and hydro-dissection on sim model)		FIC and SAP block		Immediate and at 3 months post-training			 	Wubben, et al., 2023; USA		Pre-post intervention		23/23 emergency medicine residents		Cadaver patientUltrasound phantom		4 h (Didactics, demonstration and practice on human volunteers and USG phantoms)		SAP, FIC block		In-session errors and immediate post-training			 	Kong et al., 2024; USA		Pre-post intervention		16/13 emergency medicine residents		Custom made simulation model for FIC block		One day (didactics, practice on sim model)		FIC block		Two months post-training		Challenges- Lack of time, lack of confidence and limited resources	 	Resta et al., 2024; Italy		Pre-post intervention		76/74 emergency medicine physicians		Human volunteer,Ex-vivo model (turkey thigh)Mannequin HAL S3201BlockSim™		One day (Didactics and demonstration and needling practice on biomass model and immersive simulation on sim model)		ESP and SAP block		Post-training (timing not specified)		Facilitator- Ex-vivo model is a great way to train needling and fascial plane hydro dissection	 	Griesmer et al., 2025; UK		Pre-post intervention		19/19 emergency medicine residents		Fascia iliaca manikinPorcine tissue model		One day (Didactics, LAST immersive simulation sessionAnatomy visualisation on FIC manikinNeedling practice and hydro-dissection on porcine model)		FIC block		Immediate post-training			 	Kramer et al., 2025; USA		Pre-post intervention		48/48 emergency medicine residents, physicians and clinical ultrasound fellows		Customised pork chop FIC simulation model,Block box,FIB procedure note template		One and half h(Didactics)One and half h(Immersive simulation and needling practice)		FIC block		Post-training (timing not specified)			 	Ibarra et al., 2025; USA		Pre-post intervention		34/14;emergency medicine residents and physicians		3D printed spine and rib cage suspended in ballistics gel compatible with ultrasound		30 minutes training session (5-10 mins didactics, 5 mins demonstration and 15-20 min participants to practice on sim modelOne to two sessions per week over 2 months		ESP block		Post-training (timing not specified)		Challenges- time constraints, patient mobility restrictionsFacilitators- easier access to resources, assistance with procedure setup, increased education sessions
ESP=Erector spinae plane block; FIC=Fascia iliaca compartment; SAP=Serratus anterior plane; TAP=Transversus abdominis plane; USG=Ultrasound
Outcome measures in the included studies
Reference (author, year; country of study)		Kirkpatrick 1		Kirkpatrick 2		Kirkpatrick 3 S/3 C		Kirkpatrick 4	 	O’Driscoll et al., 2018		Confidence scoresPre- 67%, post- 96%; P=0.002		Knowledge scorePre-test- 5 (IQR-1), post-test 8 (IQR- 0); P=0.002		Able to correctly place a simulated TAP block with minimal assistance using a validated evaluation tool		Five out of six indicated cases received TAP block	 	Park et al., 2019		Confidence level*Pre- 1.22 (0.52), post- 2.44 (0.90); P<0.001Knowledge gainPre- 1.83 (0.58), post – 3.35 (0.49); P<0.001							 	Rider et al., 2020		Self-reported confidence *Pre- 2 (1-2), post- 5 (4-5); P<0.001				Observed minimum passing scorePre- 8.8 (2.7), post- 18 (0.6); P<0.001			 	Torrano et al., 2022		Knowledge gain- 49 (94)Improvement in technical skills- 38 (73)				First attempt target localisationPre- 30 (58), post- 46 (88); P<0.001Number of puncturesPre- 3 (2-7), post- 2 (1, 4); P - 0.002Time to perform block(s)Pre- 131 (82-198), post- 68 (27, 91); P<0.001			 	Arulprakasam et al., 2023		-		-		Duration for performance of block:Pre- 6.21 (5.2-1.15), post-2.19 (2.08-2.45); P<0.001Attempt at needle insertionPre- 2 (2-2), post-1 (1-1); P=0.01Attempts of needle redirectionPre- 3 (3-4), post- 2 (2-3); P=0.02Needle visibility scoresPre-2 (2-3), post- 4 (4-4); P<0.001Performance score^Pre- 3 (3-4), post- 2 (2-2); P<0.001Confidence score*Pre- 2 (1-2), post- 4 (4-5); P<0.001		-	 	King et al., 2023		Average score for residents’ comfort in performing USG nerve blocksPre-1.5-3.1Post- 2.3-3.8		-		Residents were able to complete on average 4.8 of the seven tasks correctly without instruction		-	 	Paulson et al., 2023				Mean test scorePre- 84.18% (20.76)Post- 93.17% (8.64)P<0.0001		Post-training all participants were able to correctly place FIC block on a gel phantom model (observed using a validated checklist)			 	Walsh et al., 2023		Confidence score*Pre- 5.0 (2.3), post- 7.1 (1.5)Increase in knowledgePre-1.8 (0.58), post-3.35 (0.49); P<0.001		Knowledge-based competency scorePre- 66.9 (8.9), post training- 90.4 (11.7); P<0.001		-		-	 	Wubben et al., 2023		Self-reported confidence increased after the session (9.1% pre-training vs. 77.3% post- training)				Cadaver in-procedure errors addressed			 	Kong et al., 2024		Self-reported improvement in confidence and needle finding skills (3.1 pre training vs. 4.2 post training)				Increase in confidence in performing block by over 50% and needle-finding skills by over 35%		Pre-workshop surveys- block success rates ranged from 25% to 33%.Post-workshop survey- block success rates ranged from 50% to 100%	 	Resta et al., 2024		Knowledge score-Pre- 1 (1-2), post- 3 (2-3); P<0.001		-		-		-	 	Griesmer et al., 2025		Confidence and knowledge scorePre- 4.0 (1-5), post- 9 (7-10)		-		-		-	 	Kramer et al., 2025		Comfort levelPre- 1 (2%)Post- 44 (92%)		Knowledge gainPre- 47.5 vs. 86.9 post training (difference: 40.2, 95% CI: 35.2-45.2, P<0.0001)		-		Nerve block utilisation rates at institutionPre- 10.4% post-38.4%FIC block utilisation rates at EDPre- 0%Post- 15%No complications reported	 	Ibarra et al., 2025		Self-reported improvement in knowledge skill and confidence in performing block		-		-		-
*1, strongly not confident; 5 or 10, strongly confident; ^1, excellent; 5, very bad. IQR=Interquartile range; TAP=Transversus abdominis plane; FIC=Fascia iliaca compartment
Of the types of simulators used for training, a soft tissue ultrasound training model, that is, Blue Phantom™ (CAE Healthcare, Sarasota, FL, USA), was used in three studies, high-technology peripheral nerve block simulator (BlockSim™, Accurate S.r.l., Viale Europa, Italy) was used in two studies, a biomass model in seven studies, and custom-made simulators in four studies. For sono-anatomy and probe handling/orientation, seven studies utilised human volunteers. All included studies used combined educational interventions, such as didactic sessions, video-based lectures, and demonstrations.
Regarding block types, the TAP block was used in four studies, ESP block in three studies, SAP block in five studies, and the FIC block in seven studies. Trainees were from anaesthesiology in seven studies, emergency medicine residents and physicians in six studies, and certified registered nurse anaesthetists in one study. Nine studies were reported from the United States, three from Europe, and two from Asia. Among the 14 studies included in this review, most were of low methodological quality, primarily due to their pre-post intervention design, lack of assessor blinding during outcome measurement, and absence of randomisation. However, a low risk of bias was noted for deviations from the intended intervention.

Educational outcomes
Most educational interventions were of short and varied duration, ranging from 20 minutes to 1 day. Timing of outcome assessment was immediate post-training in most of the included studies and at 2 months in two studies and at 3 months in two studies as well. A few studies used a validated tool for outcome assessment, such as the ultrasound guided regional anaesthesia competency assessment tool, action checklist, learners’ checklist for FIC block, and nerve block technique assessment tool. Fifty percent of the studies have taken feedback from the participants as challenges and facilitators [Table 1]. Most studies (80%) reported outcomes at only lower KP levels, and only two studies (20%) evaluated higher KP levels, assessing patient-centred outcomes [Table 2].
As per KP 1, ten studies demonstrated a self-reported increase in confidence levels following simulation-based training, while two reported improved comfort in performing the procedure. Six studies documented a self-reported increase in knowledge, and three studies highlighted gains in self-reported skills. Under KP 2, four studies demonstrated improvement in knowledge and competency scores immediately after training. Under KP 3, eight studies evaluated observed improvements in procedural skills when performing blocks in either a clinical or simulated environment. As per KP 4, two studies reported an increase in block utilisation or performance rates in the clinical setting post-training without any reported complications, while another study demonstrated that block success rates improved significantly from 25% to 33% before training to 50–100% after training.

DISCUSSION
This scoping review appraised findings from 14 pre-post interventional studies evaluating simulation based education for USG fascial plane blocks. The majority of studies reported outcomes at lower KP levels, such as immediate feedback, short-term knowledge gains, and enhanced performance or confidence, in either simulated or clinical settings. Evidence on higher KP levels, such as long-term impact and translational outcomes from simulation studies on fascial plane blocks, remains limited.
Simulation-based training is increasingly recognised as a valuable experiential learning method. This review found post-training improvements in knowledge and competency. However, these were predominantly self-assessed and measured immediately after training, with only two studies assessing skill retention beyond 3 months. Additionally, a few studies reported increased block utilisation and block success rate following the intervention, indicating a system-level change. However, the absence of observer validation and the lack of comparison of actual patient-level data before and after the intervention limit the strength of these conclusions.
The review identified studies that employed low-cost, custom-made simulators, offering a practical and scalable alternative to expensive commercial models. Materials, such as synthetic skin, ballistic gel, plastic wrap with petroleum jelly, silicone gelatine, cornstarch, 3-dimensional spine model, balloon filled with coloured fluid, yarn, and raw hide bones were used to replicate anatomical structures for various fascial plane blocks. Locally fabricated simulators are reproducible, adaptable for multiple blocks, and effective for training in sono-anatomy, needling techniques, and drug spread visualisation. Importantly, they offer comparable educational value at a fraction of the cost, making them suitable for integration into skill labs in resource-limited settings.
A key limitation identified in this scoping review is the wide variability in assessment methods. Confidence, skill, and knowledge were often measured using non-validated, self-developed tools, limiting comparability and generalisability. Only a few studies in this review used outcome assessment tools, most of which were internally developed, limiting external validity and lacking uniformity across studies. We propose that future research should use uniform, standardised, validated tools for technical skill assessment as well as for team or soft-skill evaluation. For evaluating higher-level outcomes or the long-term impact of training, the KP framework offers a structured approach by assessing observed improvements in patient-centred outcomes such as complication rates, block success rates, and system-level changes.
Nearly all the included studies used mixed educational interventions such as didactics, video demonstration, and simulation, making it difficult to isolate the specific impact of simulation on learning outcomes. To establish the true additive value of simulation, future research should focus on direct comparisons between simulation and non-simulation modalities. Additionally, comparing outcomes between experienced physicians (focusing on unlearning and relearning) and novice learners could provide insights into the differential benefits of simulation-based training in the fascial plane block. Future research can explore the impact of just-in-time training, such as brief needling practice on a low-cost custom-made simulator, immediately before performing a block in addressing skill decay, enhancing procedural confidence, and improving patient safety in fascial plane blocks.
None of the included studies compared technology and fidelity in terms of learner outcomes. Similarly, comparisons between simulation models and human volunteers for realistic sono-anatomy training are also lacking. Studies indicate that skills decline over time, highlighting the importance of periodic retraining to sustain competency. Therefore, future studies can focus on a systematical evaluation of the impact of model technology on learners’ performance, skill retention, and patient outcomes. Simulation-based training could plausibly translate into broader system-level benefits, such as reduced opioid consumption, decreased post-operative nausea and vomiting, shorter hospital stays, and cost savings from fewer block-related complications. Future research should systematically evaluate these outcomes to capture the true healthcare value of simulation training. Given the significant costs associated with training models, future research should also evaluate the impact of such training programs in terms of cost-effectiveness and return on investment.
The impact of simulation-based training on quality and safety practices, such as compliance with hand hygiene protocols, sterile field maintenance, and ultrasound probe disinfection, which are critical components of infection control, is understudied. Other essential components of safety, like patient/site identification, timeout protocols, and aseptic technique, are often under-reported or inconsistently evaluated. Future research should explore the role of simulation on system-level changes, such as reinforcing safety checklists, prevention errors, enhancing preparedness for rare but serious complications like local anaesthetic systemic toxicity, and patient-centric outcomes like patient satisfaction, block success rate, and block-related infection rates.
A key strength of this review is its systematic mapping of outcomes to the KP framework, allowing for a structured appraisal of educational impact. Additionally, this review provides the first focused synthesis of simulation-based training for fascial plane blocks, a subset of regional anaesthesia techniques with growing clinical importance, highlighting the use of low-cost, customised simulators that are particularly valuable in low-resource settings.
However, a few limitations were identified. Methodologically, most included studies employed pre-post designs with small sample sizes, lacked control groups, and used non-validated outcome measures, limiting internal and external validity. Data collection was often reliant on self-reporting, and blinding was absent. Furthermore, mixed teaching interventions and a mixed population of learners made it difficult to isolate the specific impact of simulation. Finally, the absence of patient-centred outcome data in the majority of studies precludes any definitive conclusion of simulation training in fascial plane blocks.

CONCLUSION
This scoping review demonstrates that simulation-based fascial plane block training enhances confidence, knowledge, procedural competency, and early clinical performance. However, the literature is limited in longitudinal follow-up, just-in-time training, quality improvement integration, and linkage to patient outcomes. Moving beyond descriptive mapping, future research should adopt rigorous outcome-focussed designs to define the role of simulation in clinical training more clearly.

Presentation at conferences/CMEs and abstract publication
No.

Study data availability
De-identified data may be requested with reasonable justification from the authors (email to the corresponding author) and shall be shared upon request.

Disclosure of use of artificial intelligence (AI)-assistive or generative tools
The AI tools or language models (LLM) have not been utilised in the manuscript, except that software has been used for grammar corrections.

Declaration of use of permitted tools
Nil.

Authors contributions
NP: Concepts, Design, Definition of intellectual content, literature search, data acquisition, manuscript preparation, editing and approval. DP: Definition of intellectual content, literature search, data acquisition, manuscript editing and review. SM: Definition of intellectual content, literature search, data acquisition, manuscript editing and review. DD: Design, literature search, data acquisition, manuscript preparation and editing. RJ: Design, literature search, data acquisition and manuscript preparation. SM: Design, literature search and manuscript preparation. PB: Concepts, Design, Definition of intellectual content, literature search, data acquisition, manuscript preparation, editing and approval.

Supplementary material
This article has supplementary material and can be accessed at this link. Supplementary Material at http://links.lww.com/IJOA/A62.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
The erector spinae plane block: A novel analgesic technique in thoracic neuropathic pain
Ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane block: Description of a new technique and comparison with conventional systemic analgesia during laparoscopic cholecystectomy
Ultrasound-guided bilateral subcostal TAP block for epigastric hernia repair: A case series
Quadratus lumborum block vs. transversus abdominis plane block for caesarean delivery: A systematic review and network meta-analysis
Fascia iliaca compartment block versus no block for pain control after lower limb surgery: A meta-analysis
Research progress on serratus anterior plane block in breast surgery: A narrative review
Ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia and patient safety: Update of an evidence-based analysis
Ultrasound guidance reduces the risk of local anaesthetic systemic toxicity following peripheral nerve blockade
Regional anesthesia with fascial plane blocks for pediatric cardiac surgery with sternotomy: A narrative review
Review of simulation studies in anaesthesia journals, 2001-2010: Mapping and content analysis
Simulation in regional anaesthesia: A narrative review of its history, evolution and future prospects
Evaluation of a multidisciplinary simulation training curriculum for local anaesthetic systemic toxicity management: A quasi-experimental study using the Kirkpatrick model in India
Reliability of simulation-based assessment for practising physicians: Performance is context-specific
Assessment tools for the evaluation of simulation-based competency in ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia: An integrative review
Simulation-based summative assessment in healthcare: An overview of key principles for practice
Kirkpatrick’s Four Levels of Training Evaluation
Kirkpatrick’s evaluation of simulation and debriefing in health care education: A systematic review
Promoting simulation-based training in radiology: A homemade phantom for the practice of ultrasound-guided procedures
Homemade, low-cost ultrasound phantoms for ultrasound-guided procedures: A survey-based comparative analysis
Educational outcomes of simulation-based training in regional anaesthesia: A scoping review
PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): Checklist and explanation
Assessment of phantom-based needling training in improving the performance of ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block by anaesthesia residents – A pre- and post-intervention study
A review of Key Likert scale development advances: 1995-2019
Implementing ultrasound-guided nerve blocks in the emergency department: A low-cost, low-fidelity training approach
Ultrasound-guided fascia iliaca compartment block simulation training in an emergency medicine residency program
Simulation-based medical education and training enhance anaesthesia residents’ proficiency in erector spinae plane block
Simulation-based training in ultrasound-guided regional anaesthesia for emergency physicians: Insights from an Italian pre/post intervention study
Innovative ultrasound-guided erector spinae plane nerve block model for training emergency medicine physicians
Impact of simulation-based anesthesiology training using an anesthetized porcine model for ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane block
Exploring a cadaver-based model for teaching emergency medicine residents ultrasound-guided serratus anterior plane blocks
Using a simulated model and mastery learning approach to teach the ultrasound-guided serratus anterior plane block to emergency medicine residents: A pilot study
Implementation of an education program for an ultrasound-guided liposomal bupivacaine transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block protocol for open abdominal procedures
New kids on the block: Development and assessment of a multispecialty fascia iliaca block protocol and training program for geriatric hip fracture in the emergency department
Mixed-model curriculum for nerve block education in emergency medicine residency
Rapid education event: A Streamlined approach to ultrasound guided nerve block procedural training
Combining immersive simulation with a collaborative procedural training on local anesthetic systemic toxicity and fascia iliaca compartment block: A pilot study
Simulation-based central venous catheter insertion training increases comfort amongst residents
Simulation in airway management teaching and training
In situ simulation for cardiopulmonary resuscitation training: A systematic review
Impact of simulation-based training on difficult airway management among anesthesia trainees and nurses as real team
Comparison of low-cost phantoms for ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy training
Competency-based assessment tools for regional anaesthesia: A narrative review
Measuring non-technical skills of anaesthesiologists in the operating room: A systematic review of assessment tools and their measurement properties
The concise assessment of leader management tool: Evaluation of healthcare provider leadership during real-life pediatric emergencies
The simulation team assessment tool (STAT): Development, reliability and validation
The impact of just-in-time simulation training for healthcare professionals on learning and performance outcomes: A systematic review
Low-cost seizure simulation in low-technology mannequins for resource-constrained settings: An innovative approach to enhance fidelity
Retention of critical procedural skills after simulation training: A systematic review
Utilising simulation to evaluate robotic skill acquisition and learning decay
Long-term retention assessment after simulation-based-training of pediatric procedural skills among adult emergency physicians: A multicenter observational study
Striving for excellence in ventilator bundle compliance through continuous quality improvement initiative in the intensive care unit of a tertiary care hospital in India
Implementation of clinical practice changes by experienced anesthesiologists after simulation-based ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia training
Ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia simulation training: A systematic review