Evaluation of real-world evidence to assess health outcomes related to deprescribing medications in older adults: an International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology–endorsed systematic review of methodology
Abstract
Observational studies using real-world data (RWD) can address gaps in knowledge on deprescribing medications but are subject to methodological issues. Limited data exist on the methods employed to use RWD to measure the effects of deprescribing. To describe methodological approaches used in observational studies of deprescribing medications in older adults, we conducted a systematic review in Medline for observational studies published in English (January 1, 2000, to September 14, 2023) that examined the health effects of medication deprescribing in older adults. We described study characteristics and methods, focusing on the operationalization of deprescribing as an exposure and potential time-related biases. Forty-five studies were included, representing a variety of drug classes (eg, statins, aspirin, bisphosphonates) and diseases. Most studies adequately addressed potential time-related biases. The definition of deprescribing was not clearly defined in 12 studies. There was heterogeneity regarding the minimum duration of time that qualified as deprescribing, even within a drug class; fewer than one-third of studies provided a justification for these definitions. Observational studies are common to examine the effects of deprescribing; however, there were inconsistencies in measuring deprescribing and a lack of transparency in reporting. There is a need for minimum sufficient reporting criteria for observational studies on deprescribing.

Introduction
Deprescribing is defined as the clinically supervised process of tapering or stopping medications with the goals of minimizing potentially low-value prescribing, reducing complications from polypharmacy and drug-drug interactions, and improving patient outcomes. Target medications for deprescribing may include medications with a high potential for adverse effects, such as those listed in the Beers Criteria or the Screening Tool of Older Persons’ Prescriptions (ie, STOPP) criteria, as well as those with uncertain or negative net benefit (eg, those for which the time to benefit likely exceeds an individual’s life expectancy). However, a key barrier to the systemic implementation of deprescribing is the lack of evidence on the effects of withdrawing medications. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of deprescribing have numerous challenges, particularly in recruiting older adult participants, measuring effects on long-term and clinically relevant outcomes, and comparing the impact of discontinuing therapies at different points in a patient’s clinical course. Older adults with sufficient cognitive and physical functioning to participate in a deprescribing RCT are unlikely to be representative of frail and complex patients in routine care, limiting the generalizability of the RCT findings.
Observational studies using real-world data (RWD) sources, such as electronic health records (EHRs) or health care claims data, can potentially address the gap in knowledge on the effects of deprescribing in large, representative populations with long-term follow-up. However, there are important limitations to using RWD to study deprescribing. Defining an exposure measure to represent deprescribing using RWD is challenging and susceptible to misclassification, as medication cessation may be due to nonadherence or temporary holds on medications rather than true deprescribing. In addition, the comparison of patients discontinuing vs continuing medications in observational studies is subject to confounding by indication (the reason why the medication is being continued or discontinued), selection bias, and protopathic bias. Finally, several unique methodologic challenges exist for deprescribing studies, such as identifying “time zero” to begin follow-up, immortal time bias (by conditioning on future events when defining the treatment strategies), and choosing meaningful comparators. However, there has yet to be a systematic summary of the methods employed when using RWD to study deprescribing. Despite the clear need for more observational studies of deprescribing effects and awareness of the numerous biases that can affect pharmacoepidemiologic examinations of stopping medications, little guidance exists on best practices for the design of deprescribing studies and optimal methods for estimating effects of deprescribing on health-related outcomes.
Therefore, we aimed to address the gap in evidence and synthesize real-world evidence (RWE) on deprescribing by conducting a systematic literature review of studies using RWD to evaluate health-related outcomes associated with deprescribing of medications. The specific objectives of the systematic review were to (1) describe current methods used in published analyses using RWD in observational studies of deprescribing in older adults and (2) identify key issues and highlight opportunities for more transparent reporting to improve the overall design and quality of future deprescribing research using RWD.

Methods
The protocol for this systematic review was registered in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO CRD42021278139). We report findings following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses reporting guidelines (Table S1).

Search strategy
We searched Medline via Ovid for articles published in English between January 1, 2000, and September 14, 2023, that reported results from the use of RWD to study the health effects of medication deprescribing in older adults. In consultation with a librarian, the search strategy was informed by guidance from the US Deprescribing Research Network and several existing reviews. The search strategy was tested to ensure it captured 3 studies of interest identified by the authors. The full search strategy is available in Table S2. A protocol modification was adopted that restricted studies exclusively in older adults to ensure capture of relevant studies.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
We included studies whose participants were 50 years and older, examined deprescribing as an exposure, and used longitudinal observational or pragmatic designs with an RWD source (health care, administrative and billing data, prospective cohort study, EHR, registry, etc). While many studies consider 65 years of age as a cutoff to define the older adult population, largely due to traditional ages for entitlement to retirement and the Medicare insurance program in the United States, we opted to include a lower age threshold to avoid excluding studies with similar populations but slightly different age inclusion criteria. We then excluded (1) clinical trials, post hoc analyses of clinical trials, or experimental studies (pragmatic trials were eligible); (2) commentaries, opinion articles, editorials, letters to the editor, or preprints and papers not published under peer review (including conference abstracts); (3) review articles; (4) and studies using a noneligible observational study design (cross-sectional or time series). We also excluded studies wherein (5) deprescribing (stopping, tapering, or dose reduction) as an exposure/intervention of interest was not the primary analysis, (6) solely described deprescribing uptake or implementation, and (7) a health-related or patient-centered outcome was not measured (eg, only cost-related outcomes).
Screening was conducted by multiple reviewers in Covidence and overseen by K.H. and J.N. In phase I, titles and abstracts were screened for exclusion independently by 2 reviewers. Only items that were RCTs, post hoc analyses of RCTs, reviews, commentaries, or studies not in humans were excluded at this stage. In phase II, 2 individuals independently reviewed each item for inclusion and exclusion criteria; conflicts were resolved by senior reviewers K.H. or J.N. After all eligible articles were identified, 2 reviewers conducted a citation search method to review the reference lists of all included studies to identify potential additional studies based on article titles. The same inclusion and exclusion criteria were applied to articles identified through the citation search method.

Data extraction and synthesis
For each eligible study, 1 reviewer used a standardized Google Form (Table S3) to extract information on the following categories: general study characteristics (first author, year of publication, location, type of journal, study design, data source, population), exposure (drug class studied, details on how deprescribing was defined and measured), outcomes, and statistical methods used (with a focus on methods to control for confounding [baseline or time-varying] and whether any methods were employed to explore the competing risk of death in analyses of nonmortality outcomes [e.g., Fine and Gray models, cause-specific Cox proportional hazards models]). We also extracted information on potential confounders and then categorized them into groups previously identified as important for studies of deprescribing. For example, covariate domains included “index condition attributes” (eg, severity of condition, comorbidities) and “index medication attributes” (eg, medication burden/dose).
Finally, we assessed the potential for time-related bases when defining deprescribing exposures using principles outlined by Suissa and Hernán et al. For example, we assessed whether each cohort study clearly defined “time zero” (ie, when follow-up began), whether person-time could be erroneously misclassified as exposed to deprescribing, and whether exposure definitions and follow-up could contribute to immortal time bias. This risk of bias assessment was modified from that described in the protocol (a full ROBINS-I quality assessment) to focus primarily on exposure-related biases that are among the most impactful investigator-induced biases in pharmacoepidemiologic studies, particularly those that examine the effects of stopping medications. When information on a data element was determined to be missing based on the review of the full text and any supplementary material for the manuscript, the data element was classified as “unclear.” A second reviewer examined extracted data for accuracy and standardized information to facilitate aggregation of data (eg, standardization of drug class names). Characteristics of studies were then summarized as proportions. We presented methodologic characteristics of studies by drug class to enhance qualitative comparisons (eg, how different studies defined deprescribing for the same drug).

Results

Study selection
We identified 2937 articles through database searching and an additional 4 articles through the citation search method for a total of 2941 articles screened (Figure 1). Of the 2840 full texts assessed for eligibility, 2795 were excluded. The most common reasons for exclusion were as follows: (1) deprescribing was not the primary exposure/intervention studied (n = 2563, 92%), (2) study was not exclusively in older adults (n = 117, 4%), and (3) study only described deprescribing uptake or implementation (n = 64, 2%). In total, 45 studies were identified as eligible and included for data extraction.
Flow diagram describing systematic literature search for pharmacoepidemiologic studies examining the effects of deprescribing on health outcomes in older adults.

Overall study characteristics
Table 1 presents a summary of characteristics of the included studies, with detailed characteristics presented in Table S4. The number of studies evaluating health outcomes after deprescribing increased greatly over time, with 93% (n = 42) of identified articles published in or after 2011. Most (n = 32, 71%) articles were published in specialized clinical journals. Most studies used US data sources (n = 27, 60%), and the next most common were UK data sources (n = 5, 11%). Most studies (n = 38, 84%) used a cohort design. Regarding data sources, 38% (n = 17) used registries or similar databases, 36% (n = 16) used administrative claims data, and 18% (n = 8) used multiclinic EHR or similar databases.
Summary of characteristics of pharmacoepidemiologic studies examining the effects of deprescribing on health outcomes in older adults.
Characteristic	n (%) (of N = 45 total)	 	Country of data source		 	 United States	27 (60%)	 	 United Kingdom	5 (11%)	 	 Canada	2 (4%)	 	 France	2 (4%)	 	 Italy	2 (4%)	 	 Taiwan	2 (4%)	 	 Other	5 (11%)	 	Year of publication		 	 2000-2010	3 (7%)	 	 2011-2015	13 (29%)	 	 2016-2019	13 (29%)	 	 2020-2023	16 (36%)	 	Journal type		 	 Specialized clinical journal	32 (71%)	 	 Generalized clinical journal	11 (24%)	 	 Public health or health services journal	2 (4%)	 	 Methods or statistics journal	0 (0%)	 	Data type		 	 Claims/administrative data	16 (36%)	 	 Electronic health record data	8 (18%)	 	 Registry/database data	17 (38%)	 	 Prospective cohort	1 (2%)	 	 Other	3 (7%)	 	Study design		 	 Cohort	38 (84%)	 	 Case-control	6 (13%)	 	 Self-controlled	1 (2%)	 	Drug class of interest		 	 Bisphosphonates	6 (13%)	 	 Statins	6 (13%)	 	 Aspirin	5 (11%)	 	 Antihypertensives	4 (9%)	 	 Immunosuppressants/biologics	4 (9%)	 	 Diabetes medications	4 (9%)	 	 Antipsychotics	3 (7%)	 	 Dementia medications	3 (7%)	 	 Other	8 (7%)
Many medications and disease states were represented in the identified articles. The most common medication classes studied were preventative medications, namely statins (n = 6, 13%), bisphosphonates (n = 6, 13%), aspirin (n = 5, 11%), antihypertensives (n = 4, 9%), and diabetes medications, including insulin (n = 4, 9%). Other medication classes studied were antipsychotics, antidementia medications, hormone therapies, immunosuppressants, and biologics. Outcomes studied were heterogeneous, but most evaluated outcomes representing potential negative effects of deprescribing, including mortality (n = 17, 38%), thromboembolic events (n = 12, 29%), fractures (n = 9, 20%), or a measure of disease progression (n = 5, 11%).

Defining deprescribing as an exposure
Methodologic characteristics of exposure measurement in the included studies are presented by drug class in Table 2, with detailed methodologic characteristics presented in Table S5. Only 9 studies utilized a data source that contained information on the reason for deprescribing to inform the exposure definition. These data sources included free text notes and order discontinuation notes. Most studies (n = 38, 84%) defined deprescribing as stopping the medication completely (vs dose reduction or tapering). For studies that examined stopping a medication completely and therefore required some amount of time off-drug to measure deprescribing exposures, the date of last medication exposure was most often defined based on time after the last recorded or estimated day of supply of medication (n = 16, 36%). However, for nearly as many studies, it was unclear how the last date of exposure to the medication was defined (n = 12, 27%). There were no discernible patterns in the quality of reporting for this measure by drug class or outcome.
Summary of deprescribing exposure definitions of studies included in the review of deprescribing, by drug class.
Drug class	Total number of studies	Type of deprescribing exposure, n (%)	Required duration of change in medication use for deprescribing, n (%)	 	Stopping completelya	Dose reductiona	Taperinga	1 week or lessa	>1 week to 30 days or lessa	>30 to <90 daysa	90 to <180 daysa	180+ daysa	Variable or uncleara	 	Anticoagulants (excluding aspirin)	2	2 (100)	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (50)	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (50)	0 (0)	0 (0)	 	Antihypertensives	4	3 (75)	1 (25)	0 (0)	2 (50)	0 (0)	1 (25)	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (25)	 	Antipsychotics	3	2 (67)	1 (33)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (33)	0 (0)	2 (67)	 	Aspirin	5	5 (100)	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (20)	0 (0)	2 (40)	1 (20)	0 (0)	1 (20)	 	Asthma/COPD medications	1	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (100)	1 (100)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	 	Benzodiazepines	1	1 (100)	1 (100)	1 (100)	0 (0)	1 (100)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	 	Bisphosphonates	6	4 (67)	0 (0)	2 (34)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	2 (34)	3 (50)	1 (17)	 	Chemotherapy or anticancer biologic agents	2	2 (100)	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (50)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (50)	 	Dementia medications	3	3 (100)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	2 (67)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (33)	 	Diabetes medications (including insulin)	4	3 (75)	3 (75)	0 (0)	1 (25)	1 (25)	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (25)	1 (25)	 	Hormone therapies	3	3 (100)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	2 (67)	1 (33)	 	Immunosuppressants or biologic disease-modifying treatments	4	4 (100)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (25)	0 (0)	1 (25)	2 (50)	 	Multiple unrelated classes	1	1 (100)	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (100)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	 	Statins	6	5 (83)	1 (22)	0 (0)	2 (33)	0 (0)	0 (0)	3 (50)	1 (17)	0 (0)	 	Total	45	38 (84)	11 (24)	4 (9)	10 (22)	4 (9)	4 (9)	8 (18)	8 (18)	11 (24)
Abbreviation: COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Percentages are calculated as the proportion of studies within that drug class. Percentages may not add to 100% as studies can be included in multiple columns.
There was considerable heterogeneity regarding the duration of time over which medication changes had to be sustained to be classified as deprescribing overall and by drug class. A sustained duration of 1 week or less was used most often (n = 10, 22%), followed by a duration of 90 to 180 days and 180+ days (both n = 8, 18%). But for nearly as many studies, the duration was unclear (n = 7, 16%). Other durations were equally represented (1-30 days, 30-90 days). Just 4 studies explored the robustness of the inferences to using different durations to define deprescribing.
There were limited discernible patterns for the definitions used to identify deprescribing by drug class, except for bisphosphonates. Studies examining bisphosphonates, which have one of the longest half-lives of the medications studied, did primarily implement deprescribing definitions that exceeded 90 to 180 days. However, most other classes had varied definitions. For example, for studies that examined statin deprescribing, the length of time required to have a therapy change sustained ranged from “less than 1 week” to “180 to <365 days.” Most studies did not provide a justification for the definition used to identify deprescribing (n = 29, 64%). Among those that did (n = 15, 33%), a mix of justifications included clinical rationale, reliance on definitions from prior literature, and empiric examination of the data (eg, visualizing the distribution of medication cessation duration). Most studies clearly defined time zero (ie, the start of follow-up time; n = 33, 73%) and adequately addressed potential time-related biases (n = 27, 60%), but a nontrivial amount did not address these considerations (n = 12 [27%] and n = 18 [40%], respectively).

Covariates measured
Figure 2 summarizes the number of studies that evaluated each major covariate domain. For most studies, covariates were measured before or at time zero (n = 32, 71%), although timing of covariate measurement was unclear in 10 (22%). Nearly all studies measured at least 1 covariate related to demographics (n = 41, 91%) and index condition attributes (n = 40, 89%; eg, severity of condition, comorbidities, health care utilization). Coprescribed medications were measured in many studies (n = 33, 73%). Around half of the studies used any covariates related to index medication attributes (eg, dose, regimen) or patient prognosis (eg, measurements of life expectancy, mortality risk, frailty). Studies rarely measured covariates related to interpersonal factors (eg, provider characteristics, family/caregiver factors), health system characteristics, community/region (eg, geographic location), or policy (guidelines, calendar time).
Proportion of studies addressing potentially relevant confounders.

Statistical methods
Statistical methods used varied greatly between studies. The most common method used across studies to control for confounding was multivariable adjusted outcome regression models (n = 26, 58%), followed by propensity score methods (n = 13, 29%; propensity score matching was most common). However, n = 5 (11%) studies did not appear to use any method (or the method was unclear) to account for potential confounding. Death was examined as a competing risk, in the primary or a sensitivity analysis, in 8 of 42 studies that examined outcomes other than mortality (19%).

Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to characterize and evaluate methods employed in observational studies using RWD to examine health-related outcomes associated with deprescribing in older adults. Most studies used either registry or administrative claims data, most often from US sources, to conduct cohort studies. Studies focused on a wide variety of medication classes, with the most common relating to prevention or treatment of asymptomatic diseases, like cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis, and diabetes. A smaller proportion focused on central nervous system medications, including antidementia drugs. Overall, the clinical domains of included studies are relatively comprehensive. The focus of studies was mainly to evaluate whether deprescribing was associated with adverse effects, such as disease progression. Notably, there was very limited examination of potential benefits of deprescribing, such as reduction in medication-related adverse effects or improvement in quality of life.
There was substantial heterogeneity in how deprescribing was defined. First, the duration of time over which medication changes had to be sustained to qualify as deprescribing was highly variable, even within drug classes. A minority of studies provided a justification for the interval used. Because the reason for deprescribing was unavailable in most data sources, a robust definition of deprescribing that is informed by clinical, biological, pharmacokinetic aspects, as well as the specific research question and data source, may be optimal to identify exposures that are more likely to be true deprescribing vs other types of medication cessation events (eg, nonadherence, switching). The optimal definition of deprescribing is likely drug-specific, which should be informed by common prescribing patterns in routine care. For example, patients are often provided excess prescriptions of warfarin to allow dosage titration according to laboratory monitoring results, whereas the prescribing of direct oral anticoagulants typically follows a standard dosing and frequency scheme, so using different durations of treatment-free periods to define discontinuation may be appropriate for warfarin vs direct oral anticoagulants. Ideally, the impact of the selected definition of deprescribing on study results should also be examined through sensitivity analyses. Additional studies that incorporate other data (eg, chart review, patient/provider interviews, medication-related adverse events) to validate or contextualize different measurements of deprescribing in RWD are critical to further inform exposure measurement in RWE of deprescribing.
Further, most studies (84%) solely examined stopping medication rather than dose reduction/tapering, which may be a more relevant form of deprescribing for certain drug classes and outcomes. For example, in conditions where prescribing is tied to a treatment target (eg, hemoglobin A1C values in diabetes), the goal of deprescribing may not be to cease medication use entirely but rather to reduce the intensity of a regimen. Additionally, certain medication classes (eg, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) cannot be abruptly stopped and would require a lengthy period of follow-up to observe complete discontinuation. However, instructions for use required to ascertain tapering medication regimens are often not available in RWD, and some data sources additionally do not measure dose. Acknowledgment of the limitations of a data source to measure the most relevant form of deprescribing for a medication is important to report.
Adequate consideration of exposure periods and follow-up time is another priority for future observational studies in the field. One in 4 studies did not clearly report how they defined the date of last medication exposure, which is a critical component to determine the length of time someone is off-treatment and meets the exposure definition of deprescribing. As deprescribing is usually defined based on a medication-free time interval in RWD, clear definitions of time zero (when follow-up begins) and when a person is considered exposed to deprescribing are critical to reduce time-related biases. However, we identified that almost 1 in 4 studies and over 1 in 3 studies, respectively, did not address these aspects of study design. A lack of adequate consideration for time-related biases in the design of these studies may inadvertently lead to incorrect temporality between covariates, exposures, and outcomes. Importantly, classifying follow-up time as deprescribing based on future events (eg, follow-up time is considered “deprescribing-exposed” before meeting the minimum medication-free interval time) may ultimately contribute to incorrect estimation of the effect of deprescribing through inducing immortal time bias. Immortal time bias may make deprescribing appear more harmful for negative adverse events by attributing more events to deprescribing through misclassification of exposure time. Conversely, immortal time bias might also make deprescribing appear more protective for mortality since those whose follow-up time is prematurely classified as exposed to deprescribing have to survive to the end of the medication-free interval to be considered exposed to deprescribing.
Adjustment for covariates was generally well reported, with comprehensive inclusion of person-specific characteristics and clinical conditions, and high inclusion of coprescribed medications and medication-specific characteristics (eg, treatment history). Clinical characteristics are critical for decision-making on deprescribing and therefore act as important potential confounders. However, health care system, regional, or policy factors were rarely included, despite a number of studies that have consistently demonstrated facility- and regional-level variation in prescribing practices. While some of these factors may not be measurable in some data sources, higher-level variables (eg, US region) or proxies (eg, primary care service area, rural/urban indicators) could provide insight into regional or health care system variation.
The most common methods for adjusting for potential confounding were multivariable outcome regression or propensity score–based methods, although a small number of studies did not report how or if potential confounders were addressed. Proper accounting for confounding factors is critical for valid estimation of the effects of deprescribing due to the challenges of comparing users and nonusers of drugs, including healthy user bias or “sick-stopper” effects. At present, there is insufficient evidence to strongly recommend one of these approaches over others. Future simulation studies are needed to determine the degree to which study designs and statistical methods can optimally address confounding in RWE on deprescribing, particularly in populations with increasing medical complexity and frailty for whom prognostic factors may introduce strong biases toward negative outcomes.

Strengths and limitations
Our study had several notable strengths. To our knowledge, we conducted the first systematic review of methodology related to pharmacoepidemiologic studies on deprescribing in older adults, the most relevant population for this intervention. To accomplish this, a detailed and thorough literature search with clear eligibility criteria was undertaken with articles subsequently screened for inclusion in this study. Also, our study protocol was registered a priori to enhance transparency and reproducibility, and our search spanned the entirety of the contemporary era of pharmacoepidemiology. We comprehensively described methodologic aspects in detail to synthesize findings, and we evaluated studies for bias using pharmacoepidemiologic principles that can have the most profound impact on study results, particularly for studies of medication discontinuation. This systematic review therefore provides novel evidence on methodologic issues and general recommendations for minimum standard reporting for studies of the health effects of deprescribing.
This review has some limitations. First, studies were limited to those focused on older adults. Although older adults are likely the most relevant population for deprescribing medications, given their greater propensity for chronic medication use and well-established guidelines on potentially inappropriate medications for older adults, some literature in younger populations may have other contributions to deprescribing methodology. Other limitations include that a single database was used (although the database likely represents the most relevant and representative bibliographic source for deprescribing studies); that there were not 2 independent reviewers extracting data, although a senior author reviewed all data extracted by the reviewer for accuracy; and that a modified risk of bias assessment was conducted than the full assessment specified in the protocol. However, the focused risk-of-bias assessment on exposure measures was tailored to address the specific biases among the highest importance in studies of deprescribing.

Conclusions and recommendations
We identified a wide range of observational studies evaluating the effects of deprescribing on outcomes, primarily surrounding the negative potential consequences of deprescribing. Table 3 presents a summary of considerations for observational studies of deprescribing. Future studies should be designed with the intent of evaluating the risk/benefit trade-off of deprescribing, particularly by additionally studying patient-centered outcomes and medication-related adverse events rather than solely the potential adverse effects of deprescribing. Next, increased transparency in the reporting of research methods is a necessary step toward advancing the field of deprescribing research. Based on this review, investigators should consider at minimum including a clear definition of deprescribing, justified based on clinical factors and tested through sensitivity analyses; clearly defining time zero along with intentional design and analysis decision to avoid potential time-related biases; and identifying and adjusting for a comprehensive set of measurable confounders with clinical and practical relevance to the selected drug class. Future work should ultimately aim to achieve expert consensus on best practices for design and conduct of deprescribing studies.
Summary of considerations for observational studies of deprescribing.
Priority area	Recommendations	 	Study design	Presentation of a study diagram that clearly identifies exposure, outcome, and eligibility assessment periods along with the index date or time zero, as applicable.Acknowledge and address the potential for time-related biases.	 	Defining deprescribing	Precise reporting of how deprescribing was operationalized, including the data source, gap period, and the last exposed date.Definitions for deprescribing should include justification that is informed by clinical factors and perspectives and is tested through sensitivity analyses.	 	Outcomes	Selection of relevant outcomes that allow for evaluation of both risks and benefits of deprescribing, with a specific emphasis on patient-centered outcomes.	 	Covariates and confounding	Selection of covariates based on the clinical and practical relevance to the selected drug class that are also specific to the research question and data source.

Supplementary Material

Supplementary material
Supplementary material is available at the American Journal of Epidemiology online.

Funding
This article was endorsed by the International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology (ISPE) and was made available for public commentary to the ISPE membership before submission. This work was funded through a manuscript grant from the ISPE to Drs Kaleen Hayes and Joshua Niznik on behalf of members of the ISPE Geriatrics and Comparative Effectiveness Research Special Interest Groups. Kaleen Hayes was also supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) Research Grant R01AG078759 funded by the National Institute on Aging (NIA), the NIH Office of the Director, and the NIH Office of Disease Prevention (ODP) during the conduct of this work.

Conflict of interest
K.N.H. has received investigator-initiated grant funding paid directly to Brown University for investigator-initiated research from Sanofi, Genentech, and GlaxoSmithKline for research on influenza vaccination in nursing homes, influenza outbreak control, and shingles vaccination in nursing homes, respectively. K.N.H. has also served as a consultant for Canada’s Drug Agency (formerly the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health) for the development of reporting guidance for real-world evidence. D.B. is an employee of Takeda. S.S. is a full-time employee of Pfizer with stock. A.R.Z. has received grant funding paid directly to Brown University for collaborative research on the epidemiology of infections, vaccinations, and respiratory syncytial virus. A.B.C. is supported by the National Institute on Aging (K08 AG071856). J.L.L.’s spouse was formerly employed by and previously owned stock in GSK. D.C.M., D.G., D.T., S.H., M.-L.L., M.T., and J.D.N. report no conflicts of interest.

Data availability
Data from this study are available upon reasonable request.

References
Utilization and spending on potentially inappropriate medications by US older adults with multiple chronic conditions using multiple medications
A systematic review of the emerging definition of ‘deprescribing’ with network analysis: implications for future research and clinical practice
2023 American Geriatrics Society Beers Criteria® Update Expert Panel. American Geriatrics Society 2023 updated AGS Beers Criteria® for potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults
STOPP/START criteria for potentially inappropriate prescribing in older people: version 2
Reconsidering medication appropriateness for patients late in life
Achieving sustainable healthcare through deprescribing
Interventions to reduce anticholinergic burden in adults aged 65 and older: a systematic review
Immortal time bias in pharmaco-epidemiology
Methods for evaluating the benefit and harms of deprescribing in observational research using routinely collected data
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the prisma statement
Deprescribing research in nursing home residents using routinely collected healthcare data: a conceptual framework
Recommendations for outcome measurement for deprescribing intervention studies
Withdrawal of antihypertensive drugs in older people
Statin discontinuation and cardiovascular events among older people in Denmark
Risk for health events after deprescribing acetylcholinesterase inhibitors in nursing home residents with severe dementia
Impact of deprescribing AChEIs on aggressive behaviors and antipsychotic prescribing
Specifying a target trial prevents immortal time bias and other self-inflicted injuries in observational analyses
ROBINS-I: a tool for assessing risk of bias in nonrandomised studies of interventions
Using a simple prescription gap to determine warfarin discontinuation can lead to substantial misclassification
Validating claims-based definitions for deprescribing: bridging the gap between clinical and administrative data
General practitioners’ deprescribing decisions in older adults with polypharmacy: a case vignette study in 31 countries
Factors associated with potentially harmful medication prescribing in nursing homes: a scoping review
Primary care service areas: a new tool for the evaluation of primary care services
Healthy user and related biases in observational studies of preventive interventions: a primer for physicians
Paradoxical relations of drug treatment with mortality in older persons