Waste valorization utilizing green nanotechnology: a sustainable approach for pomegranate peel agro wastes in skincare formulations
Pomegranate peels, a valuable waste byproduct, aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals by United Nations offering a possibility for use as a raw material in herbal formulations. The review aims to highlight the pharmaceutical importance of pomegranate peel bioactive compounds and their applications in the skincare industry. A systematic search of studies identified through scientific databases resulted in the PRISMA chart. Additionally, an exhaustive search using keywords such as pomegranate peel, skincare, ADME, nanoparticles, therapeutics, and bioactive compounds led to a bibliometric analysis. The peels support the waste-to-wealth concept with a rich repertoire of flavonoids, including quercetin, kaempferol, and catechin, as well as polyphenolic compounds and other tannin compounds, such as punicalagin and ellagic acid. These compounds serve as natural reducing agents for synthesizing various nanoparticles and unveiling therapeutic activities, including antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, anticancer, and antioxidant properties. Furthermore, an attempt to bridge the gap by examining the pharmacokinetic studies on key bioactive compounds identified through ADME analysis, supported the transdermal and topical applications of these compounds. The profiling suggests that tannin compounds, such as punicalagin, have low skin permeability, indicating potential roles in topical applications. In contrast, ellagic acid exhibits high skin permeability, suggesting possible applications in products such as sunscreens. The combinatorial formulation, consisting of pomegranate peel-derived nanoparticles, has potential additional benefits by facilitating skincare products with photoprotection, enhanced hydration, and topical applications. The study also calls for future research focused on clinical validation and scalable commercial applications.
Graphical Abstract
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40643-025-00958-6.

Introduction
Reduce, recycle, and reuse are the 3Rs principle in the policy of the Food waste management hierarchy employed in various countries across the globe (Saparbekova et al.). These policies also focus on reusing intangible plant components, such as organic waste, which is usually discarded during industrial processing. One way to reuse this type of waste is by creating value-added formulations that can benefit industrial applications. Also, the overproduction of waste can be related to the overgrowing urban population (Su et al.). The annual production of agricultural wastes is increasing rapidly at a 5 to 10% rate, leading to various environmental concerns (Afzaal et al.; Riseh et al.). One such waste that is generated in massive amounts is pomegranate peels. Inedible pomegranate skin makes up as much as 40% of the fruit’s weight (Vučić et al.). Food processing plants frequently face challenges in disposing of their waste, with many of these, including pomegranate peels, being regarded as invaluable nutraceuticals for potential use in diverse food formulations (Goula and Lazarides). The United Nations established the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which encompass goals and targets designed to achieve sustainable development. There is an emphasis on environmental sustainability and waste management. Combining the 3Rs policy and resource efficiency, the aspects of a sustainable circular economy aim to support the agenda of conserving natural resources (Khajuria).
Pomegranate, or Punica granatum L., belongs to the genus Punica and the family Lythraceae (previously named Punicaceae). The Latin terms Pomum, which means apple, and granatus, which means grainy, are combined to form the name Punica granatum L., which means seeded apple (Jawad et al.). Originating from Iran, this fruit is widely cultivated across various Asian and European regions (Villa-Ruano et al.). This fruit contains bioactive components, including anthocyanins, polyphenols, and tannins, making it a functional food with various health benefits (Pirzadeh et al.). Recent studies have demonstrated the presence of high concentrations of multiple phytochemicals and bioactive substances, including polyphenols, hydrolyzable tannins, and flavonoids, in pomegranate peels (Chen et al.). As a waste byproduct, peels are rich in powerful antioxidants that help combat various diseases. Moreover, they are also shown to reduce oxidative stress, lower cholesterol, blood pressure, and improve heart health (Ain et al.). Pomegranate peel has also been found to be an effective therapeutic against gastrointestinal diseases (Parisio et al.). Pomegranate peels contain a wide range of secondary metabolites, including punicalagin and ellagic acid, which significantly contribute to their therapeutic value. All these values of the peels contribute to SDG 3 (Good Health and Well-being). The various properties of pomegranate peel render it a valuable byproduct for diverse applications across several industries. These include its use as nutraceuticals and in food processing within the food sector, as well as its role in the cosmetics, skincare industry and pharmaceuticals. Additionally, it aligns with the “waste to wealth” approach, effectively addressing environmental concerns.
A productive approach for managing biodegradable waste is to utilize it as a raw material for the green synthesis of nanoparticles (Aswathi et al.). Nanotechnology represents a scientific domain focused on creating materials and structures at the nanoscale, ranging in size from 1 to 100 nanometres, using diverse synthesis strategies (Jamkhande et al.). Currently, there is an unexpected rise in the use of nanoparticles across multiple disciplines, such as organic and inorganic chemistry, molecular biology, physics, medicine, and materials science (Jamkhande et al.). The primary reason for this growing interest is the high surface-to-volume ratio of nanoparticles, which also results in high surface energy. As the surface energy increases, reactivity also increases, thereby making nanoparticles highly versatile for various applications (Jadoun et al.). Multiple approaches, including chemical, physical, and green synthesis, are utilized to prepare various nanoparticles (Gour and Jain). In comparison to the synthetic approach, the green synthesis approach has significant advantages (Duan et al.). The green method for nanoparticle synthesis is non-toxic, rapid, effective, clean, and environmentally friendly technology commonly employed to synthesize metal oxide and metallic nanoparticles (Dhand et al.). The innovative aspect of using these green-synthesized pomegranate peel-mediated nanoparticles is their incorporation into specific formulations that can help enhance and improve skin health. Pomegranate peels have the potential to be utilized in cosmeceutical formulations for skin health due to their inherent antioxidant properties. In human reconstituted skin, pomegranate formulations have been shown to increase levels of proliferating cell nuclear antigen and tropoelastin, while also blocking UV-B-driven DNA damage (Kandylis and Kokkinomagoulos). The punicic acid in pomegranate peel has been shown to offer protective properties for the skin’s collagen fibres, which hasten wound healing and lessen the visibility of scars. According to Ain et al., punicic acid also has anti-inflammatory qualities. It reduces inflammation and oxidative damage by promoting the production of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (Ain et al.).
Additionally, it has several applications in the food sector, including the development of valuable formulations, food packaging, and preservation (Kandylis and Kokkinomagoulos; Singh et al.). Due to its explicit antioxidant and antimicrobial properties, it can be utilised as a preservative, improving both the shelf life and quality of food formulations, and as a nutritional enhancer (Singh et al.). Pomegranate peels, often discarded as waste, contain valuable uses. They can be turned into biochar for cleaning dyes from water. They are also used as natural food additives in the food industry and offer benefits in cosmetics (de Souza Mesquita et al.; Maggiore and Setti; Mahmoud and Azab). These studies show how we can reduce waste by repurposing pomegranate peels into valuable products. This process not only helps reduce waste but also supports the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by promoting circular economy practices and enhancing resource efficiency. These initiatives contribute to achieve SDG 9, SDG 3, and SDG 13.
Furthermore, these approaches not only foster sustainability but also cater to the increasing demand for eco-friendly formulations among consumers (Sarkar et al.). By embracing innovative extraction methods and utilizing products enriched with peels, companies can significantly expand their market share (Noreen et al.). The large-scale extraction of bioactive compounds from peel waste presents a substantial opportunity to reduce manufacturing costs, ultimately improving the overall economics for various industries (Pereira et al.). The global market for pomegranates is expanding due to a growing trend in health-conscious consumption. In fact, pomegranate peels have numerous benefits that contribute to their valuable market presence across various food industries. These market trends not only emphasize the use of natural substances but also enhance consumer perceptions by providing innovative and health-beneficial products (Siddiqui et al.).
The large-scale extraction of bioactive compounds from peel waste presents a substantial opportunity to reduce manufacturing costs, ultimately improving the overall economics for various industries. It can be used to formulate various value-added products. Additionally, these products can be more cost-effective than traditional ones. In the food industry, peels present considerable potential. These peels are utilized as a natural food additive, enhancing the quality, flavour, color, and texture of food products. Recent research has demonstrated their effectiveness as a natural preservative, showing that peel extracts can extend the shelf life of perishable items, such as fish, by combating food spoilage. The study reveals that the primary factors contributing to this effectiveness are their notable antimicrobial and antioxidant properties (Hossain et al.). Furthermore, pomegranate peels can be used to create sustainable antimicrobial food packaging. The life cycle assessment of these packaging films indicates a 59% reduction in environmental impact, highlighting their eco-friendly benefits (Baniasadi et al. ). In the cosmetic industry, they can be used in the preparation of formulations that tend to show UV protection benefits (Tumbarski et al.). By scaling up the extraction processes and developing these products, it creates employment and job opportunities in industries. Additionally, applying green extraction methods such as microwave-assisted, ultrasound-assisted, and hydrodynamic cavitation-assisted methods. These methods can help reduce environmental impact and energy consumption (Ballistreri et al.). These scaling-up processes require regulatory compliance for the products to be launched into the market.
This review offers an in-depth understanding of the functional and therapeutic potential of pomegranate peels, a valuable yet underutilized resource. It highlights the bioactive compounds present in the peel and their potential industrial applications, including the development of value-added formulations. The study also reviews the potential of developing value-added skin care formulations utilizing non-toxic nanoparticles derived from pomegranate peels. Furthermore, by leveraging the antioxidant and anti-aging properties of pomegranate peel extracts, this approach not only enhances skin health but also supports waste reduction, sustainable development, and innovation in the skincare industry .

Methodology
The systematic review was conducted using various scientific search engines, including PubMed, Google Scholar, ScienceDirect, Web of Science, and Scopus, with keywords such as “pomegranate peel”, “pomegranate peel therapeutics”, “pomegranate bioactive compounds”, “pomegranate peel and skincare”, “pomegranate peel nanoparticles”, and “pomegranate peel ADME studies" . Based on publication data and an analysis of trends, patterns, and gaps in studies, a discrete pictorial description was created, as depicted in Fig.1 . This bibliometric analysis illustrates the relationship between scientific publications on pomegranate peel, focusing on the interrelationships within research areas, as shown with different colors. It clearly showed that pomogrante peel extracts are in high demand, and their use in therapeutics has been well researched. The molecular mechanism and their signal transduction pathways of specific bioactive compounds have also been studied. There are indications that animal studies on both male and female animals have been conducted specifically on Wistar rats and mice. Research has been conducted in the fields of antibacterial, diabetes, gut microbiota, inflammation, and cancer. There are also some reports on green synthesis and zinc oxide. Considering this data, a further search was conducted to formulate the PRISMA chart .
Bibliometric analysis of pomegranate peel
After an initial search, some records were screened, and a total of 340 works were selected. Furthermore, based on the abstract and title, 201 records were excluded. Consequently, by bridging the gaps and highlighting the identified searches, the remaining works were selected to prepare the module for this proposed comprehensive review work, as shown in the flow chart in Fig. 2.
PRISMA chart representing the systematic pattern of the methodology of the study

Nutritional values of pomegranate peel
Pomegranate is a highly nutritious fruit known for its health benefits. Besides its consumption as a fresh fruit, it is often processed into a variety of beverages. During processing, a significant amount of waste is generated, with peels accounting for more than 30% of the total waste. Peels, being a waste byproduct, contain a variety of bioactive components, proteins, fats, carbohydrates, fibres, and other nutritional compounds Fig. 3. From ancient times, peels have been used in various home remedies to treat colds and coughs. Research has shown the use of pomegranate peel in different food products and as a natural food additive (Kaderides et al.). Research by Muhammad et al. examined the preparation of cookies fortified with pomegranate peels. They added the peel powders to wheat flour and made cookies that showed enhanced nutritional values as compared to the control ones (Muhammad et al.).
Nutritional and phytochemical composition of pomegranate peels illustrating the presence of polyphenols, flavonoids, vitamins, and essential minerals
They are a rich source of carbohydrates and crude fiber, varying from 50 to 70% and 5–20% per 100 g, respectively. The protein content is relatively low, ranging from 2 to 9%. It also contains a negligible amount of fat, ranging from 0 to 1%. Similarly, in a study, peels were incorporated into snack bars, which showed an increase in mineral, fat, total phenols, and total flavonoid content (Abbas et al.). Pomegranate is grown widely all over the globe. Several reports on the nutritional content of pomegranate peel from different countries elucidate the variability, which can also be related to the efficacy of their therapeutic properties. Table 1 presents a brief comparison of the nutritional values found in pomegranate peels from different countries.
A comparative analysis of the nutritional contents of pomegranate peel from different countries
S.No.	Site of study	Ash (%)	Protein (%)	Crude fiber (%)	Total fat (%)	Carbohydrate (%)	Totalpolyphenol(mg/g GAE)	Total flavonoids (mg/g QE)	DPPH scavenging activity(µg/mL)	References	 	1	Egypt	4.22	8.97	19.41	0.85	59.60	143.4	58.55	IC50-23.5	 Morzelle et al. 	 	2	India	4.32	3.74	17.31	0.85	66.51	269.9	10	91.52%	 Malviya et al.; Sun et al.; Alam et al. 	 	3	Bangladesh	2.41	8.23	7.75	4.04	63.11	178.61	64.64	66.86%	 Imran et al.; Čolić et al. 	 	4	Sri Lanka	3.74	4.73	15.03	–	69.6	402	52.64	IC50-20.6	 Baranwal et al.
QE- Quercetin equivalent, GAE- Gallic acid equivalents, IC50- The concentration at which 50% DPPH scavenging activity is observed
In addition to their unique composition, pomegranate peels are particularly rich in bioactive components, notably certain hydrolysable tannins such as ellagic acid, punicalagin, and other related derivatives. Numerous studies have indicated that the concentration of these bioactive compounds varies depending on the cultivar and processing methods used. For instance, a study analyzed two pomegranate peel cultivated varieties, Ganesh and Bhagwa, for the quantitative estimation of these components through HPLC. It also examined the effects of different drying methods (freeze, sun, and oven). The freeze-dried Bhagwa variety proved to be the most effective method, yielding punicalagin at 15.2 mg/g, ellagic acid at 13.6 mg/g, gallic acid at 32.2 mg/g, and quercetin at 2.5 mg/g (Kumar et al.). Furthermore, a recent study investigated extraction methods, including ultrasound, microwave, and hydrodynamic cavitation, for processing fruits across several pomegranate cultivar varieties, including Acco, Parfianka, Wonderful, Jolly Red, Valenciana, and Hicaz. The findings revealed that hydrodynamic cavitation-based extraction yielded the highest amounts of ellagitannins for only one cultivar, Wonderful, with a 20% increase compared to other varieties and extraction methods (Ballistreri et al.). For bioavailability, the key ellagitannin compounds, including ellagic acid and punicalagin, have limited or poor bioavailability due to their binding with certain proteins and minerals, which reduces their ability to undergo further chemical reactions in the body. Additionally, these ellagitannin compounds are generally broken down by weak acids, bases, and certain enzymes (Zam et al. ). These ellagitannins are hydrolysed into ellagic acid and its derivatives for absorption. For ellagic acid, it can be either absorbed directly into the small intestine or stomach, or if unabsorbed, it can be metabolized and converted into urolithins by gut microbiota. These urolithins are then circulated through the body’s circulatory system (Kang et al. ). To improve the bioavailability of ellagitannin compounds, nanoencapsulation can be utilized to reduce the size of bioactive molecules, enhancing their absorption and overall availability in the body (Venusova et al. ).

Bioactive components in pomegranate peel
Pomegranate peel has been utilized since ancient times for treating various ailments and as a traditional remedy due to its content of beneficial compounds. It is known to contain polyphenols, flavonoids, and hydrolysable tannins. The bioactive compounds in pomegranate peels are known to have therapeutic effects, including anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and anti-genotoxic properties. The health benefits mainly stem from the intense activity of water-soluble hydrolysable ellagitannins, especially punicalagin, which appears in two forms: α and β (Huang et al.). The punicalagins are the primary components of peels that contribute to their antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, anticancer, and antioxidant properties (Siddiqui et al.). Additionally, the peels are a rich source of flavonoids, such as catechin, kaempferol, and quercetin, with catechin being particularly notable for its potential anticancer effects. The bioactive components in pomegranate peel exist in a complex mixture, and their synergistic effects contribute to various therapeutic properties, emphasizing the potential for enhanced health benefits compared to individual compounds (Mo et al.). Recent research observed the synergistic effects of three tannin compounds found in peels: punicalagin, punicallin, and ellagic acid. This combination resulted in the downregulation of cytokines IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α, demonstrating strong anti-inflammatory potential (Čolić et al.). In another study, it was observed that the juice of pomogrante fruit comprises a blend of bioactive components, showing high antioxidant and antiproliferative activity as compared to the single use of commercial standards of purified punicalagin and ellagic acid, respectively (Seeram et al.).
It prevents cell growth, induces cell cycle arrest, facilitates apoptosis, and regulates cell signalling pathways through various mechanisms (Du et al.). A comprehensive list of bioactive components identified through an extensive review of the literature, along with their therapeutic benefits, is presented in Table 2.
Bioactive components identified from pomegranate peel
S. No	Compound name	Structure	Bioactivity	References	 	Polyphenolic compounds	 	1.	Pomegranatin A		Inhibited proliferation of Candida albicans	 Ruan et al. 	 	2.	Pomegranatin B		Inhibited proliferation of Candida albicans	 Ruan et al. 	 	3.	Pomegranatin C		Antioxidant and antifungal	 Ruan et al. 	 	4.	2,3-O-(S)-hexahydroxydiphenoyl (HHDP)-βD-glucopyranose		Antioxidant, antifungal, and antitumor efficacy against HeLa cell lines	 Ruan et al. 	 	5.	Gemin D		Antioxidant and antifungal	 Ruan et al. 	 	6.	Casuariin		Antifungal and antitumor efficacy against HeLa cell lines	 Ruan et al. 	 	7.	Gallic acid		Gastrointestinal, neuropsychological, cardioprotective	 Morzelle et al. 	 	8.	Caffeic acid		Antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, neuroprotective, anticancer	 Alam et al. 	 	9.	Punicacortein D		Antioxidant and antimicrobial	 Ruan et al. 	 	10.	Punicacortein C		Antioxidant, antifungal and antitumor efficacy against HeLa cell lines	 Ruan et al. 	 	11.	Granatin A		Antifungal and antitumor efficacy against HeLa cell lines	 Ruan et al. 	 	12.	Punicagranin A		Anti-inflammatory activity	 Li et al. 	 	13.	Punicagranin B		Anti-inflammatory activity	 Li et al. 	 	14.	Punicagranin C		Anti-inflammatory activity	 Li et al. 	 	15.	Punicagranin D		Anti-inflammatory activity	 Li et al. 	 	16.	Punicagranin E		Anti-inflammatory activity	 Li et al. 	 	17.	Punicagranin F		Anti-inflammatory activity 	 Li et al. 	 	18.	Punicagranin G		Anti-inflammatory activity	 Li et al. 	 	19.	Punicagranin H		Anti-inflammatory activity 	 Li et al. 	 	20.	Punicagranin I		Anti-inflammatory activity	 Li et al. 	 	21.	Isohydroxymatairesinol		Antimicrobial and anticancer	Nazeam et al. 	 	Terpenoid glycoside	 	22.	β-Sitosterol-3-O-glycoside		Antioxidant and analgesic	 Sun et al. 	 	Sterol	 	23.	β-sitosterol		Anthelmintic, antimutagenic and antimicrobial	 Sun et al. 	 	Triterpenoid compounds	 	24.	Ursolic acid		Hypolipidemic, anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer andantimicrobial	 Sun et al. 	 	25.	Corosolic acid (2α-hydroxyursolic acid)		Induce programmed death of cell in tumor cells	 Sun et al. 	 	26.	Asiatic acid		Induce apoptosis in tumor cells and antimicrobial	 Sun et al. 	 	27.	Brevifolin carboxylic acid		Treatment of hepatitis B	 Malviya et al. 	 	28.	Arjunolic acid		Protects against arsenic-induced oxidative injury	 Sun et al. 	 	Tannins	 	29.	Punicalagin		Antiinflammatory, antimicrobial, cardioprotective, anticancer, and antioxidant	 Čolić et al. 	 	30.	Punicallin		Antimicrobial and antioxidant	 Malviya et al. 	 	31.	Ellagic acid		Antioxidant, antihepatotoxic, neuroprotective effects, antisteatosic, anti-cholestatic, antihepatocarcinogenic, antifibrogenic, and antiviral properties	 Morzelle et al. 	 	32.	Pedunculagin		Antioxidant and ntifungal	 Ruan et al. 	 	33.	Punicatannin C		Anticancer and antimicrobial	Nazeam et al. 	 	Flavonoids	 	34.	Kaempferol		Antimicrobial, antioxidant, neuroprotective, cardiovascular, and anti-inflammatory	 Imran et al. 	 	35.	Catechin		Anti-inflammatory, neuroprotective, anti-diabetic, antimicrobial, memory enhancer, and hepatoprotective	 Baranwal et al. 	 	36.	Quercetin-3-O-glucoside		Antioxidant, anticancer activity, anti-inflammatory	 Nile et al. 	 	37.	Phloretin		Anticancer and antimicrobial	Nazeam et al. 	 	38.	Quercitin glycoside		Antimicrobial and anticancer	Nazeam et al. 	 	Organic acids	 	39.	Fumaric acid pent side		Antioxidant	 Yazdi and Mrowietz 	 	40.	Quinic acid		Antiviral, antiaging, anti-nociceptive, analgesic, antioxidant, and anti-diabetic	 Morzelle et al.

In silico analysis of the bioactive compounds found in pomegranate peel for potential applications in drug delivery
In silico analysis, including molecular docking studies of pomegranate peel bioactive compounds, can enhance the understanding of their therapeutic potential and their role in drug discovery and delivery. Numerous studies have highlighted the efficacy of these components as drug molecules against various target proteins (Table 3). An investigation assessed the binding efficiency of several bioactive compounds against the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The polyphenolic compounds exhibited stronger and more efficient binding to the Mpro protease inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 when compared to traditional COVID-19 medications such as lopinavir, nelfinavir, and curcumin. Notably, polyphenols such as punicalin, cyanidin-3-glucoside, and quercetin-3-O-rhamnoside formed stable complexes with the inhibitor, positioning pomegranate peel as a promising herbal formulation for COVID-19 prevention (Rakshit et al.).
Bioactive components of pomegranate peels and their potential as drug molecules against different target proteins
S. No.	Bioactive compound	Target protein	Activity	References	 	1.	Punicalagin	Tyrosinase	Inhibition of tyrosinase by decrease in the melanin content in B16F10 cells	Yu et al.()	 	2.	Punicalagin	Alpha glucosidase	Inhibit α-glucosidase that corresponds to the hypoglycemic effect.	Lu et al.	 	3.	Punicalagin	AMPK (Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase)	Colitis: in vivo study in DSS-induced colitis.	Liu et al.()	 	4.	a) Ellagic acidb) Punicalaginc) Punicalin	a) PTP1β (protein tyrosine phosphatase 1β)b) GFAT (Glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase)c) α-amylased) α-glucosidasee) RBP-4 (retinol binding protein − 4)	Promising candidates for antidiabetic activity, punicalin was most potent	 Gull et al. 	 	5.	Punicalagin	SrtA (enzyme for virulence in S.aureus)	Combating MRSA infections	Song et al.()	 	6.	Punicalagin	a) IL-6 (Interleukin-6)b) NF-kB (Nuclear factor-kB)c) TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor-α)	A nti-inflammatory and wound healing	El Nady et al. 	 	7.	Punicalagin	a) AKT1 (Serine/threonine protein kinase 1)b) ALB (serum albumin)c) IGF1 (insulin like growth factor-1)d) SRC (tyrosinase kinase c-SRC)e) CASP3 (caspase-3)f) EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor)	Punicalagin interacts with these receptors to mediate peptidoglycan and lipid, reducing the buildup of neurotoxic proteins in the brain and helping to combat Alzheimer’s.	Xu et al.()	 	8.	Punicalagin	HSV-2 (Herpes simplex virus)	Anti-viral activity against HSV2.	 Arunkumar and Rajarajan 	 	9.	a) Gallic acidb) Punicalinc) α-Punicalagind) β-Punicalagine) Ellagic acid	SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein	Attenuate SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein binding ability to ACE2 and shows in vitro inhibition activity.	 Suručić et al. 	 	10.	Pomegranate peel	a) Procyanidinb) Delphindinc) Cyanidin	6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD) inhibitory activityIn vitro breast cancer activity on MCF-7 cell lines and in vivo against mice models.	Riaz et al.()

Therapeutic properties of pomegranate peel
Pomegranate peels are shown to exhibit therapeutic properties due to their rich content of bioactive components. The various therapeutic activities exhibited include antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, cardiovascular protection, antimicrobial, hepatoprotective, anticancer, and. anti-obesity (Cheng et al.; Siddiqui et al.).

Anti-oxidant activities
Pomegranate peels are rich in antioxidants, a finding supported by numerous studies (Table 4). In a study by Wu et al., researchers examined the effects of pomegranate peel polyphenols in vivo on mice models that had been immunosuppressed with a cyclophosphamide injection (Wu et al.). The results showed that these polyphenols antioxidant effectiveness varied with its dosage. It reduced malondialdehyde levels in immunosuppressed mice and increased the activity of enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase, and catalase (CAT), indicating a key mechanism behind its antioxidant effects Fig. 4. Additionally, pomegranate peel extracts were found to have a protective antioxidant effect against hydrogen peroxide-induced reactive oxygen species production at non-cytotoxic concentrations of 1.0 µg/mL and 10 µg/mL, as confirmed by the reduction in levels of malondialdehyde (Mastrogiovanni et al.). Extracts from pomegranate peel may lower levels of oxidized LDL, lipid peroxidation, thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances, and other oxidative markers associated with cardiovascular risk in healthy individuals (Rosenblat et al.; Jing et al.). This highlights the importance of pomegranate peel as a key dietary source of antioxidants.
Therapeutic potential of pomegranate peels along with the underlying molecular mechanism supported by experimental studies
S.No.	Therapeutic activity	Mechanism of action	Experimental evidence	References	 	1.	Antioxidant and Anti-inflammatory Activity	Increase in the levels of SOD, CAT, and Glutathione (GSH), while there is a decrease in the levels of Malondialdehyde (MDA) for antioxidant activity. Reduction in expression levels of TNF-α, COX-2, and IL-10 through the NF-κB pathway for anti-inflammatory activity	In vivo in Wistar rats	Sayed et al.()	 	2.	Antioxidant	Increase in CAT, glutathione peroxidase, and MDA. Reduction in lipid peroxidation.	In vivo in rat models	 Rak-Pasikowska et al. 	 	3.	Antioxidant and Liver Protection	Peels exhibit antioxidant activity by reducing the levels of aspartate and alanine transaminases, liver myeloperoxidase, lactate dehydrogenase, and MDA. Lowers lipid globules and hepatic fibrosis.	Randomized human clinical trial	 Barghchi et al. 	 	4.	Modulation of Gut microbiota and Anti-inflammatory activity	Punicalagin-rich peel extract, when administered, shows an increase in bacteria that influence good health. Production of short-chain fatty acids reducing inflammation, urolithin A, and other secondary metabolites	Randomized human clinical trial	 Sivamani et al. 	 	5.	Anti-inflammatory	Suppression of IL-6, TNF-α, iNOS, and COX-2 expression through NF-κB, MAPK signalling pathways.	In vitro in RAW 264.7 cells	 Li et al. 	 	6.	Anti-inflammatory	Reduction in levels of C-reactive protein, serum amyloid-A, and total cholesterol	In vivo in Albino rats	 Salama et al.

Anti-inflammatory activities
The pomegranate peel extracts (PPE) exhibit anti-inflammatory activities (Table 4). The activity of peel extracts was studied on RAW264.7 cell lines. The PPE-treated cells produced fewer cytokines by blocking the release of IL-6. This was a dose-dependent impact, with cytokine levels gradually declining as PPE concentrations increased (Feng et al.). Another study found that the significant bioactive substances responsible for the anti-inflammatory qualities were ellagic acid (EA) and punicalagin (PC). Pomegranate peel polyphenols and other components LPS-induced IB phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and degradation, which in turn prevented NF-B activation and p65 nuclear translocation (Du et al.). A study conducted by Mastrogiovanni et al. emphasizes the anti-inflammatory properties of pomegranate peel water extract. This extract decreases CXCL8 secretion in TNF-stimulated Caco-2 cells and inhibits the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokine genes in LPS-challenged colonic tissues. These findings suggest PPE could be a valuable functional food ingredient for maintaining gastrointestinal tract homeostasis (Mastrogiovanni et al.). This potential effect may be due to the significant reduction in levels of cytokines, such as TNF-α, Interleukins, and Cyclooxygenases, mediated through NF-κB signaling pathways (Fig. 4) (Li et al.).

Anticancer activities
Cancer significantly contributes to elevated mortality rates in both developed and developing countries (Aneja et al.). Bioactive compounds such as ellagic acid and punicalagin found in pomegranate peel have demonstrated anticancer properties (Mo et al.). Several studies have demonstrated the effect of pomegranate peels on various types of cancer, along with their underlying mechanisms of action (Table 5).
Ellagic acid, a major active component, exhibits antimutagenic, antifibrotic, and antiaging effects. Extensive research on human hepatoma HepG2 cells demonstrates that pomegranate peel polyphenols effectively arrest the cell cycle at the S-phase, modulate levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and induce apoptosis. These findings suggest that these polyphenols hold significant potential as a therapeutic agent in the treatment of liver cancer (Teniente et al.). Methanolic extracts of pomegranate peel are known to exhibit therapeutic effects against cancer, demonstrating concentration- and time-dependent reductions in cell proliferation, increased apoptotic cell counts, and modifications in Bax/Bcl-2 expression. Furthermore, the polyphenols present in the peel show antineoplastic activity against cervical cancer by regulating apoptosis, cellular redox balance, and various signalling pathways (Teniente et al.). The peels exhibit therapeutic benefits by increasing the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio, activating caspase 3 and 8, and expression of p53, ultimately leading to apoptosis (Fig. 4).

Antimicrobial activities
Pomegranate peel has gained interest due to its impressive antimicrobial properties, establishing it as a significant natural resource with various applications. Pomegranate peels demonstrate a broad antimicrobial spectrum activity against numerous bacteria, fungi and moulds.
Therapeutic potential of pomegranate Peel in cancer, along with the underlying mechanism of action supported by experimental evidence
S.No	Type of cancer	Experimental evidence	Therapeutic action	References	 	1.	Prostate cancer	Prostate cancer cell lines from humans and mice include the DU145, PC3 and TRAMP-C1, respectively.	Increased Bax/Bcl2 expression ratio.Involved in the mitochondria-mediated intrinsic apoptotic pathway.	Deng et al.()	 	2.	Tongue cancer	Cell lines of human tongue squamous cells (HNO-97 and CVCL_D227).	Induce apoptosis and have effects on cancer cell metastasis.	 Ahmed et al. 	 	3.	Cervical cancer	Cervical cancer cell lines (HeLa and SiHa).	Promotes autophagy by activation of ROS-JNK-Bcl2 pathway facilitated by the release of BECN1 from Bcl2.	 Xie et al. 	 	4.	Lung cancer	Hep3B cell line	The in silico studies showed that ellagic acid was the most potent compound exhibiting the best docking against the EGFR-TK inhibitor.	 Danjolli-Hashani et al. 	 	5.	Breast cancer	Human MCF-7 cell lines	The peel extract showed apoptosis via caspase-3-independent, caspase-8, and p53-dependent pathways.	 Bandara et al. 	 	6.	Colon cancer	In vivo male albino mice	Activity observed due to the reduction of serum levels of Bcl2 and HIF1-α and high antioxidant activity.	 Ammar et al. 	 	7.	Thyroid cancer	In vivo in mice models and in vitro on BCPAP cell line	Induces apoptosis via mitochondria-mediated intrinsic pathway. The peel extract also downregulated the MMP-9 expression in the cell lines.	 Li et al.
The peels exhibited more antimicrobial activity than the other parts of the plant (Chen et al.). Pomegranate peel extracts show antimicrobial properties, primarily attributed to tannins and flavonoids (Chen et al.). The key bioactive component identified contributing to the antimicrobial activity is reported to be punicalagin (Gosset-Erard et al.).
Mechanism of action of pomegranate peels bioactive compounds for therapeutic activities, including anti-inflammatory (inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokines), antioxidant (Nrf-2 activation), antimicrobial (disrupting the bacterial cell membrane and inhibiting the growth), and anticancer (ROS-mediated apoptosis)
The antimicrobial action is primarily due to the ability of these bioactive components to disrupt the microbial cell membrane, inhibit crucial enzymes, and prevent microbial proliferation (Bialonska et al.; Sharma and Bisht) (Fig. 4). In a study by Lee et al., it was demonstrated that pomegranate extracts possess potential antibacterial activity against skin pathogens, including Staphylococcus aureus and Propionibacterium acnes, with an MIC of 62.5 µg/mL. It was identified that punicalagin and punicalin were the primary bioactive compounds responsible for this significant activity (Lee et al.). A recent study found that pomegranate peel extracts in water show significant antimicrobial effects against Listeria monocytogenes. In contrast, butanoic and methanolic extracts inhibit the growth of Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus megaterium, and Bacillus sphaericus. Additionally, it was reported that boiling these extracts caused a decrease in the MIC values (Abu-Niaaj et al.).

Wound healing activities
Pomegranate peel extracts have demonstrated significant wound-healing potential, attributed to their bioactive components and associated antioxidant activity. One study investigates the underlying mechanisms of this potential by testing PPE on human dermal fibroblast cells in vitro. The results indicated that PPE upregulated the expression of the Fibronectin gene (FN1). The FN1 gene plays a key role in regulating cellular adhesion and the organization of the extracellular matrix. Furthermore, PPE enhances collagen synthesis and promotes the accumulation of glycosaminoglycans, both of which contribute to strengthening the dermal matrix and facilitating tissue formation (Hashemi Poor et al.). In a recent study, a carbomer-based gel was prepared using PPE for topical applications and wound healing properties. The gels were checked for their antimicrobial activity against Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans. The gel was found to be effective against all the tested strains, and the one with 2.5% w/w of PPE showed maximum potential for wound healing and antimicrobial purposes (Ferreira et al.).

Pomegranate peel-mediated nanoparticle synthesis
The waste-to-wealth strategy involves using plant waste materials to synthesize nanoparticles, which can be applied across various industries. Nanoparticles have been produced using a variety of metals, metal oxides, organic compounds, and different parts of pomegranate for diverse purposes (Table 6).
Different types of nanoparticles prepared from parts of pomegranate with their varied applications
Types of nanoparticles	Part of plant used	Applications	References	 	Iron oxide	Seeds	Textile dye degradation	Bibi et al.()	 	Zinc oxide	Peels	Cytotoxicity 	 Mohamad Sukri et al. 	 	Gold	Peels	Diabetes nephropathy	 Manna et al. 	 	Titanium oxide	Peels	Water disinfection	Abu-Dalo et al.	 	Chitosan	Peel	Food packaging	 Cui et al. 	 	Silver	Leaf	Antimicrobial activity	Swilam and Nematallah ()	 	Zinc oxide	Leaves and flowers	Antibacterial activity	 Ifeanyichukwu et al. 	 	Copper oxide	Peels	Cytotoxic effects	 Mahmoud et al. 	 	Gold	Peels	Yogurt formulation and cytotoxicity analysis	 Esther Lydia et al. 	 	Zinc oxide	Peels	Sunscreen formulation	 Kokabi and Ebrahimi 	 	Zinc oxide	Juice	Antioxidant, antimicrobial, and anticorrosive	 Ibadi et al. 	 	Silver-zinc bimetallic	Peel	Antimicrobial and anticancer	(Hashem and El-Sayyad
In contrast to conventional chemical synthesis, the green synthesis of nanoparticles utilizing plant extracts is more efficient. This process involves combining plant extracts with a source of metal ions, which ultimately determines the type of metal oxide nanoparticles formed. A change in color signifies the successful formation of these nanoparticles, which are subsequently characterized through various analytical techniques. Figure 5 illustrates a general method for synthesizing nanoparticles using pomegranate peel. The bioactive components in pomegranate peels act as capping agents during nanoparticle formation.
Overview of the green synthesis of nanoparticles mediated by pomegranate peel
This green synthesis method, utilizing pomegranate peel extracts, is notably effective as it avoids harmful chemicals and protects the surrounding environment, thereby offering a cost-effective solution. The affordability, availability of natural plant sources, and use of non-toxic substances contribute to the high tolerability, reproducibility, effectiveness, and biocompatibility of the resulting nanoparticles (Singh et al.). Pomegranate peel-mediated nanoparticles present a range of biomedical and cosmeceutical applications. In terms of biomedical applications, these nanoparticles exhibit antimicrobial, anticancer, antioxidant, wound-healing, and anti-inflammatory properties, and can also serve as drug carriers and biosensors (Monika et al.). Additionally, their cosmeceutical applications include formulation into creams, soaps, and sunscreens. Compared to conventionally synthesized nanoparticles, those produced through green synthesis provide comparable or enhanced therapeutic benefits, as they utilize the bioactive components within the pomegranate peel as reducing agents (Abdelmigid et al.). Moreover, studies suggest that these green nanoparticles exhibit lower systemic toxicities when properly characterized. However, additional validation through in vivo and clinical studies remains essential to confirm their safety (Tavan et al.).

Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs)
AuNPs are versatile materials with many applications. Gold nanoparticles have numerous applications attributed to their unique mechanical, electrical, thermal, optical, and chemical properties. Additionally, the FDA has approved the use of AuNPs in biomedical applications (Sani et al.).
Manna et al. used aqueous extracts of pomegranate peel and added them dropwise to the chloroauric acid (HAuCl4) solution to synthesize pomegranate peel extract-mediated AuNPs (Manna et al.). Patel et al. prepared the pomegranate peel extract and combined it with chloroauric acid (1 mM) to synthesize AuNPs. The shift in color from gold to pink signified the formation of gold nanoparticles mediated by pomegranate peel (Patel et al.).

Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs)
AgNPs are of significant interest due to their prospective applications in catalysis, plasmonics, biological sensors, antimicrobial properties, DNA sequencing, climate change mitigation, water treatment technology, and a variety of other medicinal applications (Rafique et al.). Swilam et al.  mixed pomegranate leaf extracts with a silver nitrate solution in a 5:1 ratio to synthesize silver nanoparticles, and then optimized their synthesis (Swilam and Nematallah). The appearance of a dark brown color confirms the synthesis of AgNPs (Khan et al.). The pomegranate peel-mediated AgNPs are known to have potential antimicrobial activities, with MICs of 25 µg/mL against Bacillus subtilis, 50 µg/mL against S. typhi, 125 µg/mL against K. pneumoniae, and 250 µg/mL against both E. coli and E. faecalis (Farouk et al.). Additionally, AgNPs have been found to exhibit significant wound-healing properties, thereby demonstrating an anti-inflammatory impact as well (Scappaticci et al.). Since they exhibit explicit antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties, they can be incorporated into ointments, skin creams, and moisturiser formulations. They can also be used in formulations of creams used for acne treatment and can be incorporated into sunscreens (Ong and Nyam).

Zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnONPs)
The plant-mediated synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles exhibits several beneficial properties, including antimicrobial, antioxidant, and photocatalytic efficacy. They can also be used in solar cells or antimicrobial coatings as well (Bandeira et al.). For the synthesis of pomegranate peel-mediated ZnO nanoparticles (ZnONPs), any metal salt of zinc can be used. The peel extract was mixed in a 1:20 ratio, and the pH was adjusted to 12. The mixture was then continuously stirred for 2 h at 100 °C. White-coloured powder confirmed the formation of ZnONPs (Shaban et al.). Zinc oxide is often used as a UV filter and is proven to be a potential agent for blocking UVA-type radiation.

Iron oxide nanoparticles
Iron oxide nanoparticles find extensive applications across diverse fields, including environmental regulation, stem cell tracking, the biomedical sector, tissue engineering, cosmetics, and biosensing. Super magnetism, reduced susceptibility to oxidation, and flexible surface chemistry are some of the physical characteristics of these nanoparticles that make them valuable and versatile (Priya et al.). For synthesizing iron oxide nanoparticles, a solution of FeCl2 or FeCl3 was used, mixed with an aqueous extract of pomegranate peels. The pH was adjusted by adding NaOH dropwise. The mixture was stirred for 2 h at 1000 rpm and 70 °C. The change in color from orange to black indicates the formation of iron oxide nanoparticles (Ahmed et al.). Due to their magnetic properties, they are widely used in the technique of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) (Ansari et al.).

Pomegranate peel-mediated nanoparticles as an ingredient in skincare formulations
Skincare formulations can be explicitly defined as cosmetics for the epidermis of the skin to maintain healthy skin. Skincare products are available in various physical states, including solids, semisolids, and liquids. The primary objectives of using these formulations on the skin include cleansing action (effective removal of microorganisms and dirt from skin), moisturization (establishment of an effective barrier to prevent water losses through the epidermal layer); hydration (maintenance and restoration of the proper fluid balance), and protection of the skin from any external damage from pollution, UV light, dirt, etc. (Salvioni et al.). The incorporation of nanoformulations into skincare formulations enables the controlled release of bioactive components. Various nano skincare formulations include moisturizers, sunscreens, anti-aging creams, cleansers, and anti-acne formulations. These formulations also show a variety of skin benefits (Fig. 6).
Skincare formulations developed using pomegranate peel-based nanoformulations
Pomegranate peels contain a variety of bioactive compounds that provide numerous benefits for skin health. The presence of ellagic acid was found to reduce skin wrinkles and UV radiation-induced hyperpigmentation (Singh et al.). In an in vitro study, it was found that punicalagin influences melanocytes to reduce melanin production. The underlying mechanism may be that humans do not directly absorb punicalagin; instead, it is converted into ellagic acid. This compound has been recognized as a potential inhibitor of the tyrosinase enzyme, which plays a crucial role in the melanin biosynthesis pathway (Rana et al. ).

Creams
Due to their rich bioactive compounds, pomegranate peels have attracted significant attention from the cosmetic industry for use in face creams. The peels are specially recognized for their elevated concentrations of polyphenols, tannins, and flavonoids, which provide antioxidant and anti-inflammatory advantages (Jalal et al.). These compounds play a crucial role in protecting the skin from oxidative stress, reducing inflammation, and promoting overall skin health. Moreover, ellagitannins found in pomegranate peels are associated with potential anti-aging benefits, as they aid in collagen production and enhance skin elasticity (Eghbali et al.). Therefore, incorporating pomegranate peel extracts in various creams offers a natural and botanical approach to skincare, catering to the growing demand for formulations that prioritize both effectiveness and sustainability. Kalouta et al. prepared a cream composed of natural wax and an emulsifier derived from olive oil. It contained 0.5% pomegranate-encapsulated nanofibers and 16.5% natural and synthetic oils stabilized by an acrylic polymer. Next, the rheological behavior of these creams was investigated to analyze their interaction with the skin (Kalouta et al.). Colloidal ZnO synthesized from A. vasica leaves exhibited potential antimicrobial and antioxidant activities, which led to its incorporation in a cold cream formulation that showed antibacterial and antifungal activities against various pathogens causing skin infections and alleviated oxidative stress and cellular damage (Sonia et al.).

Nanoemulsions for moisturizers
Pomegranate peel offers a rich supply of antioxidants, with a high concentration of gallic acid that helps prevent the formation of free radicals and shields against damaging UV radiation. Nano emulsions are used in various skincare applications, including moisturizers, as they aid in the active delivery of bioactive components with the benefits of stability, solubility, and maintaining their potential benefits (Yadwade et al.). In a study, researchers prepared pomegranate-based seed oil nanoemulsions using the ultrasonic emulsification solvent evaporation method. Ethyl acetate fraction, soy lecithin, and pomegranate seed oil were dissolved in 10 mL of ethyl acetate. The solution was then poured slowly into 40 mL of polysorbate 80. The in vitro skin penetration studies were then performed, which indicated that these nanoemulsions helped the polyphenols present in the peel penetrate the skin more effectively and protect it from oxidative damage (Baccarin and Lemos-Senna). The preparation of plant-based nanoemulsions is advantageous as it aids in various skin repair mechanisms. Nanoemulsions are beneficial as they support processes such as collagen synthesis, melanin production, and anti-aging. Incorporating nanoemulsions into moisturizers improves skin hydration by creating a thin film that prevents dryness and by carrying hygroscopic compounds that aid in moisture retention (Romes et al.). Nanoemulsions are said to minimize or eliminate skin irritation as they penetrate directly into the skin through pores and hair follicles without harming healthy tissue. This results in improved skin hydration, an attractive visual appearance, and enhanced stabilization of bioactive ingredients in the product (Naseema et al.).

Sunscreens
Photoaging refers to the process of gradual skin deterioration resulting from prolonged exposure to the sun. This process involves several changes, such as an increase in pigment heterogeneity, collagen degradation, sunburns, a change in epidermal thickness, and mutagenesis of melanocytes and keratinocytes in the skin (Guan et al.). As per the report, 80% of skin ageing is caused by skin exposure to UV light. The application of a photoprotective agent, such as sunscreen, can be the most effective measure of prevention (Flament et al.). Opting for broad-spectrum sunscreens is ideal, as they protect against both harmful UVA and UVB rays. Sunscreens are primarily categorized into two types: physical and chemical. Physical sunscreens block and scatter UV radiation from the skin (Fig. 7).
Protective mechanism of sunscreens; the left part indicates the part of the skin that does not have sunscreen application, whereas the nanoparticle-containing sunscreen is applied on the right part. It protects the cells from harmful UV radiation, allowing them to remain healthy
The active ingredients are titanium dioxide (TiO2), zinc oxide (ZnO2), and minerals; these ingredients are often incorporated in their nano forms in the cream, which offers several advantages. On the other hand, chemical sunscreens work by absorbing sunlight, and their formulations are usually alcohol-based or lipophilic, containing active ingredients such as octisalate, oxybenzone, octocrylene, octinoxate, homosalate, and avobenzone (Yamada et al.). Therefore, selecting the correct type of sunscreen is crucial for protecting the skin from harmful UV radiation. Both titanium and zinc oxide nanoparticles are incorporated in the physical sunscreen to achieve maximum benefits of UV protection. These particles are smaller in size, resulting in a more even application on the skin and providing an increased surface area for the reflection of UV radiation. These are often odourless and colourless, and do not form any white residue upon application to the skin (Lyu et al.).

Skin cleansers
The hydrophobic skin layers contain sebaceous and sweat glands, which accumulate endogenous and exogenous contaminants. For maintaining skin health, it is essential to remove dust, irritants, dead skin, and odour. Proper cleansing using a good cleanser helps eliminate all the resident microbes and allergens that accumulate on the skin surface (Salvioni et al.). Instead of using basic, conventional soaps and cleansers, innovative nanoformulations, such as nanoemulsions and metal-based nanoparticles, can be explored. When prepared using pomegranate peel extracts, these nanoformulations not only enhance cleansing but also provide beneficial effects, including antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory properties. Several studies have been conducted that suggest incorporating silver nanoparticles into formulations such as soaps, hand washes, and gels. These formulations claimed to have antimicrobial properties, fight acne, and sunburned skin, and other benefits as well (Nafisi and Maibach).

Pharmacokinetic analysis of the bioactive components in pomegranate peels
The biological activity and potential of compounds as drug candidates are profoundly influenced by their molecular characteristics. In this study, we systematically evaluated 20 bioactive compounds derived from pomegranate peels, analysing their Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, and Excretion (ADME) profiles using the http://www.swissadme.ch/tool. This analysis not only enhances our understanding of the pharmacokinetics of these compounds but also their drug-likeness. Among the selected compounds, notable entities such as gallic acid, caffeic acid, isohydroxymatairesinol, corosolic acid, phloretin, catechin, kaempferol, ellagic acid, arjunolic acid, and asiatic acid exhibited high gastrointestinal absorption, suggesting potential efficacy upon ingestion, which could contribute positively to human health. In terms of distribution, factors such as P-glycoprotein (P-gp) efflux, penetration of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), and implications for the central nervous system (CNS) were also assessed. The analysis indicated that none of the evaluated compounds could cross the BBB, suggesting minimal effects on the central nervous system, an essential consideration for safety in therapeutic applications. Additionally, several compounds, including punicacortein C, granatin A, isohydroxymatairesinol, corosolic acid, catechin, pedunculagin, punicalin, punicalagin, and asiatic acid, were identified as P-gp substrates; their activity may limit gastrointestinal absorption, resulting in restricted distribution throughout the body. For metabolic profiling, the interaction of these compounds with cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYPs) was examined. Among all the selected bioactive compounds, two flavonoids, phloretin and kaempferol exhibited inhibitory effects on CYP enzymes. This lack of inhibition implies a lower risk of drug-drug interactions, thereby positioning these compounds as safer options for incorporation into dietary or therapeutic products. In terms of excretion, the profiling of water solubility and lipophilicity provided insights into the excretion pathways of these compounds. Such characteristics are vital for understanding the behaviour of these bioactive components within the human body and their potential long-term effects (Table S1).
Other significant factors in the ADME profiling, which suggest the feasibility of incorporating these bioactives into skincare formulations, are illustrated in Table 7. These crucial factors include molecular weight, Log Kp value, and TPSA (Topological Polar Surface Area) values. The bioactive compounds isolated from pomegranate peels were categorized into major groups, including phenolic acids, tannins, flavonoids, and triterpenoids, and their characteristics were examined in relation to skincare applications. For a compound to be primed for effective transdermal absorption, it should have a molecular weight of less than 500 Da. The Total Polar Surface Area (TPSA) values act as a valuable compass in gauging a compound’s ability to navigate and penetrate biological barriers, especially in the realm of absorption (Daina et al.). Additionally, the Log Kp value serves as an insightful indicator of the skin permeability coefficient of bioactive molecules; a Log Kp exceeding (− 2.5) clearly reveals that the compound with low skin permeability, presents a challenge for its absorption through the skin’s protective layers (Vijayakumar et al.).
On further investigations, the following observations have been made. The major polyphenolic acids, such as gallic, brevifolincarboxylic, and caffeic acid, have molecular weights less than 500Da (170–292 Da), with moderate LogKp values (-6.58 to -8.38 cm/s). The values of these compounds demonstrate excellent permeability, making them promising antioxidant candidates that can be utilised in sunscreen formulations, lotions, and other daily-use skincare products. The tannin compounds like punicalagin, pedunculagin, punicalin, granatin A, punicacortein C, and causuariin show high molecular weights ranging from 634.5–1084.72 g/mol and LogKp values ranging from − 10.33 to -12.46 cm/s. The permeability of these compounds through the skin is significantly limited due to their relatively high molecular weight. Their low permeability makes them ideal for topical skincare formulations with localized application and antimicrobial properties, such as soap formulations (Fares et al.). A study shows the potential of tannic acidas an anti-photoaging agent (Daré et al.). For flavonoids, catechin, phloretin, and kaempferol, the molecular weight of the compounds is in the range of 270–290 g/mol, and the LogKp value ranges from -6.11 to -7.82 7.82 cm/s. These flavonoid compounds play protective roles in UV protection and can therefore be incorporated into sunscreens. They also exhibit protective activities against collagen and elastin degradation (Čižmárová et al.). The triterpenoid compounds, such as ursolic acid, arjunolic acid, and corosolic acid, have an optimum molecular weight between 450 and 490 g/mol. LogKp value − 3.87 to 5.23 cm/s exhibiting dermal potential. These compounds exhibit anti-aging, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, scar-reducing, and wound-healing properties (Min et al.). Although there is limited information regarding the toxicity associated with the consumption and topical application of pomegranate peel, a study was conducted to assess its toxicity using BALB mice. The results showed no toxic effects, clinical signs, or histopathological changes in the epithelial cells of the larynx, tongue, and trachea. No adverse effects or mortality were reported in the mouse models. Intradermal injections were performed to evaluate skin allergies, yielding negative test results, which further indicated the lack of toxicity of the peels (Jahromi et al., ). Another research suggests that when consumed in moderation, pomegranate peel is generally safe and does not pose toxic effects. However, it is essential to note that high doses of peel extracts can be harmful, making it necessary to evaluate and use appropriate concentrations before consumption (Singh et al.). Additionally, these peels and their bioactive components have demonstrated no toxicological effects upon topical application, making them entirely safe for use. They possess significant photoprotective potential against UV radiation and can be incorporated into skincare products to promote healthy, disease-free skin (Tumbarski et al.). Future research should focus more on the toxicological effects related to the consumption and topical application of peels.
ADME profiling of the bioactive compounds identified from pomegranate peel
S.No.	Bioactive compound	Molecular formula	Molecular weight	Log S	TPSA	log Kp (cm/s)	Bioavailability radar	 	1	Gemin D	C27H22O18	634.45	− 3.53	318.50 Å²	− 10.33 cm/s		 	2	Causuariin	C34H24O22	784.54	− 5.00	388.42 Å²	− 11.04 cm/s		 	3	Gallic acid	C7H6O5	170.12	− 1.64	97.99 Å²	− 6.84 cm/s		 	4	Caffeic acid	C9H8O4	180.16	− 1.89	77.76 Å²	− 6.58 cm/s		 	5	Punicacortein C	C48H28O30	1084.72	− 7.43	529.76 Å²	− 12.29 cm/s		 	6	Granatin A	C34H24O22	784.54	− 3.73	374.26 Å²	− 12.46 cm/s		 	7	Isohydroxymatairesinol	C20H22O7	374.38	− 3.45	105.45 Å²	− 7.06 cm/s		 	8	β− sitosterol	C29H50O	414.71	− 7.90	20.23 Å²	− 2.20 cm/s		 	9	Ursolic acid	C30H48O3	456.70	− 7.23	57.53 Å²	− 3.87 cm/s		 	10	Corosolic acid	C30H48O4	472.70	− 6.72	77.76 Å²	− 4.66 cm/s		 	11	Phloretin	C15H14O5	274.27	− 3.37	97.99 Å²	− 6.11 cm/s		 	12	Catechin	C15H14O6	290.27	− 2.22	110.38 Å²	− 7.82 cm/s		 	13	Kaempferol	C15H10O6	286.24	− 3.31	111.13 Å²	− 6.70 cm/s		 	14	Pedunculagin	C34H24O22	784.54	− 5.61	377.42 Å²	− 10.42 cm/s		 	15	Ellagic Acid	C14H6O8	302.19	− 2.94	141.34 Å²	− 7.36 cm/s		 	16	Punicalin	C34H22O22	782.53	− 4.88	385.24 Å²	− 11.28 cm/s		 	17	Punicalagin	C48H28O30	1084.72	− 8.50	518.76 Å²	− 11.67 cm/s		 	18	Arjunolic Acid	C30H48O5	488.70	− 6.42	97.99 Å²	− 5.13 cm/s		 	19	Brevifolincarboxylic acid	C13H8O8	292.20	− 1.67	145.27 Å²	− 8.38 cm/s		 	20	Asiatic Acid	C30H48O5	488.70	− 6.33	97.99 Å²	− 5.23 cm/s

Conclusion
The industrial sector stands to gain significantly from the bioactive components present in pomegranate peels, a nutrient-rich byproduct. The presence of the bioactive compounds make the peel waste a valuable element for applications in healthcare and skincare. Key bioactive compounds contributing to the therapeutic properties and photo-protective activity include specific hydrolysable tannins, such as ellagic acid and punicalagin. Moreover, these bioactives found in the peels act as effective reducing and capping agents in the synthesis of nanoparticles. Incorporating these green-synthesised nanoparticles into skincare products represents an innovative strategy that supports a circular economy approach. Pharmacokinetic studies of the bioactive molecules in pomegranate peels reveal their absorption and skin permeability values, which are beneficial for formulating skincare products. These studies also demonstrate the complete safety of these molecules, indicating their potential for inclusion in advanced nanoformulations at specific concentrations. Future prospects can concentrate on optimizing these nanoformulations for enhanced skin absorption. However, the detailed in vitro, in vivo, and clinical investigations of these formulations are recommended. Contraindications to the toxicological potential of overuse and overdose of peel extracts in formulations are particular challenges that cannot be overlooked.

Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Abbreviations
LDL
Low-density lipid
PPE
Pomegranate peel extract
IL
Interleukin
EA
Ellagic acid
PC
Punicalagin
LPS
Lipopolysaccharide
TNF
Tumor necrosis factor
NF
Necrosis factor
ROS
Reactive oxygen species
Gold nanoparticles
AuNPs
Silver nanoparticles
AgNPs
FDA
Food and drug administration
MIC
Minimum inhibitory concentration
PRISMA
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
ZnONPs
Zinc oxide nanoparticles
UV
Ultraviolet
ADME
Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, and Excretion
SDGs
Sustainable Development Goals
DPPH
2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl
AMPK
Adenosine monophosphate activated protein kinase
PTP1β
Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1β
RBP
retinol binding protein
SrtA
Sortase A
IL6
Interleukin-6
GFAT
Glutamine fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase
NF kB
Nuclear factor-kB
AKT1
Serine/threonine protein kinase 1
ALB
Serum albumin
IGF1
Insulin like growth factor 1
SRC
Tyrosinase kinase c SRC
CASP3
Caspase-3
HSV
Herpes simplex virus
6PGD
6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase
FN1
Fibronectin gene
EGFR
Epidermal growth factor receptor
HPLC
High Performance Liquid Chromatography
NO
Nitric oxide
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
D.A. and M.D. wrote the manuscript text, and D.A. prepared all the figures and tables. Both authors reviewed the manuscript.

Funding
Open access funding provided by Manipal University Jaipur. The authors express their gratitude for the support received from the Manipal Research Board (MRB seed grant, DoR MRB|2023 |SG-03).

Data availability
The article and/or supplemental materials contain the datasets that support the findings of this work.

Declarations

Conflict of interest
All authors consented to the publication of this manuscript. There are no competing interests among the authors.

References
Development and nutritional evaluation of pomegranate Peel enriched bars
Green synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles using pomegranate fruit Peel and solid coffee grounds vs. Chemical method of synthesis, with their biocompatibility and antibacterial properties investigation
Abu-Dalo M, Jaradat A, Albiss BA, Al-Rawashdeh NAF (2019) Green synthesis of TiO2 NPs/pristine pomegranate peel extract nanocomposite and its antimicrobial activity for water disinfection. J Environ Chem Eng 7. 10.1016/j.jece.2019.103370
Pomegranate peel: bioactivities as antimicrobial and cytotoxic agents
Afzaal M, Saeed F, Ahmad A, Saeed M, Usman I, Nouman M (2022) Microbial processing for valorization of waste and application. Environ Microbiology: Adv Res Multidisciplinary Appl 187–210. 10.2174/9781681089584122010012
Preparation and characterization of iron nanoparticles by green synthesis method and its application in water treatment
Antitumoral properties of the pomegranate Peel and blueberry extracts against tongue carcinoma ( study)
Nutritional importance and industrial uses of pomegranate peel: A critical review
Alam M, Ahmed S, Elasbali AM, Adnan M, Alam S, Hassan M I, Pasupuleti V R (2022) Therapeutic implications of caffeic acid in cancer and neurological diseases. Front Oncol 12. 10.3389/fonc.2022.860508
Promising anticancer activity of pomegranate peels extract (PPE) against bacterial pathogens-induced colon cancer in mice model
The emerging superfruit: ’s role in revolutionizing the nutraceutical and food industries
Iron oxide Nanoparticles-Synthesis, surface Modification, applications and toxicity: A review
Study on antiviral activities, drug-likeness and molecular Docking of bioactive compounds of L. to herpes simplex virus – 2 (HSV-2)
Green synthesis of nanoparticles from biodegradable waste extracts and their applications: a critical review
Potential application of nanoemulsions for skin delivery of pomegranate Peel polyphenols
Sustainable extraction protocols for the recovery of bioactive compounds from By-Products of pomegranate fruit processing
Baniasadi H, Fathi Z, Lizundia E, Cruz CD, Abidnejad R, Fazeli M, Tammela P, Kontturi E, Lipponen J, Niskanen (2025) Development and characterization of pomegranate peel extract-infused carboxymethyl cellulose composite films for functional, sustainable food packaging. Food Hydrocoll 158:110525. 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2024.110525
Induction of apoptosis and antiproliferative activity of MCF-7 human breast cancer cells with sonicated aqueous Peel extract of L. (Nimali sp)
Bandeira M, Giovanela M, Roesch-Ely M, Devine D M, da Silva Crespo (2020) Green synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles: a review of the synthesis methodology and mechanism of formation. Sustain Chem Pharm 15. 10.1016/j.scp.2020.100223
Biopolymer: A sustainable material for food and medical applications
Pomegranate ( L.) Peel extract ameliorates metabolic syndrome risk factors in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: a randomized double-blind clinical trial
Urolithins, intestinal microbial metabolites of pomegranate ~ ellagitannins, exhibit potent antioxidant activity in a cell-based assay
Green synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles using pomegranate seeds extract and photocatalytic activity evaluation for the degradation of textile dye
Antimicrobial activity of pomegranate Peel and its applications on food preservation
Bioactive compounds and health benefits of pomegranate: an updated narrative review
Flavonoids as promising natural compounds in the prevention and treatment of selected skin diseases
Čolić M, Mihajlović D, Bekić M, Marković M, Dragišić B, Tomić S, Miljuš N, Šavikin K, Škrbić R (2022) Immunomodulatory activity of punicalagin, punicalin, and ellagic acid differs from the effect of pomegranate peel extract. Molecules 27. 10.3390/molecules27227871
Cui H, Surendhiran D, Li C, Lin L (2020) Biodegradable zein active film containing chitosan nanoparticle encapsulated with pomegranate peel extract for food packaging. Food Packag Shelf Life 24. 10.1016/j.fpsl.2020.100511
SwissADME: A free web tool to evaluate pharmacokinetics, drug-likeness and medicinal chemistry friendliness of small molecules
L. Peel: anticancer activity on Hep3B, Drug-likeness, ADMET Prediction, and molecular Docking with EGFR-TK
Tannic acid, a promising anti-photoaging agent: evidences of its antioxidant and anti-wrinkle potentials, and its ability to prevent photodamage and MMP-1 expression in L929 fibroblasts exposed to UVB
Valorization of pomegranate waste through green solvent extraction and Biochar production: a zero-waste biorefinery approach
The extract from (pomegranate) Peel induces apoptosis and impairs metastasis in prostate cancer cells
Methods and strategies for the synthesis of diverse nanoparticles and their applications: A comprehensive overview
Du L, Li J, Zhang X , Wang L, Zhang W, Yang M, Hou C (2019) Pomegranate peel polyphenols inhibits inflammation in LPS-induced RAW264.7 macrophages via the suppression of TLR4/NF-κB pathway activation. Food Nutr Res 63. 10.29219/fnr.v63.3392
Du J, Wang H, Zhong L, Wei S, Min X, Deng H, Zhang X, Zhong M, Huang Y (2025) Bioactivity and biomedical applications of pomegranate peel extract: a comprehensive review. Front Pharmacol 16. 10.3389/fphar.2025.1569141
Green chemistry for nanoparticle synthesis
Eghbali S, Askari SF, Avan R, Sahebkar A (2021) Therapeutic Effects of Punica granatum (Pomegranate): an updated review of clinical trials. J Nutr Metab 2021. 10.1155/2021/5297162
El Nady GH, El. Zaater MM, Ahmed AT, Abdel Razik AB, El-Dougdoug KA, Ibrahim MI (2024) Assessment of wound healing potential of Punica granatum peel extract in rheumatoid arthritis mice: in silico and in vivo study. Egypt Acad J Biol Sci C Physiol Mol Biol 16:329–350. 10.21608/eajbsc.2024.393106
Esther Lydia D, Khusro A, Immanuel P, Esmail GA, Al-Dhabi NA, Arasu MV. (2020) Photo-activated synthesis and characterization of gold nanoparticles from Punica granatum L. seed oil: an assessment on antioxidant and anticancer properties for functional yoghurt nutraceuticals. J Photochem Photobiol B 206. 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2020.111868
Green tannins /Avocado oil composites; suncare and skincare materials
Farouk SM, Abu-Hussien SH, Abd-Elhalim BT , Mohamed RM, Arabe NM, Hussain AA, Mostafa ME, Hemdan B, El-Sayed SM, Bakry A, Ebeed NM (2023) Biosynthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles from Punica granatum (pomegranate) peel waste and its application to inhibit foodborne pathogens. Sci Rep 13. 10.1038/s41598-023-46355-x
Feng Y, Lin J, He G, Liang L, Liu Q, Yan J, Yao Q (2022) Compositions and biological activities of pomegranate peel polyphenols extracted by different solvents. Molecules 27. 10.3390/molecules27154796
Development of a gel formulation with pomegranate Peel extract ( L.) for antimicrobial and wound healing action
Effect of the sun on visible clinical signs of aging in Caucasian skin
Gosset-Erard C, Zhao M, Lordel-Madeleine S, Ennahar S (2021) Identification of punicalagin as the bioactive compound behind the antimicrobial activity of pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) peels. Food Chem 352 10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.129396
Integrated processes can turn industrial food waste into valuable food by-products and/or ingredients: the cases of Olive mill and pomegranate wastes
Advances in green synthesis of nanoparticles
Sunscreens and photoaging: A review of current literature
Assessing the multitargeted antidiabetic potential of three pomegranate peel-specific metabolites: an and pharmacokinetics study
Antimicrobial and anticancer activities of biosynthesized bimetallic silver-zinc oxide nanoparticles (Ag-ZnO NPs) using pomegranate Peel extract
Wound healing potential of pomegranate Peel extract in human dermal fibroblasts through regulating the expression of FN1 gene
Huang Z, Foo SC, Choo WS (2025) A review on the extraction of polyphenols from pomegranate peel for punicalagin purification: techniques, applications, and future prospects. SFT 10.1039/D4FB00304G
Anticorrosion, antimicrobial and antioxidant study of ZnO nanoparticles synthesized from (Pomegranate) extract
Green synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles from pomegranate (Punica granatum) extracts and characterization of their antibacterial activity
Imran M, Salehi B, Sharifi-Rad J, Aslam Gondal T, Saeed F, Imran A, Shahbaz M, Tsouh Fokou PV, Umair Arshad M, Khan H, Guerreiro SG(2019) Kaempferol: a key emphasis to its anticancer potential. Molecules 24: 2277. 10.3390/molecules24122277
Jadoun S, Arif R, Jangid NK, Meena RK (2021) Green synthesis of nanoparticles using plant extracts: a review. Environ Chem Lett 19:355–374 10.1007/s10311-020-01074-x
Jalal H,Pal MA, Hamdani H, Rovida M, Khan NN. (2018) Antioxidant activity of pomegranate peel and seed powder extracts. J Pharmacogn Phytochem 7:992-997
Jamkhande PG, Ghule NW, Bamer AH, Kalaskar MG (2019) Metal nanoparticles synthesis: an overview on methods of preparation, advantages and disadvantages, and applications. J Drug Deliv Sci Technol 53
Jawad M, Schoop R, Suter A, Peter Klein P, Eccles R (2013) Perfil de eficacia y Seguridad de Echinacea purpurea En La prevención de episodios de Resfriado común: estudio clínico aleatorizado, doble Ciego y Controlado Con placebo. Revista De Fitoterapia 13:125–135. 10.1002/jsfa
Protective effect of urolithin a on cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity in mice via modulation of inflammation and oxidative stress
Potential of pomegranate Peel extract as a natural additive in foods
Dynamic mechanical analysis of novel cosmeceutical facial creams containing nano-encapsulated natural plant and fruit extracts
Kandylis P, Kokkinomagoulos E (2020) Food applications and potential health benefits of pomegranate and its derivatives. Foods 9:122 10.3390/foods9020122
Kang I, Buckner T, Shay NF, Gu L, Chung S (2016) Improvements in metabolic health with consumption of ellagic acid and subsequent conversion into urolithins: evidence and mechanisms. Adv Nutr 7:961-972. 10.3945/an.116.012575
Nexus of circular economy and industry 4.0 to achieve the UN sustainable development goals
Pomegranate Peel induced biogenic synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their multifaceted potential against intracellular pathogen and cancer
Polyphenol enriched extract of pomegranate peel; A novel precursor for the biosynthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles and application in sunscreens
Effects of drying methods and solvent extraction on quantification of major bioactive compounds in pomegranate Peel waste using HPLC
Lee CJ, Chen LG, Liang WL, Wang CC (2017) Multiple activities of Punica granatum Linne against Acne vulgaris. Int J Mol Sci 18. 10.3390/ijms18010141
Punica granatum (pomegranate) Peel extract exerts potent antitumor and anti-metastasis activity in thyroid cancer
Li HM, Kouye O, Yang DS, Zhang YQ, Ruan JY, Han LF, Zhang Y, Wang T (2022) Polyphenols from the peels of Punica granatum L. and their bioactivity of suppressing lipopolysaccharide-stimulated inflammatory cytokines and mediators in RAW 264.7 cells via activating p38 MAPK and NF-κB signaling pathways. Molecules 27. 10.3390/molecules27144622
Punicalagin ameliorates DSS-induced colitis in mice through strengthening gut barrier, decreasing oxidative stress and downregulating inflammation via AMPK–NF–κB-STAT3 pathway
Lu X, Ye Z, Jiang L, Wen L, Liu J, Cui Q (2024) UPLC-Q-TOF-MS/MS analysis of pomegranate peel polyphenols and preliminary study on the biosynthesis of ellagic acid and flavonoids. Beverage Plant Res 4. 10.48130/bpr-0024-0031
Nanoparticles in sunscreen: exploration of the effect and harm of titanium oxide and zinc oxide
New biorefinery approach for the valorization of fruit processing waste at a local scale: pomegranate pomace as case study
Upcycling Mango and pomegranate Peel as pectin source: characterization, fat substitute and retarded lipid oxidation in caramel candy
Efficient biosynthesis of CuO nanoparticles with potential cytotoxic activity
Antioxidant and antibacterial potential of pomegranate Peel extracts
Amelioration of diabetic nephropathy using pomegranate Peel extract-stabilized gold nanoparticles: assessment of NF-ΚB and Nrf2 signaling system
Antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects of pomegranate Peel extracts on bovine mammary epithelial cells BME-UV1
Pharmacological effects of pentacyclic triterpenoids isolated from centella Asiatica
Mo Y, Ma J, Gao W, Zhang L, Li J, Li J, Zang J (2022) Pomegranate Peel as a source of bioactive compounds: a mini review on their physiological functions. Front Nutr 9 10.3389/fnut.2022.887113
Cytotoxicity and antibacterial activities of plant-mediated synthesized zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles using (pomegranate) fruit peels extract
Recent advances in pomegranate Peel extract mediated nanoparticles for clinical and biomedical applications
Morzelle MC, Salgado JM, Telles M , Mourelle D, Bachiega P, Buck HS, Viel TA.(2016) Neuroprotective effects of pomegranate peel extract after chronic infusion with amyloid-β peptide in mice. PLoS ONE 1 10.1371/journal.pone.0166123
Muhammad A, Dayisoylu KS, Pei J, Khan MR, Salman M, Ahmad R, Ullah H, Noor GR (2023) Compositional analysis of natural pomegranate peel powder dried by different methods and nutritional and sensory evaluation of cookies fortified with pomegranate peel powder. Front Nutr 10. 10.3389/fnut.2023.1118156
Nafisi S, Maibach HI (2017) Nanotechnology in cosmetics. Cosmetic science and technology: theoretical principles and applications. Elsevier Inc., pp 337–361
Naseema A, Kovooru L, Behera AK, Kumar KP, Srivastava P (2021) A critical review of synthesis procedures, applications and future potential of nanoemulsions. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 287:102318 10.1016/j.cis.2020.102318
Nazeam JA, AL-Shareef WA, Helmy MW, El-Haddad AE (2020) Bioassay-guided isolation of potential bioactive constituents from pomegranate agrifood by-product. Food Chem 326. 10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.126993
Nile A, Nile SH, Shin J, Park G, Oh JW(2021) Quercetin-3-glucoside extracted from apple pomace induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis by increasing intracellular ROS levels. Int J Mol Sci 22 :10749 10.3390/ijms221910749
Phytochemicals and Pharmacology of pomegranate (Punica granatum L.): nutraceutical benefits and industrial applications: a review
Ong WTJ, Nyam KL (2022) Evaluation of silver nanoparticles in cosmeceutical and potential biosafety complications. Saudi J Biol Sci 29:2085–2094 10.1016/j.sjbs.2022.01.035
Pomegranate mesocarp against colitis-induced visceral pain in rats: effects of a Decoction and its fractions
Patel M, Siddiqi NJ, Sharma P, Alhomida AS, Khan HA (2019) Reproductive toxicity of pomegranate peel extract synthesized gold nanoparticles: a multigeneration study in C. elegans. J Nanomater 2019 : 8767943 10.1155/2019/8767943
Pereira DTV, Zabot GL, Martínez J (2025) Economic evaluation of a promising strategy for the extraction and concentration of bioactive compounds from passion fruit rinds. Food Bioprod Process 153:536–545. 10.1016/J.FBP.2025.08.007
Pomegranate as a source of bioactive constituents: a review on their characterization, properties and applications
Priya N, Kaur K, Sidhu AK (2021) Green synthesis: an eco-friendly route for the synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles. Front Nanotechnol 3:655062 10.3389/fnano.2021.655062
Rafique M, Sadaf I, Rafique MS, Tahir MB (2017) A review on green synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their applications. Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol 45:1272–1291 10.1080/21691401.2016.1241792
The effect of pomegranate Peel extract on the oxidative and inflammatory status in the spleens of rats with metabolic syndrome
Pomegranate Peel polyphenols prophylaxis against SARS-CoV-2 main protease by in-silico Docking and molecular dynamics study
Rana J, Diwakar G, Saito L, Scholten JD, Mulder T (2013) Inhibition of melanin content by punicalagins in the super fruit pomegranate (Punica granatum). J Cosmet Sci 64:445-453
Jahromi SB, Pourshafie MR, Mirabzadeh E, Tavasoli A, Katiraee F, Mostafavi E, Abbasian S. (2015) Punica granatum peel extract toxicity in mice. Jundishapur J Nat Pharm Prod 10:23770 10.17795/jjnpp-23770
Pomegranate Peel extract as 6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD) inhibitor for treatment of breast cancer
Agricultural wastes: A practical and potential source for the isolation and Preparation of cellulose and application in agriculture and different industries
Romes NB, Abdul Wahab R, Abdul Hamid M (2021) The role of bioactive phytoconstituents-loaded nanoemulsions for skin improvement: a review. Biotechnol Biotechnol Equip 35:711–729 10.1080/13102818.2021.1915869
Anti-oxidative effects of pomegranate juice (PJ) consumption by diabetic patients on serum and on macrophages
Phenolic compounds and bioactivities from pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) peels
The Anti-inflammatory and antiatherogenic in vivo effects of pomegranate Peel powder: from waste to medicinal food
Salvioni L, Morelli L, Ochoa E, Labra M, Fiandra L, Palugan L, Prosperi D, Colombo M (2021) The emerging role of nanotechnology in skincare. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 293102437. 10.1016/j.cis.2021.102437
Sani A, Cao C, Cui D (2021) Toxicity of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs): a review. Biochem Biophys Rep 26:100991. 10.1016/j.bbrep.2021.100991
Saparbekova AA, Kantureyeva GO, Kudasova DE, Konarbayeva ZK, Latif AS et al (2023) Potential of phenolic compounds from pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) by-product with significant antioxidant and therapeutic effects: a narrative review. Saudi J Biol Sci 30: 103553. 10.1016/j.sjbs.2022.103553
Unlocking the potential of pomegranate peels as a valuable source of bioactive compounds through effective drying strategies
The Anti-Inflammatory, Anti-Apoptotic, and antioxidant effects of a Pomegranate-Peel extract against Acrylamide-Induced hepatotoxicity in rats
Scappaticci RAF, Berretta AA, Torres EC, Buszinski AF, Fernandes GL, Dos Reis TF, de Souza-Neto FN, Gorup LF, de Camargo ER, Barbosa DB (2021) Green and chemical silver nanoparticles and pomegranate formulations to heal infected wounds in diabetic rats. Antibiotics 10:1343. 10.3390/antibiotics10111343
In vitro antiproliferative, apoptotic and antioxidant activities of punicalagin, ellagic acid and a total pomegranate tannin extract are enhanced in combination with other polyphenols as found in pomegranate juice
Punica granatum Peel extract mediated green synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles: structure and evaluation of their biological applications
Sharma D, Bisht D (2017) M. tuberculosis hypothetical proteins and proteins of unknown function: hope for exploring novel resistance mechanisms as well as future target of drug resistance. Front Microbiol 8. 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00465
Bioactive compounds from pomegranate peels - Biological properties, structure–function relationships, health benefits and food applications – A comprehensive review
Singh B, Mal G, Sharma D, Gautam SK, Kumar M, Solimene U, Metalla M, Marotta F. (2018) Plant polyphenols: the futuristic bioactive therapeutics for skin care. Polyphenols: prevention and treatment of human disease. Elsevier, pp 385–394
Singh H, Desimone MF, Pandya S, Jasani S, George N, Adnan M, Aldarhami A, Bazaid AS, Alderhami SA (2023a) Revisiting the green synthesis of nanoparticles: uncovering influences of plant extracts as reducing agents for enhanced synthesis efficiency and its biomedical applications. Int J Nanomed 18:4727–4750. 10.2147/IJN.S419369
Pomegranate Peel Phytochemistry, Pharmacological Properties, methods of Extraction, and its application: A comprehensive review
Prospective Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled study of a standardized oral pomegranate extract on the gut Microbiome and Short-Chain fatty acids
Song W, Wang L, Jin M, Guo X, Wang X, Guan J, Zhao Y (2022) Punicalagin, an inhibitor of sortase A, is a promising therapeutic drug to combat methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 66. 10.1128/aac.00224-22
Antimicrobial and antioxidant potentials of biosynthesized colloidal zinc oxide nanoparticles for a fortified cold cream formulation: A potent nanocosmeceutical application
Su L, Wu S, Fu G, Zhu W, Zhang X, Liang B (2024) Creep characterisation and microstructural analysis of municipal solid waste incineration fly ash geopolymer backfill. Sci Rep 14:1–16. 10.1038/S41598-024-81426-7
Sun S, Huang S, Shi Y, Shao Y, Qiu J, Sedjoah RC, Yan Z, Ding L, Zou D, Xin Z (2021) Extraction, isolation, characterization and antimicrobial activities of non-extractable polyphenols from pomegranate peel. Food Chem 351:129232 . 10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.129232
Pomegranate Peel extract polyphenols attenuate the SARS-CoV-2 S-glycoprotein binding ability to ACE2 receptor: in Silico and in vitro studies
Swilam N, Nematallah KA (2020) Polyphenols profile of pomegranate leaves and their role in green synthesis of silver nanoparticles. Sci Rep 10. 10.1038/s41598-020-71847-5
Comparative assessment of the biological activity of the green synthesized silver nanoparticles and aqueous leaf extract of Perilla frutescens (L)
Teniente SL, Flores-Gallegos AC, Esparza-González SC, Campos-Múzquiz LG, Nery-Flores SD, Rodríguez-Herrera R (2023) Anticancer effect of pomegranate peel polyphenols against cervical cancer. Antioxidants 12:127. 10.3390/antiox12010127
Tumbarski Y, Ivanov I, Vrancheva R, Mazova N, Nikolova K (2025) Pomegranate Peels: a promising source of biologically active compounds with potential application in cosmetic products. Cosmetics 12:169. 10.3390/COSMETICS12040169
Venusova E, Kolesarova A, Horky P, Slama P (2021) Physiological and immune functions of punicalagin. Nutrients 13:2150. 10.3390/nu13072150
In Silico identification of potential inhibitors against main protease of SARS-CoV-2 6LU7 from andrographis panniculata via molecular docking, binding energy calculations and molecular dynamics simulation studies
Study of nutritional quality of pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) juice using 1H NMR-based metabolomic approach: A comparison between conventionally and organically grown fruits
Composition and potential health benefits of pomegranate: A review
Immunomodulatory and antioxidant effects of pomegranate Peel polysaccharides on immunosuppressed mice
Xie X, Hu L, Liu L, Wang J, Liu Y, Ma L, Sun G, Li C, Aisa HA, Meng S (2022) Punicalagin promotes autophagic degradation of human papillomavirus E6 and E7 proteins in cervical cancer through the ROS-JNK-BCL2 pathway. Transl Oncol 19. 10.1016/j.tranon.2022.101388
Analysis of the molecular mechanism of Punicalagin in the treatment of alzheimer’s disease by Computer-Aided drug research technology
Yadwade R, Gharpure S, Ankamwar B (2021) Nanotechnology in cosmetics pros and cons. Nano Express 2 10.1088/2632-959X/abf46b
Yamada M, Mohammed Y, Prow TW (2020) Advances and controversies in studying sunscreen delivery and toxicity. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 153:72–86 10.1016/j.addr.2020.02.001
Fumaric acid esters
Yu ZY, Xu K, Wang X, Wen YT, Wang LJ, Huang DQ, Chen XX, Chai WM (2022) Punicalagin as a novel tyrosinase and melanin inhibitor: inhibitory activity and mechanism. LWT 161. 10.1016/j.lwt.2022.113318
Zam T, D’Auria JC, Jaisi A. (2025) Advancements in biotechnological approaches for the production of high-value metabolites in Punica granatum. ACS FST 5:2086-2097. 10.1021/acsfoodscitech.5c00190