Economic evaluation of robotic-assisted versus manual unicompartmental knee arthroplasty: a systematic review of Markov models and clinical studies
Background
This systematic review aimed to compare the cost-effectiveness of robotic-assisted unicompartmental knee arthroplasty (rUKA) with manual UKA (mUKA) for patients who have isolated unicompartmental knee osteoarthritis (OA).
Methods
A systematic review was conducted following PRISMA guidelines, searching databases including PubMed, Scopus, Embase, and Web of Science up to January 2025. Studies comparing the cost-effectiveness of rUKA and mUKA, including cohort studies, case–control studies, clinical trials, and Markov models, were eligible for inclusion in this study. There were no restrictions. Independent reviewers conducted the screening, data extraction, and quality assessment of the studies, and any resolved conflicts were discussed and referred to the corresponding reviewer for resolution. The National Institute of Health (NIH) tools were utilized for quality assessment of the cohort studies and RCTs. Qualitative synthesis was performed due to methodological heterogeneity. Also, the protocol of this study was registered prospectively on the PROSPERO with registration number CRD420250645008.
Results
Eight studies, including four Markov and four non-Markov from the US and UK, were included in the study. The rUKA procedure showed higher initial costs but improved quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) and lower revision rates compared to mUKA. Incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) ranged from £1,238 (approximately $1672) to $47,180 per QALY, consistently below country-specific thresholds, indicating cost-effectiveness, particularly in high-volume centers. Long-term follow-up further supported rUKA, with notable cost savings.
Conclusions
Despite higher upfront costs, rUKA appears to be cost-effective compared to mUKA, driven by reduced revisions and enhanced outcomes, especially in high-volume settings and over extended follow-up periods.

Introduction
Total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is a well-established surgical option in individuals suffering from end-stage knee osteoarthritis (OA). Despite this procedure having resulted in favorable outcomes, including implant survival rates above 90%, the procedure may lead to complications, such as aseptic loosening, periprosthetic joint infection, instability, and fracture. On the other hand, unicompartmental knee arthroplasty (UKA) has been considered as an appropriate alternative to TKA as a viable option in patients who have isolated unicompartmental OA of the knee. Although the main concern about the manual UKA (mUKA) is higher revision rates compared to TKA, it provides several advantages such as quicker recovery, better knee kinematics, reduced blood loss, lower length of stay (LOS), better functional outcomes, enhanced patient satisfaction, reduced overall healthcare cost, and fewer complications. Notable advancements in the technique and prosthesis design of UKA have led to increased attention in research and clinical practice in recent years.
One of the newly emerging techniques is robotic-assisted UKA (rUKA), which accounts for about 25% of currently performed UKA procedures, with its rising application in clinical practice. The rUKA offers better surgical accuracy, functional scores, component alignment, soft-tissue balancing, reduced complications, and lower revision rates compared to mUKA. Despite these advantages of rUKA relative to mUKA, the main concern about rUKA is the higher cost, which includes the price of the robot system, maintenance expenses, preoperative CT imaging, and personnel. However, it is essential to consider the effects of incremental costs associated with improved clinical outcomes and evaluate the cost-effectiveness to make a more accurate comparison between rUKA and mUKA. Cost-effectiveness findings of the primary studies show variation depending on the healthcare system, patient demographics, yearly case volume, and study design. Therefore, a comprehensive cost-effectiveness comparison between rUKA and mUKA can inform healthcare policymakers and physicians in making informed decisions and potentially lead to the optimal allocation of resources in clinical practices.
There have been previous systematic review studies, mainly focusing on the comparison of rUKA and mUKA in terms of functional outcomes, patient-reported measurement outcomes, complications, and implant survival. However, based on our knowledge, there have been no previous systematic review studies that specifically compared the cost-effectiveness of rUKA and mUKA. Therefore, due to these reasons, this systematic review aimed to present a comprehensive summary of the findings of earlier studies.

Methods
This systematic review study was conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. The protocol of this systematic review was registered prospectively on the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) with registration number CRD420250645008.

Search strategy
In this systematic review study, a comprehensive search of the Scopus, PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science databases was conducted up to December 2024, utilizing Boolean operators and relevant MeSH keywords. Our search strategy for PubMed is as follows: ("Health Care Economics and Organizations"[Mesh] OR"Quality-Adjusted Life Years"[Mesh] OR"QALY*"[tiab] OR"QUALY*"[tiab] OR"cost*"[tiab] OR"econom*"[tiab] OR"pric*"[tiab] OR"money"[tiab] OR"budget"[tiab] OR"dollar*"[tiab]) AND ("uka"[tiab] OR"Unicompartmental Knee"[tiab] OR"unicondylar knee"[tiab]). This strategy was then adapted for other databases. Additionally, the reference lists of the included articles were carefully reviewed, and forward citation tracking was conducted to identify any potentially missing studies. Additionally, the search was updated up to February 2025. Any search filter limitations, such as study time and language restrictions, were not applied in our search strategy. All retrieved records were screened using the Rayan website, and duplicates were manually removed from the records.

Eligibility criteria
Case–control, cohort, cross-sectional, clinical trial, and Markov studies that compared the costs and health outcomes of r-UKA with mUKA were eligible for inclusion. Reviews, case reports, case series, letters, and cadaveric studies were excluded.

Study selection
Two reviewers (Z. Imani and A. Dadgostar) independently screened the search results, and studies deemed irrelevant were excluded. Conflicts in the included studies were resolved through discussions among the reviewers, and any unresolved conflicts were referred to a third reviewer, A. Mehrvar.

Risk of bias assessment
The quality assessment of the included studies was conducted by two independent assessors (A. Arab and M. Zarandi) using the National Institutes of Health (NIH) assessment tool for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and cohort studies. Any disagreements were resolved by discussion between assessors, and any remaining conflicts were referred to a third person (A. Mehrvar). The final evaluation was conducted by validating the opinion feature with the word"yes"for all questions. This quality assessment tool utilizes 14 questions to evaluate the quality of each article, categorizing them as poor, fair, or good. A score above 75% is considered “good”, between 50 and 75% is considered “fair”, and below 50% is considered “poor”.

Data extraction
A pre-specified Google Sheet was created. The details of each are as follows: First author, year, country, study design, journal, mean age, currency year, discount rate, utility measurement, time horizon, effectiveness measurements, robot brand, and case volume. Three independent reviewers (S. Mohebbi, Y. Khani, A. Amiri) extracted the data based on the pre-specified Google sheet. In cases where there was any disagreement on the specified concepts, an appropriate solution was reached through discussion. Any unresolved conflicts were referred to a third reviewer, A. Mehrvar.

Data synthesis
A qualitative synthesis of the included studies was performed due to the lack of standardized methods for pooling cost-effectiveness estimates, as outlined in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. Additionally, there was significant methodological heterogeneity in the primary studies, characterized by differences in study designs, time horizons, healthcare systems, perioperative resource utilization, and reported outcomes. Results were organized to highlight cost components, effectiveness measured through reported quality-adjusted life year (QALY) or revision number avoided, incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER), and ICER threshold based on the country. In the included studies, QALYs were mainly regarded as a standardized measure of quality of life, with values between 0 and 1, where perfect health for one year accounts for 1 QALY, while poorer health equals a value below 1 QALY. Also, ICER was calculated by assessing the difference between the cost divided by the difference in the effectiveness in each study between the rUKA and mUKA. Direct comparisons between mUKA and rUKA were emphasized to lead to a robust conclusion.

Results

Selection process of studies
PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analysis) flowchart
After conducting a search strategy in databases, a total of 1170 articles were initially found. After removing duplicate articles, 436 unique studies remained. During title and abstract screening, only studies that compared the costs and health outcomes of rUKA with mUKA were retained. Following this screening, eight articles that met the inclusion criteria proceeded to full-text review. Of these eight studies, two articles were based on the same study of the same population, one comparing 5-year cost-effectiveness and the second comparing it at a 10-year follow-up duration. Therefore, the smaller article was excluded to prevent a patient from being included more than once. On the other hand, reviewing the reference lists of included studies and conducting forward citation chasing led to the discovery of relevant research. Ultimately, eight articles that met the inclusion and exclusion criteria were included in this systematic review study (see Fig. 1).

Study characteristics
Characteristics of the included studies
First author, year	Country	Study design	Journal	Mean age	Currency year	Discount rate	Utility measurement	Time horizon	Effectiveness measurements	Robot brand	Case volume	 	Moschetti 2016 	USA	Markov	Journal of Arthroplasty	65	USD-2012	3%	QALY	Lifetime	ICER	Mako	per 100 anual UKA	 	Clement 2019 	UK	Markov	The Bone & Joint Journal	65	Pound (£),	NR	QALY	Lifetime	ICER	Mako	per 100 annual UKA	 	Nherera 2020 	UK	Markov	Advances in Orthope dics	65	Pound (£), 2018/19	3.50%	QALY /  revisions avoided	5 years	ICER	Navio	per 100 annu al UKA	 	Yeroushalmi 2022 	USA	Markov	The Journal of Knee	65	USD-2018.2019	3%	revisions avoided	2 years	ICER	Navio	per 100 annu al UKA	 	Blyth, 2025 	UK	RCT	Bone and Joint Open	62.3	UK pound (£)2022-2023	NR	QALY	10 years	ICER	Mako	64 rUKA, 65 mUKA	 	Cool 2019 	USA	Cohort	The Journal of Arthroplasty	59.77	USD 2013-2015	NR	Revisions / Length of stay	2 years	revisions / length of hospital stays	NR	246 rUKA, 492 mUKA	 	Goh 2022 	USA	Cohort	The Journal of Arthroplasty	61.8	USD	NR	Costs	4 years	Cots	Navio	133 rUKA, 132 mUKA	 	Kolessar 2022 	USA	Cohort	Journal of Health Economics and Outcomes Research	59.3	NR	NR	Costs	2 years	Costs	Mako	29 rUKA,  6 mUK A,
QALY Quality-acquired life year, ICER Incremental cost effectiveness rate, rUKA Robotic-assisted unicompartmental knee arthroplasty, mUKA Manual unicompartmental knee arthroplasty, RCT Randomized controlled trail, NR Not reported
The final eight articles comprise four Markov studies and four non-Markov studies, including one RCT and three cohort studies. Out of these articles, 62.5% were conducted in the US, followed by 37.5% done in the UK. All Markov studies primarily examined the comparative cost-effectiveness of rUKA versus mUKA, with a secondary focus on the impact of surgical volume size. Each Markov article mainly focused on patients aged 65 years or older at surgical centers performing approximately 100 UKA surgeries annually. Additionally, the ICER was employed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of rUKA versus mUKA. In terms of utility measurement, two Markov studies specifically utilized QALY; in one study, the revisions avoided were used as a measure, and in the other study, cost-effectiveness was calculated both per QALY and in terms of the revisions avoided. The overall risk of mortality in the Markov studies was primarily derived from the National Joint Registry (NJR) and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) system. The non-Markov articles included three cohort studies and one randomized clinical trial. In these studies, UKA was performed on 1167 patients, of whom 472 received rUKA and 695 were in the mUKA group. The age of the participants in these studies was mainly about 60 years. In the RCT conducted by Blyth et al., the ICER was used for cost-effectiveness assessment, and QALYs were used for utility measurement. This study calculated QALY using the EuroQol 5-Dimension Questionnaire before and after surgery. In the included cohort studies, different costs associated with these procedures and also clinical outcomes were assessed as indicators of cost-effectiveness revision rates; however, the ICER was not calculated directly. Among these eight studies, 50% utilized Mako robotic systems (mainly Mako Surgical Corporation, Fort Lauderdale, Florida), while 37.5% employed Navio (mainly Navio Smith & Nephew, Memphis, TN), and one study did not specify the brand of robotic system used. Discount rates were reported as 3% in studies by Moschetti and Yeroushalmi, while Nherera noted a rate of 3.5%. Other studies did not specify any discount rates for their costs or QALY calculations. In all of these studies, the assessment of costs was presented in accordance with the country in which the study was conducted and based on the local currency of that country. The general characteristics of the included articles are summarized in Table 1.

Risk of bias of included studies
Quality assessment of included studies based on the National Institutes of Health (NIH) quality assessment tool
First author	Year	Total score	Quality rating	 	Blyth et al	2025	13/14 (92%)	Good	 	Cool et al	2019	12/14 (85%)	Good	 	Goh et al	2020	12/14 (85%)	Good	 	Kolessar et al	2022	11/14 (78%)	Good	 	Moschetti et al	2016	11/14 (78%)	Good	 	Clement et al	2019	10/14(71%)	Fair	 	Nherera et al	2020	9/14(64%)	Fair	 	Yeroushalmi et al	2022	8/14(57%)	Fair
For the Markov and cohort studies, the Quality Assessment Tool for Observational Cohort and Cross-Sectional Studies was employed, and for the RCT article, the Quality Assessment of Controlled Intervention Studies was utilized. Five studies (Blyth et al., Cool et al., Goh et al., Kolessar et al., and Moschetti et al.) received a “Good” quality rating, and the remaining three studies received a “Fair” quality rating. For more detailed information, refer to Table 2.

Study findings
Cost-effectiveness Comparison of the rUKA and mUKA in the included studies
Author	rUKA	mUKA	Difference	ICER threshold	 	Cost per case	Effectiveness	Cost/effectiveness	Cost per case	Effectiveness	Cost/effectiveness	ICER	 	Moschetti, 2016	19,219$	13.81 QALY	1,391 per QALY	16,476$	13.76 QALY	1,198 per QALY	47,180$ per QALY	50,000 per QALY	 	Clement, 2019 	not directly reported(1626£ more than mUKA)	13.59 QALY	not directly reported	not directly reported	12.2 QALY	not directly reported	1170£ per QALY	20,000 per QALY	 	Nherera, 2020 	8798.52£	4.40 QALY/96 revisions avoided	1999.66£ per QALY/91.65£ per revision avoided	8530.34£	4.31 QALY/86 revisions avoided	1979.19£ per QALY/99.19£ per revision avoided	2831£ per QALY/2521£ per revisions avoided	20,000 per QALY	 	Yeroushalmi, 2022 	6,622,816$ (per 100 cases)	4 revisions happened (12 revisions avoided)	-	6,448,926$ (per 100 cases)	16 revisions happened	-	14,737$ perrevision avoided	50,0000 per revision avoided	 	Blyth, 2025 	1,051£	7.410 QALY	141.83£ per QALY	without revision: 910£/for revisions only: 821£	7.223QALY	256.12£ per QALY	incremental cost per QALY = 757£ (when revision included increases to 1,238£)	20,000 per QALY	 	Cool, 2019 	26,001 $	outcome: 2.00 length of stay/revision procedures = 0.81%	-	27,915 $	outcome: 2.33 length of stay/revision procedures = 5.28%	-	-	-	 	Goh, 2022 	4,929$	-	-	5,019$	-	-	-	-	 	Kolessar, 2022 	perioperative: 4025$/postoprative: 1051$	-	-	perioperative: 3287$/postoprative: 1239$	-	-	-	-
QALY quality-acquired life year, ICER Incremental cost effectiveness rate
In a study conducted by Moschetti et al., it was demonstrated that in a surgical center performing 100 UKA surgeries annually, rUKA resulted in a higher cost ($19,219 vs. $16,476) and offered a slightly better QALY (13.81 vs. 13.76) compared to mUKA. The ICER was calculated by assessing the difference between the cost divided by the difference in the effectiveness in each study between the rUKA and mUKA. In this study, the ICER for rUKA was calculated as $47,170 per QALY, supporting better cost-effectiveness of rUKA relative to mUKA. Similarly, a study done by Clement et al. in the UK found that rUKA had a higher cost (£1,626 or approximately $2197 more than mUKA) and QALY (13.59 vs. 12.2), with an ICER of £1,170 (approximately $1581) per QALY for rUKA, further concluding that rUKA is more cost-effective than mUKA. Their findings also suggested that cost-effectiveness improves with increased surgical volume. Nherera et al. compared non-computerized tomography (non-CT) rUKA to mUKA and reported that rUKA had a higher cost (£8,798.52 (or approximately $11,891) vs. £8,530.34 (or approximately $11,529)) and QALY (4.40 vs. 4.31) and revisions avoided (96 vs. 86). They demonstrated higher cost-effectiveness in the non-CT rUKA group with an ICER of £2,831 (approximately $3,825) per QALY and £2,521 (approximately $3,406) per revision avoided. Also, it was reported that rUKA becomes increasingly cost-effective at high-volume orthopaedic centers and is also performed by experienced clinicians. In a study conducted by Yeroushalmi et al., it was found that rUKA had a higher cost ($66,228.16 vs. $64,489.26) and resulted in 12 fewer revisions (4 vs. 16) in patients who have end-stage OA. The ICER was calculated at $14,737 per avoided revision, indicating greater cost-effectiveness for rUKA in this patient population. Moreover, Blyth et al. found a QALY gain of 0.187 for rUKA over mUKA, with an incremental cost per QALY of £757 (approximately $1,022) without revision and £1,238 (approximately $1,672) with revision costs considered. Cool et al. assessed the cost-effectiveness between rUKA and mUKA by comparing costs, LOS, and revision rates, showing higher costs in the mUKA group ($26,001 vs. $27,915), alongside shorter LOS (2 days vs. 2.33 days) and reduced revision rates (0.81% vs. 5.28%) for the rUKA group over two years. Goh et al. and Kolessar et al. focused on comparing costs between the two procedures; Goh et al. reported costs of $4,929 for rUKA versus $5,019 for mUKA, while Kolessar et al. indicated preoperative costs of $4,025 for rUKA versus $3,287 for mUKA and postoperative costs of $1,051 for rUKA versus $1,239 for mUKA. See Table 3 for more comprehensive data.

Discussion
The mUKA is a reliable treatment option for patients suffering from end-stage knee OA, offering benefits such as reduced pain, less blood loss, and faster recovery compared to TKA. Despite these advantages, its higher revision rate remains a concern. In recent years, rUKA has gained attention as a modern surgical technique intended to improve precision during surgery and ensure accurate implant positioning. As a result, it led to improved clinical outcomes, including reduced revision rates compared to the mUKA procedure. Despite these advantages, the widespread utilization of rUKA faces challenges mainly due to its high initial costs, particularly related to robotic systems and their maintenance. As the growing utilization of rUKA continues, it is essential to evaluate its cost-effectiveness compared to mUKA. Additionally, cost-effectiveness evaluations provide a framework for minimizing inconsistencies in surgical choice by presenting a detailed assessment of both the costs and improvements in clinical outcomes associated with each surgical procedure. The primary studies comparing the cost-effectiveness of rUKA and mUKA face limitations, including short follow-ups, single-center designs, differing healthcare systems across countries, and small sample sizes, which lead to varied conclusions regarding cost-effectiveness. Therefore, this systematic review was conducted to conclude the findings of the previous primary studies and provide a comprehensive assessment of the cost-effectiveness of rUKA compared to mUKA.
The cost per QALY or revision avoided is determined by surgical volume, as the yearly cost of the robotic system is divided based on the number of surgeries conducted each year. Therefore, a center with lower patient volume would achieve a higher cost per QALY or revisions avoided compared to a center with higher patient volume. In this regard, the study conducted by Moschetti et al. in the US healthcare setting demonstrated an association between annual case volume and the cost-effectiveness of rUKA, showing that at hospitals with low volume, the ICER was very high, rendering it not cost-effective. However, with more than 94 cases annually or a total robotic system cost of less than $ 1.426 million, the ICER declined to under $50,000 per QALY, making rUKA cost-effective. Additionally, this study found that surgical volume was the key factor influencing the cost-effectiveness of the rUKA, with expenses related to the robotic device and surgical failure rates being the next most important factors. Additionally, they noted that at centers performing more than 32 procedures annually, the rUKA can be considered cost-effective, with a cost of $150,000 per QALY. Complementing these findings, a study by Blyth et al. in the UK reported that, when including all reintervention costs, rUKA was considered cost-saving if more than 100 surgeries were performed annually. Consistent with these findings, Yeroushalmi et al. demonstrated that the ICER was $14,737 per revision avoided in centers with an annual caseload of 100 procedures. These findings suggest that rUKA is considered cost-effective only when the case volume exceeds a certain threshold. Furthermore, the higher the case volume, the more cost-effective rUKA becomes. Besides the patient volume, which highly impacts the cost-effectiveness of rUKA compared to mUKA, a study done by Nherera et al. in the UK illustrated that the ICER was more favorable for individuals under 55 years of age compared to those older than 75 years. On the other hand, gender showed only a slight impact on ICER. These findings were also confirmed in the US healthcare setting, as shown in the study done by Yeroushalmi et al.. Additionally, it was noted that due to the higher revision rates in younger individuals, they experience greater improvements from rUKA as a more effective intervention compared to mUKA.
In three included studies by Cool, Goh, and Kolessar et al., the cost-effectiveness of rUKA was assessed indirectly through the evaluation of costs and by comparing outcomes following rUKA and mUKA; however, the ICER was not calculated directly. According to the study done by Cool et al. the cost of initial hospitalization was slightly higher for mUKA compared to rUKA, and rUKA cases experienced a 12.38% decrease in LOS (1.77 vs. 2.02 days) and a 2.02% or $521 cost reduction relative to mUKA. Additionally, at 2 years, individuals who underwent rUKA experienced lower revision rates (0.81% vs. 5.28%) and shorter LOS for revision surgeries. These aspects led to a reduced total cost for rUKA in comparison to mUKA. Therefore, better outcomes and lower cost confirm the cost-effectiveness of rUKA in treating isolated compartment knee OA. Similarly, a study by Goh et al. assessed various cost factors, including personnel costs, implant costs, and total supply costs, in rUKA compared to mUKA. It was found that rUKA was associated with increased overall personnel costs because of the longer operating room period. However, these costs were offset by lower implant costs and decreased total supply costs, resulting in lower median total facility costs ($4,930 vs. $5,020). After factoring in all costs, the overall cost of rUKA in this study was $90.21 lower than mUKA, indicating that rUKA is a more cost-effective option overall. A key consideration is that, the cost of the rUKA and mUKA implants was considered to be the same in other included studies, which is unlikely to be practically applicable across different surgical centers. However, the findings of this research indicate that the implant cost for rUKA was found to be lower, and it is recommended that implant manufacturers might offer reduced implant prices in cases where healthcare providers agree to high-volume rUKA implant purchases to support widespread utilization of this technology and make robotic surgery more cost-effective. On the other hand, a study by Kolessar et al. indicated that rUKA had lower mean operating room costs ($368 vs. $610) and patient room costs ($82 vs. $281) but higher costs for imaging ($40 vs. $26), recovery ($613 vs. $226), anesthesia ($586 vs. $523), and supplies ($1,161 vs. $651), which leads to a greater total perioperative cost ($4,025 vs. $3,287). The rUKA procedure was associated with reduced postoperative costs ($1,051 vs. $1,239), primarily due to lower home rehab visits (2 vs. 5) and home health visits (0.3 vs. 1.8). Altogether, the total cost of perioperative and postoperative care was $5,076 for rUKA and $4,526 for mUKA, with rUKA being $550 costlier than mUKA up to 90 days. The costs reported in the study were up to 90 days, meaning more cost of rUKA in early months; however, long-term benefits would offset these initial expenses.
Several studies in the literature acknowledge the need to extend the evaluation of cost-effectiveness beyond the short-term and mid-term also to include long-term outcomes when comparing rUKA with mUKA to ensure a more accurate assessment. Based on the findings presented in the RCT study done by Blyth et al., a comprehensive comparison across short, mid, and long-term outcomes demonstrates distinct patterns of benefit over ten years of follow-up for rUKA. In the short term, up to 2 years, patients undergoing rUKA experience faster recovery, reduced postoperative complications, and earlier improvements in pain and function. These benefits justify the initial higher costs of robotic technology by leading to overall cost savings through improved recovery and lower complication rates. Moving into the mid-term, around 2–5 years, it was indicated that these early benefits translate into improved QALYs and a lower early revision rate, suggesting that the upfront costs begin to be offset by fewer complications and readmission costs. Finally, in the long-term follow-up (10 years), these benefits not only persist but also improve over time, with the cost-effectiveness of rUKA significantly increasing due to overall cost savings from sustained clinical performance, reduced revision rates, and greater patient satisfaction. In long-term follow-ups (10 years), the costs of potential revisions or implant failure could further be captured. Therefore, the overall findings of this study indicated that rUKA was the dominant intervention, both clinically superior and cost-effective compared to mUKA at different time points. Consistent with these findings, a study done by Nherera et al. determined that a follow-up period exceeding 5 years increased the cost-effectiveness of non-CT r-UKA, resulting in cost savings after 7 years. Also, findings of the study by Yeroushalmi et al. demonstrated that an extended follow-up period would improve the cost-effectiveness of rUKA, and beyond 7 years, rUKA became cost-saving, which further confirms the long-term cost-effectiveness of rUKA in comparison to mUKA. Thus, the initial additional investment related to rUKR appears to be cost-effective in long-term follow-ups and for patients throughout their lives, offering a lower risk of revision in the long term. Additionally, policymakers and physicians should consider the long-term cost-effectiveness of the rUKA, in addition to its short-term and mid-term duration, for informed decision-making.
In the included studies, the cost-effectiveness of rUKA was assessed in comparison with mUKA, with the conclusion that rUKA is more cost-effective. However, the reported ICERs ranged from £1,238 (approximatley $1,672) to $47,180 per QALY. This difference is likely due to variations in follow-up duration, time horizons, and healthcare systems across countries. Despite this, in all studies that calculated the ICER, it was below the ICER threshold, indicating rUKA as a cost-effective procedure compared to mUKA. Additionally, the included studies had high overall methodological quality, leading to robust conclusions.
Moreover, robotic-assisted surgery also reduces the variability and outliers of implant alignment by enhancing the accuracy of implant placement, ensuring more reliable outcomes in UKA, thereby leading to a change in patient selection and making UKA more accessible to eligible patients. As a result, it could lead to faster recovery and a shorter LOS and potentially offset the higher initial cost of the robotic system. Also, the learning curve of the rUKA is shorter compared to the mUKA, which leads to faster proficiency, improved outcomes, reduced complications, and cost-effectiveness over time. Moreover, the growing number of performed rUKA each year and also the frequency of rUKA surgery per each surgeon would further accelerate this and possibly lead to a more cost-effective procedure in the future.

Limitations
In addition to comparing methodological approaches, this study also examines key findings across studies. However, such comparisons should be interpreted with caution due to methodological limitations and various factors that affect the generalizability of economic evaluations. Cost estimates often vary due to differences in costing perspectives, healthcare systems, and currency conversions, introducing further uncertainty. Furthermore, the included studies in this systematic review were conducted in the US and the UK, limiting the global applicability of the findings. Future research in other countries would enhance the robustness and generalizability of these results. Despite these challenges, comparing findings provides valuable insight into research consistency and the impact of methodological differences on results. Identifying these variations can help decision-makers assess the relevance of studies to their specific settings and guide future research.

Conclusion
This systematic review provides critical insights for the cost-effectiveness evaluation of rUKA compared to mUKA. While rUKA has higher upfront costs due to the use of robotic systems and longer operative times, studies suggest that it may be cost-effective in the long term by reducing revision rates, enhancing implant precision, lowering complication rates, and improving functional outcomes. Also, operative time differences are surgeon-dependent and may diminish with experience in favor of rUKA. Therefore, rUKA is considered a cost-effective procedure compared to mUKA for patients who have isolated unicompartmental OA who meet the criteria for UKA. To maximize cost-effectiveness, rUKA should ideally be performed in high-volume centers.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Authors’ contributions
This systematic review represents a collaborative effort with clearly defined roles: Sadra Mohebbi contributed to study conception, methodology design, and initial manuscript drafting. Yashar Khani and Amirhossein Amiri performed comprehensive literature searches, while Zeinab Imani and Amir Dadgostar independently screened studies. Amirreza Arab and Marzieh Mahmoudi Zarandi conducted quality assessments. Mohebbi, Khani, and Amiri performed data extraction. Amir Mehrvar supervised all stages of the review, adjudicated disagreements in study selection and quality assessment, and finalized the manuscript. All authors critically reviewed and approved the final submission.

Funding
None.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Safety of Total Knee Arthroplasty in the Treatment of Knee Osteoarthritis and Its Effect on Postoperative Pain and Quality of Life of Patients
The 22 to 25-Year Survival of Cemented and Cementless Total Knee Arthroplasty in Young Patients
Big data analysis reveals significant increases in complications, costs, and hospital stay in revision total knee arthroplasty compared to primary TKA
The Current Epidemiology of Revision Total Knee Arthroplasty in the United States From 2016 to 2022
Patient relevant outcomes of unicompartmental versus total knee replacement: systematic review and meta-analysis
Shorter length of stay and significant cost savings with ambulatory surgery primary unilateral total knee arthroplasty in Asians using enhanced recovery protocols
Choosing Between Unicompartmental and Total Knee Replacement: What Can Economic Evaluations Tell Us?
Trends in unicompartmental knee arthroplasty among 138 international experienced arthroplasty knee surgeons
Current trends of unicompartmental knee arthroplasty (UKA): choosing between robotic-assisted and conventional surgeries and timing of procedures
Robotic-assisted unicompartmental knee arthroplasty: a review
Robotic-assisted unicompartmental knee arthroplasty improves functional outcomes, complications, and revisions
Robotic Versus Conventional Unicompartmental Knee Surgery: A Comprehensive Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Robotic-Assisted Versus Manual Unicompartmental Knee Arthroplasty: A Time-Driven Activity-Based Cost Analysis
Robotic arm-assisted medial compartment knee arthroplasty is a cost-effective intervention at ten-year follow-up
Robotic-Arm Assisted Technology's Impact on Knee Arthroplasty and Associated Healthcare Costs
A systematic review of robotic-assisted unicompartmental knee arthroplasty: prosthesis design and type should be reported
A systematic review of MAKO-assisted unicompartmental knee arthroplasty
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement
Rayyan—a web and mobile app for systematic reviews
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Study Quality Assessment Tools [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health; 2013 [cited 2025 Jun 26]. Available from: https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/study-quality-assessment-tools.
Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, Cumpston M, Li T, Page MJ, Welch VA, eds. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. 2nd ed. Chichester (UK): John Wiley & Sons; 2019.
Cost-utility analysis of robotic arm-assisted medial compartment knee arthroplasty
Can Robot-Assisted Unicompartmental Knee Arthroplasty Be Cost-Effective? A Markov Decision Analysis
Robot-assisted unicompartmental knee arthroplasty for patients with isolated medial compartment osteoarthritis is cost-effective: a markov decision analysis
Early Economic Evaluation Demonstrates That Noncomputerized Tomography Robotic-Assisted Surgery Is Cost-Effective in Patients Undergoing Unicompartmental Knee Arthroplasty at High-Volume Orthopaedic Centres
Early Economic Analysis of Robotic-Assisted Unicondylar Knee Arthroplasty May Be Cost Effective in Patients with End-Stage Osteoarthritis
Revision Analysis of Robotic Arm-Assisted and Manual Unicompartmental Knee Arthroplasty
Registry TNJ. Available from: https://www.njrcentre.org.uk/.
Prevention CfDCa. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/index.html.
Robotic-arm-assisted Knee Arthroplasty Associated With Favorable In-hospital Metrics and Exponentially Rising Adoption Compared With Manual Knee Arthroplasty
Robotic unicompartmental knee arthroplasty: Current challenges and future perspectives
Advancements in Robotic Surgery: A Comprehensive Overview of Current Utilizations and Upcoming Frontiers
Systematic reviews of economic evaluations: utility or futility?
Economics notes: Converting international cost effectiveness data to UK prices
Challenges in systematic reviews of economic analyses