Selection and Prioritization of Medical Devices for HTA Evaluation: A Systematic Review of Existing Approaches
Background
Efficient resource allocation in the health technology assessment process of medical devices requires a robust selection and prioritization of medical devices for evaluation. Despite its importance, there is currently no generally accepted approach for such a prioritization task, and a comprehensive review of adaptable approaches is needed.
Objective
Our study aimed to provide a comprehensive review of existing approaches that could be used or adapted to select and prioritize medical devices for health technology assessment (HTA) evaluation.
Methods
Searches were conducted in PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, and the databases of the International Network of Agencies for Health Technology Assessment and the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination. Following the screening, analyses and comparisons were based on data such as publication year, target jurisdiction, decision context, health technology focus, methods used for value assessment and included attributes, and the social methods used for stakeholder engagement.
Results
From 1055 identified records, 51 studies were eligible for review. Only 31 records mentioned the value assessment method used and, although there was a wide variety of techniques found in this sample, the majority of them (77%) applied multicriteria decision analysis. A total of 22 studies were specifically focused on HTA prioritization and, within this set, the most frequently used value attributes were Clinical efficacy and/or effectiveness (n = 21, 95%), Impact of the disease (n = 13, 59%), and Ethical, social and legal aspects (n = 11, 50%). Social methods commonly implemented were questionnaires/surveys and the Delphi technique, with 15 and 7 reported applications, respectively.
Conclusions
A wide variety of methods have been reported to assess value in HTA contexts, and our premise that a generally accepted approach for prioritizing medical devices for HTA is still lacking was confirmed. Despite such heterogeneity, it was noticed that a multicriteria decision analysis is predominantly applied, with both intervention- and disease-related attributes being considered. Underreporting of the approaches used was recurrent, which should be avoided in the future to ensure their transparency and replicability.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s40258-025-00981-w.

Key Points for Decision Makers
Prioritization is crucial for an efficient resource allocation in the HTA process of medical devices. However, HTA agencies and other entities not only lack a generally accepted approach to prioritize devices for evaluation but also a comprehensive review of existing approaches that could be used or adapted for this particular purpose. The present systematic review aims to fill this research gap and advance knowledge in this field.	 	While a wide range of value assessment methods were identified, a multicriteria decision analysis was often applied to prioritize medical devices for evaluation, incorporating both intervention- and disease-related attributes.	 	The findings from this review may support decision making in the HTA context, offering valuable insights for establishing robust socio-technical frameworks to guide medical device prioritization decisions.

Introduction
Health technology assessment (HTA) is a necessary tool to appraise health technologies in terms of their value to patients and society, supporting their adoption and use in healthcare delivery, and informing other healthcare decisions (such as reimbursement and pricing). Among health technologies, although medicines have been the primary focus of many in the HTA community, increasing attention is being given to the evaluation of medical devices (MDs).
The MD industry stands out for its diversity, given the broad spectrum of MDs being commercialized which, according to the World Health Organization, is estimated to encompass 2 million different types of devices. Health technology assessment agencies are facing challenges to conduct the HTA process of these technologies not only owing to their massive diversity, but also because of characteristic aspects that set them apart from technologies that have been the traditional focus of HTA processes, namely medicines. Such aspects have been highlighted by several authors and must be taken into account when assessing evidence for MDs. First, unlike drugs, MDs often lack robust clinical evidence because of challenges in designing and conducting randomized controlled trials. Accordingly, a device HTA frequently relies on observational studies, which are more susceptible to bias. In addition, because many MDs require direct interaction between the device and the clinician (“operator”), their performance is highly dependent on the operator’s expertise. One should acknowledge that, as clinicians gain experience, their proficiency naturally improves—the “learning curve”—leading to enhanced clinical outcomes over time. Furthermore, the short product life cycle and incremental innovation of MDs add complexity to HTA, as new iterations may emerge before sufficient data can be collected. This creates pressure to conduct HTAs in a timely manner, otherwise the results risk becoming outdated. Pricing in MDs is typically more dynamic than that of pharmaceuticals, which makes it challenging to calculate costs and perform reimbursement and coverage decisions. Another key characteristic difference, particularly for MDs used in screening or diagnostics, is their broad applicability across multiple diseases and their integration into clinical pathways involving other devices. This results in both an absence of a clearly defined target population and a lack of direct clinical outcomes. Altogether, these factors suggest the development of tailored HTA methodologies that account for the unique nature of MDs.
Given the challenges inherent to MD assessments and the limited resources available to HTA agencies, effective prioritization of MDs for HTA evaluation is necessary. In this review, “prioritization for HTA evaluation” refers to the initial step within the HTA process, in which agencies or other institutions determine which technologies should proceed to a full detailed evaluation. This step is recognized in the HTA literature as part of identifying topics for appraisal. It differs from an early HTA, which typically focuses on technologies at a very early stage of development. Instead, the stage under focus here includes both innovative and mature devices requiring evaluation for reimbursement, procurement, or other decision-making purposes.
Although companies often develop HTA analyses for their devices, the responsibility for identifying which MDs should undergo assessment primarily lies with HTA agencies, particularly in public healthcare systems where resource optimization is critical. By establishing priorities before the HTA evaluation phase, evaluators can identify the most critical assessments to conduct, thereby optimizing resource allocation and enabling faster access to the most beneficial devices.
When selecting and prioritizing MDs for HTA evaluation, it is essential to assess the potential value that conducting a full evaluation could bring, helping to identify the most impactful assessments. This relates to, but is not the same as, determining the value of the health technology in question. More explicitly, judging the value of an evaluation is focused on its expected outcome and not necessarily on the outcome arising from the use of the respective health technology. For instance, we may encounter that there is “more benefit in assessing a technology of lesser value but associated with greater uncertainty”. In both cases, nevertheless, value is recognized as multidimensional, going beyond clinical benefit and cost, but there is no global consensus on how to define it. Although economic evaluation techniques are traditionally pursued by HTA systems, limitations of this methodology have been reported, particularly for being too restrictive in the value dimensions it can capture explicitly. One particular alternative to traditional economic evaluation techniques that has emerged in recent years is multicriteria decision analysis (MCDA). In contrast with traditional economic evaluations, MCDA methods allow the inclusion of a broader range of attributes as explicit criteria, notably social value factors such as disease severity, target population size, the nature of the intervention, and evidence quality, among others.
In addition to the technical exercise of a value assessment that is inherent to both the step of selecting and prioritizing for HTA and the subsequent step of HTA evaluation, a social component is essential. These are decision-making problems that typically involve the participation of multiple stakeholders with possibly differing perspectives, and thus their engagement is fundamental.
Given that there is currently no generally accepted approach for selecting and prioritizing MDs for HTA evaluation, a comprehensive review of existing frameworks is necessary to identify patterns and provide valuable insights for researchers, health institutions, and HTA agencies addressing this decision problem. This systematic review aims to fulfil this need by systematically synthesizing available approaches that can be used or adapted for the specific context of MD prioritization for evaluation.

Methods
To accomplish its main objective, the present systematic review was guided by a defined set of research questions. An initial search and analysis of the HTA literature quickly revealed a scarcity of publications focused solely on the topic of prioritizing MDs for HTA. Because of this limitation, we broadened our scope to include research that, while not explicitly centered on prioritization, addressed related decision-making contexts—specifically, studies that described methods for selecting or setting priorities among health technologies. One such context is the evaluation of health technologies, a step that follows prioritization in the HTA process to support, for instance, reimbursement or coverage decisions. As the prioritization directly informs evaluation, there are key value aspects that overlap between these two stages. Analyzing relevant HTA evaluation decision problems as well can, therefore, yield insightful information that will allow a more comprehensive understanding of how prioritization can be effectively guided.
Based on these considerations, we first sought to analyze the technical components of the approaches identified in the literature. At this step, we aimed to determine which methods have been applied for value assessment, a necessary exercise in the prioritization of MDs for HTA. This led to our first research question:
RQ. I: What methods have been applied in the literature that could be used to assess value when selecting and prioritizing MDs for HTA evaluation?
Further examining the technical component, we investigated the value attributes considered in the included studies when applying the methods identified in RQ. I. This is arguably the most critical step, as it addresses a central challenge when setting priorities for HTA—the selection of a concise yet comprehensive set of criteria to support prioritization decisions. Our second research question is thus:
RQ. II: When assessing value, what attributes have been reported in the literature that could be applied to select and prioritize MDs for HTA evaluation?
After analyzing the technical component of each approach, we examined the social component, an often-overlooked but essential aspect of the process. Identifying key stakeholders in the problem and defining their engagement process is crucial for robust decision making. Accordingly, our third and final research question is:
RQ. III: What social processes have been described in the literature that could be implemented to elicit stakeholder input when selecting and prioritizing MDs for HTA evaluation?
In the following subsections, the systematic review is reported in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines.

Search Strategy
A search of scientific literature published up to December 2024 was first conducted in PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus. Subsequently, for the same time frame, a similar search was conducted in two additional databases, which are more specific to healthcare and HTA topics, the International Network of Agencies for Health Technology Assessment HTA database and the database for the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, at the University of York. The Electronic Supplementary Material (ESM) shows the detailed search strategies that were used in each database.

Study Selection
For the purpose of filtering the identified set of studies to arrive at a reduced number of relevant studies to include for review, a list of exclusion criteria was defined composed of both formal and content-related aspects: (i) record is a duplicate; (ii) full text is not written in English; (iii) full text is not available; (iv) does not report an approach intended to select or set priorities among health technologies; (v) assesses medicines or vaccines exclusively; (vi) assesses digital health technologies exclusively; (vii) focuses on the individual patient level; and (viii) is not health related. Both authors independently applied these criteria to screen and assess study eligibility based on titles, abstracts, and, when necessary, full texts, with subsequent comparison of results.
Within the scope of our review, and consistent with our rationale when defining the research questions in the beginning of this section, we sought studies that, despite addressing different HTA problems, describe approaches to select or set priorities among MDs or health technologies in general. In addition to the literature focusing on these two health technology categories, we considered studies targeting only medical interventions to be equally eligible for inclusion. Medical interventions or procedures typically involve devices, hence their potential relevance to our analysis. Accordingly, records that exclusively assessed medicines or vaccines were excluded, as well as those focusing entirely on digital health technologies, such as medical apps. An exception was made for studies assessing health wearables, as these technologies typically serve a medical purpose through physical interaction with the human body (e.g., monitoring or diagnosing health conditions), aligning with the nature of MDs.
Although most studies were identified through database searching, other sources were also used. Particularly, Google Scholar and websites from selected European HTA agencies—National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK), Health Information and Quality Authority (Ireland), and Belgian Health Care Knowledge Centre (Belgium)—were consulted. Five additional publications were deemed eligible for review. We also included literature that was made available by the Portuguese HTA agency, INFARMED—National Authority of Medicines and Health Products, I.P., namely four technical documents and reports from other HTA agencies, which were also considered eligible for review.

Data Extraction and Synthesis
Both authors collaboratively reviewed the included studies following a series of structured steps. First, bibliographic information was extracted from each record and registered on a Microsoft Excel sheet. To ease the documentation of this review, records were coded by assigning them a number. Following this, the full text of each study was analyzed. During this step, specific data were consistently collected from each record, namely: year of publication; target jurisdiction; decision context, either selection and prioritization for HTA or actual evaluation (HTA); health technology focus; method(s) used as part of the technical component of the approach, i.e., value assessment methods; attributes used to assess value and information on how such attributes were identified and selected; method(s) used as part of the social component of the approach; participants involved in the process; and the intended user(s) of the resulting approach.
Given that many studies use different designations to express the same value dimension, deciding which term is the most appropriate to designate a particular attribute can be challenging. Therefore, we based our terminology on the comprehensive list of value aspects recently proposed by Freitas et al.. Some aspects were withdrawn as they were not used in the reviewed literature. Several additional aspects were considered whenever no terms that represented the attribute being applied in a study were found in this list. In addition, as there is no standard designation for stakeholder groups in the literature, we considered a specific set of categories inspired by the “7Ps Framework” to identify stakeholders, proposed by Concannon et al., adjusting this taxonomy to our particular research in an HTA context.
For further interpretation and conclusions on findings from the sample considered in this systematic review, the next step consisted of aggregating the data contained in Microsoft Excel through the use of the frequency function of the software. This allowed the construction of histograms and bar charts, among other forms of graphical representation of data, which are useful to present, visualize, and facilitate the statistical analysis of the results.

Results

Search and Study Selection Results
Following the search strategy outlined in the previous section, a total of 1055 records were identified through database searching (of which 522 were duplicates). After screening the remaining studies and assessing for eligibility based on the defined exclusion criteria, a total of 42 were deemed eligible for review.
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram describing the selection of studies to include in the final sample for review. CRD Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, INAHTA International Network of Agencies for Health Technology Assessment, INFARMED National Authority of Medicines and Health Products, I.P., HTs health technologies
List of included records for the systematic literature review
Number (code)	Title of included record and reference	 	1	Selection of needlestick prevention devices: a conceptual framework for approaching product evaluation 	 	2	Selecting image-guided surgical technologies in oncology: a surgeon’s perspective 	 	3	Medical device selection in private hospitals by integrated fuzzy MCGDM methods: a case study in choosing MRI system 	 	4	Ultrasound device selection by using F-ANP and COPRAS 	 	5	An integrated framework for non-traditional machining process technology selection in healthcare applications 	 	6	Development of a tool for selection and acquisition of medical devices based on the Analytic Hierarchy Process 	 	7	Developing an evaluation framework for selecting optimal medical devices 	 	8	Health wearables for early detection of frailty syndrome in older adults in Mexico: an informed, structured process for the selection of a suitable device 	 	9	Towards a selection and acquisition method for IoT devices oriented to older people in Ecuador 	 	10	Smart medical device selection based on interval valued intuitionistic fuzzy VIKOR 	 	11	Smart medical device selection based on intuitionistic fuzzy Choquet integral 	 	12	Selecting mobile health technologies for Electronic Health Record integration: case study 	 	13	Developing a prioritized list of innovative technologies: the Spanish experience 	 	14	Priority setting for health technology assessment at CADTH 	 	15	Defining priority medical devices for cancer management: a WHO initiative 	 	16	Multi-criteria decision analysis for supporting the selection of medical devices under uncertainty 	 	17	Priority setting for horizon scanning of new health technologies in Denmark: Views of health care stakeholders and health economists 	 	18	Topic selection for health technology assessment: An approach combining multiple attribute decision making and decision rules 	 	19	Selecting technologies for assessment 	 	20	An integrated multi-criteria decision-making framework for a medical device selection in the healthcare industry 	 	21	Fuzzy multicriteria model for selection of vibration technology 	 	22	A model for priority setting of health technology assessment: the experience of AHP-TOPSIS combination approach 	 	23	Prioritizing health technologies in a Primary Care Trust 	 	24	A model for prioritizing projects: an example from therapeutic devices 	 	25	An objective methodology for the selection of a device for continuous mobility assessment 	 	26	A group decision making framework based on neutrosophic TOPSIS approach for smart medical device selection 	 	27	An approach to prioritization of medical devices in low-income countries: an example based on the Republic of South Sudan 	 	28	Setting priorities for the adoption of health technologies on a national level—the Israeli experience 	 	29	A process of prioritizing topics for health technology assessment in Kazakhstan 	 	30	The use of societal criteria in priority setting for health technology assessment in The Netherlands: initial experiences and future challenges 	 	31	Information service on new and emerging health technologies: Identification and prioritization processes for a European Union–wide newsletter 	 	32	Which health technologies should be funded? A prioritization framework based explicitly on value for money 	 	33	Priority setting for technology adoption at a hospital level: relevant issues from the literature 	 	34	Selecting medical devices and materials for development in Korea: the analytic hierarchy process approach 	 	35	British Columbia-Prioritization and MCDA matrices	 	36	Canada-Topic Identification and Prioritization Process (CADTH)	 	37	Sweden-HTA Prioritization	 	38	Norway-TISP for HTA 2021	 	39	Identification, prioritization and assessment of obsolete health technologies. A methodological guideline 	 	40	Testing a new taxonomic model for the assessment of medical devices: is it plausible and applicable? Insights from HTA reports and interviews with HTA institutions in Europe 	 	41	A model for HTA priority setting: experience in Lithuania 	 	42	Combining multi-criteria decision analysis and mini-health technology assessment: a funding decision-support tool for medical devices in a university hospital setting 	 	43	Prioritization criteria for the selection of new diagnostic technologies for evaluation 	 	44	Setting priorities for health technologies assessment: a model process 	 	45	National priorities for the assessment of clinical conditions and medical technologies: report of a pilot study 	 	46	Development of a prioritization framework to aid healthcare funding decision making in health technology assessment in Australia: application of multicriteria decision analysis 	 	47	Design of a multiple criteria decision analysis framework for prioritizing high-impact health technologies in a regional health service 	 	48	A practical guide for selecting continuous monitoring wearable devices for community-dwelling adults 	 	49	Development of a hybrid AHP-TOPSIS decision making framework for technology selection in hospital medication dispensing processes 	 	50	A new health technology assessment system for devices: the first 5 years 	 	51	United Kingdom-NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual
Records 35–38 are technical documents made available by the Portuguese national HTA agency (thus no reference is included)
AHP analytic hierarchy process, HTA health technology assessment, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, NICE National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, TOPSIS Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution, VIKOR VIšekriterijumsko KOmpromisno Rangiranje, WHO World Health Organization
By adding the four eligible technical documents and reports made available by INFARMED and the five eligible studies manually identified through Google Scholar and HTA agencies’ websites, the final sample for review consisted of 51 records, in total. The search and study selection steps are represented in the PRISMA flow diagram in Fig. 1, and the final list of included records (coded with numbers) and the corresponding references are displayed in Table 1.
In order to convey the research outcomes as explicitly and transparently as possible, thereby not omitting any important piece of information that was considered, all the data that were collected across the set of included records are organized and presented in the ESM. Statistical analyses of these data were conducted and the outcomes are reported over the following subsections.

Publication Trend Over Time and Target Jurisdiction
Number of published studies over time
First, the number of publications over time was recorded in order to capture the publication trend, considering that no restrictions in terms of time frame were imposed in our literature search. Figure 2 shows the results of this step. One record did not disclose the date of creation nor the date of publication (record 37, in the list in Table 1), which is a technical document. As depicted in the figure, the trend in the number of published studies grew substantially over the last 8 years. A total of 32 studies were published in the period between 2015 and 2024, accounting for 63% of the study sample.
Number of studies by target jurisdiction. LMIC low- and middle-income countries
An analysis of the distribution of the studies in terms of their target jurisdiction was also conducted. This information was found to be potentially more useful than focusing on the geographic distribution, given that there is literature that originates from specific countries but whose approaches may apply to other settings beyond borders. As the bar chart in Fig. 3 shows, a significant fraction of the records (18) provides frameworks that are not necessarily country specific and may be applied globally. In contrast, 30 studies address decision situations within a specific country: ten in European countries; seven in North American countries; eight in Asian countries; two in Latin American countries; and two specific to Australia. Additionally, two studies are directed to Europe, in general, and one study is especially focused on low- and middle-income countries.

Health Technology Focus
In terms of health technology focus, the reviewed studies fell into several categories: those specifically targeting MDs, smart MDs, wearables, diagnostic technologies, or health interventions; those taking a more general approach, covering a broad spectrum of health technologies without a specific focus on any particular type. Medical devices and general health technologies made up the majority, with 21 and 20 of the 51 included studies, respectively. In addition, seven studies focused on health interventions and another four on smart MDs. Additionally, four records focused on wearables and two others were aimed at diagnostic technologies. In some situations, the approaches targeted more than one of these health technology categories.
Starting with the next subsection, we present relevant findings on the technical component of the reported approaches. Guided by RQ. I, our first goal at this step was to identify the method(s) used to assess value in each study.

Value Assessment Methods (Technical Component)
Methods applied for value assessment and their frequency in the study sample. Methods marked with an asterisk (*) correspond to multicriteria decision analysis methods. AHP Analytic Hierarchy Process, ANP Analytic Network Process, BWM Best-Worst Method, CBA cost-benefit analysis, CEA cost-effectiveness analysis, COPRAS Complex Proportional Assessment, EDAS Evaluation based on Distance from Average Solution, ELECTRE Elimination Et Choice Translating Reality, EVIDEM Evidence and Value: Impact on Decision-Making, IFCI Intuitionistic Fuzzy Choquet Integral, MARCOS Measurement of Alternatives and Ranking according to Compromise Solution, MAST Model for Assessment of Telemedicine applications, PAPRIKA Potentially All Pairwise RanKings of all possible Alternatives, PSI Preference Selection Index, SAW Simple Additive Weighting, TOPSIS Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution, VIKOR VIsekriterijumsko KOmpromisno Rangiranje)
A large variety of methods and techniques are described and applied in the literature with the intent of capturing the value of a health technology (when performing an HTA evaluation) or the value of its evaluation (when prioritizing for an HTA evaluation). A total of 59 methods were identified in the 51 analyzed studies, which can be visualized in Fig. 4.
The most used technique was the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), including its variants (e.g., fuzzy AHP), with a total of 11 reported applications (19%). Although applied in a substantially lower number of studies when compared with the AHP, the next most frequently used techniques were: the Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS), including its variants (e.g., neutrosophic TOPSIS), four applications (7%); PAPRIKA (“Potentially All Pairwise RanKings of all possible Alternatives”), three applications (5%); and VIšekriterijumsko KOmpromisno Rangiranje (VIKOR), also including its variants (e.g., Interval Valued Intuitionistic Fuzzy VIKOR), two applications (3%). However, about 34% (20) of the 59 methods found were “unknown”, meaning that the technique being applied was not specified. All the remaining 19 identified methods corresponded to applications of different techniques, namely: cost-effectiveness analysis, fuzzy Analytic Network Process (ANP), Simple Additive Weighting (SAW), and many others, as shown in Fig. 4.
Focusing on the 31 records that explicitly indicated value assessment method(s), if we cluster them based on the type of analysis conducted (MCDA, economic evaluation, etc.), we find that a vast majority applied MCDA (corresponding MCDA methods are marked with an asterisk in Fig. 4). More concretely, 24 studies (77%) applied this methodology —four focused on the selection and prioritization for an HTA evaluation, while most (20 studies) concentrated on the actual evaluation. It is important to note that the low number of prioritization-focused studies explicitly using MCDA does not imply that MCDA principles were rarely applied in that context. In fact, many HTA prioritization studies did not report a specific method and were therefore not included in this 31-record count. As the next section highlights, these studies often used multiple attributes to assess value, a practice aligned with core MCDA principles.
Proceeding with this analysis, only two (6%), out of the 31 records indicating a value assessment method, pursued economic evaluation approaches, while five (16%) adopted approaches that fell outside both MCDA and economic evaluation. These included, in particular, a screening method using decision gates, a checklist, and a taxonomic approach.
Moreover, it was further investigated which of the MCDA studies used aggregation to model value, grouping scores on the multiple attributes into one overall score. From the set of 24 studies applying MCDA, only one did not report the use of aggregation.
Looking further into the technical component, motivated by RQ. II, we sought to record which value attributes were integrated in each reported method. The outcomes of this step are reported over the following subsection.

Value Attributes
Regardless of their specific approaches and target health technologies, all studies included in this review aimed at selecting or setting priorities among a defined set of technologies, considering certain value attributes. The attributes applied in each study were collected and are reported in this subsection.
Value attributes used and their frequency in the study sample
Attribute	For: selection and prioritization for HTA	For: evaluation (HTA)	Description	 	Frequency	Records	Frequency	Records	 	Clinical efficacy and/or effectiveness	21	95%	13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 22, 29, 30, 31, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 43, 44, 45, 46, 49, 50, 51	12	41%	2, 11, 12, 15, 23, 32, 33, 34, 41, 42, 47, 49	Measure of the beneficial effect of a technology, i.e., the device’s ability to produce a desired (beneficial) change in the signs, symptoms, and evolution of the target health condition	 	Impact of the disease	13	59%	13, 14, 17, 19, 29, 30, 35, 37, 38, 39, 43, 44, 46	4	14%	12, 23, 28, 47	Impact of health condition on: the disease burden for the patient and society, the incidence and prevalence and the natural history of the disease without treatment	 	Ethical, social, and legal aspects	11	50%	13, 14, 17, 29, 36, 37, 38, 44, 45, 46, 51	6	21%	5, 9, 12, 23, 33, 41	Ethical, social, and legal implications arising from the use of the device, including equity concerns	 	Target population	10	45%	18, 19, 22, 24, 35, 36, 38, 45, 50, 51	3	10%	28, 42, 47	Number of people affected by the target condition or relevant subgroup(s) in a specific time period	 	Budget impact on the health system	10	45%	13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 29, 36, 38, 50, 51	2	7%	41, 47	Impact of device adoption on the health system budget	 	Quality of the available scientific evidence	8	36%	14, 18, 19, 22, 38, 46, 50, 51	6	21%	15, 23, 32, 41, 42, 47	Robustness of the sources of evidence and quality of the evidence, regarding the target population and the intended clinical course, in a complete, consistent, and relevant approach, with the problems properly reported (risk of bias, imprecision, inconsistency, indirect evidence and publication bias)	 	Cost of the device (including complementary equipment)	7	32%	17, 31, 37, 38, 39, 44, 46	14	48%	2, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 26, 28, 32, 42, 47, 48, 49	Costs with the device (e.g., disposable items) and other equipment inherent to the use of the device, maintenance (sterilization, licensing, or updates) and training	 	Risk analysis	6	27%	24, 29, 38, 39, 40, 43	9	31%	2, 5, 10, 12, 15, 21, 26, 42, 47	Considers risk factors related to the potential number of patients at risk of harm: the likelihood of a device having problems, the likelihood of a patient being harmed, and the total number of patients exposed	 	Market competitiveness	5	23%	14, 18, 29, 38, 43	6	21%	7, 9, 28, 34, 41, 47	Competition in the market, in terms of the number of competing products (i.e., alternatives)	 	Efficiency	5	23%	29, 39, 43, 44, 45	6	21%	2, 15, 27, 28, 33, 49	Potential cost savings with the adoption of the device, considering the affordability of the device and the opportunity cost (lost alternatives)	 	Organizational aspects	5	23%	13, 31, 37, 43, 46	5	17%	2, 12, 21, 47, 49	Need for adaptation/reorganization of the organization/system to the device and its use in clinical practice	 	Stakeholders agreement on the adoption of the device	4	18%	14, 19, 35, 43	3	10%	23, 33, 49	Agreement between key actors (groups of stakeholders) or individuals in the health context, that is, the extent to which the adoption of the device is aligned with common goals	 	Public health interest	3	14%	14, 35, 38	1	3%	41	Impact of the use of the device on public health and society. Interest for the public, physicians, policy makers, and society, in general	 	Variation in medical practice	3	14%	43, 44, 45	0	0%	−	Unexplained variations in the patterns of medical practice and patient outcomes, potentially arising from variations in geographical regions and type of healthcare provider	 	Degree of innovation	3	14%	31, 38, 50	1	3%	3	Innovativeness of the device, in terms of incorporated technology and clinical practice	 	Uncertainty about the use of the technology	3	14%	19, 30, 50	2	7%	33, 47	Uncertainties and a lack of agreement among healthcare professionals regarding the indications and effects of the use of the device in clinical practice (usually more significant in the case of innovative devices, for which less research was conducted). The higher the uncertainty, the greater the need to perform an HTA	 	Timeliness of HTA	2	9%	14, 19	1	3%	41	Timeliness of the release of results obtained in the assessment (HTA) of the device, for the purpose of supporting decision making in healthcare	 	Medical/technological knowledge	2	9%	38, 45	1	3%	33	Extent to which the adoption of the device can lead to the development of new health services, healthcare technologies, and/or promote knowledge and research on the issue	 	User friendliness	2	9%	46, 50	12	41%	2, 7, 9, 10, 11, 15, 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 48	Extent to which the device is comfortable and easy to be used (e.g., in the case of a healthcare professional, depth perception, eye-hand coordination, or hours required to perform the examinations). The procedures for using the device are defined and clear. Extent to which the result of the device is easy to understand and interpret	 	Specific features of the device	1	5%	40	10	34%	2, 3, 5, 10, 11, 20, 21, 26, 33, 42	Relevant characteristics such as lifetime of the device, contact with the patient’s body (direct: invasive and non-invasive; indirect), length of hospital stay, limitations compared to alternatives, reputation, and set-up/maintenance issues	 	Need for training of the healthcare professional	1	5%	31	9	31%	1, 2, 5, 9, 15, 21, 33, 42, 49	Need for training of health professionals to ensure specific knowledge necessary for the use of the device	 	Cost effectiveness	1	5%	38	4	14%	7, 10, 11, 27	Measure of the balance between the costs incurred in the adoption of the device and its clinical effectiveness (e.g., cost per QALY is a cost-effectiveness measure)	 	Regulatory status of the device	1	5%	38	2	7%	1, 9	Current regulatory status of the device and adherence to market approval requirements	 	Cost of procedure without the cost of the device	1	5%	35	3	10%	3, 15, 47	Costs arising from the number of human resources required, time of use, and infrastructure, e.g., operating room (without considering the cost of the device)	 	Patient-reported outcomes	1	5%	38	4	14%	12, 15, 38, 47	Patient’s perspective on a disease/treatment that may not be captured by a clinical measure, but of importance to the patient and their adherence to treatment or use of the device	 	Medical or technical complications for the patient	1	5%	24	1	3%	2	Expected occurrence and severity of medical and technical complications related to the procedure (e.g., with surgery to implant the device)	 	Multi-disease applicability	1	5%	38	1	3%	15	Number of indications/diseases for which the device is useful in clinical practice	 	Capacity of the health system	1	5%	51	2	7%	2, 49	Adjustment of the device to the existing infrastructures and qualifications in the health system	 	Environmental impact of the production and use of the device	1	5%	51	1	3%	38	Extent to which the production and use or implementation of the device causes environmental damage	 	Technical specifications	0	0%	−	12	41%	1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 12, 16, 20, 21, 25, 48	Factors related to the technology used in the device and its specific purpose (e.g., imaging characteristics in the case of medical imaging devices, such as MRI, CT, and US; connectivity in the case of wearables)	 	Quality/reliability	0	0%	−	7	24%	4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 25, 26	Extent to which the device, at any stage of its operations, ensures the highest reliability	 	Price of the device	0	0%	−	5	17%	3, 4, 8, 20, 21	Unit price of the device	 	Comfort for the patient	0	0%	−	3	10%	2, 11, 33	Extent to which the use of the device is expected to improve the service offered to the patient (including patient satisfaction)	 	Quality of life for the patient	0	0%	−	2	7%	28, 42	Expected impact on the patient’s quality of life	 	Exposure of the healthcare professional to physical or chemical agents	0	0%	−	1	3%	5	Exposure (internal or external) of the health professional to specific physical and chemical agents, metabolites, or reaction products	 	Technical performance of the device	0	0%	−	2	7%	7, 48	Performance of a device or response of the patient(s) to the device regarding its intended purpose and as indicated by the manufacturer, when properly applied to the appropriate patient(s)	 	Adverse events for the patient	0	0%	−	1	3%	39	Severity and frequency of adverse events and their impacts	 	Financing	0	0%	−	1	3%	42	Extent to which the device is reimbursed; diagnostic-related group tariff or additional payments for the device (coverage)
CT computed tomography, HTA health technology assessment, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, QALY quality-adjusted life-year, US ultrasound
About 43% (22) of the 51 records used particular attributes prior to the HTA evaluation to help decide which technologies to evaluate, whereas the remaining 57% (29) did it during the actual evaluation, to support, for instance, reimbursement or coverage decisions. Although these two contexts are related and share key values and concerns, the most frequently applied attributes to assess value may differ from one context to another as they refer to different timings of the HTA process. Hence, to investigate which attributes were considered while applying the value assessment methods, separate research was carried out for studies focusing on the selection and prioritization for HTA and studies focusing on the evaluation (HTA) stage. Table 2 displays the results obtained.
To ensure the transparency of the findings presented in Table 2, whenever it was observed that a record applied a certain attribute but named it differently, the term used in that record was added to a list containing distinct designations found in the literature for the attribute in question. We included a table in the ESM displaying the “other terms” found in the literature for each attribute.
The results show that the set of most frequently included attributes differs between decision contexts. Among the 22 studies focusing on the selection and prioritization for HTA, the five most included attributes were: 1. Clinical efficacy and/or effectiveness (21 applications, 95%); 2. Impact of the disease (13 applications, 59%); 3. Ethical, social, and legal aspects (11 applications, 50%); 4. Target population (10 applications, 45%); 5. Budget impact to the health system (10 applications, 45%). Among the other 29 studies focusing on the evaluation (HTA), the five most included attributes were: 1. Cost of the device (including complementary equipment) (14 applications, 48%); 2. Technical specifications (12 applications, 41%); 3. User-friendliness (12 applications, 41%); 4. Clinical efficacy and/or effectiveness (12 applications, 41%); 5. Specific features of the device (10 applications, 34%).
A total of 45 studies specified the methodological steps taken to identify and select the value dimensions used in their approaches. The majority of records conducted a literature review at the beginning of the process to investigate potential attributes, 40 records (89%), more particularly. Within those, more than half (22) reported expert consultation after conducting the literature review. Only five records (11%) reportedly selected attributes through expert consultation alone (i.e., without any prior literature review).
Last but not least, the final step of our analysis is directly linked to RQ. III, and it focuses on the social component of the reported approaches. We sought to identify which social method(s) were implemented in the process and the stakeholder groups that were engaged. The following subsection presents these findings.

Social Methods and Participants (Social Component)
a Social methods applied for stakeholder engagement and their frequency in the study sample. b Key stakeholder groups taking part in the social methods and their frequency in the study sample. HTA health technology assessment
Social methods must be implemented to engage key stakeholders in the process, hence the relevance of RQ. III. A total of 59 social processes were identified in the 51 included studies, which can be visualized in the chart in Fig. 5a. A substantial number of these, more specifically 19 processes (32%), were vaguely regarded as “meetings”. Questionnaires/surveys were implemented in 15 cases (25%), and there were seven applications (12%) of the Delphi technique. In a lower number of studies, workshops and interviews were conducted—three applications (5%) and three applications (5%), respectively. One implementation of a focus group discussion was reported. Eleven social components were not sufficiently described to associate them with one of the aforementioned methods. Although we know stakeholders were engaged in the process somehow, no details regarding the participatory method(s) conducted were provided in these cases.
The fact that 59 methods were identified among 51 studies means that eight studies implemented more than one method within the social components of their approaches. Regarding this matter, the following method combinations were documented: questionnaires/surveys and meetings (5); questionnaires/surveys and Delphi (1); questionnaires/surveys and focus groups (1); and interviews and meetings (1).
We also investigated who typically participates in these social processes based on the sample of reviewed studies (Fig. 5b). Adapting the taxonomy by Concannon et al. to our particular research in HTA, the following set of seven categories was adopted for this analysis: (i) patients and the public—current and potential consumers of healthcare provided by means of the MDs, health technologies, and interventions, under analysis; (ii) providers—includes both individuals (i.e., physicians, nurses, pharmacists) and organizations (i.e., hospitals, clinics, community health centers, pharmacies) whose responsibility is to provide care to patients and populations; (iii) payers and policy makers—entities directly associated with the government, considering the government as responsible for financing healthcare and/or establishing policies (namely, HTA policies); (iv) HTA committees/agencies—those responsible for conducting HTA; (v) product makers—manufacturers, industry, etc.; (vi) scientific experts—includes HTA experts, health economists, epidemiologists, experts from academia, and statisticians, among others; and (vii) principal investigators—researchers.
The results show that scientific experts were engaged in 24 (47%) out of the 51 reviewed studies. There were 23 studies (45%) reporting the engagement of providers. The next most frequently engaged group refers to payers and policy makers, involved in 15 studies (29%), followed by principal investigators, who took part in eight studies (16%). Patients and the public were engaged in a total of seven records (14%), while product makers participated in six studies (12%). In four studies (8%), participants included members of HTA committees/agencies. Moreover, a total of nine records (18%) did not disclose the involved stakeholders with sufficient detail. Those studies often referred to the participants as “experts” or “stakeholders” in healthcare, but such information was not clear enough to discern which of the aforementioned key groups were being regarded.
Last, we also explored the intended users for whom the prioritization approaches were developed or applied, to better understand who is responsible for implementing these methods. Among the 22 studies focusing on the selection and prioritization for HTA, 20 specified the intended users. Most of these studies (16; 80%) presented approaches designed for use by HTA committees/agencies. Although much less frequently, some approaches were also intended for payers and policy makers, principal investigators, or providers.

Discussion
One of the current challenges in the HTA process is the selection and prioritization of MDs for evaluation. This initial task allows assessors to determine which devices are of utmost priority to assess, optimizing the use of limited HTA resources. Addressing the three research questions, this systematic review provides a comprehensive summary and analysis of possible approaches to HTA prioritization, with a greater focus on MDs. It should be noted that none of the reviewed approaches can be directly applied to an MD prioritization problem without adjustments, as their applicability depends on context-specific factors such as the types of devices under consideration, the stakeholders involved and the value attributes that are to be included. Some studies were not specifically dedicated to HTA prioritization, so their approaches may need a more extensive adaptation than the other approaches that were tailored to this specific context. According to the results of our review, almost 80% of the included studies targeting MDs were published since 2015 and only during these recent years has there been a stronger focus on the development of priority-setting approaches within the HTA process. Therefore, as we anticipate there will be a strong increase in publications on MD prioritization for HTA in the coming years, we aim to offer key insights in this section that will certainly be valuable for further exploring this emerging topic.

Insights Into the Technical Component of an Approach to Prioritize MDs for HTA Evaluation: Which Methodology to Assess Value?
Addressing RQ. I, a broad set of methods for value assessment was identified, although a significant portion of studies did not clearly designate the applied methods, indicating a lack of transparency in the literature. Approximately 81% of the identified methods were MCDA techniques and, in nearly every case, aggregation was performed by grouping scores on multiple attributes into a single expression of value for decision making. The high proportion of MCDA studies in our review reflects the growing interest in the literature in applying MCDA to healthcare settings, particularly in HTA.
But what reasons justify the current preference for the MCDA methodology in these type of decision problems over more traditional approaches, such as economic evaluation techniques? The answer to this question relies on the increasingly recognized need for broader and more transparent decision-making approaches. The major drawback of exclusively using economic evaluation methods in HTA systems arises from the fact that value goes beyond cost-per-outcome estimates. We must stress, once again, that value is multidimensional and it should also capture social value factors: disease severity and target population size; the nature of the technology/intervention; economic impact and budgetary constraints; and evidence quality, among the many other aspects that were collected from the sample of studies included in this review. Although an economic evaluation has recently evolved into a deliberative process that allows for these additional criteria to be considered, this can only occur in an implicit or ad hoc manner, compromising the overall transparency of the process. Moreover, as different stakeholders will assign different value judgments to the criteria considered, the aim is to “arrive at a clear process that elicits and accounts for the preferences of different stakeholders in a transparent way” [, p. 436], which economic evaluation frameworks fail to fulfil. Multicriteria decision analysis, in contrast, proves to be a broader and more transparent methodology. It follows a “divide and conquer rationale”, dividing the problem into simpler components, measuring the extent to which the objectives are attained by a set of options, weighting these objectives, and re-assembling the components to form the overall picture. In terms of the MCDA process itself, the ESM details the three key phases highlighted by Belton and Stewart: problem identification and structuring; model building and use; and development of action plans. Multiple criteria are applied in an explicit and systematic manner, while accounting for the different stakeholder views along the process. As previously demonstrated, our findings further reinforce this notion that the MCDA methodology is potentially the most suitable one for decision contexts where value is multidimensional and diverse perspectives must be explicitly considered.

Insights Into the Value Attributes to Include in an Approach to Prioritize MDs for HTA Evaluation
Covering RQ. II, we investigated which value attributes were applied in the studies. Results show there is no standard set of value attributes used across the sample, varying between decision contexts. The most frequently used value attributes for the selection and prioritization for HTA differ from those used in HTA evaluation. Clinical efficacy and/or effectiveness is commonly applied in both contexts, aligning with the primary goal of any healthcare professional, institution, or system, which is to improve patient health outcomes. Although Technical specifications is frequently applied in HTA evaluation, it is not considered in prioritization approaches. This is logical as many HTA evaluation procedures are applied over a more specific set of health technologies that are intended to address the same medical condition or purpose, and usually have similar characteristics. In these cases, it is thus plausible to assess these specifications when selecting the best technology in a defined group. In contrast, when the decision problem refers to selecting and prioritizing for HTA, the set of health technologies to prioritize is often quite broad, including technologies that target completely distinct medical conditions. Therefore, this attribute is generally not suitable for prioritization. Because of that broad nature of the prioritization problem, disease-related attributes are more commonly used in that context—Impact of the disease and Target population, for instance. The latter is possibly more appropriate in the case of MDs, as some devices have multi-disease applicability, making it impractical to assess the Impact of the disease in those cases. To develop a prioritization approach that also accommodates such devices, one could instead capture the size of the device’s target population, given by the total number of individuals that would effectively benefit from the implementation of the MD in clinical practice (regardless of the disease(s) it addresses).
Beyond intervention-related and disease-related attributes, incorporating Ethical, social, and legal aspects into the prioritization process can bring important topics to the forefront. It is reasonable to assign higher priority to devices that significantly reduce health inequalities or address equity concerns. Additionally, as our review strongly suggests, economic attributes are key value dimensions to include. Health technology assessment agencies may assess the direct Cost of the device (including complementary equipment) or take a broader approach by estimating the Budget impact on the health system, balancing both costs and potential savings arising from MD adoption. This latter approach can be challenging, particularly when prioritizing both therapeutic and diagnostic MDs—while therapeutic devices may have an immediate budgetary impact, diagnostic devices often require a longer time horizon to reveal their financial implications.
Last, we expected Degree of innovation to be a commonly used attribute, particularly in recent HTA studies. However, this was not the case, possibly because the concept of innovation is often perceived as controversial and difficult to define. Innovation is relevant when, for instance, it can be translated into improved clinical outcomes or improved user friendliness, so there are certainly other attributes that express these concerns more directly.

Insights Into the Social Component of an Approach to Prioritize MDs for HTA Evaluation: How Should Stakeholders be Engaged in the Process?
With reference to RQ. III, the social component of each record was analyzed to identify participatory methods and key stakeholders. Given that HTA prioritization is a multidisciplinary issue, it is expected to involve a broad range of stakeholders. The participation of providers is essential, as they bring a clinical perspective and focus on the primary goal of improving patient health. Payers and policy makers also play a crucial role, providing a financial perspective and advocating for the sustainability of the health system. As our findings indicate, scientific experts from various fields are key participants as well, particularly in defining and assessing criteria related to their areas of expertise. Although our results show that patients and the public are not commonly engaged in these decision-making processes, exploring their involvement in future work could be valuable. By including patient representatives with sufficient knowledge to engage in discussions with other stakeholders, the user and patient perspective could have a more direct impact on the decision-making process and its recommendations.
Furthermore, while choosing a participatory method to pursue in the prioritization of MDs for HTA, we should keep in mind that multiple and often conflicting stakeholder views are involved and open discussion should be promoted. In this matter, the results from our review indicate that questionnaires/surveys are the most commonly used social methods to select and establish priorities among health technologies. While these techniques can efficiently capture stakeholder input, they do not support the dynamic exchange of ideas essential for addressing the complexities of the decision problem under study. Alternative participatory methods, such as decision conferencing, offer a more interactive and deliberative approach by fostering on-the-spot modeling and real-time dialogue among stakeholders and facilitating a shared understanding of priorities. Although decision conferencing was not reported among the methods used in the studies we analyzed, we consider it a highly appropriate, albeit complex, method for MD prioritization for HTA. It refers to a gathering of key stakeholders to collaboratively build a model of relevant data and judgments on the spot, guided by an impartial facilitator who is a specialist in decision analysis. The model is developed transparently in real time, fostering clearer thinking (thus, a “black box” perception is less likely), shared understanding, and collaborative learning. Phillips reports several features of decision conferences that are valued by participants, such as the collective reflection on the issues without demanding consensus, the development of a sense of common purpose among participants, and the fact that they gain mutual commitment to action, independently of whether everyone agreed about the best decisions or not. Taking this into consideration, we believe that an HTA prioritization framework would gain more value if it integrated a decision conferencing process for the implementation of the model that sets priorities. Not only would there be improvement of communication within the organization undergoing the decision problem, but also the development of a shared understanding of the results and alignment on the way forward.
Apart from our findings and insights provided here, the truth is many social components lacked detailed descriptions. Around one-third of the reported social methods were generically designated as “meetings,” and 11 other methods were not identified with an exact term. This lack of clarity in both the social and technical components reported in the studies compromises the replicability of approaches and highlights the need for improved documentation in future work.

Strengths and Limitations
Given that no time frame nor limit on the target jurisdiction was set in our research, this systematic review provides a comprehensive overview of the past work that relates to HTA prioritization, particularly targeting MDs. Several socio-technical frameworks were reviewed, including those that, despite focusing on other health technologies, reported methodologies that can be valuable to MD prioritization for HTA evaluation. Therefore, we anticipate that the research findings from this review will provide a beneficial contribution to future work in this underexplored (yet emerging) domain within the HTA research field.
Nonetheless, this review has a few limitations. Not all relevant studies were found because of restrictions imposed by the initial search using a limited set of keywords and databases. Additional sources could have extended the sample. Furthermore, part of our literature search was manual and applied a selective approach rather than a systematic approach, specifically selecting records from Google Scholar, consulting websites of particular HTA agencies, and including specific literature provided by INFARMED. Moreover, the data in Table 2 reflect our interpretation of attribute definitions provided in the studies, which were often unclear. The clusters in the table were used to summarize the information meaningfully, but some attributes may not exactly match the descriptions of the clusters with which we associated them (only indirectly). Such a limitation results from the wide range of terms and definitions found in the literature aiming to express similar concepts.

Policy and Research Implications
The key findings from this systematic review can inform future HTA research and healthcare decision making, supporting the development of frameworks for MD prioritization in HTA. The available literature on this specific topic is very limited, as evidenced by the small fraction of included studies that directly address it. Given this gap, our primary focus was on gathering and presenting key information about methods and criteria that could serve as valuable input for future work.
While our review aimed to provide a global perspective rather than prescribe region-specific solutions, we recognize that regional differences in healthcare systems, regulatory environments, and socioeconomic conditions can influence the applicability of our findings. Priorities and HTA systems vary across jurisdictions, affecting not only how prioritization methods and criteria are selected and implemented but also which stakeholders to engage. Therefore, while our findings identify commonalities and adaptable frameworks, their practical application will likely require adjustments to fit regional contexts. We hope this review encourages HTA agencies and other entities to build upon these insights, developing robust MD prioritization frameworks tailored to their specific settings—integrating both technical and social components—and sharing them with the broader HTA community.
Fostering international collaboration and knowledge exchange among HTA agencies may help mitigate regional discrepancies and support the development of more harmonized prioritization strategies. In Europe, for instance, the ultimate achievement would be the establishment of a standardized approach that consistently prioritizes MDs for evaluation. Such an approach used across European HTA agencies would improve the efficiency of HTA processes and ensure that new effective devices reach a wider population in a timely manner, making positive changes in the global healthcare landscape. This could be further enhanced, for instance, by actively identifying new and emerging devices for prioritization, a process known as horizon scanning (HS). Horizon scanning is formally defined as the “systematic identification of health technologies that are new, emerging, or becoming obsolete and that have the potential to affect health, health services, and/or society” and serves as an early detection system within the HTA process. Because its output informs the prioritization step, HS can strengthen prioritization efforts by identifying the most relevant and impactful MDs, aligned with health system priorities, at an early stage. However, according to Oortwijn et al., HS systems have yet to reach their full potential, and a more integrated approach to defining and utilizing these systems within HTA is needed. Given the overlap and synergies between HS and prioritization, we anticipate that this review may also contribute, to some extent, to improving HS systems for MD HTA. For instance, the insights provided on value attributes can help harmonize the criteria used in HS and prioritization, while the information on stakeholder engagement may assist in investigating and defining the broad groups of relevant stakeholders that HS systems currently require.

Conclusions
There is a wide range of methods reported in the HTA literature to assess value, which reflects the absence of a generally accepted approach to select and prioritize MDs for an HTA evaluation. Nevertheless, the MCDA methodology was found to be predominant among the identified techniques, particularly including the aggregation of multiple value attributes to obtain a single index to facilitate HTA decision making. A clinical/intervention-related attribute is typically considered not only for the HTA prioritization but also for the actual evaluation. In addition, the former context commonly involves disease-related attributes to define and assess value. One major flaw that was noted in the literature was the frequent underreporting of both technical and social components of the approaches, which compromises their transparency and replicability. Despite its limitations, this review provides valuable insights to those in the HTA community looking to address the current need to effectively select and prioritize MDs before conducting HTA evaluation on such technologies.

Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Declarations

Funding
Open access funding provided by FCT|FCCN (b-on). This work is financed by Portuguese funds through the FCT-Foundation for Science and Technology, I.P., under the projects UIDB/00097/2025 and UIDP/00097/2025 (CEGIST).

Conflicts of Interest/Competing Interests
João Félix Pimenta and Ana C.L. Vieira have no conflicts of interest that are directly relevant to the content of this article.

Ethics Approval
Not applicable.

Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

Consent for Publication
Not applicable.

Availability of Data and Material
All data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper and its supplementary information.

Code Availability
Not applicable.

Authors’ Contributions
Both authors performed the study conception and design, as well as the literature search, data collection, and analysis. The first draft of the manuscript was written by JFP and both authors commented on and revised previous versions of the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.

References
Multicriteria decision analysis and value assessment frameworks: where do we stand? What next?
World Health Organization. Medical devices. https://www.who.int/health-topics/medical-devices#tab=tab_1. Accessed 22 Mar 2024.
Economic evaluation for devices and drugs-same or different?
Applying health economics for policy decision making: do devices differ from drugs?
The economic evaluation of medical devices: challenges ahead
Assessing the clinical and cost-effectiveness of medical devices and drugs: are they that different?
Health technology assessment of medical devices: current landscape, challenges, and a way forward
Assessment of devices, diagnostics and digital technologies: a review of NICE medical technologies guidance
Are medical device characteristics included in HTA methods guidelines and reports? A brief review
Key principles for the improved conduct of health technology assessments for resource allocation decisions
Henshall C, Oortwijn W, Stevens A, et al. Priority setting for health technology assessment: theoretical considerations and practical approaches: a paper produced by the priority setting subgroup of the EUR-ASSESS project. Int J Technol Assess Health Care. 1997;13(2):144–85.
Using health technology assessment to assess the value of new medicines: results of a systematic review and expert consultation across eight European countries
What is value in health and healthcare? A systematic literature review of value assessment frameworks
Resource allocation and priority setting in health care: a multi-criteria decision analysis problem of value?
Multiple criteria decision analysis for health care decision making: an introduction: report 1 of the ISPOR MCDA Emerging Good Practices Task Force
Transparent prioritisation, budgeting and resource allocation with multi-criteria decision analysis and decision conferencing
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Which value aspects are relevant for the evaluation of medical devices? Exploring stakeholders’ views through a Web-Delphi process
A new taxonomy for stakeholder engagement in patient-centered outcomes research
Selecting image-guided surgical technologies in oncology: a surgeon’s perspective
Medical device selection in private hospitals by integrated fuzzy MCGDM methods: a case study in choosing MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) system
Napitupulu HL. Ultrasound device selection by using F-ANP and COPRAS. IOP Conf Ser: Mater Sci Eng. 2019;505(1):012083.
An integrated framework for non-traditional machining process technology selection in healthcare applications
Oliveira V, Sobral J, Ribeiro MM. Development of a tool for selection and acquisition of medical devices based on the analytic hierarchy process. In: 2019 IEEE 6th Portuguese meeting on bioengineering (ENBENG). Lisbon, Portugal: IEEE; 2019. p. 1–4.
Park J, Kim E, Shin K. Developing an evaluation framework for selecting optimal medical devices. J Open Innov Technol Mark Complex. 2019;5(3):64.
Bustamante-Bello R, Ruiz-Soto G, Ramírez-Mendoza R, et al. Health wearables for early detection of frailty syndrome in older adults in Mexico: an informed, structured process for the selection of a suitable device. Procedia Comput Sci. 2016;98:374–81.
Galan J, Cedillo P, Valdez W. Towards a selection and acquisition method for IoT devices oriented to older people in Ecuador. In: 2nd International conference on information systems and software technologies (ICI2ST). Quito, Ecuador: IEEE; 2021. p. 94–100.
Smart medical device selection based on interval valued intuitionistic fuzzy VIKOR
Smart medical device selection based on intuitionistic fuzzy Choquet integral
Shaw R, Stroo M, Fiander C, McMillan K. Selecting mobile health technologies for electronic health record integration: case study. J Med Internet Res. 2020;22(10):e23314.
Defining priority medical devices for cancer management: a WHO initiative
Multi-criteria decision analysis for supporting the selection of medical devices under uncertainty
Topic selection for health technology assessment: an approach combining multiple attribute decision making and decision rules
Shbool MA, Arabeyyat OS, Al-Bazi A, AlAlaween WH. An integrated multi-criteria decision-making framework for a medical device selection in the healthcare industry. Cogent Eng. 2021;8(1):1968741.
Carnero MC. Fuzzy multicriteria model for selection of vibration technology. Shock Vib. 2016;2016(1):6723605.
Mobinizadeh MC, Raeissi P, Nasiripour AA, Olyaeemanesh A, Tabibi SJ. A model for priority setting of health technology assessment: the experience of AHP-TOPSIS combination approach. DARU J Pharm Sci. 2016;24(1):1–12.
Bonci T, Keogh A, Del Din S, Scott K, Mazzà C, on behalf of the Mobilise-D Consortium. An objective methodology for the selection of a device for continuous mobility assessment. Sensors. 2020;20(22):6509.
Abdel-Basset M, Manogaran G, Gamal A, Smarandache F. A group decision making framework based on neutrosophic TOPSIS approach for smart medical device selection. J Med Syst. 2019;43(2):38.
Lilford RJ, Burn SL, Diaconu KD, et al. An approach to prioritization of medical devices in low-income countries: an example based on the Republic of South Sudan. Cost Effect Resour Alloc. 2015;13(1):2.
A process of prioritizing topics for health technology assessment in Kazakhstan
Testing a new taxonomic model for the assessment of medical devices: is it plausible and applicable? Insights from HTA reports and interviews with HTA institutions in Europe
Combining multi-criteria decision analysis and mini-health technology assessment: a funding decision-support tool for medical devices in a university hospital setting
Development of a prioritization framework to aid healthcare funding decision making in health technology assessment in Australia: application of multicriteria decision analysis
Design of a multiple criteria decision analysis framework for prioritizing high-impact health technologies in a regional health service
Lu JK, Wang W, Goh J, Maier AB. A practical guide for selecting continuous monitoring wearable devices for community-dwelling adults. Heliyon. 2024;10(13):e33488.
Boonsothonsatit G, Vongbunyong S, Chonsawat N, Chanpuypetch W. Development of a hybrid AHP-TOPSIS decision-making framework for technology selection in hospital medication dispensing processes. IEEE Access. 2024;12:2500–16.
A new health technology assessment system for devices: the first five years
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. NICE-wide topic prioritisation: the manual (PMG46); 2024.
Selecting technologies for assessment
Priority setting for technology adoption at a hospital level: relevant issues from the literature
Plüddemann A, Heneghan C, Thompson M, et al. Prioritisation criteria for the selection of new diagnostic technologies for evaluation. BMC Health Serv Res. 2010;10:109.
Developing a prioritized list of innovative technologies: the Spanish experience
Priority setting for horizon scanning of new health technologies in Denmark: views of health care stakeholders and health economists
Prioritizing health technologies in a primary care trust
The use of societal criteria in priority setting for health technology assessment in the Netherlands: initial experiences and future challenges
Raviña AR, González MV, Lema V, Mota TC, Roteta NI, Ibarluzea IG. Identification, prioritisation and assessment of obsolete health technologies: a methodological guideline. Quality Plan for the National Health System, Galicia, Spain; 2009.
A model for HTA priority setting: experience in Lithuania
Selection of needlestick prevention devices: a conceptual framework for approaching product evaluation
Priority setting for health technology assessment at CADTH
Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on priorities for assessment and reassessment of health care technologies. Setting priorities for health technology assessment: a model process. In: Donaldson MS, Sox HCJ, editors. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1992.
Institute of Medicine (US) Council on Health Care Technology Priority-Setting Group. National priorities for the assessment of clinical conditions and medical technologies: report of a pilot study. Lara ME, Goodman C, editors. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1990.
Setting priorities for the adoption of health technologies on a national level: the Israeli experience
Golan O, Hansen P. Which health technologies should be funded? A prioritization framework based explicitly on value for money. Israel J Health Policy Res. 2012;1:44.
Selecting medical devices and materials for development in Korea: the analytic hierarchy process approach
Butler JRG. A model for prioritising projects: an example from therapeutic devices. Project Appraisal. 1991;6(3):131–42.
Information service on new and emerging health technologies: identification and prioritization processes for a European Union-wide newsletter
Multiple criteria decision analysis for health technology assessment
Value-based assessment of new medical technologies: towards a robust methodological framework for the application of multiple criteria decision analysis in the context of health technology assessment
Multiple criteria decision analysis (MCDA) for evaluating new medicines in health technology assessment and beyond: the advance value framework
The use of MCDA in HTA: great potential, but more effort needed
Realizing the “great potential” of MCDA in HTA
Multicriteria decision analysis to support health technology assessment agencies: benefits, limitations, and the way forward
Raiffa H, Decision analysis: introductory lectures on choices under uncertainty. Oxford, England: Addison-Wesley; 1968.
Kanavos P, Angelis A. Multiple criteria decision analysis for value based assessment of new medical technologies: a conceptual framework. The LSE Health Working Paper Series in Health Policy and Economics; 2013.
Belton V, Stewart T. Multiple criteria decision analysis: an integrated approach. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2002.
Decision conferencing
Lauvrak V, Arentz-Hansen H, Di Bidino R, et al. Recommendations for horizon scanning, topic identification, selection and prioritisation for European Cooperation on Health Technology Assessment. EUnetHTA WP4 Deliverable 4.10; 2020.
How can health systems prepare for new and emerging health technologies? The role of horizon scanning revisited