An evaluation of the culturally-centered addictions research training (C-CART) graduate certificate program: A qualitative review
The Culturally-Centered Addictions Research Training (C-CART) program is a two-year graduate training program designed to train practicing clinicians and doctoral students in health-related fields in culturally-centered research for the prevention and treatment of substance use disorders (SUDs) among underserved rural communities. This paper presents data from the qualitative portion of program evaluation. These data identified the program’s strengths and areas for growth, which have been implemented to ensure a better learning experience for Scholars. We conducted ten focus groups with three C-CART cohorts, with a total of 32 Scholars. Thematic analysis revealed that participation in the program was motivated by the program emphasis on culture and research skills, as well as opportunities to connect with community agencies. Scholars were positively impacted by improved research skills and understanding of methods, increased knowledge of the importance of culturally centered practices for SUD prevention and treatment, and enhanced ability to work within interdisciplinary teams. Scholars reported gaining confidence and benefiting from a support network of faculty and peers outside their primary graduate programs.Challenges included managing demanding workloads, interprofessional cooperation, interagency collaboration, and interpersonal issues in community-engaged doctoral research. Future programs should consider how to facilitate collaboration in interdisciplinary research teams, cater to workload demand of doctoral Scholars, and ensure ample opportunities for connection and support.

Introduction
Research plays a critical role in expanding effective prevention and treatment options for substance use disorders (SUDs) in rural communities, where trained and licensed providers for SUD treatment are often scarce. In rural communities with large proportions of diverse populations, such as Native Americas, it is crucial that research focused on SUDs is grounded in culturally tailored practices. Research approaches that promote community traditions and values demonstrate respect for minoritized participants’ identities and experiences, which helps promote trust both in the research process and the evidence that emerges from it. Trusted evidence is essential, as it can serve as the foundation for tailored interventions and also informs training programs that prepare provides with the skills needed for effective prevention and treatment of SUDs among minoritized communities. The Culturally-Centered Addictions Research Training (C-CART) program addresses the need for training in research focused on this type of care, especially in rural settings.
The term “substance use disorder” is a diagnosis defined as a set of physiological, behavioral, and cognitive symptoms that persist despite clear evidence of substance-related harm, emotional distress, or functional impairment. These symptoms frequently include impaired self-regulation of substance intake and engagement in behaviors that pose significant risk. We use the term “substance use disorder” (SUD) throughout this paper. However, the participants of the C-CART Scholars’ research projects may not have received a medical diagnosis but have experience with substance use, defined as “the continued use of alcohol, illegal drugs, or the misuse of prescription or over-the-counter medicines with negative consequences”.
Although cultural adaptation of evidence-based interventions has demonstrated high acceptability, implementation remains limited, and more research is needed to tailor evidence-bases treatments to unique cultural contexts. Cultural tailoring is especially needed in contexts where a large percentage of clients are from Indigenous backgrounds, or other minoritized groups that have experienced historical and contemporary traumas that impact trust in the health care system. Culturally adapted interventions are useful and acceptable to clients, but cultural adaptation of interventions is still rarely conducted. Advancing the field of culturally tailored SUD research demands training researchers to be equipped with the knowledge and skills to conduct science grounded in cultural respect in all its phases. Doing so demands commitment to the inclusion of diverse populations as equal agents in the research process to tackle historical power imbalances.
Community-engaged research is an approach to achieve this. Community-engaged research is broadly defined as a collaborative process between researchers and community partners that equitably involves all stakeholders throughout the research process to produce knowledge and action that improves health and well-being. Although community-engaged research has gained traction in academic literature, there remains a paucity of evaluations examining how doctoral training programs specifically prepare emerging scholars to practice community-engaged research. Our study contributes to this evolving discussion by assessing how the C-CART program supports scholars in developing the skills, relationships, and frameworks necessary to engage meaningfully with communities through research.
In rural areas, providers often serve hard-to-reach and diverse clientele. Combined with the complexity of cultural care, remoteness of services, and a sentiment of “rugged individualism” among rural providers, collaboration and implementation of evidence-based practice in culturally-tailored ways may face significant barriers. Primary care physicians, often the main contact in rural communities, may struggle to connect with behavioral health services due to inconsistent availability, limited services, and lack of collaboration among providers. Thus, there is a pressing need for training programs that equip providers with the skills to bridge these gaps and implement culturally responsive, evidence-based care in rural settings.
The C-CART program is a two-year graduate certificate program funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) through the R25 grant mechanism. This research training program is offered by Northern Arizona University (NAU). C-CART is designed to train practicing clinicians and doctoral students in health-related fields in culturally-centered research. C-CART specifically focuses on training current and future clinicians and researchers on culturally-centered research for the prevention and treatment of SUDs among underserved rural communities. The program emphasizes community-engaged research by fostering partnerships with community behavioral health centers, promoting collaborative research within interdisciplinary teams and equipping Scholars with the skills to integrate evidence-based practices into SUD treatment. The motivation behind C-CART is to better equip clinicians and researchers to work with rural and underserved populations in Arizona and the Southwest, emphasizing cultural factors related to SUD research. The program fills a critical need for culturally relevant training in the health professions and complements NAU’s research training offered in graduate programs in health care and behavioral health fields.
The aims of the C-CART program are to: (1) Develop and implement an interprofessional graduate certificate in culturally-centered SUD research for clinical and interdisciplinary health doctoral students and clinicians in the communities they serve; (2) Foster teamwork among the students enrolled in the C-CART program (referred to as C-CART Scholars throughout), their mentors, and community partners as they develop culturally-centered research projects focused on SUD prevention and treatment among underserved rural populations, including American Indians, Latinos and Hispanics, and other individuals experiencing health disparities; (3) Assess the effectiveness of the program through formative and summative evaluation of learning outcomes, longitudinal tracking of Scholar careers, and documentation of efforts and products developed by students, faculty, and mentors; and (4) Disseminate research products through regional, national, and international conference presentations, peer-reviewed manuscripts, capstone research experiences, and highlighting program achievements on the C-CART program website. Additionally, the annual C-CART conference brings together Scholars, faculty, community leaders, and behavioral healthcare directors to showcase graduating Scholars’ culturally-centered SUD prevention and treatment research projects.
Similar to the C-CART Graduate Certificate program, other doctoral-level initiatives have emphasized the integration of interdisciplinary training with real-world community involvement. For instance, the European Joint Doctorate “UrbanHist” provided transnational and cross-sectoral training for PhD students in urban history, combining academic study with internships, community-engaged projects, and collaboration across public and private institutions. Like C-CART, the UrbanHist program emphasized mentorship, international collaboration, and commitment to societal impact, although it focused less on substance use or health equity and more on urban transformation and is a full doctoral program, while C-CART is a graduate certificate program. Nevertheless, both programs underscore the benefits and challenges of embedding community-focused, interdisciplinary approaches in doctoral education.
This paper focuses on the qualitative portion of the evaluation of the C-CART program. The evaluation aimed to identify program strengths and areas for growth, ensuring a better learning experience for Scholars. These findings can also inform other research training programs focused on culturally-centered care and community-engaged research.

Methods

Study design
The program evaluation included focus group discussions conducted with Scholars from the C-CART program’s first, second, and third cohorts. We conducted at least one focus group with each of the three cohort of students. To avoid bias, the focus groups were facilitated by a program evaluator who is not an instructor and does not have regular contact with the Scholars. The same evaluator facilitated all the focus groups. The discussions centered around: Scholars’ interprofessional experiences; acquired culturally-centered research skills; experiences with community-engaged research with behavioral health centers; perceived increases in understanding and confidence in researching SUDs; and perceived benefits and drawbacks of working with academic mentors, community partners, and interdisciplinary peers; and insights gained from the first year of participation in the program. Table 1 shows the cohort, year, number of scholars, and number of focus groups conducted.
The first focus group was conducted in the fall of 2022 with the inaugural cohort of C-CART Scholars. The focus group occurred during the last semester of the program, focusing on students’ experience with the research project and working with community partners, knowledge of culturally-centered practice and research, and skill development in applied settings. To accommodate different schedules in an online program, the focus groups were held in three different sessions, two of which were held over Zoom and one in person. Ten Scholars participated, with five in the first Zoom group, three in the in-person group, and two in the last Zoom group.
In the fall of 2023, the second cohort participated in five small focus groups in a similar format. The same 13 questions asked of the first cohort were used again. Feedback from these focus groups indicated that the questions were too extensive, and some were premature for the stage of their research. After which, the evaluation team divided the questions into two sets of six questions asked in two focus groups per cohort. The first focus group was held after the first year of training, with questions about their experience in the foundational courses, before the research projects began. The second focus group was then held after the second year of the program, when research projects had been completed, with questions about the research project experience and community partner collaboration. The evaluation team will continue with this yearly sequential format for future cohorts.
In the spring of 2024, the second and third cohorts of the C-CART program participated in the in-person focus groups. In their final focus group, the second cohort was asked about their overall experience, research project experience, experience with the community partners, the challenges they faced, the strengths of the program, and suggestions for improvement. In their initial focus group, the third cohort was asked about their motivations for joining the C-CART program, their experience thus far, the knowledge and skills they have gained, the interprofessional collaborative aspects of the program, skills in culturally-centered practices, the most important things they have learned, and what suggestions they have for the program. The third cohort had their final focus group in the spring of 2025, after presenting their research projects at the C-CART conference.
Qualitative evaluation involved a combination of inductive and deductive conventional content analysis, which began after all the recordings were transcribed and de-identified. Deductive themes were embedded in the focus group questions, based on the goal of evaluating program objectives. Transcripts from the first cohort were reviewed and coded independently by two researchers. For each question, common topics were identified from the responses and emerging themes were extracted as they arose. To improve internal validity, the two researchers then convened, discussing the codes they each identified. This discussion and iterative coding process is a method used to confirm that the data were interpreted similarly across analyses and achieve inter-rater consistency. The transcripts for the second and third cohorts were coded by one of the original coders and reviewed by two other researchers. Deductive codes emphasized topics of interest for our evaluation of the program; for example, codes relating to motivations for joining the program included emphasizing cultural components, applied research experience, conducting community-based research, and increasing knowledge about substance use research. Coders also carefully coded for emergent themes, inductively coding to ensure the unexpected areas of importance to scholars were included. Emergent themes included Scholars feeling supported, prepared, and having a sense of professional confirmation.

Results
The evaluation included 32 Scholars from the C-CART program’s first, second, and third cohorts. Participants represented diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds, described in Table 2.
Scholars also came from a range of academic disciplines, with representation from graduate programs such as Clinical Psychology (n = 9), Combined Counseling and School Psychology (n = 9), Interdisciplinary Health (n = 4), Occupational Therapy (n = 5), Physical Therapy (n = 3), Counselor Education (n = 1), and Population Health (n = 1).
Five primary themes were identified through the analyses: motivations for joining the C-CART program, experience with program interprofessional collaborations, what the C-CART program added to participants’ doctoral education, experience with the research project, and recommendations for similar programs. The themes reflected both the successes of the program and areas of the program that needed improvement.

Motivations for joining the C-CART program
We found that a primary motivations to participate in the C-CART program for doctoral students from more clinically focused programs were the opportunities to engage in community-engaged, culturally focused research; to interact and build relationships with community health partners and peers from other disciplines; and to join a mentorship program outside of their primary program.

Program support and encouragement
In addition to interest around program topics, Scholars cited external motivators like tuition support and being encouraged by faculty or past C-CART Scholars. A major benefit of the program is that Scholar tuition is fully or partially covered by the program, as well as textbooks supplied and opportunities to attend conferences paid for by the program. Being encouraged to apply was also a factor, as one Scholar stated:
I was encouraged to apply by three or four of my professors, and it was not something that I was seeking out. I just got a few emails from my professors saying that this fits your research area.

A focus on culture in research
When asked to describe what motivated them to participate in the C-CART program, Scholars described the program’s emphasis on culture, and learning culturally-centered approaches to research as a key incentive to join the program. One Scholar noted they appreciated the focus on culture and the opportunity to center research from a cultural perspective and provide this forum for others to gain experiences:
For someone of my color and background, it’s actually really hard to have these types of experiences come your way and I wouldn’t have got it if it wasn’t for this. I really appreciate that this experience is open to increase diversity and to capture that cultural part in terms of being able to try to have this experience open to everybody.
Upon reflecting on their experience, another Scholar highlighted how cultural sensitivity and humility play a key role in research:
I think overall it added a lot to the research, like the foundational research knowledge base that I had along with having a better understanding of the need for cultural humility and cultural sensitivity when it comes to not only research, but also just thinking about treatments for patients or assessments for patients and things like that.

Expanding interprofessional research skills
Scholars also found that the opportunity to learn research skills outside of their main program’s offerings was also a contributing factor. These research skills included conducting mixed methods research and qualitative research as well as SUD-focused research. One scholar shared their journey related to conducting applied research where they quickly learned how to work with community partners and data:
As somebody who has not done a lot of research prior to this, it’s been on a steep learning curve and challenging, I would say. But I think that overall, we’re being well-supported and well-prepared but now that we are in the action of doing the research itself and kind of working with our community partners, there’s a lot to learn. But I think with how much there is to learn in this topic, the program has done a good job at preparing us.
Another scholar noted that the comprehensive nature of the C-CART research training expanded and deepened their understanding of multiple research methods:
It’s definitely helped me in the research area for my dissertation. We don’t have a lot of support necessarily for our dissertation and learning all the different ways that the C-CART program breaks down research, be it mixed methods, qualitative, quantitative, and our stat class is not that detailed. So in the C-CART program, I’ve learned a lot more than my other classes would have exposed me to.
Grounding applied skills within theoretical research frameworks emerged as an important lesson for another Scholar who appreciated the role of qualitative research theories as both guiding research inquiry and analysis:
I already knew how to do the practical component of facilitating and coding and all of that stuff, but what I didn’t have was the from analogy versus grounded theory and all of that. And that part of the course was really impactful for me because it really let me understand how these theories connect to the practice that we’re doing and how to relate the framework that you’re using back to the types of questions that you ask.

Community engaged research opportunities
The opportunity to work with local communities was an additional factor in the Scholars’ application decision. Interest in working with local communities centered on the opportunity to build and maintain relationships with local communities and focus on community-driven needs. However, they expressed disappointment when their research groups were too small to facilitate interprofessional experiences. They also voiced frustration when they experienced the realities of working with addiction service focused community partners.
This was the first time I’ve been a part of a study that needed IRB. So, kind of walking through the research steps. I think also that realistic understanding of how hard it is to kind of work with community partners, because things are not… it’s like a whole different thing.
However, when projects coalesced and moved forward the Scholars felt excitement and pride about working to enact change in their community through research. One Scholar noted:
We’re following our professors, our mentors, but learning how to talk to our stakeholders, our community partners, investigating what is it that they need, and how we can help them. I feel honored that I am a part of a project that is really happening…. This project is really going to happen, and somehow I am helping my community with this, with our findings.
Echoing this sentiment, another Scholar stated:
I will say a significant outcome for me is knowing that this project, that we’re doing with our community partners is happening. This is for real. We somehow are putting all our minds together to make a significant contribution.
In summary, the Scholars applied to the program hoping for an interprofessional experience where they could engage in meaningful community research that led to tangible aspects. Other factors that inspired Scholars to apply were being encouraged by people in their network and the financial support provided by the program. They valued the focus on culturally-centered principles that the program espoused and upon reflection about their experiences found that they gained both practical and theoretical knowledge to assist them with culturally and community centered research. Scholars also experienced the realities when working with busy service systems who provided direct care to local and statewide communities. As they continued through the program, they expanded on their experiences, reflecting on their culturally-centered, community-based research experiences.

Experience in the program

Appreciation of interprofessional collaborations
As hoped for during their application for admission, Scholars valued the program’s interprofessional focus and observed that it was missing from their primary doctoral programs. Overall, the interprofessional focus allowed participants to better understand the experience of SUDs in local communities from multiple perspectives and approaches of other disciplines. Diverse strengths and knowledge within a team supported cross-disciplinary connections in the community for Scholars to broaden the reach of their network. It was noted that opportunities to further introduce each other to their fields early on would have supported stronger interprofessional connections. One Scholar voiced that program participation impacted their confidence to voice their opinions as a professional, “I’ve learned to let my voice out.” Another Scholar explained that they felt better prepared and more rounded after working with their team:
One of the things that I’m really grateful for is the interprofessional education and knowledge that I’ve gained from my classmates about their role within the health care system and within substance use and their experiences on the cultural side of things.
Scholars found that the interprofessional component of the program challenged their thinking and contributed to their success in their core doctoral programs, as noted by one participant:
The other research project that I’m involved with in my other program was run pretty much by our professors, and then we were just kind of there to help run whatever needed to be run. But here I feel like we’re kind of taking the reins and working alongside.

Feeling academically supported
An area that Scholars emphasized was the support they received from C-CART mentors, faculty, and cohort members. Scholars described feeling well supported and prepared academically by the overall program structure, faculty, and staff. One scholar noted valuing the readings and other materials provided in classes, and that they will continue to reference the materials. Additionally, Scholars emphasized the benefit of having a support structure that was outside of their core discipline, and in several cases, allowed them some room to ask questions, engage in different types of learning, and work with peers not already embedded in their core programs. Scholars also talked about benefitting from the C-CART program’s research project fulfilling some requirements of their core programs.
I think overall the experience has been really great. I’m learning a lot. I love the connections that I’m building with people who I wouldn’t have met otherwise because not in my program, and also just the connections with other departments throughout NAU.
It’s very helpful to get that mixed methods research course at the same time that I’m doing my data collection and analysis. So um, I think really just the support [of the program] to complete my dissertation project…The training, the courses, and I think just the social support, and classes themselves, too.
How there’s so many different programs that are represented in this one cohort, and that we all get to interact into professionally, and we get to learn how to communicate with one another, how to understand each other’s professions, and to speak in a way that we can all understand, even though we have different lingo and different knowledge sets from each of our professions. So, the interprofessional work has been really, really amazing to get to learn how to do.
A couple of Scholars indicated that they did not connect as well as they had hoped with their academic mentors or program faculty due to interpersonal styles of communication, availability, or other factors. These concerns have been taken into consideration when making modifications to the program.

Culturally-centered community field work
Scholars explained that the emphasis on culturally-centered practices increased their confidence as academics and professionals. The most important element of the research experience was the opportunity to work with local community partners. Scholars reported learning the importance of ensuring that local communities felt empowered to share their needs. One individual stated, “We are just the middle person to give back to that community.” Another appreciated the aspect of “empowering individuals to share what they have to share.”
It’s in some way, as an Indigenous person, this is a sense of validation for myself as a Scholar, as a student, first-generation student, for my tribe, my community and other Indigenous peoples. How our research and the things that we’ve been talking about as it relates to protective factors. Culturally relevant practices are now in the spotlight, and it’s one of the only times where I’m like, this is me. This is where I belong, and this is something I feel like everyone should know about…So I think it’s important for professions to know about, and for me it’s more validating in my experience and the communities that I come from.
I think that the learning outcome of how to take action, and just like all the parts that go into the ability to take action is just feeling very valuable to me, and my education and my life as a whole.
Scholars described positive outcomes from the program including developing research skills, building relationships with professors in various disciplines, and building relationships with community partners. Scholars discussed learning research skills in mixed methods, qualitative, quantitative, and community-based participatory research. Relationships with C-CART were described as collaborative, compared to vertical relationships in the Scholar’s primary doctoral programs where doctoral students work under the supervision of a single faculty member.
Highlights of working with communities included the opportunity to take action and engage in social justice work while contributing to communities as partners. Overall, participants appreciated gaining the “tools necessary to take action.”
I think overall it added a lot to the research, like the foundational research knowledge base that I had along with having a better understanding of the need for cultural humility and cultural sensitivity when it comes to not only research, but also just thinking about treatments for patients or assessments for patients and things like that.
When it relates to working with community partners, has that real world aspects of how to communicate. How do we work with people that are in other organizations aside from university? How do we, as professionals continue those relationships well after the program has ended? So, I think that those skills are essential to have as a researcher, especially for those of us that want to work in rural, isolated areas in the Southwest. So, I think that that’s important, but also how the skills, as it relates to how to work with populations that are already stigmatized when it relates to substance use.
When asked about their community partnerships, Scholars described them as most effective when they built a relationship of mutual respect and trust and fostered compassion among all participants. Some Scholars mentioned an initial delay in getting responses from community partners. Although often challenging, learning the dynamics of working on research projects with community partners and continuing to reach out to their community partners was a meaningful learning experience that ensured strong working relationships.
Scholars valued the guidance they received from their community partner mentors, noting that community partners were open to multiple ideas regarding their projects. The opportunity to gain “hands-on experience” with their partner communities was challenging yet rewarding. Scholars were satisfied with community partnerships except in a few cases where community partners were not responsive or could not meet often enough to build a strong relationship. Having enough Scholars to create an interdisciplinary team to work with each community partner was important. In years when Scholars worked in smaller teams to make sure that several community partners were involved, they expressed more difficulty engaging with the program and with completing meaningful research projects.
They are eager to be your community partner, but at the same time they’re afraid of what the research findings are going to show or display. Therefore, we encountered some hesitancy, all the projects that we were proposing, and we have to take a step back and listen to them and understand other process. Sometimes you meet with person A and person A has person B, C, D that need to discuss all this. And a lot of this involves funding and the name of the institution. So we even had to say in one of our meetings, If you want, when we publish, we do not need to put the name of your agency.

Interpretation and analysis of results for improvement

Expanding and deepening interprofessional connections
Connections with peers, faculty, and community partners in the program were considered essential. Interprofessional and multidisciplinary research that was centered in cultural and community was one of the attractions for Scholars applying to the program. Although they experienced these to a degree during the program, the Scholars wished they had additional opportunities to make those connections throughout the program. The first semester’s fast pace and heavy academic workload was overwhelming for some Scholars who already faced demanding curricula in their primary programs, all while managing their personal lives. To better bond and navigate their program, the Scholars wanted more inclusion of specific strengths and backgrounds of students when forming research groups and assigning tasks. For Scholars who struggled connecting with academic mentors or community partners, more opportunities for interaction and openness to questions was crucial. Scholars suggested that meeting with community partners in person early in their program, would enhance understanding and collaboration.

Reformatting curriculum to ease academic pressure
Although participants expressed satisfaction with many elements of the C-CART program, certain aspects of the program needed targeted improvements. Areas of strength included getting support from professors and colleagues within the cohort, flexibility in the program that allowed participation in other life activities, and relationships with peers, as noted above. Recommendations for additions to course discussions included introductory IRB training to enhance comprehension and facilitate approval in a more reasonable timeframe, and a brief orientation to functions and processes of grand funding. Scholars expressed some concerns regarding the pacing of program requirements, and needing more time to build relationships with peers, community partners, and mentors. These concerns prompted changes to the curriculum, like extending the first two courses from 7.5 weeks to the length of the entire semester and adding additional opportunities to meet with mentors/faculty.

Discussion
Evaluation of the C-CART program revealed key areas of impact, and areas that could present challenges if not carefully implemented. C-CART Scholars described gaining enhanced research skills, cultural competence, and benefitting from interprofessional collaboration experiences. They also brought up the unexpected benefit of academic support from faculty and a cohort outside of their primary degree programs. Scholars also explained that cultural-centeredness in training not only helped them see the benefit of valuing the perspectives of others but also increased their perception of their own voices as important and worthwhile in several cases. Challenges included managing increased workload and maintaining balance in interprofessional collaboration. Continuous feedback from Scholars and community partners has informed curriculum improvements and process modifications, enhancing the program’s impact on advancing health equity and improving SUD treatment outcomes in diverse healthcare settings. Some of the challenges mentioned here are felt by many PhD students, which we are working on ways to mitigate.
Mixed-methods research focusing on preparing current and future clinicians who work with individuals that have SUDs is essential to addressing complex public health challenges that underserved, rural communities face. Mixed-methods research allows for a comprehensive understanding by combining the depth of qualitative insights with the breadth of quantitative data. This approach is especially valuable in culturally-centered SUD research, where examining the outcomes of prevention and treatment interventions while capturing the nuanced experiences and perspectives of diverse populations is crucial. By building on their original graduate programs, interdisciplinary-mentored research training is a way for Scholars to deepen their technical expertise and learn to adapt their methodologies to complex and often resource-constrained settings. This adaptability not only enhances their research relevance and impact but also equips them to contribute meaningfully to evidence-based solutions tailored to the needs of specific underserved communities.
Although C-CART focuses on SUD research in underserved areas of the U.S., the value of cultivating a broad range of research skills extends far beyond our local context. Developing expertise in culturally-centered research methodologies is especially critical for addressing SUDs in diverse and global contexts, where understanding and respecting the cultural nuances of diverse populations is foundational. By gaining experience in culturally-centered approaches, researchers can effectively adapt and apply their skills to a range of rural, underserved, and international settings. This adaptability ensures that projects are methodologically rigorous, respectful of, and responsive to the cultural, social, and economic contexts in which they operate.

Future research directions
The evaluation of the experiences of the C-CART Scholars explored motivational factors for entering an adjunctive graduate certificate program. Future research could explore the motivational aspirations for doctoral students to undertake additional coursework and commitments beyond their prescribed course of study. Relatedly, support, comradery, and clear trajectories for productivity seemed to be elements that supported Scholars’ persistence in the program. Given that a graduate certificate is ancillary to students’ primary degree, research could investigate the ways that interpersonal connections, relationships building activities, and professionalism predict program persistence. Likewise, the C-CART program was delivered primarily online with structured face-to-face interactions. Comparisons that vary the amount of face-to-face versus online delivery could explore the role and value of each modality related to participants motivation and program persistence. Future research may also investigate differences in experiences between personal characteristics, like race/ethnicity, traditional or non-traditional student type, and other background variables. Finally, research that compares professional outcomes (e.g., publications, grant applications, professional research presentations) between participants who engage in targeted, culturally-centered intensive research training, and traditional doctoral education could evaluate participants’ confidence and competence with completing and disseminating community and culturally centered research.

Limitations
Evaluation of the C-CART program is limited to Scholars’ perceptions of what they learned and gained from it. Due to the small number of Scholars and the wide range of careers they move into after completion of the program, the evaluation does not include broadly measured impacts on communities or health systems. Longer-term follow-ups with Scholars and community partners may produce more insight into outcomes beyond Scholars’ immediate perceptions.
The small sample size posed a limitation in investigating how experiences may differ by identity or personal characteristics (race/ethnicity, traditional or non-traditional student type, and other background variables). With a larger sample size, it may be possible to make inferences about differing experiences between groups. It would also facilitate providing details in subsequent works that reference quotes.
Although we cannot comment on the broader and more long-term impacts or provide comparisons on experiences based on Scholars’ personal characteristics, we hope these results are useful to other research training programs or programs that foster interdisciplinary collaboration and community partnership, particularly with practicing clinician-researchers.

Conclusion
Through collaborative research with community behavioral healthcare facilities and interdisciplinary teams of peers, C-CART Scholars gained experience in community-based, interdisciplinary research approaches toward addressing the multifaceted challenges associated with SUDs among minoritized populations. Practical insights into the complexities of conducting research in real-world settings are intended to support the development of a research-literate and culturally-centered core for research clinicians practicing in rural areas. Experiential education is a national priority to effectively scale up research-based interventions across clinical settings. The overarching goal of training clinically focused doctoral students is to develop a workforce capable of addressing the complex interplay of individual, cultural, societal, and system-level factors that either facilitate or hinder SUD prevention, treatment, and recovery efforts. Future research should consider how experience with interdisciplinary teams during doctoral training can support integrating diverse expertise and perspectives into health systems, fostering innovative and holistic approaches to SUD prevention and treatment. These skills are essential for advancing health equity and creating sustainable solutions to the SUD epidemic, particularly in rural and underserved communities where resources are limited, and effective collaboration is paramount. By cultivating interdisciplinary, community-based research competencies, Scholars can be better prepared to lead initiatives that bridge the gap between research and practice for SUD prevention and treatment among minoritized populations.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Tracking the geographic distribution and growth of clinicians with a DEA waiver to prescribe buprenorphine to treat opioid use disorder
The neglect of culture in global health research and practice
Strategies for culturally safe research with Native American communities: An integrative review
The european joint doctorate “UrbanHist”: Insights from an innovative training network acrosseurope
A qualitative study of rural healthcare providers’ views of social, cultural, and programmatic barriers to healthcare access
The qualitative content analysis process
Culturally adapted evidence-based treatments for adults with substance use problems: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Beyond a coefficient: An interactive process for achieving inter-rater consistency in qualitative coding
A systematic review of trauma and substance use in American Indian and Alaska native individuals: Incorporating cultural considerations
Three approaches to qualitative content analysis
Family Medicine physicians’ perspectives regarding rural behavioral health care: Informing ideas for increasing access to high-quality services
I Don’t even want to go to the doctor when I get sick now: Healthcare experiences and discrimination reported by people who use drugs, arizona 2019
Culture-centeredness in community-based participatory research: Contributions to health education intervention research
The growing importance of mixed-methods research in health
Focus group participation by year.
Cohort	Focus group year	Number of scholars	Number of focus groups	 	Cohort 1	2022	10	3	 	Cohort 2	2023	9	5	 	Cohort 2	2024	8	1	 	Cohort 3	2024	10	1
Demographic characteristics of C-CART program scholars, 2021, 2022, and 2023 cohorts.
Scholar Characteristics	N = 32	 	Self-Reported Gender		 	Female/Woman	27	 	Male/Man	5	 	Race/Ethnicity		 	Hispanic/Latino	6	 	Black	5	 	American Indian/Indigenous	4	 	Asian	2	 	White	14	 	2 or more races	1	 	Country of Origin		 	Brazil	1	 	Ghana	1	 	India	1	 	Puerto Rico (US)	1	 	Mainland US	28