Challenges in combating tick-borne disease transmissions in India: Emphasizing the importance of a one-health approach
Graphical abstract
Tick-borne diseases (TBDs) pose a substantial public health threat in India, impacting humans, livestock, and wildlife. Despite this, due to underreporting and lack of knowledge, the burden of these diseases is frequently underestimated. Healthcare systems still face difficulties in managing these diseases even after different management mechanisms have been put in place. To address the intricate interplay of ecological, epidemiological, and socioeconomic factors that contribute to the survival and spread of these diseases, this review article examines the grassroots difficulties encountered. It advocates a One-Health strategy in combating TBDs in India. We examined the diversity of tick species, their hosts, and the pathogens they transmit, as the impact of under-reporting highlights the necessity for integrated surveillance, research, and control efforts across human, animal, and environmental health sectors. In addition, we assessed the current diagnostic techniques, preventative measures, and the socioeconomic effects of TBDs on vulnerable populations. To lessen the impact of TBDs in India, this review emphasizes the value of interdisciplinary collaboration and knowledge exchange.
Highlights
Significant underreporting masks the true burden of tick-borne diseases in India.
Ecological and climatic shifts drive tick-vector habitat expansion and disease risk.
Diagnostic limitations hinder timely TBD detection in resource-poor areas.
Advocates a One Health approach for integrated TBD surveillance and control.
Emphasizes the need for intersectoral collaboration to mitigate TBD spread.

Introduction
The Global Landscape of Tick-Borne Diseases: The world map illustrates the diverse spectrum of tick-borne illnesses reported in various countries. Each pie chart on the map represents a nation's burden, with different coloured segments indicating the presence of specific tick-borne diseases, and the pie size varies based on the number of tick-borne diseases reported.
Fig. 1
State-wise distribution of tick-borne diseases in India: Both maps utilize pie charts within each Indian state to illustrate different aspects of tick-borne disease prevalence. Map A: Aetiology-Based Distribution (left panel) displays the relative proportions of tick-borne diseases categorized by etiological agent. Map B: Disease-Specific Distribution (right panel) presents the disease-specific distribution of 14 individual tick-borne diseases, with each segment representing a causal pathogen.
Fig. 2
Ticks are specialised, obligate hematophagous ectoparasites found worldwide, infesting human and domesticated animal populations. Most newly discovered infectious diseases are caused by pathogenic zoonotic agents, and tick vectors are often the means of transmission. Ticks are proficient and adaptable carriers of pathogens, and after mosquitoes, they are the second-most prevalent vector of human pathogens, such as bacteria, viruses, rickettsia, spirochetes, and others. Moreover, ticks are the most significant global vector of pathogens that affect cattle. Tick diseases in humans usually involve a small number of specimens, and the greatest risk for individuals bitten by ticks is contracting tick-borne pathogens (Fig. 1). In addition to spreading diseases like theileriosis, anaplasmosis, babesiosis, rickettsiosis, Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever, Kyasanur Forest Disease, Lyme disease, and many more (Fig. 2 and Supplement Table), multispecies tick infestations cause significant damage to the cattle and buffalo populations in India, resulting in enormous economic losses to the livestock industry. The total expenditure for managing tick-borne diseases has been predicted to be US$498.7 million every year in India, while the global loss attributed to ticks and tick-borne diseases has been calculated to be US$13.9 and 18.7 billion, respectively, on an annual basis. The incidence of tick-borne diseases (TBDs) is steadily increasing as ticks are expanding their geographic ranges to newer or urban areas, posing a major threat to global health.
Approximately 70 % of the Indian population relies heavily on agriculture and livestock resources for economic growth and stability. India plays a significant role in the global livestock sector, with a total livestock population of 536.76 million. In addition, India ranks first in the world's buffalo production, accounting for 56 % of global production. However, many of these animals are afflicted by multi-species tick infestations. Hyalomma, Rhipicephalus and Haemaphysalis are the most prevalent and widely distributed tick genera in the country.
In addition to the ecological and host factors, human intervention and encounters at the forest fringes increase the potential crossover of tick-borne infections that naturally circulate in the sylvatic cycles, incidentally infecting humans. Owing to the nature of these infections, they are rarely diagnosed. In clinical settings, unless the healthcare workers have prior knowledge or sensitization, the differential diagnosis of these infections is challenging. The inadequate availability of point-of-care tests to diagnose TBDs further increases the gap in delivering essential healthcare services to affected populations. Therefore, this review aims to explore in detail the challenges in combating TBDs, their hidden burden in the Indian subcontinent, and how integrating a One-Health approach to combating infections may pave the way to efficiently tackle TBDs.

Global landscape of TBDs and prevalent tick species
TBDs pose a notable disease burden and their distribution is worldwide, especially in temperate North America, Asia, and Europe (Fig. 1). Predominantly, the rise in cases is seen in the spring season. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the tick-borne disease cases documented have significantly doubled in number over the past 13 years. The most encountered etiological agents transmitting these diseases are bacteria, with Lyme disease accounting for around 82 % of the cases worldwide. Other bacteria, such as Ehrlichia chaffeensis, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Rickettsia rickettsii, and parasites such as Babesia microti, cause significant mortality and morbidity. On the other hand, viral diseases caused by ticks pose a major threat and cause severe infections.
Currently in India, TBDs are known to cause severe unfavourable repercussions for both animal and human populations, including economic losses due to reduced livestock productivity, mortality in animals, and serious health complications such as acute febrile illness, encephalitis, and even death. The rise in these diseases can be attributed to several factors, including changes in ecology and the environment, global warming, encroachment on forest edges, deforestation, and certain agricultural practices, among others. Approximately 125 species of ticks from 10 different genera are found in India, a few of which are known to be potent disease vectors. India's ecosystems predominantly harbour hard ticks of the family Ixodidae, which primarily include the genera Haemaphysalis (52 species), Amblyomma (13 species), Ixodes (13 species), Rhipicephalus (12 species), and Hyalomma (10 species). Additionally, soft ticks from the family of Argasidae are represented mainly by Argas (10 species) and Ornithodoros (9 species). Rhipicephalus microplus, Hyalomma anatolicum and Haemaphysalis bispinosa are the most prevalent tick species in India. These vector ticks, though capable of disastrous virus transmission, are restricted to their respective geographic locations across the country (Fig. 2 and Supplement Table 1). The first TBD recorded in India was Indian Tick Typhus (ITT), where cases were reported in mountain and forest areas. It is caused by the vector, Rhipicephalus sanguineus, which is most widely spread across urban and rural areas.

The hidden burden of TBDs in India- The impact of under-reporting and epidemiological challenges
Reported Tick-Borne Disease Cases in India: An illustrative diagram depicting the “iceberg phenomenon” to highlight the disparity between officially reported tick-borne disease cases and the estimated true burden in India.
Fig. 3
The incidence rates of TBD infections are rarely well-established due to limited testing and diagnosis in both rural and urban settings. Some of the TBDs have acute pathogenic cycles that may lead to undiagnosed deaths in affected populations. The duration of this illness is often present with non-specific symptoms. Unless prior cases of known TBD infections in the geographical areas have been recorded, the differential diagnosis is further delayed. This has inadvertently become a silent, yet constant burden on the primary and secondary healthcare facilities, creating an iceberg effect (Fig. 3).
India currently reports an estimated 2000 to 3500 tick-borne disease (TBD) cases annually; however, this likely represents only a small fraction of the true burden. This has been proven in the case of CCHF recently in 2022, where incidental or nosocomial transmission of the viral infection contributed to the prevalence of CCHF in remote communities of India.
Comparison of reported cases vs. Estimated true cases for key tick-borne diseases in India, with implied underreporting.
Table 1
Disease Name	Annual Reported Cases	Limitations in reporting	Estimated sero-prevalence	Inferred Reporting Completeness	Estimated True Cases (Annual)	Implied Underreporting Factor (X-folds)	 	Lyme Disease	20–60	Severe underdiagnosis due to non-specific symptoms and low awareness.	15–20 % 	5 % - 10 %	200–1200	10× to 20×	 	Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD)	400–500	More consistent reporting for severe cases in endemic areas, but milder cases may be missed.	5–10 % 	20 % - 50 %	800–2500	2× to 5×	 	Rickettsial Infections	Very Low/ sporadic(1500–3000)	High underreporting due to non-specific symptoms, lack of rapid tests, and low clinician suspicion. Precise numerical estimation is challenging.	45–60 % 	2–5 %	∼Tens of Thousands(30,000 - 1,50,000)	20× to 50×	 	CCHF	Variable/ Outbreak-driven(5–20)	Reporting driven by severity and outbreaks; national annual baseline outside outbreaks is difficult to establish.	(0.5–9 %) 	50 % - 80 % (during outbreaks)	Higher than reported, but not consistently quantifiable annually(6–40)	1× to 2×	 	Total Estimated Burden (Symptomatic)	∼2000–3500	Represents the “tip of the iceberg” (Excludes asymptomatic and undiagnosed cases)	Variable	Variable	∼31,000 - 1,53,000	15× to 45×
A re-analysis using seroprevalence data to estimate “reporting completeness” revealed a significant under-estimation due to diagnostic challenges, lack of awareness, and systemic gaps in surveillance (Table 1). The estimated true cases were calculated using the formula:
For instance, Lyme disease has reported cases in the range of 20–60 annually, whereas seroprevalence studies suggest the true number could range from 200 to 1200, indicating a reporting completeness of only 5–10 %. Similarly, the estimated burden of KFD ranges between 800 and 2500 cases annually, which is two to five times higher than the reported 400–500 cases. Rickettsial infections, though largely unreported, show high tick positivity rates, implying tens of thousands of undetected human cases, while the burden of Crimean-Congo Haemorrhagic Fever (CCHF) remains underestimated due to reliance on outbreak-driven reporting (Table 1).
This stark discrepancy, termed the “iceberg phenomenon,” underscores a severity-dependent reporting bias, where only the most clinically apparent or fatal cases are documented, leaving a vast pool of mild, misdiagnosed, or hidden asymptomatic cases (Fig. 3). These findings point to the urgent need for enhanced surveillance, expanded diagnostic capacity, and public health strategies that account for this hidden burden to ensure appropriate resource allocation and disease control.

Epidemiological challenges

Tick ecology and seasonal variation
Projected impacts of climate change and land use on tick-borne disease risk in India.
Table 2
Factor influencing	Mechanism of impact	Projected outcome	 	Climate change	 	Rising Temperatures (1–7 °C by 2100)	Faster tick development rates (eggs to adults), increased reproduction rates, and expanded geographical range.	Increased tick abundance, longer transmission season, and emergence in new regions	 	Varied Humidity Patterns	Critical for tick survival and development	Altered tick habitat suitability, potential shifts in endemic areas	 	  	 	Land use changes	 	Deforestation & Agricultural Expansion	Increased human-animal-environment interfaces, creation of agro-forestry mosaics	Higher human exposure to infected ticks, altered host densities, and interspecies contact rates	 	Human Settlement Encroachment	Increased human presence in tick-infested natural habitats	Direct increase in human-tick contact, heightened spill-over risk
The biodiversity hotspots in India, with the presence of evergreen and deciduous forests in peninsular, north-eastern, and north-western India, allow a wide range of soft and hard tick populations to flourish. Studies on the distribution of ticks in India were initiated on a large scale only after KFD, transmitted by Haemaphysalis spp., was discovered in the Western Ghats of India. The distribution of ticks is heavily dependent on the environmental conditions (Table 2). The different stages of the tick life cycle are influenced by the association between different seasonal variations and climate. Humidity plays a crucial role in the viability of ticks, where species like Ixodes ricinus require a relative humidity of around 80 % to prevent desiccation. As a result, seasonal variations and climate have proven to directly influence the various tick life cycle stages and questing behaviour, with low humidity driving the ticks to replenish moisture and draining their energy resources.
Temperature and humidity have been shown to affect the tick's questing behaviour. Subolesin and heat shock protein expression increase in ticks under high temperature during feeding time, thus protecting ticks from stress and infection by the agent, as well as increasing the questing rate. In some studies, on Hyalomma spp. associated with CCHF outbreaks, these ticks were found to prefer warmer winters and climate patterns.
Various species of ticks, including I. ricinus, are greatly influenced by the seasonal variations. They experience a state of dormancy during colder seasons and resume questing once the climatic conditions are warmer. The onset of milder winters and earlier springs can facilitate questing of ticks much earlier and longer, amplifying the exposure risk to both humans and animals. Conversely, during unfavourably hot and dry seasons, ticks may be compelled to cease questing to survive and reside in more humid microclimates. Colder winters can also impact the tick populations by affecting the survival ability of small mammal hosts. Varying temperatures can also influence the tick species to exhibit distinct activity thresholds; for instance, at temperatures as low as −0.6 °C, adult Ixodes scapularis can still quest, whereas for adult Amblyomma americanum, temperatures above 4.4 °C are favourable for activity. In India, KFD outbreaks usually occur from December to May, and this period coincides with the pinnacle density of nymphal Haemaphysalis spinigera, which is the principal vector of the disease.
A variety of ticks have different habitats, for example, ticks associated with bats reside in caves, domestic animal ticks are present on animals, and some ticks are also present in wildlife.The landscape of agriculture affects the survival rate of ticks and their attachment to hosts. Moreover, the methods of breeding and cattle grazing influence the risk of exposure to ticks. Hence, comprehending the population dynamics of ticks and the spread of their pathogens mandates a holistic approach that evaluates the climate, habitat, and host dynamics.

Anthropogenic changes and ecotone expansion
One of the pivotal drivers of the prevalence and distribution of tick populations and TBDs is landscapes that undergo anthropogenic modifications, which enable the expansion of the ecotone. Historically, ecotones were essentially believed to have static boundaries between different ecological communities. However, they are now being recognised as more dynamic and complex elements of the ecosystem, which influences the biodiversity across all habitats. This depicts the fact that they play a significant role in the ecological integrity.
Globally, the prevalence of vector-borne infections is influenced by climatic changes, shifts in land use, and habitat modification (Table 2). This, in turn, contributes to an increase in tick-borne infections, which have become more complex over time. The susceptible population in these cases is often dependent on wild flora and fauna of the forests for their livelihood and are involved in activities such as agriculture and livestock rearing. One of the major factors responsible for the spread of tick-borne diseases beyond endemic areas is the increasing interactions between humans and animals, and other human activities such as encroachment of forest areas, traveling, and changes in the habitats of ticks. Increasing deforestation is a notable contributor to the spurring incidence of TBDs and has been directly linked to KFD transmission.
Climate change and its effect on the environment in response to rapid deforestation in previously undisturbed regions have led to a rise in TBD incidence since the early 2000s. This was further cemented by the re-emergence of Kyasanur Forest Disease virus (KFDV). Due to human-associated global warming and subsequent climate change, ticks have moved to newer habitats. Animal handling and farming have extreme potential to change tick habitats and behavioural patterns. The expansion of land for agricultural use and the development of human settlements have caused an increase in the ecotone, which is the transition area among adjacent ecologies where different species meet. This has led to the spill over of the disease-causing agents, adaptation, and other changes.

Diagnostic methods and challenges
Standard diagnostic methods for tick-borne diseases in India.
Table 3
Disease	First detected in humans	Microscopy	Serology	PCR	Others	 	Q Fever	1954(Across India)	Not applicable	IgM/IgG ELISA, Complement fixation test	PCRtargeting the IS1111 transposase gene	Culture in biosafety level-3 facilities	 	Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD)	1957(Karnataka)	Not applicable	IgM/IgG ELISA	RT-PCRtargeting NS5 gene	Virus isolation, sequencing	 	Ganjam Virus (GANV)	1969(Odisha, Tamilnadu)	Not applicable	IgM ELISA	RT-PCRtargeting the N gene	Sequencing	 	Indian Tick Typhus (ITT)	1971(Maharashtra and Tamilnadu)	Not applicable	Weil-Felix test, IgM/IgG ELISA	PCRtargeting ompA/gltA genes	Sequencing	 	Bhanja Virus (BHAV)	1974(Odisha)	Not applicable	IgM ELISA	RT-PCRtargeting the N gene	Sequencing	 	Lyme Disease	1990(Himachal Pradesh)	Not applicable	IgM/IgG ELISA, Western Blot	PCRtargeting the ospA gene	Culture in BSK medium	 	Human Babesiosis	2005(Gujarat)	Giemsa-stained blood smear	IgM/IgG ELISA	PCRtargeting the 18S rRNA gene	Culture in erythrocytes	 	Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever (CCHF)	2011(Gujarat)	Not applicable	IgM/IgG ELISA	RT-PCRtargeting S segment (L, M, S genes)	Virus isolation, sequencing	 	Anaplasmosis	2015(Some reports in Northern India)	Giemsa-stained smear (morulae in neutrophils)	IgM/IgG ELISA	PCRtargeting msp2/p44 genes	Culture in cell lines	 	Ehrlichiosis	2015(Some reports in Northern India)	Giemsa-stained smear (morulae in monocytes)	IgM/IgG ELISA	PCRtargeting the 16S rRNA gene	Culture in cell lines	 	Tularemia	2015(Madhya Pradesh)	Direct staining of infected tissues	IgM/IgG ELISA	PCRtargeting fopA/tul4 genes	Culture on cysteine-enriched media	 	African Swine Fever (ASF)	2020(Arunachal Pradesh and Assam)	Blood smear for inclusion bodies	Not widely used	PCRtargeting p72 gene	Virus isolation	 	Theileriosis	No human case reported yet	Giemsa-stained blood smear (piroplasms in RBCs)	Indirect Fluorescent Antibody Test (IFAT)	PCRtargeting the 18S rRNA gene	Culture in tick cell lines
In India, a diverse range of tick-borne pathogens, including viral, bacterial, rickettsial, and protozoan agents, contribute to human and animal infections. Diagnosis of TBDs primarily relies on clinical presentation and patient history, including travel to endemic areas and tick exposure. Laboratory diagnosis, on the other hand, involves various methodologies, ranging from conventional techniques like blood smear examination, rapid diagnostic tests, and serology techniques to advanced approaches such as PCR and sequencing (Table 3).
Serological tests, such as IgM and IgG ELISA, are commonly used, but occasionally suffer from cross-reactivity, leading to false positives with other bacterial infections. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays provides a confirmatory diagnosis, targeting conserved genetic regions: Envelope and non-structural genes in viral pathogens, 16S rRNA for Rickettsia spp., gltA for spotted fever group rickettsiae, and p44/msp2 for Anaplasma spp. However, challenges such as low pathogen load in early infection, symptom overlap with other febrile illnesses, and limited access to molecular tools hinder timely and accurate diagnosis.
The cost of diagnostics has increasingly become a challenge for the prompt and precise diagnosis of TBDs in India, especially in resource-limited settings. Most of the TBDs, like KFD, CCHF, rickettsiosis, and Lyme disease, often require specialised laboratory tests like PCR, ELISA, or IFA, which may be unavailable or unaffordable at primary care health facilities. The lack of cost-effective diagnostic tools has invariably led to a rise in undiagnosed, misdiagnosed, and delayed diagnoses, contributing to increased morbidity and mortality. Additionally, the overlapping febrile symptoms with other locally endemic diseases, such as dengue or malaria, warrant high-end, specific diagnostic tools for efficient differential diagnosis. This economic barrier significantly impacts the implementation of a robust TBD surveillance, highlighting the urgent need for affordable point-of-care diagnostic tools and a decentralised laboratory network.
However, recent efforts both globally and in India have been targeted to advance and establish various molecular diagnostic measures to overcome the obstacles of traditional methods of tick-borne disease diagnosis. Various multiplex PCR assays have been developed to simultaneously detect multiple tick-borne pathogens in both livestock and spill-over human infections. There has also been a rise in point of care testing especially in areas where spill-over events are commonly seen and recorded. In this regard, metagenomic sequencing has emerged as a powerful tool for the surveillance, novel pathogens, mutations in existing pathogens and providing a broad understanding of the circulating tick virome and bacterial flora.

Prevention and control strategies

Current strategies for surveillance and control
The current strategies to control tick-borne diseases in India involve integrated vector and host management, with responsibilities shared across public health, veterinary, and environmental sectors. Direct control primarily targets the tick vector by employing chemical methods such as acaricides, insecticides, and tick repellents, with common classes including organophosphates and pyrethroids, which target different stages of the tick's life cycle via host acaricide treatment, typically repeated every 21 to 30 days. Herbal tick controls use essential oil phytochemicals, which can inhibit tick attachment to humans, preventing infection. Biological control via natural predators and physical prevention, through sealing animal sheds to prevent tick infestation, offers an eco-friendly alternative.
Anti-tick vaccination for animals and humans, with variable efficacy and commercially available vaccines targeting tick gut glycoprotein, aims to reduce dependency on acaricides. Bm86-based recombinant vaccines called Gabites and TickGARDPLUS effectively control Rhipicephalus appendiculatus and Boophilus bovis, offering a cost-effective and eco-friendly remedy. Cross-protection, especially for a country like India, with such a diverse population of tick species, is crucial. Beyond conventional methods, vector control includes oral vaccines targeting rodent reservoirs and antibiotics to tackle black-legged ticks. Certain protease inhibitors have also been characterized as being able to halt blood meals by ticks.
India exercises varied surveillance for different tick-borne diseases. For KFDV, a pool of ticks (minimum 30 ticks in each pool) is annually collected (5 km radius of hotspots, seasonal abundance) to study species composition, density, morphology, and isolate the virus. Specific sites use the Flag drag method (lint cloth) for collection, followed by microscopic detection and density calculation. Based on location, species, stage, and sex, the ticks are pooled. Another direct collection method involves hand-picking from infected hosts.
ICMR and ICAR jointly surveyed IgG (Immunoglobulin G) antibodies against CCHF in Indian cattle. Furthermore, the IDSP provides weekly reports on diseases, including KFDV, which is under the National Centre for Disease Control, MoHFW. The Government of India established a nationwide VRDL laboratory network to support IDSP in strengthening virus identification for outbreak management and public health surveillance. ICMR-Vector Control Research Centre, Pondicherry, and ICMR-National Institute of Virology, Pune, have undertaken tick surveillance for KFDV disease. Host surveillance can tangentially monitor these diseases; for instance, human KFDV case tracking has steered vaccination campaigns and facilitated disease distribution mapping.

Current limitations in tick and TBD control
Frequent limitations in tick control include farmers lacking guidance on acaricide resistance and the suboptimal effectiveness of vaccines because of insufficient user awareness. Beyond resistance, acaricides are also toxic to cattle, persist in the environment, and are expensive. Plant-based tick control also faces drawbacks, such as lower potency, and are typically unsafe. Constraints in tick control stem directly from the shortcomings in TBD surveillance in India. Human disease risk does not necessarily correlate with the presence of certain ticks at specific locations in vector surveillance, potentially leading to underreporting, delayed reporting, or misreporting of KFDV cases. Major complexities include improper sample handling, lack of epidemiological data, and inadequate development of novel molecular detection tools. Host surveillance involving small animals is time-consuming, challenged by short infection periods and difficulty in collecting sufficient samples.

New concepts on Tick and TBD control
Examining the recent findings, successful tick control approaches require accurate ecological data and economic evaluations to develop the efficacious adoption of new strategies. Over the past decade, numerous countries in eastern and central Africa have conducted tick ecological research. Focused research has been carried out on tick development and persistence in meadows and their seasonal influence on livestock. Sophisticated software and climate models have also enabled simulations of targeted control techniques, such as strategic acaricide dipping based on local ecological data to estimate the number of ticks eradicated. Economic evaluations of tick-induced productivity losses are crucial for justifying and designing cost-effective control strategies.
Two scientific methods assess the output losses from ticks: Suherst's simulation models (1987) investigating single-factor impacts on weight gain/milk yield in cows, and a systems approach using on-farm research for broader economic examination. Highlighting realistic field trials and extensive production measurement for sound regulation, recent African research utilized these to evaluate the economic impact of ticks and their control.
Evolving approaches in tick and tick-borne disease control advocate for a transition towards Integrated Tick Management (ITM). Here, vaccination and fostering host resistance are portrayed as the mainstay, underscoring on sustaining enzootic stability, often attained by selectively easing rigorous management measures. Prospective strategies involve investigating the advantages of different cattle breeds, revising animal husbandry practices, and organizing economically sound control programs. ITM incorporates animal management, ecology, epizootiology, and economics, requiring appropriate regulations and precise information, vaccination for enzootic stability, employing appropriate breeds for resistance, and applying strategic, seasonal control tactics.
Recent advancements offer innovative tick management techniques, including convenient acaricide application methods and mechanical devices. Slow-release ivermectin boluses providing extended protection have also been considered. Research explores tick-repellent plants (e.g., Cassia absus) and the use of toxicants with pheromone attractants. Pasture management strategies like spell grazing and rotation grazing with rest periods have shown promise in reducing tick populations by interrupting the lifecycle of ticks. Techniques like pasture rotation combined with periodic use of chemical acaricides have been reported to reduce certain species of tick burden by 77–89 %. In vitro studies have proven the efficacy of bioactive legumes, especially Stylosanthes spp., with acaricidal properties in trapping or repelling tick populations in India. It is one of the important legumes being used to improve overall pasture productivity and nutrition in India, but no field trials have been documented so far. Although, pasture spelling is a viable option available for a tropical country like India, as recommended in limited reviews such practice can be adapted by commercial or government-organised livestock farms but may not be feasible for smallholder livestock farmers. The current challenges are designing a cost-effective and region-specific control strategy for India's diverse production practices, limited knowledge and skills among farmers to enable them to implement the sustainable strategies. Additionally, innovative control strategies based on pheromones, such as assembly pheromone and kairomone lures combined with acaricides, have demonstrated efficacy in pilot and field trials against Indian tick species, suggesting future directions for integrated tick control programs in the country.

Solutions to improve current control measures for TBDs
Tackling the escalating global threat of ticks and tick-borne diseases requires optimized interventions focusing on pre-emptive risk management. This involves incorporating active and passive surveillance with predictive modelling of favourable environments for tick species and their hosts to combat obstacles like climate change-driven geographical distribution and the introduction of non-native species, due to globalization The US-Mexico collaboration against bovine fever ticks demonstrates the crucial role of enhanced cross-border and interagency efforts, underpinned by a One Health framework. Strengthening surveillance programs, promoting public health awareness, and investing in ongoing research for control and mitigation are essential to combat the re-emergence of these zoonotic illnesses, insights magnified by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Socio-economic impact and vulnerable communities
The burden of VBDs and specifically TBDs is significantly greater in tropical and sub-tropical regions and disproportionately affects communities belonging to the lower-middle class. A combination of socio-economic disadvantage in these populations and limited access to healthcare adds to the magnitude of the challenge that needs to be addressed by policymakers. A multitude of intricate factors influence the spread of vector-borne diseases, resulting in significant variation in disease outcomes and effects among various populations. Certain populations are deemed particularly vulnerable because of variables such as living circumstances below standard, poverty, and occupational settings that are linked to vector exposure. In addition to working in impoverished and subpar living conditions, migrant and seasonal labourers in the agricultural and other sectors may be particularly susceptible to tick-borne diseases because of their lack of access to specialists.
KFD first appeared in Karnataka, India, in 1957 and rapidly spread within the Western Ghats of India, and into districts in Kerala, Goa, Tamil Nadu, and Maharashtra, putting a larger portion of communities at risk. The indigenous populations are highly susceptible, mainly due to a complex interplay of environmental, socio-economic, and institutional factors. Precisely, it affects impoverished rural forest residents, including small-scale farmers, plantation workers, and tribal communities, who are often at high risk of contracting an infection from ticks, due to their frequent reliance on the forest. Case studies have revealed instances of KFD outbreaks among tribal groups, for example, in the Nilambur area of Kerala's Malappuram district, where both fever and KFD positivity were confirmed.
Limited availability of medical care serves as a major obstacle, compounded by the isolation of these communities from medical facilities due to remote settlements and the overstretched capacity of local medical services. Although a vaccine for KFD is available, with 93.5 % efficacy post two doses, its protection is often short-lived and requires booster doses. Also, its ability to induce a strong immune response is a point of concern. In addition, these communities demonstrate less belief in immunization and precautionary measures, which renders the current vaccination strategies less effective. This stems from multiple causes: inadequate knowledge regarding the KFD transmission routes, a lack of faith in government-aided programs, as few communities perceive official information as a threat to their forest access; and cultural barriers such as deeply ingrained religio-cultural beliefs, that may view vaccination as “foreign” or certain linguistic hindrances which would further complicate effective communication with the affected communities. Hence, tackling these problems in hand demands foundational change, mandating comprehensive public health strategies that prioritize understanding, building confidence among communities, and recognizing disparities in socio-economic status.

Importance of a one health approach in TBDs
One Health is an interdisciplinary system that assists in scrutinising the spill over of zoonotic infections. Infections that are intrinsically transmitted from animals to humans are of zoonotic origin and contact with these diseases may jeopardise essential activities for survival, specifically for populations that inhabit tropical forests. It is of paramount importance in containing tick-borne diseases due to its comprehensive and interdisciplinary nature, which recognizes the intricate connections between human health, animal health, and the environment. Tick-borne diseases pose a significant public health threat worldwide, and the One Health approach offers a strategic framework for addressing these diseases effectively.
A multidisciplinary approach to ecosystems is necessary to comprehend this zoonotic spill over since the ecological and socio-political mechanisms that make humans susceptible are being studied in conjunction across compromised habitats. Furthermore, One Health can close knowledge gaps and improve disease management across sectors by collaborating with environmentalists, ecologists, microbiologists, public health professionals, clinicians, veterinarians, vector biologists, and agriculturists to co-produce tools and research to combat TBDs. India's whopping human population and biological diversity across plant and animal species, besides various ecological and risk factors such as deforestation, change in climate, forest encroachment (including settlement, habitat invasion, and grazing), and limited knowledge about alternate hosts and tick species, significantly influence the One Health approach. These factors collectively position India as a global hotspot for emerging and re-emerging zoonotic diseases.
Surveillance is a crucial component of one health aspect that aids in arriving at intervention strategies and prevention of the spread of disease. Since there is no single optimal approach to reducing tick populations, an integrated control strategy may likely be the most effective one. Both reservoir and vector, along with human surveillance, are important components of tick control to understand the prevalence, distribution, and early detection of the disease. To enhance the surveillance strategies, the Forestry and Animal Husbandry divisions can coordinate efficiently. A coordinated effort and timely response from all the critical sectors will ensure a robust surveillance system that will assist in apprehending the prevalence of the virus in the forest fringes, anticipate outbreaks in the surrounding vicinity, and help in preventing future outbreaks.
Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD) in India illustrates the operationalization of a One Health approach, as its transmission involves small mammals (such as rodents and shrews) as reservoirs, monkeys (particularly bonnet macaques (Macaca radiata) and langurs (Semnopithecus entellus)) as amplifying hosts whose deaths act as sentinel events, and humans at risk through tick exposure. The Karnataka prevention program though not explicitly termed “One Health,” integrates human case surveillance, monkey mortality monitoring, tick mapping, and targeted vaccination, effectively embodying cross-sectoral collaboration. Research efforts like the “MonkeyFeverRisk” project further advanced this approach by showing how land-use changes, such as conversion of forests into plantations and rice fields, heighten human exposure to infected ticks, creating new hotspots beyond forest boundaries. By linking ecosystem disruption to zoonotic spillover and co-producing tools and educational resources for communities, KFD programs demonstrate both the necessity and effectiveness of integrated human-animal-environment health strategies. Implementation of a One Health framework at the community level in rural India faces profound challenges, especially among vulnerable groups, stemming from entrenched socio-economic barriers, staggering out-of-pocket healthcare costs, and inadequate access to services. Nearly 92 % of rural households bear hospitalization costs themselves, with only around 8 % of expenses reimbursed, forcing many to borrow money or sell assets to cope. These costs frequently push households into poverty, with high usage of private care further elevating financial strain. Socially marginalized populations, landless families, and elderly-headed households—many working in high-risk environments like forests—face heightened exposure to diseases such as Kyasanur Forest Disease, while healthcare access is hindered by long distances, poor infrastructure, and shortages of qualified personnel. Though community engagement is vital for sustainable One Health implementation enabling local knowledge integration, inclusivity, and ownership such initiatives often falter due to limited disease awareness, suspicion of preventive measures like vaccines or repellents, and the resource-intensive nature of tailoring interventions to each community, which constrains scalability and may provoke resistance, especially when interventions impact livelihoods.

Conclusion
Tick-borne diseases (TBDs) in India represent a growing public health concern, shaped by complex interactions between ecological, biological, and anthropogenic factors. The country's vast human and animal populations, rich biodiversity, and varied ecosystems provide fertile ground for the emergence and transmission of diverse tick species and pathogens. Deforestation, habitat encroachment, climate change, and unregulated livestock practices further intensify this threat.
Effective control of TBDs requires a nuanced understanding of tick species distribution, their behavioural ecology, transmission dynamics, and the socio-environmental factors influencing their spread. However, fragmented data, limited research, and poor integration across health sectors hinder timely and coordinated responses. Current surveillance systems are inadequate, and public awareness remains low in many endemic regions.
To address these challenges, a robust One Health approach is essential, linking human, animal, and environmental health through interdisciplinary collaboration. Strengthening national surveillance, investing in targeted research, enhancing laboratory and field capacity, and fostering community-level education are critical steps. Equally important is the need for sustainable land use policies and climate-resilient practices to mitigate ecological triggers of disease emergence.
Partnerships between government agencies, research institutions, and funding bodies must be prioritized to build a cohesive national strategy. With coordinated efforts, India can improve preparedness and response to TBDs, reduce disease burden, and protect both human and animal health.
In summary, the path forward demands integrated, cross-sectoral action rooted in the One Health framework. Only through such a holistic approach can India effectively tackle the multifaceted challenges of tick-borne diseases and ensure long-term public health security and environmental sustainability.

Funding sources
Open access funding provided by Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal. No funding was received for conducting this study.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
N. Naren Babu: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Trupti Satish Kadni: Writing – review & editing, Software. Sanjana Rao: Writing – original draft. Vojjila Sanjana Arunkumar: Writing – original draft. Ishika Nepali: Writing – original draft. Ankita Saha: Writing – original draft. Prasad Varamballi: Visualization. Piya Paul Mudgal: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources.

Declaration of competing interest
Authors with no competing interests to declare.

References
Tick, fly, and mosquito control--lessons from the past, solutions for the future
Ticks and tickborne bacterial diseases in humans: an emerging infectious threat
Sustainable tick and tickborne disease control in livestock improvement in developing countries
Importance of ticks and their chemical and immunological control in livestock
Control of ticks of ruminants, with special emphasis on livestock farming systems in India: present and future possibilities for integrated control--a review
Status of tick distribution in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan
Spatial distribution of Haemaphysalis species ticks and human Kyasanur Forest disease cases along the Western Ghats of India, 2017–2018
Vital signs: trends in reported Vectorborne disease cases - United States and territories, 2004-2016
Tickborne diseases — confronting a growing threat
Time for a different approach to Lyme disease and long-term symptoms
Update on prevalence and distribution pattern of tick-borne diseases among humans in India: a review
Emerging and re-emerging Tickborne diseases of public health importance in India
Kumar Ashwani, Samuel P Philip, current status of ticks (Acari: Argasidae, Ixodidae) in India
Current scenario of tick-borne diseases in India - A review
The risk of Crimean Congo Haemorrhagic fever in India as a growing health concern
Seroprevalence of Lymes disease in the Nagarahole and Bandipur forest areas of South India
Lyme Borreliosis, a public health concern in India: findings of Borrelia burgdorferi serosurvey from two states
Sociodemographic factors associated with Kyasanur forest disease in India - a retrospective study
Kyasanur Forest disease prevalence in Western Ghats proven and confirmed by recent outbreak in Maharashtra, India
Geography and prevalence of rickettsial infections in northern Tamil Nadu, India: a cross-sectional study
Seroprevalence of Rickettsial disease: a population-based survey from kashmir valley, North India
Seroprevalence of spotted fever group and typhus group rickettsiae in individuals with acute febrile illness from Gorakhpur, India
Seroprevalence of Rickettsial infections in Northeast India: a population-based cross-sectional survey, Asia Pacific
Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever serosurvey in humans for identifying high-risk populations and high-risk areas in the endemic state of Gujarat, India
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever: current scenario in India
Rickettsia africae and other unclassified Rickettsia species of the spotted fever group in ticks of the Western Ghats, India
Expediency of dengue illness classification: the Sri Lankan perspective highly infectious tick-borne viral diseases: Kyasanur forest disease and Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever in India
Modulatory effect of cattle on risk for Lyme disease
Effects of selected meterological factors on diurnal questing of Ixodes scapularis and Amblyomma Americanum (Acari: Ixodidade)
Expression of heat shock proteins and subolesin affects stress responses, Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection and questing behaviour in the tick, Ixodes scapularis
A population model to describe the distribution and seasonal dynamics of the tick Hyalomma marginatum in the Mediterranean Basin
Kyasanur Forest Disease, is our surveillance system healthy to prevent a larger outbreak? A mixed-method study, Shivamogga, Karnataka, India: 2019
Ticks and tick-borne diseases: a one health perspective
Understanding the relationships between landscape connectivity and abundance of Ixodes ricinus ticks
Advancing integrated tick management to mitigate burden of tick-borne diseases
Impact of climate trends on tick-borne pathogen transmission
Climate change, biodiversity, ticks and tick-borne diseases: the butterfly effect
Land system governance shapes tick-related public and animal health risks
Driving forces for changes in geographical distribution of Ixodes ricinus ticks in Europe
The role of ecotones in emerging infectious diseases
Tick trouble: overview of tick-borne diseases
Problem of ticks and tick-borne diseases in India with special emphasis on progress in tick control research: a review
Molecular investigation of the status of ticks on infected cattle for Coxiella burnetii in India
Molecular characterization of Theileria orientalis causing fatal infection in crossbred adult bovines of South India
Detection of African genotype in Hyalomma tick pools during Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever outbreak, Rajasthan, India, 2019
Clinical and laboratory evidence of Lyme disease in North India, 2016–2019
Point of care real-time polymerase chain reaction-based diagnostic for Kyasanur forest disease
Impact of nanopore-based metagenome sequencing on tick-borne virus detection
Utility of a Sequence-Independent, Single-Primer-Amplification (SISPA) and nanopore sequencing approach for detection and characterization of tick-borne viral pathogens
Tick-borne zoonotic diseases and its control
Plant extracts to control ticks of veterinary and medical importance: a review
Plant-derived natural compounds for tick Pest control in livestock and wildlife: pragmatism or utopia?
Towards a permanent solution for controlling cattle ticks
Upcoming of the integrated tick control program of ruminants with special emphasis on livestock farming system in India
Immunity against Boophilus annulatus induced by the Bm86 (tick-GARD) vaccine
Problem of ticks and tick-borne diseases in India with special emphasis on progress in tick control research: a review
Vaccination with recombinant Boophilus annulatus Bm86 ortholog protein, Ba86, protects cattle against B. Annulatus and B. Microplus infestations
Vectra 3D (dinotefuran, pyriproxyfen and permethrin) prevents acquisition of Borrelia burgdorferi sensu stricto by Ixodes ricinus and Ixodes scapularis ticks in an ex vivo feeding model
Protease inhibitors in tick saliva: the role of serpins and cystatins in tick-host-pathogen interaction
Prevalence and spatial distribution of Ixodid tick populations in the forest fringes of Western Ghats reported with human cases of Kyasanur forest disease and monkey deaths in South India
Experiences of Indian Council of Medical Research with tick-borne zoonotic infections: Kyasanur Forest disease & Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever in India with one health focus
Predicting Kyasanur forest disease in resource-limited settings using event-based surveillance and transfer learning
Tick-borne viruses: current trends in large-scale viral surveillance
Kyasanur Forest disease, India, 2011-2012
On the transmission pattern of Kyasanur Forest disease (KFD) in India
Current limitations in the control and spread of ticks that affect livestock: a review
Plant-based insect repellents: a review of their efficacy, development and testing
Reviewing the ecological evidence base for management of emerging tropical zoonoses: Kyasanur Forest disease in India as a case study
Studies on the economics of ticks in Zambia
Interaction between parasite and vector
Interactions between ticks and their hosts
Tick control in the context of ECF immunization
Tick control on cattle with flumethrin pour-on through a Duncan applicator
Appropriate Technology in Vector Control
Integrated management strategies for Amblyomma americanum (Acari: Ixodidae) on pastured beef cattle
Effect of methanol extract of Stylosanthes scabra on ixodid ticks of animals
Integrated Pest management programs with special emphasis on livestock production in India: a review
Control and management of ticks, ∼ 1091 ∼
Sustainable management of tick infestations in cattle: a tropical perspective
Exploiting assembly pheromone for the control of ixodid ticks
In vitro assessment of assembly and sex pheromones in the control of larval stages of brown dog ticks
Field trials to attract questing stages of brown dog tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus using tick pheromone–acaricide complex
Tick control in a connected world: challenges, solutions, and public policy from a United States border perspective., trop med
Factors in the emergence of infectious diseases
Drivers, dynamics, and control of emerging vector-borne zoonotic diseases
The ecology of tick-borne diseases
COVID-19 and underinvestment in the public health infrastructure of the United States
Wild animal and zoonotic disease risk management and regulation in China: examining gaps and one health opportunities in scope, mandates, and monitoring systems., one
Pediatric policy council, COVID-19 impact on research, lessons learned from COVID-19 research, implications for pediatric research
Triangulating the new frontier of health geo-data: assessing tick-borne disease risk as an occupational Hazard among vulnerable populations
Tick-borne disease risk and exposure among vulnerable populations in perceived non-endemic regions
Predicting Kyasanur forest disease in resource-limited settings using event-based surveillance and transfer learning
Experiences of Indian Council of Medical Research with tick-borne zoonotic infections
Structural drivers of vulnerability to zoonotic disease in Africa
Skin diseases among the tribal population of Kerala: the challenges and way forward
Clinical & epidemiological significance of Kyasanur forest disease
The role of social vulnerability in improving interventions for neglected zoonotic diseases: the example of Kyasanur Forest disease in India
One health activities to reinforce intersectoral coordination at local levels in India
A one health ecosystem approach for understanding and mitigating spill-over of tick-borne diseases in India’s degraded forests
The economic value of one health in relation to the mitigation of zoonotic disease risks
Editorial: emerging Zoonoses: eco-epidemiology, involved mechanisms, and public health implications., front public
“None of my ancestors ever discussed this disease before!” How disease information shapes adaptive capacity of marginalised rural populations in India
Outbreaks of human monkeypox during the COVID-19 pandemic: a systematic review for healthcare professionals., Iran
One health approach to tick and tick-borne disease surveillance in the United Kingdom
Spread of Kyasanur Forest disease, Bandipur Tiger Reserve, India, 2012–2013
Kyasanur forest disease: a review on the emerging infectious disease
Palacholla, Kyasanur Forest disease: A comprehensive review
Kyasanur Forest disease: an epidemiological investigation and case-control study in Shivamogga, Karnataka, India-2022
Predicting disease risk areas through co-production of spatial models: the example of Kyasanur Forest disease in India’s forest landscapes
Do hospitalizations push households into poverty in India: evidence from national data

Supplementary data

Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.onehlt.2025.101199.