Kidney-sparing approach for upper tract urothelial carcinoma: An update on current evidence
Objective
This article reviews the latest updates and outcomes of kidney-sparing surgery (KSS) in patients with upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC).
Methods
A comprehensive literature search was performed using the PubMed and Embase databases to identify related English-language studies published within the last 10 years. Key search words included “upper urinary tract tumour/cancer/carcinoma”, “kidney-sparing surgery or approach”, “endoscopic treatment for upper tract tumour/cancer/carcinoma”, “topical instillation in the upper urinary tract”, and “urinary marker for urothelial carcinoma”. References within the identified literature were explored and evaluated for relevance.
Results
KSS is recommended for both low-risk and selected high-risk UTUC with imperative indications such as solitary kidney. Studies have shown comparable oncological outcomes after KSS including endoscopic ablation, segmental ureterectomy, and topical instillation of novel agents when compared to radical nephroureterectomy in well-selected cases. The development of novel diagnostic tools and risk-stratifying models allows optimal case selection for KSS without compromising oncological outcomes.
Conclusion
Kidney-sparing approach for UTUC is an evolving and promising area in urologic oncology, driven by advances in technology, better diagnostic tools, and novel therapeutic agents. Our article provides a comprehensive review of the latest advancements and clinical recommendations. While current evidence is mainly based on retrospective studies, prospective trials are required to address important but unanswered clinical questions in this field.

Introduction
Urothelial cancer poses a significant disease burden, especially in the elderly population in developed countries. While upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC) accounts for only 5%–10% of all urothelial carcinoma, it remains a challenging subset within this population. The European Association of Urology (EAU) guidelines stratify UTUC into low-risk and high-risk disease based on tumour characteristics. To be classified as low-risk, patients need to be diagnosed with unifocal disease, a tumour size of less than 2 cm, low-grade disease at pathological review, and lack of radiological invasiveness. While radical nephroureterectomy (RNU) with bladder cuff excision has traditionally been the standard treatment for UTUC, there is a gradual paradigm shift in the management of low-risk tumours, with an increasing trend towards kidney-sparing approaches. Reduced procedural morbidity and preservation of renal function are some of the most obvious advantages of kidney-sparing surgery (KSS), with up to 82% of the 5-year renal preservation rate reported in endoscopically treated UTUC. Other absolute or imperative indications for KSS include solitary kidney, bilateral UTUC, or severe chronic kidney disease. The decision for KSS should be made on a case-by-case basis, balancing the risks of cancer progression and recurrence against the morbidities of renal failure. With a threefold risk of combined intravesical and local recurrence compared to RNU, locoregional recurrence is a major concern for KSS and must be addressed. Long-term rigorous surveillance is therefore necessary to ensure timely detection of recurrence. Over the years, there has been significant development and advancement in novel diagnostic tools, therapeutic agents, and drug delivery systems. The aim of this manuscript is to provide an update on the latest evidence on the modern techniques of kidney-sparing management in patients with UTUC.

Method
This is a non-systematic review of the literature focusing on the studies related to the kidney-sparing approach for UTUC. A comprehensive literature search was performed using the PubMed and Embase databases to identify related English-language studies published within the last 10 years. Key search words included “upper urinary tract tumour/cancer/carcinoma”, “kidney-sparing surgery or approach”, “endoscopic treatment for upper tract tumour/cancer/carcinoma”, “topical instillation in the upper urinary tract”, and “urinary marker for urothelial carcinoma”. References within the identified literature were explored and evaluated for relevance.

Diagnosis and workup for UTUC
Haematuria, either gross or microscopic, is the most common symptom, occurring in up to two-thirds of UTUC patients. Flank pain can occur in up to 32% of patients due to obstruction of the urinary tract by blood clots or tumour. Although these aforementioned clinical features correlate with the diagnosis of UTUC, they are not helpful for the prediction of disease status and decision on KSS. Other diagnostic means, including cross-sectional imaging, cytology, and ureterorenoscopy (URS), are becoming increasingly important in selecting patients for KSS.

Role of cross-sectional imaging
CT urogram (CTU) and magnetic resonance urogram (MRU) have been shown to detect UTUC with high sensitivities of 92% and 75%, respectively. MRU is susceptible to motion artifacts and limited by the decreased spatial resolution compared with CTU. Due to lower diagnostic accuracy and prolonged procedure times, MRU is often reserved for patients who are contraindicated for radiation exposure or iodinated contrast. Apart from detecting the presence of a tumour, CTU is accurate in detecting locally advanced disease (T3 or higher stages) that precludes KSS with a sensitivity and specificity of 87.5% and 92.9%, respectively. On the other hand, currently available imaging techniques still face difficulties in differentiating between T1 and T2 disease. The accuracy of preoperative imaging on T staging was below 60%. This inherent uncertainty considerably impacts the selection of patients for KSS. The limitation of CTU in assessing the anatomical details of ureteric wall layers renders it impossible to assess the potential invasion of the muscularis propria. MRI, on the other hand, has proven its capacity in evaluating the depth of tumour infiltration of the bladder wall in bladder cancer, which was further developed resulting in the Vesical Imaging-Reporting and Data System. In a recently published prospective study evaluating the use of MRI in predicting muscle-invasive disease in UTUC, 29 patients underwent both CT and MRI before RNU and obtained histopathological analysis. An 81% positive predictive value (PPV, range 63%–93%) and 92% negative predictive value (NPV, range 0%–100%) were achieved in the assessment of muscle-layer invasion. Although the study was limited by its small sample size, it demonstrated that MRI may be helpful for the preoperative risk stratification for selecting patients for KSS.
Regarding positron emission tomography in combination with CT (PET/CT), it is mainly used for the detection of lymph node metastasis and distal metastasis, and thus its role in local staging is limited by the physiological excretion of the radiotracer through the urinary system. In a retrospective analysis by Voskuilen et al., a sensitivity and specificity of 82% and 84%, respectively, for detection of lymph node metastases by PET/CT were reported. However, the EAU guidelines do not suggest routine use of PET/CT for detection of metastatic disease as there is no high-level evidence supporting the superiority of PET/CT compared with conventional CT in the diagnosis of UTUC.

Urine cytology and novel biomarkers
While the use of urine cytology has been incorporated as part of the workup for haematuria in the EAU guidelines, its applicability in selecting the suitable cases for KSS has to be carefully scrutinised. There have been limited retrospective series documenting the performance of urine cytology in predicting aggressive disease, potentially limiting the possibility of performing KSS. Urine cytology has been used in research models to predict histological UTUC, high-grade, or muscle-invasive disease. Liu and colleagues retrospectively reviewed 315 patients treated with RNU and noted that positive urine cytology was associated with multifocal tumours (p=0.017) and higher tumour grades (p=0.01). Lee et al. reviewed 665 consecutive RNU performed for suspected UTUC. They found that a combination of any two out of the three preoperative factors (gross hematuria, suspicious or malignant urine cytology, and filling defect or enhancing mass on CTU) already yielded a range of 99.5%–100% PPV for histological UTUC. Brien et al. proposed the combination of hydronephrosis, high-grade disease on biopsy, and positive urinary cytology to predict muscle-invasive or non-organ confined disease. Abnormalities of all three tests had an 89% and 73% PPV for muscle-invasive and non-organ confined disease, respectively. The NPV reached 100% when all tests were normal. Other series reported similar results. Given these studies were based on cytology from voided urine rather than selective urine sampling, there was a significant risk that these positive urine cytology results were contaminated by the tumorigenicity of bladder mucosa or even field change effect of the urothelium, rather than an actual measure of the aggressiveness of the ureteric tumour of concern. Therefore, investigators have turned their attention to novel urinary biomarkers. Studies on the ability of novel markers to detect high-risk UTUC are currently ongoing. Voided urine fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for molecular characteristics of UTUC is an emerging technology with mixed results reported. In a systematic review by Białek et al. including 25 studies, FISH had a specificity of 80%–100% (range) and sensitivity of 35%–86% (range). Su et al. reported around 60% PPV for invasive UTUC (muscle-invasive or high-grade disease) in patients with positive FISH in void urine. Recently, the role of DNA methylation urine biomarkers was investigated. In a single-center prospective trial in 2022, the sensitivity and NPV of Bladder EpiCheck™ were 71% and 88%, respectively, for bladder urine samples for high-grade tumours. For ipsilateral upper tract urine samples, the sensitivity and NPV was 96% and 97%, respectively. Bladder CARE, another novel urine-based epigenetic test, was tested in a prospective trial in 2023. It exhibited a high sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV for detecting UTUC at 96%, 88%, 89%, and 96%, respectively. While the tests mentioned above mainly concentrate on urinary markers, researchers have also investigated the role of novel biomarkers in blood. A recent study showed that the level of plasma circulating tumour DNA was highly correlated with muscle-invasive or non-organ-confined UTUC, with sensitivity and specificity up to 79% and 94%, respectively. As most of the available evidence did not provide subgroup analyses regarding diagnostic accuracy on carcinoma in situ (CIS), the performance of urine markers for detecting CIS has yet to be determined. In view of the wide ranges of diagnostic accuracy reported, current guidelines do not support the use of urinary biomarkers as an integral diagnostic tool in the workup in patients with suspected UTUC.
While these tools may provide additional information and may help identify patients at risk for high-grade and advanced disease—which in turn can preclude KSS—further investigation is vital to improve the utility of urinary markers on predicting the aggressiveness of UTUC.

URS and advancement in imaging systems
Further endoscopic diagnostics using URS are used when there is no unambiguous diagnosis based on cross-sectional imaging or when KSS is contemplated. The use of URS to confirm UTUC before RNU remains controversial. On one hand, it enables assessment of the tumour size, morphology, multifocality of disease, and confirmation of histology via biopsy as well as endoscopic treatment of small tumours by laser ablation. On the other hand, there is conflicting evidence that URS before RNU may be associated with an increased risk of intravesical recurrence. Another potential drawback of URS may be a prolonged interval between suspected UTUC and RNU, especially in time-critical periods such as the recent COVID-19 pandemic. During the pandemic, Lee et al. reported that a 3-month delay in RNU worsened the overall survival (OS) of UTUC patients, and that the results further questioned the necessity of preoperative URS. Of note, the EAU guidelines suggested that the use of URS be reserved for equivocal cases, and that biopsy should be avoided as far as possible.
Despite the advancement of the optical system, small lesions are still easily missed by digital or fiberoptic white light URS—up to 25% for papillary UTUC and 50% for CIS. Narrow band imaging photodynamic diagnosis (PDD) and confocal laser endomicroscopy (CLE) are new tools, which may improve the diagnostic accuracy of URS. Narrow band imaging has been widely used in cystoscopy for the detection of bladder tumours. Narrow band imaging works by filtering white light into blue and green light, which are preferentially absorbed by haemoglobin, thereby enhancing the contrast between hypervascular and normal mucosa, improving the tumour detection rate by 22.7% and detection of tumour margins, which is important to ensure complete endoscopic resection.
Another modality is PDD. Fluorescent photosensitizers such as 5-aminolevulinic acid or hexaminolevulinate can be administered orally or by instillation. The endoscope is then introduced for detection of fluorescence emitted by tumours along the urinary tract. In a study including 106 cases of suspected UTUC, PDD-URS was able to detect significantly more UTUC (up to 35%) and CIS or dysplastic lesions (up to 75%) compared to conventional white light URS.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a developing medical imaging technology that allows real-time, cross-sectional, three-dimensional imaging of tissue microstructure during URS. OCT uses near-infrared light to produce cross-sectional images and obtain depth information with high depth resolution. Sideward-looking OCT probes are small in size, at 3 Fr, making them compatible with flexible ureteroscopes. Early experience from a pilot study by Bus et al. showed that OCT staging and tumour grading were in concordance with final specimen pathology in 83% and 88% of eight cases, respectively. The authors further expanded the study to a total of 26 patients and reported their outcomes in 2016, showing a similarly accurate concordance with a high sensitivity (100%) and specificity (92%) for tumour invasion detection in comparison to the RNU histopathology. Studies from Bus et al. supported the clinical potential of OCT to detect T2 diseases and high-grade tumours, which may further aid in the selection process for potential candidates for KSS.
CLE, on the other hand, provides real-time in vivo pathological examination using ultra-high-resolution microscopy to visualize tissue architecture and cell morphology. CLE was previously used in lower urinary tract tumours and was able to detect differences between the normal and pathological urothelium. Currently, there are only limited data available regarding the use of CLE in the setting of UTUC diagnostics. In a small-scale study, CLE could identify characteristic features of cellular aggregates and fibrovascular stalks as well as more undifferentiated features in high-grade disease, resulting in a good correspondence between CLE findings and final pathology in tumour grading. Currently, the use of CLE is limited by the lack of standardised CLE pathological criteria for low-grade and high-grade disease, insufficient evidence on its accuracy, as well as lack of on-site support from pathologists during the operation.
In the future, the use of OCT and CLE may allow more accurate intraoperative risk assessment and facilitate immediate treatment selection, reducing both the need for subsequent URS and the healthcare costs.
Criteria for kidney-sparing approach (the European Association of Urology guidelines 2024).
Table 1
Feature	Low riska	High risk	 	Tumour focality	Unifocal disease	Multifocal	 	Tumour size	Tumour size of <2 cm	Tumour size of 2 cm or above	 	Tumour histology	Low-grade cytology or URS biopsy	High-grade cytology or URS biopsyHistological subtypeb	 	Cross-sectional imaging finding	Absence of invasive aspectAbsence of hydronephrosis or lymph node involvement	Local invasion on CT, hydronephrosis or lymph node metastases	 	Preferred treatment	Kidney-sparing approach	Radical nephroureterectomy
URS, ureterorenoscopy.
All these factors need to be present.
Micropapillary, squamous, and sarcomatoid variants.
Factors predicting muscle invasive upper tract urothelial carcinoma that were reported in the literature.
Table 2
Study	Nature	Case, n	Factor and result	 	Marcq et al. 	Retrospective cohort	1214	- Sessile architecture: OR 2.63 (95% CI 1.71–4.53), p<0.001	 	Foerster et al. 	Retrospective cohort	1214	- Sessile architecture: OR 2.31 (95% CI 1.58–3.36), p<0.001	 	Ma et al. 	Retrospective cohort	245	- Sessile architecture: OR 3.86 (95% CI 1.22–12.21), p=0.021	 	Petros et al. 	Retrospective cohort	699	- Sessile architecture: OR 2.65 (95% CI 0.86–8.15), p=0.09	 	Yoshida et al. 	Retrospective cohort	1101	- Neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio: HR 2.27 (95% CI 1.54–3.35), p<0.001	 	- Chronic kidney disease: HR 1.56 (95% CI 1.04–2.23), p=0.032	 	- Ureteric tumour (vs. pelvic tumour): HR 1.60 (95% CI 1.05–2.43), p=0.029
CI, confidence interval; HR, hazard ratio; OR, odds ratio.
The advancement of technology improves the accuracy of preoperative risk stratification and case selection for kidney-sparing approaches. Multiple preoperative factors and predictive models have been proposed to correlate with muscle-invasive or high-grade disease. The EAU guidelines suggest risk stratification based on tumour focality, size, tumour grading, pathological subtypes, and any invasive aspects of CT findings. Low-risk tumours and selected high-risk tumours with indications precluding RNU should be considered for KSS. A risk-stratification model proposed by the American Urological Association further sub-classifies “low-risk” and “high-risk” diseases into favorable and unfavorable risk groups based on endoscopic, radiological, and histological features, as well as any involvement of the lower tract. In conclusion, KSS should be offered to patients with a single small papillary lesion, without high-grade histological findings or invasion on CT. This should be considered while taking into account the patient’s baseline renal function, suitability for surgery, and ability to comply with close follow-up and regular surveillance. Table 1 summarizes the recommendations from the EAU guidelines. Table 2 summarizes the available predictive models for high-risk disease from the literature.

Treatment approaches of KSS

Endoscopic management
The endoscopic approach has been widely adopted for low-risk UTUC, as it may yield comparable oncological outcomes to RNU demonstrated by a recent meta-analysis. It should be noted that while ablative KSS is recommended in low-risk disease in general, different international guidelines have varying methods of risk stratification and hence the discussion of these treatments still remains to be a challenge. Overall, the AUA and EAU guidelines reached a consensus on offering KSS to low-risk patients. Endoscopic management has been recommended in cases in which the ureteric lesion could be ablated adequately while ureteric resection should only be reserved for those lesions that cannot be removed entirely. In the choice of ablative KSS, tumour location plays a vital role in the choice of approach. For pelvicalyceal tumours, the options include percutaneous antegrade access or retrograde access via flexible URS. Due to its lower invasiveness with minimal risk of urine or tumour spillage, the retrograde approach is currently the preferred access for endoscopic management. Regarding tumour resection, laser ablation has been established as the most widespread technique for endoscopic treatment of UTUC. Gallioli et al. evaluated the role of diagnostic URS and CTU prior to definitive procedures, with 61% of cases undergoing a planned second URS for a therapeutic procedure. Same-session laser ablation should be performed at the first diagnostic URS procedure as soon as it is technically feasible to reduce delay in treatment and unnecessary second procedures. Holmium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Ho:YAG) and neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) are the two most studied and used laser systems in this setting. Nd:YAG is one of the earliest lasers available and a solid-state laser that operates in continuous and pulsatile modes. It offers wavelength options from 946 nm to 1444 nm and reaches a depth of penetration of 5–10 mm in soft tissue. The holmium laser Ho:YAG, also a solid-state laser, only operates in the pulsatile mode. It emits a wavelength of 2120 nm, which is highly absorbed in water, and therefore has a much shallower depth of penetration of 0.5 mm. Therefore, Nd:YAG is an appropriate option for ablating a large, bulky tumour in the renal pelvis, while Ho:YAG offers a safer option while dealing with small tumours in the ureter.
The recent introduction of thulium:yttrium-aluminium-garnet (Tm:YAG) laser gains popularity as an alternative to its predecessors. It is a solid-state laser which operates at a wavelength of 1940–2013 nm. This wavelength is closer to the peak absorption point of water; therefore, energy delivered by Tm:YAG is more effectively absorbed by cells, causing better ablation of tumours. The shallower depth of tissue penetration (0.2–0.4 mm) further reduces the risk of iatrogenic trauma and ureteric stenosis. Proietti et al. reported an ex vivo study comparing Tm:YAG with Ho:YAG and concluded that it could be potentially safer and more efficient for ablation of UTUC. The ability of continuous firing using Tm:YAG allows a more precise cut that generates a shallower and more regular incision. The retrospective studies conducted by Bozzini et al. and Wen et al. reported upper tract recurrence rates of 19% and 21.9%, respectively, using Tm:YAG ablation, which were comparable to that of Ho:YAG. Ureteral stricture developed in four patients at 3 months after surgery in Wen et al.’s study while no ureteric strictures were observed in Bozzini et al.’s study. A prospective study conducted by Musi et al. with 42 patients reported similar results. Clinical recurrence was observed in eight (19%) patients, with a median estimated recurrence-free survival of 44 months.
Thulium fiber laser (TFL) has been recently introduced. Two main operative modes are available at a wavelength of 1940 nm: the TFL quasi-continuous mode and the TFL SuperPulsed mode. At a wavelength of 1940 nm, it has the highest water absorption coefficient among all available laser fibres, and is therefore a more effective method for tumour cell ablation. The drawback of the continuous mode of Tm:YAG is the high degree of carbonization due to the lack of thermal relaxation. The prolonged pulse duration with reasonable carbonization to maintain adequate hemostasis helps to overcome the aforementioned drawbacks of Tm:YAG. Its initial outcome was demonstrated in ex vivo studies conducted by Doizi et al. and Taratkin et al. comparing TFL with Ho:YAG. Proietti et al. reported their initial experience of using TFL for 28 patients with UTUC. Thirteen (46.4%) and fifteen (53.6%) had low- and high-risk disease, respectively. UTUC recurrence was detected in 21.7% (5/23) at 6 months. No ureteric stricture was reported.
PDD has demonstrated its efficacy in promoting disease detection in initial diagnosis and surveillance. Recent studies have attempted to extend the use of PDD in detecting residual lesions during laser ablation. Yoshida et al. reported their experience in the initial 10 cases of PDD-assisted dual laser ablation (Tm:YAG and Ho:YAG) and compared the outcome with their historical cohort using Ho:YAG. The PDD-dual laser ablation group demonstrated a better 2-year recurrence-free survival rate and progression-free survival rate. Miyake et al. are currently conducting a 5-year prospective study to investigate the effect of PDD-assisted laser ablation on progression-free survival.
Before laser ablation, biopsy of a suspected lesion with forceps is commonly performed to obtain histological details. However, in one of the four biopsies, a definitive diagnosis cannot be made because of inadequate tissue, crush artifact, or distorted architecture. Pathological discordance is commonly observed, with up to 51% of low-grade cases on biopsy being upgraded at surgery. The lack of complete pathological examination after laser ablation might result in understaging of disease. With the advancement of laser technology, en bloc resection of UTUC might address the aforementioned clinical concerns. Shoen et al. reported the first case of en bloc resection of upper tract urothelial cancer using the novel laser system T-1470 LiteTouch™, a diode laser with a wavelength of 1470 nm that provides a good balance in deep soft tissue penetration for dissection and effective coagulation. No operative complication was reported. Jue and Armenakas recently reported their operative experience using the 200-μm thulium laser fibre for en bloc resection. Pathological staging instead of a preoperative biopsy avoids understaging of disease and allows proper counselling on disease status and treatment of choice. Although technically feasible, the safety and impact on oncological outcomes of this approach have yet to be determined.
In a systematic review that included 13 studies, with four studies being included in the meta-analysis, similar OS, cancer-specific survival, and bladder recurrence-free survival were reported between endoscopic management and RNU. On the other hand, retrospective studies showed conflicting results regarding the preservation of renal function, with some indicating better or comparable postoperative renal function.
After initial endoscopic treatment, early second-look URS within 60 days was recommended by guidelines in view of the high risk of recurrence (up to 50%). The outcomes of the second-look URS would also affect subsequent endoscopic findings and metastatic recurrence-free rates.

Topical instillation after endoscopic management

Chemoablation (MMC)
To achieve the optimal effect of topical treatment, the key is to achieve an effective therapeutic concentration in the target tissue. However, the effect of the local chemotherapy is limited by the short contact time between these liquid agents and urothelium due to continuous washing of urine, limited permeability of urothelium, and high resistance of urothelium to the therapeutic agent. UGN-101 is a reversible thermal gel of MMC which could be instilled antegradely via percutaneous nephrostomy tube or retrogradely via ureteric catheter. After instillation, it turns from the original viscous fluid state into a semi-solid form when exposed to core body temperature, prolonging the contact time between MMC and urothelium with a higher drug achievable concentration at the target site. Kleinmann et al. reported the results of an open-label, single-arm, phase 3 trial including 71 patients diagnosed with low-grade UTUC receiving UGN-101 as primary MMC. Forty-one (58%) patients had a complete response to induction therapy. Of the 71 patients, 23 (32%) remained in complete remission after 12 months. Ureteric stenosis was the most common adverse event (31/71 [44%] patients) and it was more frequently observed in patients who received maintenance instillation (66% vs. 29%). Rose et al. reported the initial outcomes of 48 patients with imperative indications including solitary kidney, bilateral UTUC, chronic kidney disease, and those who were unfit for or unwilling to undergo RNU. Twelve patients had biopsy-proven high-grade papillary disease. Following induction therapy, five (42%) patients achieved no evidence of disease after initial induction therapy. Jacob et al. retrospectively reviewed 132 patients treated with UGN-101 across 15 centres and reported a similar safety profile and efficacy in both ureteral and renal pelvic tumours. Regarding the route of instillation, a recently published retrospective study suggested that anterograde instillation of UGN-101 might reduce adverse events (e.g., ureteric stenosis) without affecting the efficacy. Given its promising initial outcomes, it has recently been approved for the treatment of low-grade non-invasive UTUC of the renal pelvis and calyx. Further studies are required to establish the optimal route of instillation and the efficacy of UGN-101 in high-grade diseases.
Local recurrences are commonly encountered after endoscopic ablation of UTUC, but the use of adjuvant instillation remains unclear. Common approaches to delivering intraureteric therapeutic agents include anterograde instillation via percutaneous nephrostomy, and retrograde instillation via ureteric catheter. Mitomycin C is one of the most studied agents with promising initial outcomes and tolerability. In a recent study including 52 patients reported by Gallioli et al., early single adjuvant intracavitary upper tract instillation of mitomycin C appears to reduce the risk of local recurrence (hazard ratio [HR] 0.13; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.03−0.65; p=0.01). Labbate et al. reported the use of UGN-101 as adjuvant therapy after complete endoscopic management of UTUC. Compared with patients treated with UGN-101 as topical MMC, combination therapy showed significantly lower disease recurrence rates (p<0.001) with a median follow-up of 6.8 months. No increase in adverse events such as ureteral stenosis in the combination treatment group was observed.

Immunotherapy (bacillus Calmette-Guérin [BCG])
First established in 1921 as a tuberculosis vaccine, BCG is a live-attenuated strain of Mycobacterium bovis commonly used in non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. The initial efficacy of BCG topical instillation as a primary treatment of CIS in the upper urinary tract (UUT) is well studied. However, due to the paucity of disease burden, there is a lack of long-term effectiveness of disease control in terms of recurrence-free survival and disease-specific survival. Tomisaki et al. retrospectively evaluated the outcome of 41 patients (52 renal units) with CIS in the UUT. An excellent initial complete response rate of 90% with a favourable 5-year recurrence-free survival rate (60.2%) and progression-free survival rate (74.2%) was reported. In a retrospective study conducted by Giannarini et al. including 42 renal units that received BCG instillation as primary MMC and 22 renal units as adjuvant treatment after endoscopic ablation with a median follow-up time of 42 months, thirty (47%) cases of recurrence were reported in the primary treatment group. The authors concluded that patients treated with curative intent for CIS with topical BCG, compared with adjuvant intent after ablation of a low-risk tumour, tended to have better recurrence-free survival, progression-free survival, and nephroureterectomy-free survival. A systematic review in 2023 including 15 studies and 218 cases attempted to evaluate the use of topical BCG as a primary treatment. High heterogeneity in the methods used to assess response to BCG therapy and highly variable results on recurrence (range 0%–46%) and progression (range 0%–45%) were observed.
Regarding adjuvant BCG instillations, the efficacy of BCG has been variable, and the results were highly heterogeneous. Giannarini et al. reported 61% local recurrence (11 out of 18 renal units) in a median follow-up time of 42 months. In a retrospective study including 50 patients conducted by Rastinehad et al., no significant differences were observed in terms of recurrence rates, kidney preservation, or OS between the BCG-treated and untreated groups.

Summary of adjuvant instillation after endoscopic management
Currently, all available studies are limited by their retrospective design and small sample sizes. Foerster et al. conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis assessing the efficacy of adjuvant therapy (chemotherapeutic agents or BCG) in patients with papillary UTUC or CIS of upper tract treated with KSS. A total of 27 reports and 438 patients who received upper tract instillations were included. All included reports were non-randomised observational case series. No significant difference in recurrence rate was observed between patients receiving adjuvant instillations compared with the untreated patients reported in the literature. Therefore, despite the most recent EAU recommendation that the use of adjuvant topical MMC may be a beneficial approach, larger-scale prospective studies are still required to delineate the true benefits of adjuvant instillation.

Other novel agents
Another novel modality for MMC of UTUC is photodynamic therapy. The role of photodynamic therapy for urothelial carcinoma of the bladder has been investigated since the 1980s. After the uptake of a photosensitizer, tumour cells were exposed to irradiation of a specific wavelength. The photosensitizers would be activated and eventually lead to the production of reactive oxygen species to initiate cell death. The use of the older generation of photosensitizers was limited by the disadvantages of poor light absorption and cutaneous photosensitivity. As a result, new generations of photosensitizers are under investigation with the aim of providing high tumour-specific ablation efficacy while minimizing systemic side effects. Yip et al. recently reported the outcome of an open-label phase I trial using WST-11/TOOKAD-Soluble (padeliporfin) for UTUC ablation. WST-11 is a water-soluble bacteriochlorophyll derivative which achieved MMC in the form of vascular-targeted photodynamic therapy (VTP). In contrast to former photodynamic therapies, VTP targets the vasculature of the tumour, causing rapid occlusion of tumour blood supply and profound tumour necrosis within 48 h. The results were promising with a 90% initial treatment response rate and a 68% complete pathologic response rate. Common adverse events reported include transient flank pain (79%) and hematuria (84%). No ureteral stricture was observed during the follow-up. Following the initial success of phase I safety trial, a phase 3 multicentre, open-label study of padeliporfin, ENdoluminal LIGHT ActivatED Treatment of UTUC (ENLIGHTED) trial (UCM301) was initiated with expected primary completion by December 2024. New or recurrent low-grade non-invasive UTUC was included. VTP was given every 4 weeks as an induction therapy followed by repeated maintenance treatment for any clinical recurrence.
Apart from instillation of therapeutic agents, the advancement of drug-eluting biodegradable stents (BUSs) as a novel delivery system provides another potential treatment option. It has the advantages of increased contact time between the anti-cancer drugs and the urothelium without the need for the second procedure to remove the stent after the drug delivery. Barros et al., Soria et al., and Wang et al. reported promising in vitro and in vivo sustainable anti-tumour activity of drug-eluting BUSs. Soria et al. continued their study into an animal model, observing no stent-related systemic toxic effects with this option. BUSs were completely degraded by 6–7 weeks. Soria et al. concluded that BUSs were able to provide controlled and well-tolerated release of mitomycin into the UUT.

Segmental ureterectomy (SU)
SU involves the resection of the diseased ureter and the reconstruction of the urinary tract by direct reimplantation, psoas-hitch, or the Boari flap technique. It has been widely investigated, demonstrating comparable oncological outcomes in low-risk disease when compared to RNU. The oncological safety for high-risk disease remains debatable. In 2020, Veccia et al. conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to assess the outcomes of SU versus RNU in patients with UTUC, with 4797 patients included (1313 patients in the SU group and 3484 patients in the RNU group). The SU group was associated with a shorter 5-year relapse-free survival (odds ratio [OR] 0.64; 95% CI 0.43−0.95; p=0.03) compared with the RNU group. On the other hand, the SU group was associated with better renal function preservation with a higher postoperative estimated glomerular filtration rate (weighted mean difference 10.97 mL/min; 95% CI 2.97−18.98 mL/min; p=0.007). The authors concluded that carefully selected patients could benefit from SU with a strict follow-up for recurrence. A retrospective study of the National Cancer Database, including 9016 RNU and 4045 SU cases between 2004 and 2015, was recently published. Two groups of patients were propensity-score overlap-weighted to minimize the confounders. The authors concluded that the long-term survival of SU is non-inferior to RNU. Female gender (OR 0.81; 95% CI 0.75–0.88; p<0.001), clinical T4 stage (OR 0.51; 95% CI 0.30–0.88; p=0.015), and high-grade tumour (OR 0.76; 95% CI 0.67–0.86; p<0.001) were associated with decreased likelihood of receiving SU. On the other hand, age greater than 79 years was associated with an increased probability of undergoing SU (OR 1.18; 95% CI 1.00–1.38; p=0.047).
Regarding the role of lymph node dissection (LND), EAU guidelines supported the role of simultaneous LND with SU in cases of high-risk UTUC, noting that it can provide the benefit of complete pathological staging. There are limited studies investigating the benefits and complications of LND during SU. In a retrospective cohort study conducted by Lec et al. investigating the trend of lymphadenectomy in 1962 patients with high-risk UTUC receiving SU or RNU, only 22.7% (446/1962) of the cohort underwent LND in both the SU and RNU groups. LND was associated with improved OS in the RNU group when more than three nodes were removed, which was not observed in the SU group. On multivariable analysis, SU had a comparable performance on OS with RNU. Further studies are required to evaluate whether a more accurate pathological staging with LND could translate into better survival in patients receiving SU.

Adjuvant radiotherapy (RT) after SU
Although there are comparable OS and cancer-specific survival between RNU and SU, the considerable risk of local recurrence necessitates new strategies to improve local control. Studies have shown adjuvant RT after RNU might be beneficial in terms of locoregional and bladder control, but the role of RT after KSS has yet to be determined. Li et al. reported significantly better 5-year recurrence-free survival in the adjuvant RT group compared to partial ureterectomy alone. Guan et al. showed that adjuvant RT after SU was safe and well tolerated without high-grade toxicity reported. Currently, there is no consensus on the optimal radiation dosage or the field of radiation. Most centers cover the tumour bed, regional lymph nodes, as well as retroperitoneal lymph node drainage area in case of suspected lymph node metastases. Chen et al. reported that the addition of whole bladder irradiation may even reduce bladder recurrence. Therefore, the role of RT after KSS may be feasible and further studies are required to define the irradiation range and dosage.

Summary
Key studies comparing the oncological outcomes of kidney-sparing surgery with RNU.
Table 3
Study	Oncologicalintervention	Study nature	Studies included, n;patients(KSS vs. RNU), n	CSS (HR [95% CI];p-value)	OS (HR [95% CI];p-value)	 	Kawada et al.,2023 	Endoscopicablation	Systematic review and meta-analysis	13; 336 vs. 924	1.37 (0.99–1.91); 0.06	1.27 (0.75–2.16); 0.38	 	Veccia et al.,2020 	Segmentalureterectomy	Systematic review and meta-analysis	18; 1313 vs. 3484	1.13 (0.92–1.38); 0.25	NR	 	Fang et al.,2016 	Segmentalureterectomy	Systematic review and meta-analysis	11; 983 vs. 2980	0.90 (0.73–1.11); 0.33	0.98 (0.63–1.53); 0.93	 	Paciotti et al.,2023 	Segmentalureterectomy	Retrospective review on National Cancer Database population	NR; 4045 vs. 9016	NR	0.98 (0.93–1.04); 0.538
CI, confidence interval; CSS, cancer-specific survival; HR, hazard ratio; KSS, kidney-sparing approach; NR, not reported; OS, overall survival; RNU, radical nephroureterectomy.
Upcoming trials for kidney sparing approach for UTUC.
Table 4
Title; ClinicalTrials.gov ID	Aim	Status	Primary outcome	 	Multicenter clinical trial of ST-02 for ablation of upper tract urothelial carcinoma; NCT06124976	To investigate the safety and efficacy of ST-02 (mucoadhesive gemcitabine suspension for pyelocaliceal instillation) for low-grade UTUC	Recruiting patientsEstimated enrollment: 70Estimated primary completion: 2026-04	Complete response rate at 3 months	 	Pembrolizumab (MK-3475) and bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) as first-line treatment for high-risk T1 non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) and high-grade non-muscle-invasive upper tract urothelial carcinoma (NMI-UTUC); NCT03504163	To find out the effectiveness of pembrolizumab in combination with BCG as a first-line therapy for participants with high-grade T1 bladder cancer who are at “high risk” for BCG alone to be ineffective and are seeking an alternative treatment option to radical cystectomy. The combination of pembrolizumab with BCG will also be evaluated in an exploratory cohort of patients with upper tract urothelial cancer	Recruiting patientsEstimated enrollment: 37Estimated primary completion: 2025-04	Disease-free survival at 6 months	 	Multicenter phase 3 pivotal study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of TOOKAD (padeliporfin) vascular targeted photodynamic therapy in the treatment of low grade upper tract urothelial cancer(ENLIGHTED) study; NCT04620239	To evaluate the oncological outcome of patients with low-risk UTUC treated with padeliporfin VTP in two phases: an induction treatment phase and a maintenance treatment phase	Recruiting patientsEstimated enrollment: 100Estimated primary completion: 2024-12	Number of patients with absence of UTUC tumours in the entire ipsilateral urinary system at the time of PRE (28±3 days post last treatment)
BCG, bacillus Calmette-Guérin; PRE, primary response evaluation; UTUC, upper tract urothelial carcinoma; VTP, vascular targeted photodynamic therapy.
Endoscopic ablation is the main modality in KSS, followed by SU and topical instillation of a therapeutic agent. RNU, on the other hand, is a well-studied topic with long-term oncological outcomes available. It is considered the standard treatment and control for studying new agents. Table 3 summarizes key existing studies comparing the oncological outcomes of different KSS and RNU. Currently, there are no prospective studies comparing different KSS modalities with RNU. Prospective trials should be initiated to address the unresolved clinical questions. Table 4 summarizes the upcoming trials for the kidney-sparing approach for UTUC.

Follow-up protocol after KSS
Upper tract recurrences after KSS are common and occur in up to 84% of endoscopically treated UTUC with an average of 3.2 recurrences per patient. Vemana et al. reported a 53% salvage RNU rate with time to salvage operation of around 9 months. According to the EAU guidelines, early second-look ureteroscopy after 6−8 weeks of KSS should be arranged to look for any recurrence. If no subsequent upstaging or upgrading was identified in the resection specimen after segmental ureteric resection, cystoscopy for any intravesical recurrence and CT-urography should be carried out at 3 months and 6 months, and then yearly for 5 years. For high-risk tumours after KSS, the EAU guidelines suggest cystoscopy and urinary cytology at 3 months, and be repeated every 3 months for a period of 2 years, and every 6 months thereafter until 5 years, and then yearly.
The role of regular URS surveillance remains unclear. In a retrospective study conducted by Lindner et al., 42.9% of upper tract recurrence was observed in 14 low-risk UUT patients who received KSS with a mean time of 3 years postoperatively. Figaroa et al. reported the results of a single-center cohort with 71 URS-treated UTUC patients, who were followed up with regular 6-monthly URS for up to 3 years then yearly. With a median follow-up of 49 months, the median times to treatment conversion to RNU and upgrading were 9.1 months and 21.9 months, respectively. The authors concluded that treatment conversion and upgrading frequently occur beyond second-look URS, and suggested the role of follow-up intensification with URS in patients who received KSS. In a large retrospective review that included 170 patients with endoscopically managed UTUC, Mohapatra et al. reported 50% and 80% extrapolated rates of progression to RNU at 2 years and 5 years, respectively. The positive biopsy (HR 11.8, 95% CI 2.4–59.5, p=0.003) and visible lesion on ureteroscopy (HR 8.4, 95% CI 3.0–23.9, p<0.001) were predictors for progression to RNU. Current guidelines do not suggest regular URS surveillance as the additional value of URS on top of regular CTU and voided urinary cytology remains unclear, and regular URS surveillance would expose patients to additional cost and repeated anesthetic and procedural risk. Flexible ureteroscopy under local anaesthesia for urolithiasis has shown promising outcomes with satisfactory patient tolerance. The use of flexible ureteroscopy under local anaesthesia might be a more cost-effective alternative for surveillance with lower anaesthetic risk. High-risk UTUC patients after KSS shall derive the greatest benefit from additional endoscopic surveillance.
For novel urine markers, current studies showed promising diagnostic accuracy as discussed in the previous part of this article. Incorporating novel urine markers into the standard surveillance protocol may allow early detection of recurrence and hence, salvage treatment. However, the postulated benefit has yet to be determined.

Conclusion
In selected UTUC patients, KSS can provide non-inferior oncological outcomes, better preserve renal function, and reduce treatment morbidities. Accurate preoperative risk stratification followed by comprehensive patient counseling is a rule of thumb. The advent of new imaging technology is expected to improve the accuracy of diagnosis, grading, and staging of UTUC, and conduce to patient selection for KSS. The long-term oncological outcomes have established the role of endoscopic ablation and SU in well-selected cases. Intraureteric administration of mitomycin C gel and photodynamic agents has given encouraging initial results, both in the chemoablative and adjuvant settings. Novel urinary markers provide convenient and non-invasive means to aid surveillance, but their additional benefits have yet to be confirmed. Further studies are warranted to establish the long-term efficacy and safety profile of these new treatment modalities.

Author contributions
Study concept and design: Ivan Ching Ho Ko, Chris Ho Ming Wong, David Ka Wai Leung, Alex Qin-yang Liu.
Data acquisition: Ivan Ching Ho Ko, Kevin Cheuk Kin Cheng, Brian Wai Hei Siu, Steffi Kar Kei Yuen.
Data analysis: Ivan Ching Ho Ko, Chris Ho Ming Wong.
Drafting of manuscript: Ivan Ching Ho Ko, Chris Ho Ming Wong, David Ka Wai Leung, Alex Qin-yang Liu.
Critical revision of the manuscript: Ivan Ching Ho Ko, Nikhil Vasdev, Keiichiro Mori, Karl H. Tully, Dmitry Enikeev, Anthony Chi Fai Ng, Jeremy Yuen Chun Teoh.

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
Cancer statistics, 2021
Epidemiology, diagnosis, preoperative evaluation and prognostic assessment of upper-tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC)
European Association of Urology guidelines on upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma: 2023 update
Outcomes of radical nephroureterectomy: a series from the upper tract urothelial carcinoma collaboration
Third prize: the role of endoscopic nephron-sparing surgery in the management of upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Oncologic outcomes of kidney-sparing surgery versus radical nephroureterectomy for upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a systematic review by the EAU non-muscle invasive bladder cancer guidelines panel
Radical nephroureterectomy versus endoscopic procedures for the treatment of localised upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a meta-analysis and a systematic review of current evidence from comparative studies
Endoscopic versus laparoscopic management of noninvasive upper tract urothelial carcinoma: 20-year single center experience
CT urography for hematuria
Microscopic hematuria predicts lower stage in patients with upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Gadolinium enhanced magnetic resonance urography for upper urinary tract malignancy
Diagnostic performance of multidetector computed tomographic (MDCTU) in upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC): a systematic review and meta-analysis
Imaging in upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a review
T categorization of urothelial carcinomas of the ureter with CT: preliminary study of new diagnostic criteria proposed for differentiating T2 or lower from T3 or higher
Limitations of computed tomography in the preoperative staging of upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging for bladder cancer: development of VI-RADS (Vesical Imaging-Reporting and Data System)
MRI for risk stratification of muscle invasion by upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a feasibility study
Diagnostic value of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography with computed tomography for lymph node staging in patients with upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Influence of preoperative factors on the oncologic outcome for upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma after radical nephroureterectomy
Preoperative positive voided urine cytology predicts poor clinical outcomes in patients with upper tract urothelial carcinoma undergoing nephroureterectomy
How to manage patients with suspected upper tract urothelial carcinoma in the pandemic of COVID-19?
Preoperative hydronephrosis, ureteroscopic biopsy grade and urinary cytology can improve prediction of advanced upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Intravesical seeding of upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma cells during nephroureterectomy: an exploratory analysis from the THPMG trial
The predictive value of positive urine cytology for outcomes following radical nephroureterectomy in patients with primary upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a multi-institutional study
Non-invasive biomarkers in the diagnosis of upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma—a systematic review
Fluorescence in situ hybridization status of voided urine predicts invasive and high-grade upper tract urothelial carcinoma
DNA methylation urine biomarkers test in the diagnosis of upper tract urothelial carcinoma: results from a single-center prospective clinical trial
A urine-based DNA methylation marker test to detect upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a prospective cohort study
Fragmentation of cell-free DNA is induced by upper-tract urothelial carcinoma-associated systemic inflammation
Novel use of circulating tumor DNA to identify muscle-invasive and non-organ-confined upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Bladder recurrence following upper tract surgery for urothelial carcinoma: a contemporary review of risk factors and management strategies
Ureterorenoscopy for upper tract urothelial carcinoma: how often are we missing lesions?
Learning from the past and present to change the future: endoscopic management of upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma
Narrow-band imaging digital flexible ureteroscopy in detection of upper urinary tract transitional-cell carcinoma: initial experience
Photodynamic diagnosis with oral 5-aminolevulinic acid for upper urinary tract carcinoma: a prospective clinical trial
Photodynamic diagnostic ureterorenoscopy: a valuable tool in the detection of upper urinary tract tumour
Optical coherence tomography in urologic oncology: a comprehensive review
Volumetric in vivo visualization of upper urinary tract tumors using optical coherence tomography: a pilot study
Optical coherence tomography as a tool for in vivo staging and grading of upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma: a study of diagnostic accuracy
Optical biopsy of human bladder neoplasia with in vivo confocal laser endomicroscopy
Confocal laser endomicroscopy in the management of endoscopically treated upper urinary tract transitional cell carcinoma: preliminary data
Correlation between confocal laser endomicroscopy (Cellvizio®) and histological grading of upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a step forward for a better selection of patients suitable for conservative management
Confocal laser endomicroscopy for upper tract urothelial carcinoma: validation of the proposed criteria and proposal of a scoring system for real-time tumor grading
Diagnosis and management of non-metastatic upper tract urothelial carcinoma: AUA/SUO guideline
Novel classification for upper tract urothelial carcinoma to better risk-stratify patients eligible for kidney-sparing strategies: an international collaborative study
Pretreatment risk stratification for endoscopic kidney-sparing surgery in upper tract urothelial carcinoma: an international collaborative study
A diagnostic nomogram of pathologic grade for preoperative risk stratification in upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Preoperative multiplex nomogram for prediction of high-risk nonorgan-confined upper-tract urothelial carcinoma
Development and external validation of a preoperative nomogram for predicting pathological locally advanced disease of clinically localized upper urinary tract carcinoma
Upper tract urothelial cancer: guideline of guidelines
Oncologic control obtained after exclusive flexible ureteroscopic management of upper urinary tract urothelial cell carcinoma
The impact of ureteroscopy following computerized tomography urography in the management of upper tract urothelial carcinoma
The evolution of lasers in urology
Endoscopic approaches to upper tract urothelial carcinoma
A systematic review of thulium fiber laser: applications and advantages of laser technology in the field of urology
Thulium:YAG versus holmium:YAG laser effect on upper urinary tract soft tissue: evidence from an ex vivo experimental study
Thulium-laser retrograde intra renal ablation of upper urinary tract transitional cell carcinoma: an ESUT Study
Treatment of upper tract urothelial carcinoma with ureteroscopy and thulium laser: a retrospective single center study
A review of how lasers are used in utuc surgery: can the choice of laser affect outcomes?
Thulium laser treatment of upper urinary tract carcinoma: a multi-institutional analysis of surgical and oncological outcomes
Thulium fiber laser: the new kid on the block
Effectiveness and safety of thulium fiber laser in the conservative management of patients with upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Comparison of holmium:YAG and thulium fiber lasers on soft tissue: an ex vivo study
Ex vivo study of Ho:YAG and thulium fiber lasers for soft tissue surgery: which laser for which case? Lasers
Photodynamic diagnosis-guided dual laser ablation for upper urinary tract carcinoma: preoperative preparation, surgical technique, and clinical outcomes
A prospective, single-arm trial of fluorescent ureteroscopy-assisted thulium-holmium:YAG dual laser ablation for upper urinary tract cancer: study protocol of the FLUAM trial
Small endoscopic biopsies of the ureter and renal pelvis: pathologic pitfalls
Discordance between clinical and pathological staging and grading in upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Use of the T-1470 LiteTouch™ laser in the en bloc resection of an upper tract urothelial cancer
Upper tract tumor en bloc enucleation: a novel approach to the diagnosis and management of upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Oncologic and safety outcomes for endoscopic surgery versus radical nephroureterectomy for upper tract urothelial carcinoma: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis
Results and outcomes after endoscopic treatment of upper urinary tract carcinoma: the Austrian experience
Endoscopic management versus radical nephroureterectomy for localized upper tract urothelial carcinoma in a high endemic region
Early repeated ureteroscopy within 6−8 weeks after a primary endoscopic treatment in patients with upper tract urothelial cell carcinoma: preliminary findings
Local drug delivery in the urinary tract: current challenges and opportunities
Pharmacokinetics of UGN-101, a mitomycin-containing reverse thermal gel instilled via retrograde catheter for the treatment of low-grade upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Primary chemoablation of low-grade upper tract urothelial carcinoma using UGN-101, a mitomycin-containing reverse thermal gel (OLYMPUS): an open-label, single-arm, phase 3 trial
Durability of response to primary chemoablation of low-grade upper tract urothelial carcinoma using UGN-101, a mitomycin-containing reverse thermal gel: OLYMPUS trial final report
Mitomycin gel (UGN-101) as a kidney-sparing treatment for upper tract urothelial carcinoma in patients with imperative indications and high-grade disease
First analysis of the safety and efficacy of UGN-101 in the treatment of ureteral tumors
Route of administration for UGN-101 and impact on oncological and safety outcomes
FDA approves first therapy for treatment of low-grade upper tract urothelial cancer
Induction and maintenance adjuvant mitomycin C topical therapy for upper tract urothelial carcinoma: tolerability and intermediate term outcomes
Adjuvant single-dose upper urinary tract instillation of mitomycin C after therapeutic ureteroscopy for upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a single-centre prospective non-randomized trial
Efficacy and safety of mitomycin gel (UGN-101) as an adjuvant therapy after complete endoscopic management of upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Bacillus Calmette-Guérin immunotherapy for urothelial carcinoma of the bladder
Long-term effects of bacille Calmette- Guérin perfusion therapy for treatment of transitional cell carcinoma in situ of upper urinary tract
Efficacy and tolerability of bacillus Calmette-Guérin therapy as the first-line therapy for upper urinary tract carcinoma in situ
Antegrade perfusion with bacillus Calmette- Guérin in patients with non-muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma of the upper urinary tract: who may benefit?
Topical instillation of BCG immunotherapy for biopsy-proven primary upper urinary tract carcinoma in situ: a single institution series and systematic review
A 20-year experience with percutaneous resection of upper tract transitional carcinoma: is there an oncologic benefit with adjuvant bacillus Calmette-Guérin therapy?
Endocavitary treatment for upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a meta-analysis of the current literature
Laser photodynamic therapy for bladder cancer
Photodynamic therapy for cancer
Porphyrin and nonporphyrin photosensitizers in oncology: preclinical and clinical advances in photodynamic therapy
Final results of a Phase I trial of WST-11 (TOOKAD soluble) vascular-targeted photodynamic therapy for upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Novel water-soluble bacteriochlorophyll derivatives for vascular-targeted photodynamic therapy: synthesis, solubility, phototoxicity and the effect of serum proteins
Permanent occlusion of feeding arteries and draining veins in solid mouse tumors by vascular targeted photodynamic therapy (VTP) with Tookad
ENdoluminal LIGHT ActivatED treatment of upper tract urothelial cancer (ENLIGHTED) study
Advances in drug delivery via biodegradable ureteral stent for the treatment of upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Drug-eluting biodegradable ureteral stent: new approach for urothelial tumors of upper urinary tract cancer
Cytotoxicity assessment of a new design for a biodegradable ureteral mitomycin drug-eluting stent in urothelial carcinoma cell culture
Assessment of a coated mitomycin-releasing biodegradable ureteral stent as an adjuvant therapy in upper urothelial carcinoma: a comparative in vitro study
Gradiently degraded electrospun polyester scaffolds with cytostatic for urothelial carcinoma therapy
Animal model assessment of a new design for a coated mitomycin-eluting biodegradable ureteral stent for intracavitary instillation as an adjuvant therapy in upper urothelial carcinoma
Comparison of oncological outcomes after segmental ureterectomy or radical nephroureterectomy in urothelial carcinomas of the upper urinary tract: results from a large French multicentre study
Nephroureterectomy and segmental ureterectomy in the treatment of invasive upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a population-based study of 2299 patients
Segmental ureterectomy can safely be performed in patients with transitional cell carcinoma of the ureter
Segmental ureterectomy for upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis of comparative studies
Is segmental ureterectomy associated with inferior survival for localized upper-tract urothelial carcinoma of the ureter compared to radical nephroureterectomy?
Trends in management of ureteral urothelial carcinoma and effects on survival: a hospital-based registry study
Analysis of progression after elective distal ureterectomy and effects of salvage radical nephroureterectomy in patients with distal ureteral urothelial carcinoma
Adjuvant radiotherapy for stage III/IV urothelial carcinoma of the upper tract
Adjuvant radiotherapy for upper tract urothelial carcinoma: systematic review and meta-analysis
Oncological outcomes of adjuvant radiotherapy for partial ureterectomy in distal ureteral urothelial carcinoma patients
Postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy for patients with upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC) who underwent kidney-sparing surgery (KSS): a single-center study
Radiotherapy may improve overall survival of patients with T3/T4 transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis or ureter and delay bladder tumour relapse
Oncologic outcomes following radical nephroureterectomy for upper tract urothelial carcinoma: a literature review
A systematic review and meta-analysis of oncological and renal function outcomes obtained after segmental ureterectomy versus radical nephroureterectomy for upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Long-term outcomes of nephroureterectomy versus endoscopic management for upper tract urothelial carcinoma
Endoscopic management of low-grade upper tract urothelial carcinoma: characterizing the long-term burden of care in comparison to radical nephroureterectomy
Survival comparison between endoscopic and surgical management for patients with upper tract urothelial cancer: a matched propensity score analysis using surveillance, epidemiology and end results-medicare data
Optimization of postoperative surveillance protocols in upper tract urothelial cancer: a retrospective cohort study
Longer is better for endoscopic follow-up of upper tract urothelial carcinoma after ureteroscopic treatment: an evaluation spanning 10 years of data
Importance of long-term follow-up after endoscopic management for upper tract urothelial carcinoma and factors leading to surgical management
Flexible ureteroscopy under local anesthesia for stone management: initial exploration and two-year experience
Peer review under responsibility of Tongji University.