An integrated social–ecological–evolutionary–phenotypic (SEEP) approach to understanding animal responses to urbanization
ABSTRACT
Humans play key roles in shaping the structure and processes of ecosystems globally, especially in cities. This recognition has prompted a recent focus on understanding urban systems via interactions between human social systems and ecological and evolutionary processes. Most research has focused on interactions between two of these three domains. Here we present a framework for linking all three – social, ecological, and evolutionary – by focusing on phenotypic response and effect traits, illustrating the framework's utility in understanding wildlife dynamics in urban systems. We first present a generalized model for the social–ecological–evolutionary–phenotypic (SEEP) framework, then use urban climate as a specific example, provide guidance on how to implement this approach, and finally discuss emerging questions motivated by the framework and challenges in utilizing the approach.

INTRODUCTION
Understanding the impacts of human‐induced environmental changes is critical to supporting biodiversity conservation, maintaining ecosystem services (see Table 1 for definitions), and advancing the well‐being of human communities. But this understanding is complicated by interactions between ecological, evolutionary, and human social processes occurring at multiple spatial and temporal scales (Grimm et al., ; Aronson et al., ; Rivkin et al., ; Des Roches et al., ; note that we use ‘social’ herein to refer to human social systems). Interactions between social and ecological systems have received attention over the last two decades (Ostrom, ), including human–wildlife interactions (Treves et al., ; Nyhus, ), ecotourism (Buckley, ; Shannon et al., ; D'Cruze et al., ), how species introductions influence ecological assemblages (Strauss et al., ; Wisz et al., ; Aronson et al., ), and the impacts of human demographics on urban biodiversity (Hope et al., ; Kinzig et al., ; Grimm et al., ). These studies have improved our understanding of the complex ways in which human social systems impact wildlife. Recent work also shows that human social systems can influence the evolution of wildlife species (Johnson & Munshi‐South, ; Rivkin et al., ; Miles et al., ), but we are just beginning to understand the phenomena that shape social–ecological–evolutionary dynamics (Ouyang et al., ; Des Roches et al., ).
Definitions of terms used in this review. In most cases these terms follow standard convention, but we have chosen particular definitions where multiple definitions exist.
Term	Definition	 	SEEP	The social–ecological–evolutionary‐phenotypic framework proposed here. This framework uses phenotypically and evolutionarily plastic response and effect traits to help understand coupled human and natural systems.	 	Microclimate	The weather conditions that are typically encountered in a small area (e.g. in the shade, under a rock, or on top of a leaf) and distinct from the typical weather conditions at larger scales. Typically 1 cm3 to 500 m3.	 	Local climate	The weather conditions that are typical within a medium‐sized area (e.g. a neighbourhood) and distinct from the typical weather conditions at larger scales. Typically 0.4 km2 to 25 km2 in cities, or sometimes larger in areas outside cities with less heterogeneity.	 	Regional climate	The weather conditions that are typical within a large area (e.g. southern California, USA), less than the size of the Earth. Typically 10,000 km2 to 1 million km2.	 	Trait	Any characteristic of an organism, whether morphological, physiological, or behavioural.	 	Response trait	A functional trait that influences the success or fitness of an organism in a particular environment.	 	Effect trait	A trait that influences humans, including through services and disservices. We note that others use this term more broadly, including any effect on another species or ecosystem, not just humans. Our use here promotes linkages to human social systems.	 	Phenotypic plasticity	The ability of a trait to change, either within an organism over time or between organisms without underlying genetic changes.	 	Potential for rapid adaptation	The ability of a trait to adapt quickly to environmental change through genotypic change.	 	Stressor	Physiological: an external or internal factor that either acutely or chronically alters the state of an organism away from homeostasis. Acute stress is a short‐term physiological or behavioural response to an immediate stressor and may be adaptive and beneficial. Chronic stress is a long‐lasting response usually associated with detrimental behavioural and/or physiological outcomes.Ecological: any environmental condition at the edges of or beyond that population's ecological niche.	 	Urban	An area of intense human inhabitation and alteration. Often characterized by high proportions of impervious surfaces or population densities.	 	Ecosystem services or disservices	Any ecosystem property or process that positively (service) or negatively (disservice) affects humans.	 	Ecological filter	The conditions of an ecological system that influence which organisms from a larger potential species pool can access or persist within a particular environment (e.g. local climate, species interactions, socioeconomic conditions).
Building on previous approaches (Donihue & Lambert, ; Aronson et al., ; Ouyang et al., ; Lerman et al., ; Des Roches et al., ; Lambert et al., ; Grilo et al., ), we propose that an explicit focus on phenotypic traits (i.e. morphological, physiological, and behavioural characteristics) can help link social, ecological, and evolutionary processes. As evolution by natural selection acts on phenotypes, trait‐based approaches can allow researchers explicitly to study, measure, and test the interplay between organisms and the environment (Wong, Guénard & Lewis, ). The study of phenotypes can also reveal how organisms influence ecosystem health and processes (functional effects traits; Lavorel & Garnier, ), respond to environmental conditions (functional response traits; Lavorel & Garnier, ), move through ecological filters (Aronson et al., ), occupy ecological niches (Violle & Jiang, ; Kearney et al., ; Blonder, ), or form complex ecological communities (Aronson et al., ; Weiss & Ray, ). Thus, investigating phenotypes can provide a particularly useful lens through which to understand how organisms, communities, and ecosystems respond to human impacts (Aronson et al., ). However, although trait‐based approaches have been used to assess the relationship between phenotypic traits and urbanization in a variety of organisms (Yom‐Tov, ; Diamond et al., ; Nelson, Atzori & Gastrich, ; Biard et al., ; Charmantier et al., ; Dahirel et al., ; Santini et al., ; Suraci et al., ; Weiss et al., ; Rega‐Brodsky et al., ), generalizations within or across taxonomic groups have yet to be identified. This is partly due to variation in local social systems, regional climate, species pools, and community assembly processes that influence the ecology and evolution of populations through time (Aronson et al., ). Using a social–ecological–evolutionary–phenotypic (SEEP; Table 1) framework is a useful approach to understand the impacts of human‐induced environmental change, as a focus on response and effect traits can facilitate testing hypotheses that explain differential responses of taxa to urbanization, as well as identify consequences for ecosystem services and their feedbacks (Fig. 1).
General social–ecological–evolutionary–phenotypic (SEEP) framework overview (A) and generalized climate example (B). Phenotypic response and effect traits allow elucidation of interactions between social, ecological, and evolutionary systems through time, with processes that occur at different rates (e.g. presses and pulses) and multiple scales (e.g. global, regional, and local systems). For example, social–ecological feedbacks could include waste disposal regulations that alter food availability and subsequent wildlife distributions, or zoning decisions that alter local climates, affecting pest abundance. These feedbacks, in turn, could alter genetic and trait variation via neutral or selective evolutionary processes, resulting in the filtering or selection of certain traits. The evolution of these traits could result in animals with higher cortisol levels (physiology), smaller body sizes (morphology), or increased boldness (behaviour), which could have varied effects on human social processes (e.g. alter management needs/concerns). Global and regional social processes, such as laws, regulations, and legacies of systematic oppression of certain groups, as well as regional species pools, evolutionary histories, and global climate trends, could further influence these feedbacks and interactions.
We suggest that the SEEP framework provides a practical approach for studying urban SEEP dynamics. It suggests that researchers can predict species distributions by measuring differences in environmentally relevant response traits, along with non‐plastic, plastic, and evolutionary variation in those traits, between populations and species. Researchers can then predict the effects of these species distributions on human services and disservices through effect traits. This builds on previous frameworks that focus on using phenotypic traits to predict species distributions, but do not tend to incorporate adaptive evolution, leave out feedbacks with social systems, focus on plants, or have more of a management focus (Aronson et al., ; Lerman et al., ; Grilo et al., ). Some of these frameworks also focus primarily on urban evolution (Donihue & Lambert, ; Lambert et al., ) or are review articles that discuss urban social–ecological–evolutionary systems but do not present a concrete framework that can clearly be applied (Ouyang et al., ; Des Roches et al., ). Thus, our framework represents an innovative synthetic combination of previous ideas into a practical approach that can be applied to understand coupled human–natural systems in cities.
In urban ecosystems, the interactions and fates of human social–infrastructural and ecological–evolutionary systems are tightly intertwined. For example, poor refuse disposal practices may increase the prevalence of rats and other rodents, which could lead to changes in human behaviour, like increased application of rodenticides, leading to the evolution of greater resistance to these pesticides (Desvars‐Larrive et al., ; Des Roches et al., ). These dynamics in urban environments can also be further exacerbated by broader ecological conditions, such as global climate change (Richardson et al., ). In general, urbanization is a human‐driven, environmentally mediated process that results in physical and environmental changes that can have both short‐ and long‐term effects. These changes expose organisms to novel landscapes, altered local and microclimates, and a variety of stressors, leading to physiological, behavioural, evolutionary, and ecological changes that can affect human social processes and the built environment over short and long timescales (McDonnell & Pickett, ; McKinney, ; Grimm et al., ; Ramalho & Hobbs, ; Johnson & Munshi‐South, ; Schell et al., ). Accordingly, identifying feedbacks between human social systems, ecology, evolution, and phenotypes is critical to understanding the dynamics of urban systems, including wildlife.
Contemporary and historical social processes result in differences in infrastructure and human ecosystem management across metropolitan areas. For example, urban development history, formal and informal governance and power structures, social stratification, as well as current and legacy racist and classist policies and actions (Schell et al., ; Hoffman, Shandas & Pendleton, ) create complex heterogeneous landscapes that influence wildlife traits and distributions (Carlen, Li & Winchell, ; Schmidt & Garroway, ) as well as human well‐being, values, norms, and behaviours (Nardone, Chiang & Corburn, ). Thus, urban landscapes provide insight into the iterative feedbacks between people and wildlife, and how these may change over time.
A recent flurry of interdisciplinary research has strived to build more accurate models of urban ecosystems in a social–ecological context, as well as to understand evolutionary dynamics in urban settings (Donihue & Lambert, ; Aronson et al., ; Ouyang et al., ; Schell et al., ; Lerman et al., ; Des Roches et al., ; Lambert et al., ; McPhearson et al., ; Grilo et al., ). Despite existing innovative research, we suggest that the importance of animal physiology, behaviour, and morphology (i.e. phenotype) in understanding social–ecological–evolutionary processes has been insufficiently recognized. Animal responses to urban ecosystems often reflect differences in phenotypic traits among individuals and taxa. For instance, differences in body size across taxa might influence their movement ability (e.g. Winchell et al., ; Jung & Threlfall, ; Kendall et al., ), as well as their metabolic rates (Brown et al., ; Agutter & Wheatley, ; Nagy, ; Glazier, ; Mortola, ) and evaporative water loss (Woods & Smith, ; Van Sant et al., ; Gavrilov & Gavrilov, ), leading to differential abilities to access and persist in parts of cities with different barriers to movement, heat exposure, and/or food and water availability (e.g. Merckx et al., ; Chick, Waters & Diamond, ).
Traits are sometimes viewed as static, but behavioural and physiological traits can change rapidly (Fig. 2) in response to environmental differences, both within individuals over time and between individuals that share genes for specific traits, but have differential gene expression [i.e. phenotypic plasticity or epigenetics (Alberti, Marzluff & Hunt, ; Liker, ; Caspi et al., )]. For example, some organisms may be able to persist in hotter parts of a city in warm climates because of greater ability to access moist and/or cool refuges, shifts in peak periods of activity and energy intake, evaporative thermoregulation, convective thermoregulation through cutaneous vasodilation, and/or adjustment of their body temperature (Terrien, Perret & Aujard, ; McKechnie & Wolf, ; Johnson & Stahlschmidt, ; Mota‐Rojas et al., ). Thus, it is important to consider traits as dynamic, with underlying genes influencing a range of possible phenotypes (Fig. 2). Shifts in gene frequencies in populations may occur with neutral and adaptive evolutionary change, altering ranges of morphological, physiological, and behavioural traits. For instance, urban warming may be expected to lead to the evolution of higher thermal limits (Brans et al., ) and/or smaller body sizes (Merckx et al., ). However other factors, like dispersal ability and food availability, may interact with warming to influence the evolution of these traits. For example, in mammals, body size tends to increase intraspecifically in urban areas, counter to warming‐based predictions, likely due to increased food availability (Hantak et al., ). Thus, understanding changes in trait distributions in cities is complex, but evolutionary biologists, physiologists, ecologists, and social scientists are all accustomed to determining causality in systems with multiple drivers. Combining approaches and expertise across disciplines could rapidly advance our understanding of these complex systems.
Traits may vary within individuals over time (organismal–developmental or physiological adjustments), between individuals within species (plastic or genetic), between urban and rural populations (plastic or genetic), and between species (typically genetic). Individual variation is shown only for rural populations of species 1 and red arrows showing trait variation are shown only for selected examples for simplicity. pop., population.
Here we propose that the ecological filtering of individuals and taxa with different phenotypic traits, from regional pools into urban landscapes, along with dynamic changes in physiology, behaviour, and morphology in response to urbanization, alters species interactions, community composition, and biodiversity (Figs 1 and 3). These alterations in turn influence human–wildlife interactions and human social systems, changing urban landscapes. Thus, organismal physiology, behaviour, and morphology are likely key to mediating the dynamics of urban social–ecological–evolutionary systems. Studies that integrate feedbacks and connections between these domains will allow for an understanding of urban systems that transcends current paradigms of social and biological sciences and leads to a better understanding of urban ecological patterns and processes. Response and effect traits can help translate broad conceptual frameworks that have been described by others (Ouyang et al., ; Des Roches et al., ) into practical applications. Here, we illustrate this integrative SEEP approach with a climate‐focused example that combines findings from multiple studies from different localities (Fig. 3). We then provide guidance on implementation of this approach and discuss emerging questions and challenges for cross‐scale, cross‐temporal, cross‐discipline, and cross‐boundary urban SEEP research. Although the SEEP framework could be applied to a wide array of traits (e.g. urban squirrel coloration; Cosentino, Vanek & Gibbs, ), not all traits have explicit impacts on the function of organisms or ecosystems (i.e. functional traits). As such, we focus on response and effect traits herein to illustrate best the applicability of our approach.
Example of urban SEEP framework applied to climate alteration, focusing on the local scale to emphasize dynamics within cities. Differences in shapes indicate different species, while differences in fill (grey, black, and white) indicates a change in phenotype within a species, sometimes mediated by differences in genotypes (grey versus black). Global urban and regional species pools are filtered by local climates that are determined by global and regional climate and climate change, as well as urbanization that alters local climate through impervious surfaces that increase infrared radiation, irrigation that elevates soil moisture and evaporative cooling, and trees and structures that influence variation in shade (A). Factors that affect local climates are driven by global, regional, and local regulations, cultures, and history (e.g. redlining, zoning, public parks), leading to variation in climatic exposure and refugia. Variation in exposure in turn leads to altered phenotypes and species interactions, and differential mortality and reproduction that filters both phenotypes and genotypes, thereby altering local species and genetic pools and population sizes (B). Human–wildlife interactions and human perceptions of the effects of climate on human–wildlife interactions (C) may in turn alter human regulations and behaviours at multiple scales, leading to subsequent changes in the landscape of stressors (D). Human social systems component in the bottom block modified from Cook et al.; imagery in social systems is from Google Maps (© 2022 Google); photograph credits: bee and turkey, K. McCluney; snake, B. Hughes; bobcat, H. Bateman.

SEEP EXAMPLE: ALTERED URBAN CLIMATE

Overview
Climatic alterations associated with urbanization can be used to illustrate the power of the SEEP framework to understand the impacts of human‐induced environmental changes (Fig. 3). Moreover, urban warming may simulate future climate change outside cities (Youngsteadt et al., ; Lahr, Dunn & Frank, ). Urbanization alters many biologically relevant conditions including climate at multiple scales (see Table 1 for definitions). Locations in cities with a high density of impervious surfaces can have daytime air and ground surface temperatures that are as much as 7 or 8 °C hotter, respectively, than locations with low density of impervious surfaces (Imhoff et al., ; Yan et al., ; Hibbard et al., ). However, the influence of impervious surfaces on ambient temperature can differ regionally. For instance, residential areas of xeric cities may have lower maximum temperatures, likely due to the cooling effects of increased evapotranspiration associated with irrigation (Brazel et al., ). Nighttime temperatures can also be higher in cities compared to surrounding rural environments (Hibbard et al., ). These effects are referred to as the Urban Heat Island (UHI) (Oke, ).
Soil moisture and surface water may also be influenced by human activities in cities. Warming can reduce soil moisture by increasing evapotranspiration, whereas irrigation increases soil moisture. The combination of these processes can lead to lower soil moisture in highly urbanized (high impervious surface) parts of cities in mesic regions, but higher soil moisture in residential (intermediate impervious surface) parts of cities in xeric regions, leading to convergence in soil moisture in certain locations across both cities (Groffman et al., ; Mazrooei et al., ). Additionally, cities in mesic regions often have decreased amounts of surface water due to drainage and water control, whereas the opposite is observed in cities in xeric regions as water may be captured and stored in reservoirs and canals (Steele et al., ). Thus, certain environmental conditions within cities in different climatic regions may converge, demonstrating the overriding influence of urbanization on these conditions (Groffman et al., ). Physiological parameters that influence organismal health may also converge in response to different environmental conditions. For example, terrestrial arthropod body water content can increase with urbanization in cities in xeric regions and decrease in cities in mesic regions, converging to similar water content in certain locations across cities (McCluney, Burdine & Frank, ), with potential implications for their health (Benoit et al., ). These examples illustrate the extent to which human social systems can influence the biophysical characteristics of cities.
Here we suggest that the heterogeneous changes in temperature and water associated with urbanization filter a regional and global urban species pool into local communities that have a subset of response traits (e.g. thermal limits, desiccation resistance; Table 2) that allow them to persist in these locations (Fig. 3A,B). Some species will possess sufficient phenotypic plasticity to occupy a wide range of environmental conditions rapidly, others may adapt to these conditions on longer timescales, and some may be completely excluded (Fig. 3B). The local community will then have effect traits (e.g. boldness, venom, pollination; Table 2) that influence negative or positive human–wildlife interactions (Fig. 3C). These interactions may in turn alter zoning, parks, financial incentives, or individual behaviour in ways that feed back to influence local climate (Fig. 3D). Although here we present a logical path through the complexity of studying social, ecological, and evolutionary processes in cities, we note that other approaches are possible and thus our discussion sometimes departs from the main path in order to illustrate important considerations.
Selected examples of response and effect traits useful for implementing the urban social–ecological–evolutionary–phenotypic (SEEP) framework. Note: some traits can be both response and effect traits, depending on the context.
Trait	Utility examples	Example citations	 	Examples of response traits	 	Thermoregulatory ability and thermal limits	Predict which species may be lost from hot sites in hot cities or where colonization/persistence may be enabled in cold cities	Hamblin et al.; Guo et al. 	 	Desiccation resistance/tolerance	Predict which species may be lost from hot sites in hot or dry cities	Burdine & McCluney 	 	Mobility (and related traits)	Predict which species could be found in urban greenspaces that are isolated by impervious surface	Niemelä & Kotze; Vergnes et al. 	 	Dependence on sound for communication (and sound characteristics)	Predict which species could be found in locations near roadways or industrial areas	Proppe et al.; Francis 	 	Boldness	Predict which species are likely to be more common where human‐derived food sources are available	Breck et al. 	 	Diet specialization	Predict if species can be found in locations dominated by non‐native plants or loss of other kinds of food	Ferrari & Polidori; Caspi et al. 	 	Beak size in birds	Predict if populations are able to use human supplemental food sources	Badyaev et al. 	 	Pesticide resistance	Predict if populations will persist in urban homes and gardens where pesticides are prevalent	Wada‐Katsumata et al.; Desvars‐Larrive et al. 	 	Nesting behaviour	Predict presence of species that need particular nesting habitat, such as tall trees for raptors or bare ground for ground‐nesting bees	Ferrari & Polidori 	 	Examples of effect traits	 	Pollination presence and traits	Increase pollination of plants, including garden crops	Woodcock et al.; Greenop et al. 	 	Detritivore traits (e.g. mouthparts)	Waste removal	Youngsteadt et al. ; Marchand et al. 	 	Coloration	Influence attractiveness and appeal to humans	Tan et al.; Larasati et al. 	 	Trophic position and mobility	Pest abundance or biocontrol	Perović et al.; Korányi et al. 	 	Boldness	Increase negative or positive encounters with humans	Breck et al.; Wilkinson et al. 	 	Production of venom	Increase human injury and fear	McIntyre; Larson et al.; Schmack et al. 	 	Disease vector or agent	Increase human disease and fear	Eritja et al.; Obame‐Nkoghe et al. 	 	Diet specialization (e.g. blood feeding or pollination of specific flowers)	Increase negative (e.g. bites from mosquitoes) or positive (e.g. pollination of squash by squash bees) human interactions	Goodman et al. 	 	Thermy (ectothermy or endothermy)	Influence the extent to which interactions with humans are influenced by ambient temperatures	Abrahms et al.; Clark & Johnson

Social systems and urban climate
Humans alter the local climate of cities primarily through (i) addition of concrete and other impervious surfaces, (ii) manipulation of plant communities, (iii) changes in the spatial and temporal distribution of water and irrigation (Ojima, Galvin & Turner, ; McDonald et al., ), and (iv) addition of technological systems that modify local temperatures (e.g. air conditioners, fans, and subway vents) (Jin et al., ; Ortiz et al., ). Humans influence these activities through land‐use changes, urban development, and property management, which are the result of formal and informal governance systems as well as values, beliefs, and social norms of residents and decision makers (Younger et al., ; Harlan & Ruddell, ). For instance, in most cities, industrial and commercial areas tend to have more impervious surfaces and less vegetation coverage than residential areas (Van de Voorde, Jacquet & Canters, ). Additionally, the distribution of vegetation, water bodies, and cover type differ spatially throughout urban areas based on urban planning and development histories. The shifts in environmental conditions associated with urbanization can in turn alter the characteristics of local biological communities by selecting for particular phenotypic response traits, such as thermal and water content limits, desiccation resistance, and body size (e.g. Hamblin et al., ).
Across the globe, historical and contemporary practices of racism and classism influence the distribution of green spaces and the presence of shade trees and other environmental amenities, resulting in environmental justice issues such as differences between neighbourhoods in degree of impervious surface cover, exposure to pollutants, and other environmental hazards (Morello‐Frosch, Pastor & Sadd, ; Bolin, Grineski & Collins, ). North American cities are increasingly attempting to improve environmental equity by providing green spaces to low‐income and predominantly Black, Indigenous, and People of Colour (BIPOC) neighbourhoods, which tend to have less access to green spaces than their higher‐income or predominantly White counterparts (Byrne & Wolch, ; Declet‐Barreto et al., ). However, some attempts at increasing green spaces in lower income communities have led to eco‐gentrification, i.e. the implementation of environmental or sustainability initiatives that lead to the exclusion, marginalization, and displacement of economically marginalized residents (Pearsall & Anguelovski, ; Maantay & Maroko, ) or even disamenities (e.g. if there is improper care of new green space infrastructure).
In general, underlying social processes impact the structure and function of green spaces within a city, altering local climates, and these dynamics occur at varying spatial scales (Chang et al., ). At the residential parcel level, socioeconomic differences between landowners may influence the type of landscaping employed (van Heezik et al., ; Locke et al., ), corresponding irrigation practices (Savelli et al., ), and the presence of water bodies (Thornhill et al., ). Neighbourhood demographics, Homeowners Associations (HOAs), and various regulations can also alter the management of individual parcels and differences between neighbourhoods (Groffman et al., ). Residential neighbourhoods are only one component of a broader system of land cover, built environment, hydrology, and vegetation structure within the urban landscape. They are all influenced by human management and mediated by land use zoning, local, state, and federal ordinances, individuals' socioeconomic and demographic traits, norms, beliefs and values, and historical legacies (Roy Chowdhury et al., ). Thus, regional, neighbourhood, and individual‐level social systems all interact to influence local climatic conditions (Schell et al., ; McPhearson et al., ). These climatic conditions, and their effects on ecosystems, may lead to feedbacks (e.g. change in land‐use planning, ground‐level management of habitat, or local ordinances) that in turn alter climate‐related social systems (Fig. 3). More research is needed to determine to what extent these alterations to ecological communities can lead to changes in policies and management (e.g. whether a shift in bird communities can lead to increased tree planting; Larson et al., ). We postulate that feedbacks between ecological and social systems may partly depend on public awareness of linkages between urban climate change and ecological shifts (e.g. understanding the climatic sensitivity of pollinators could promote addition of certain flowers or shade), but integrating theories of social change and adaptive governance should advance our understanding of these feedbacks (Anderies, Janssen & Ostrom, ; Olsson, Folke & Berkes, ; Cote & Nightingale, ).

Climate‐related drivers of local species and trait assemblages
Local climate is likely an important ecological filter of regional species pools, thereby influencing local urban species assemblages (Fig. 3A,B). Investigating local urban climate, interactions of climatic with non‐climatic filters, and how these influence urban animal communities and their evolution, is critical to our understanding of the functioning of urban ecosystems. A focus on phenotypic response traits can help guide this research. For instance, studying thermal tolerance traits may help us understand the losses or additions of certain taxa from or to warmer, more urbanized parts of cities (Fig. 3B). For example, bee taxa with relatively low maximum thermal tolerance (a physiological phenotypic trait) were found to be less abundant or missing from the hotter parts of Raleigh, NC, USA (Hamblin et al., ). Inversely, taxa with relatively high minimum thermal tolerance might benefit from urban warming (Youngsteadt et al., ). Several potential physiological mechanisms underlie differences in thermal tolerance, including cell membrane fluidity (Bowler, ) and protein folding (González‐Tokman et al., ), which may influence neural (Vornanen, ), liver (Connors, Malenke & Dearing, ), and cardiovascular function (Vornanen, ). Differences in how ectotherms and endotherms handle heat stress are still debated (Boyles et al., ). Although endotherms maintain a more narrow range of body temperatures than ectotherms, endotherm body temperatures can vary (e.g. Tieleman & Williams, ), and responses of ectotherms and endotherms to changes in ambient temperature may follow similar patterns (i.e. thermal performance curves may have similar shapes) (Boyles et al., ). Moreover, evaporative cooling is known to be important for both endotherm and ectotherm thermoregulation (DeNardo, ; Boyles et al., ; Loughran & Wolf, ; Lahondère, ), but comparative studies between the two groups are lacking. Both ectotherms and endotherms may show substantial variation in thermoregulatory rigidity and mechanisms among taxa.
Our ability to use thermal tolerance traits to predict species assemblages in different parts of cities is complicated by the plasticity of these traits and even their potential for rapid adaptation (Figs 2 and 3B), which must be understood for adequate prediction (Stillman, ; Magozzi & Calosi, ). For instance, some heat‐exposed endotherms are able to shift their thermoneutral zone to higher temperatures, resulting in greater tolerance of heatwaves than might be predicted (Cooper et al., ). Other animals may rapidly evolve higher thermal tolerance: acorn ants (Temnothorax curvispinosus), which form colonies in single acorns, have evolved more plastic and higher thermal tolerance within the hotter parts of Cleveland, Ohio, USA, an adaptation that may allow them to persist in these areas (Diamond et al., ; Martin et al., ). This ability may, however, not be widespread–phenotypic thermal tolerance plasticity and potential for rapid evolution in ectotherms is likely limited (Gunderson & Stillman, ). Additionally, the evolution of thermal tolerance, when it occurs, is often slower than the rate of urban warming (Diamond, Kolaske & Martin, ).
The use of thermal tolerance traits to predict responses to urban warming is further complicated by behavioural plasticity, which can alter heat exposure (Fey et al., ; Youngsteadt et al., ). For instance, during periods of intense heat in Phoenix, Arizona, USA, rosy‐faced lovebirds, Agapornis roseicollis, appear to decrease their exposure to heat when they perch next to air‐conditioned building exhaust vents (Mills & McGraw, ). Similarly, eastern water dragons (Intellagama lesueurii) in Brisbane, Australia, which have temperature‐dependent sex determination, are able to avoid the potential problems of unbalanced sex ratios among offspring in hot parts of cities by digging deeper nests or travelling outside their home range to nest in cooler conditions (Jackson et al., ). But the behavioural approaches that animals employ to deal with urban warming may not be fully effective at preventing heat stress (Youngsteadt et al., ) and may be costly. For instance, taxa that are able to persist in hot conditions through changes in behaviour, rather than thermal limits, may spend less time foraging or doing so in less‐optimal locations (Mason et al., ; van de Ven, McKechnie & Cunningham, ; Valle et al., ) and thus eventually experience reduced health (van de Ven et al., ), fecundity (Valle et al., ), and population declines, despite successfully avoiding being exposed to lethal temperatures. Thus, thermal tolerance traits may be effective predictors of responses to urban heat, even when behavioural plasticity allows avoidance of lethal temperatures. Additionally, the behaviours that allow animals to avoid heat stress, such as those described above, may themselves be quantifiable response traits that could be used within the SEEP framework.
Mobility (e.g. flight) and body size traits may underlie some of the variation in exposure to potentially physiologically stressful conditions or plasticity in traits. On the one hand, more mobile organisms (which are often larger within a particular locomotory category) might be better able to take advantage of cooler microenvironments (e.g. shade of a tree or a cooler neighbourhood) and, therefore, avoid the harshest microclimatic conditions. On the other hand, smaller organisms (which are often less mobile within a particular locomotory category) might be better able to utilize benign microenvironments (e.g. soil pores, undersides of leaves, and tree cavities), thereby reducing their exposure to conditions that might be physiologically stressful. Mobility may also influence gene flow and thus the potential for local adaptation. Highly mobile taxa with high gene flow and reduced exposure to stressful conditions may be the least likely to exhibit local adaptation, but also the least at risk from urban warming. By contrast, poorly mobile animals might be the most exposed to harsh climatic conditions, and thus most at risk of being lost from these environments, but also the most likely to experience local adaptation that facilitates persistence under these conditions. Although more work is needed, body size and mobility traits are likely crucial to understanding evolutionary, physiological, and ecological dynamics of animals in cities.
Our framework generally focuses on using response traits to predict how species distributions will respond to environmental change. Integral to our approach is recognizing that these traits may shift either plastically, or evolutionarily, in response to environmental factors. Predicting these shifts is not always simple. For instance, because smaller organisms tend to have higher surface area to volume ratios, increasing heat dissipation (Bergmann, ), some have predicted that animals will become smaller with urban warming (Merckx et al., ). However, although some examples exist, body mass has not been found to decline consistently with increasing urban heat across taxa (Beasley et al., ; Merckx et al., ; Santini et al., ; Magura, Ferrante & Lövei, ; Hantak et al., ; Martin & Sheridan, ; Rega‐Brodsky et al., ). Many factors may account for this apparent discrepancy. First, body size is not the only trait that affects thermoregulation–morphological (e.g. body shape, insulation), physiological (e.g. metabolic rate), and behavioural (e.g. mobility, boldness) traits may also contribute to adjustments to heat. For instance, animals may use shape‐shifting, i.e. a change in the size of appendages such as ears and bills, instead of overall body size, to alter their body surface‐to‐volume ratio (Miller, Latimer & Zuckerberg, ; Allen's rule; Ryding et al., ). Additionally, effects of urban heat on body size may in some cases be counteracted by other factors. For example, in urban mammals that are commensal with humans, increased access to anthropogenic foods may cause increases in body size (Yom‐Tov, ). However, this increase would not be expected in taxa that do not exploit anthropogenic food resources. Another factor that could prevent body size reductions with urban warming is desiccation. Increased surface‐to‐volume ratios resulting, in particular, from smaller body sizes, enhance the risk of desiccation (Hadley, ; McCluney, ; Benoit et al., ), and so would be less expected in drier urban environments. Although the drivers of differences in body size are complex, body size is likely an important trait for understanding social–ecological–evolutionary dynamics in cities. Given the paucity of studies that isolate the effects of warming on body size from those of other urban factors, further research on this subject is warranted (Merckx et al., ; Prokosch et al., ; Hantak et al., ; Baldwin, Garcia‐Porta & Botero, ).
Most research on the effects of urban climate has focused on warming, because of clear relationships with urbanization (i.e. urban heat island) and effects on organisms. But urbanization also affects animal water availability and desiccation risk, which may present a greater danger than overheating for some species in some cities (Burdine & McCluney, ). For example, honey bees (Apis mellifera) can become closer to their desiccation limits with increasing urbanization, suggesting a potential risk of loss of this species in highly urbanized parts of some cities (Burdine & McCluney, ). Other animals may be able to tolerate this increased desiccation risk behaviourally or physiologically. For example, Becker & McCluney found that some urban arthropods in hotter parts of Toledo, OH, USA, increased their consumption of lipids compared to proteins, and this dietary shift was reduced with water supplementation. The authors predicted this outcome because lipids are generally better than proteins for water balance due to their increased water production during metabolism combined with the lack of water loss from the excretion of nitrogenous waste associated with protein metabolism. Similarly, urban zebra finches consumed food and drank early in the day and limited their activity when temperatures were high, which helped protect these birds from desiccation during heat waves (Cooper et al., ). To our knowledge, evolutionary responses of traits to changes in desiccation and dehydration risk have not yet been documented (but see an investigation that found a lack of evolution in isopods; Yilmaz, Diamond & Martin, ). Similar to thermal tolerance, plasticity in desiccation‐related traits, and factors influencing exposure to desiccating conditions, likely govern the predictive ability of desiccation traits for understanding shifts in species assemblages in response to urbanization.
Although many taxa may be negatively affected by urban warming, some may benefit. For example, scale insects (superfamily Coccoidea) have increased fecundity and abundance with urban warming (Meineke et al., ; Dale & Frank, ). Pigeons (Columba livia) and brown rats (Rattus norvegicus) may also benefit – outside of urban centres in temperate climates, these organisms generally cease to breed in the winter due to colder temperatures and reduced resources; warmer urban temperatures year‐round and ample access to resources can allow urban counterparts to increase their fecundity (Johnston & Janiga, ; Richardson et al., ). In addition, urban warming may allow certain taxa with low cold tolerance to spread into regions with harsh winter climates (Latimer & Zuckerberg, ; Polidori et al., ). For instance, Anna's hummingbirds (Calypte anna) have shown a rapid and extensive (700 km) northward extension of their range over a 40‐year period in the northwest USA, likely due to the use of urban areas (Greig, Wood & Bonter, ). Similar examples exist for species with potential for negative interactions with humans, like wasps (Polidori et al., ). Urban ecosystems may also allow individuals of some taxa to tolerate warming better than non‐urban individuals: nestling great tits (Parus major) living in urban environments experienced lower rates of mortality during hot weather than those living in forested areas (Pipoly et al., ). Some migratory birds may arrive, and thus breed, earlier in the spring in urban areas compared to rural areas (Tryjanowski et al., ). Thus, local urban species assemblages likely include a combination of taxa that show trait plasticity in response to warming, evolve in response to local warming, or already have traits that allow them to benefit from warming, with loss of taxa that are unable to tolerate these conditions.
How variation in traits influences species co‐occurrence across climatically heterogeneous urban landscapes could alter the types of interspecific interactions that are possible (e.g. Dale & Frank, ; Pintanel et al., ), and these interactions may themselves be influenced by climatic conditions (e.g. Barton & Schmitz, ; McCluney & Sabo, ). Ultimately, climatic filtering of ecological communities results in particular taxon assemblages (Fig. 3A, B), with some taxa having large effects on ecosystem services and disservices as well as people's perceptions thereof (Dale & Frank, ). Moreover, differences in climatic filtering of species assemblages between cities may underlie the increased strength of diversity–income (‘luxury effect’) relationships in arid cities (Chamberlain et al., ).

Human–wildlife interactions, social systems, and climate feedbacks
The successful establishment, proliferation, or exclusion of many urban species is a direct result of human–wildlife interactions (Sinclair, Brown & Lockwood, ; Carter & Linnell, ). These interactions, in turn, generate social system feedbacks that further alter local environmental conditions, such as vegetative structure and local climate (Avolio et al., ; Frank, Glikman & Marchini, ; Sharmin et al., ) (Fig. 3D). Thus, human–wildlife interactions can have positive, negative, and neutral outcomes for humans and wildlife species (Harris et al., ; Carter & Linnell, ). These outcomes may be predictable from effect traits that directly affect humans (e.g. venom production, pollination generalism; Table 2).
Climate influences human–wildlife interactions in multiple ways, with global climate change often intensifying conflicts (Abrahms et al., ). For example, climate‐related range shifts altered human–wildlife interactions in 69% of the 49 studies examined by Abrahms et al.. Explicit examination of the impacts of climate on human–wildlife interactions in cities is rare, but animals often seek resources in urban environments when resources outside cities are diminished by droughts, other weather events, or climate shifts (Lewis et al., ; Abrahms et al., ). For instance, droughts may cause Baird's tapirs (Tapirus bairdii) in Mexico (Pérez‐Flores et al., ) and African elephants (Loxodonta africana) in Tanzania (Mariki, Svarstad & Benjaminsen, ) to seek resources in populated areas, and melting ice may drive polar bears (Ursus maritimus) to seek food near human settlements (Towns et al., ). Urban warming itself may also cause changes in human–wildlife interactions. For example, residents and foresters may increase their use of pesticides to combat pest species that increase in abundance with urban warming (Dhang, ). The extent to which climate may mediate beneficial human–wildlife interactions is less well‐studied, but possibilities exist. For instance, pollinators likely harmed by urbanization and heat islands (Hamblin et al., ; Burdine & McCluney, ) may benefit from management efforts of urban gardeners, like planting more flowers (e.g. Burdine & McCluney, ). Such interactions may vary substantially across different urban systems, where distinct characteristics of human populations (e.g. attitudes toward wildlife, demographics, and land management practices) and of the environment (e.g. regional climate, resource availability, and wildlife species pools) generate unique social–ecological dynamics (Wilkinson et al., ).
The impacts of climate on human–wildlife interactions in cities has rarely been studied, but human interactions with coyotes provides one example (e.g. Wilkinson et al., ; Larson et al., ). Possibly due to a combination of reduced human threat and supplemental feeding, today urban coyotes in many North American cities appear more bold and exploratory than their rural counterparts, increasing interactions with humans and their pets, which are sometimes consumed (Breck et al., ). In Los Angeles, California, USA, climate change‐induced drought is hypothesized to increase the likelihood of urban pet predation by coyotes, especially on free‐roaming domestic cats (Weaver et al., ). This seasonal variation in consumption of domestic cats, in combination with the occurrence of rare but high‐profile attacks on humans (Siemer et al., ), has increased the fear experienced by some urban residents, who view the coyotes as a nuisance or pest species, resulting in calls to trap or kill them (e.g. the ‘Evict Coyotes’ movement in southern California). In the Los Angeles metropolitan area, these ecological–evolutionary processes are further complicated by intentional coyote feeding by urban residents. Social media sites, like Facebook or Nextdoor, provide a venue to discuss the need further to control urban spaces in ways that insulate humans from urban wildlife; these conversations lead to changes to the landscape at both the single parcel and neighbourhood scale, in ways intended to deter coyotes (Niesner, Kelty & Robins, ) (Fig. 3D). Although the population‐level impact of conflict‐mitigation strategies like Coyote Management Plans (CMPs) remains to be studied, the social–ecological–evolutionary loop is closed when trapping and killing becomes enacted as municipal policy for dealing with human–coyote conflicts, wherein lethal removal becomes a selective force on the landscape (Schell et al., ). Thus, drought‐induced increases in domestic pet predation by coyotes (Weaver et al., ) can change human behaviour in ways that increase selective pressures on coyotes that could alter their distribution and subsequent interactions with humans (Fig. 3B, C) (Schell et al., ; Wilkinson et al., ; Niesner et al., ). Thus, the study of coyote behavioural traits, including their variation over time with seasonal climate patterns, may allow a better understanding of the SEEP dynamics in this system. However, these dynamics may differ regionally. For example, in urbanized areas of the Phoenix, Arizona, USA metropolitan area, domestic cat predation by coyotes may be more related to macronutrient regulation, although further investigation is needed to disentangle these relationships properly (Weiss, ). Climate‐related changes in human–wildlife interactions may occur also in other systems [e.g. rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) in Central and South Asia (Ciani, )].
Climate may mediate human–wildlife interactions in other ways. For instance, the need to improve water‐use efficiency in Southern California and other regions with dry climates has resulted in policies that are causing residents to plant native vegetation and adopt drought‐tolerant xeric landscaping (Myjer, ). Native and xeric vegetation can increase the diversity of native birds (Lerman & Warren, ; Warren et al., ) and possibly other wildlife species (Lerman et al., ) in arid regions, and thus could alter interactions with humans. Each yard's environmental conditions result from management (or lack thereof) by residents, which is often driven by their own values, beliefs, norms, and sociodemographics (Locke et al., ) acting within the context of neighbourhood regulations (e.g. homeowner associations) and city‐wide initiatives (Larson et al., ). Although some of these social factors may be independent of environmental factors, others may be dynamic, shifting in response to short‐term weather (e.g. droughts and heatwaves) or long‐term climate change or perceptions of this change (Chui, ). The ability to shift management in response to weather events can be related to social factors; for example, predominantly Black and Hispanic, historically red‐lined neighbourhoods in Los Angeles experienced greater vegetation declines during a drought than did predominantly White neighbourhoods (Dong et al., ), with unexplored consequences for human–wildlife interactions. Other landscape structures such as golf courses, city green spaces, or other urban infrastructural units, which are often publicly owned, can have differing management drivers, and these spaces are increasingly seen as offering habitat to urban wildlife species (Gallo et al., ; Niesner et al., ). Understanding how human forces operating at various spatial and temporal scales interact with urban climate and wildlife to influence urban ecology is crucial for understanding and managing these complex systems (Fig. 3).

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SEEP APPROACH
As illustrated in previous sections, social–ecological–evolutionary coupled human–natural systems are complex and challenging to study holistically. However, viewing these systems through a phenotypic‐trait lens (Table 2), can simplify their study. Specifically, we suggest that researchers (i) identify and then quantify important and relevant environmental variables, (ii) identify and then measure related response traits, including their variation within and among individuals, populations, and species, (iii) determine the relative explanatory power of each trait for species distribution, developing an understanding of factors that most influence the distribution and abundance of each species, (iv) identify or quantify human‐relevant effect traits, likely integrated with surveys or other approaches for identifying and quantifying services and disservices, (v) gauge human responses to changes in the services and disservices associated with these traits through surveys or other observational research, and (vi) examine how trait distributions, species distributions, and human beliefs and actions change across time. Although these steps will require substantial effort by multi‐disciplinary teams, they present a concrete plan for SEEP urban wildlife research.
Efforts are needed to reduce some of the challenges in conducting this kind of research. First, funding multidisciplinary SEEP research either requires simultaneous funding of multiple grants to multiple principal investigators or integrated funding opportunities (e.g. US National Science Foundation, Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems). Although a carefully planned short‐term study could produce important results, long‐term funding would greatly improve the ability to study the dynamics of these systems. Second, working in multidisciplinary teams that use different terminology and methods requires extra effort that might initially subtract from productivity, but could eventually increase it. Efforts are needed to facilitate these collaborations, including through workshops (such as the one that stimulated this review), localized research centres (e.g. Central Arizona Phoenix, Long‐term Ecological Research program), as well as national or international research centres (e.g. National Socio‐Environmental Synthesis Center).
We note that our suggested implementation does not emphasize detailed mechanistic studies that allow disentangling phenotypic plasticity from genetic evolutionary change, such as common garden experiments, reciprocal translocation experiments, and genomic analyses that link specific traits to genes that differ between populations (Donihue & Lambert, ; Lambert et al., ). These studies are highly worthwhile, but it is typically easier to assess and utilize phenotypic measurements than it is to assess underlying genotypic mechanisms. Thus, a first step in the SEEP approach may be to assess variation in phenotypic traits, with studies of genotypic change added when possible.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The SEEP framework suggests that a focus on animal phenotypic traits can help us understand social–ecological–evolutionary processes in urban systems. Although we focus on urban climate change to illustrate components of the SEEP framework, the framework may also be applied to other urban factors such as habitat connectivity, resource availability and quality, species interactions, toxin exposure, as well as light and noise levels (Table 3). For example, animals that require low‐frequency sound for communication or hearing for prey detection may be absent from locations in cities with higher levels of anthropogenic noise (Francis, ).
Examples of abiotic and biotic non‐climatic factors that interact with social processes to affect urban animal ecology and evolution.
Factor	Examples	 	Habitat connectivity	LaPoint et al.; Morin et al. 	 	Resource availability and quality	Steele et al.; Coogan et al.; Hansen et al.; Brown et al. 	 	Species interactions	Wang & Hung; Theodorou; Knutie et al. 	 	Toxin exposure	Gardiner & Harwood; Fritsch et al.; Murray et al.; Scott et al.; Scott et al.; Hitt et al. 	 	Artificial light	Foster et al.; Katabaro et al.; Gaston & Miguel; Beaugeard et al. 	 	Artificial noise	Francis; Courter et al.; Osbrink et al.; Nelson‐Olivieri et al.
Studies that focus on individual components of SEEP dynamics are increasingly available, but some topics are understudied, and rarely have multiple linkages been examined simultaneously. We offer several future promising lines of research prompted by considering a SEEP framework (Table 4).
Future research recommendations within the social–ecological–evolutionary–phenotypic (SEEP) framework.
(1) The role of phenotype in understanding ecological and evolutionary responses to urbanization	 	(a) How do multiple urban environmental variables (e.g. climate, food, light and noise pollution) and processes (e.g. phenotypic adjustments versus genetic adaptations) integrate to influence SEEP dynamics?(i) How are physiological and behavioural responses to environmental variables (heat, ambient noise, artificial light, etc.) integrated? To what extent does this integration follow general principles or is context specific?(ii) What factors influence intraspecific differences in body size with urbanization? Can the effects of warming, desiccation, and supplemental feeding be disentangled and quantified? Are there traits that mediate the importance of these factors?(b) What key traits influence the ability of particular species to thrive in or be lost from cities? Which traits increase the likelihood of acclimation or adaptation to urbanization?(i) Are particular traits broadly associated with disappearance of particular species from cities (e.g. diet specialization or mobility) or are traits more specific to responses to particular environmental factors (e.g. climate, light, noise)?(ii) Does mobility drive rates of evolution in cities, such that less‐mobile taxa are more likely to adapt to urban environments? If so, what specific mechanisms (e.g. genetic versus epigenetic) mediate this adaptation?(iii) Does the degree of diet specialization influence a species' plasticity in response to urbanization or rate of evolution?	 	(2) Drivers of human–wildlife interactions in cities(a) How do interactions between governance, culture, norms, beliefs and values influence human–wildlife interactions?(b) How does racism/classism and its history influence human–wildlife interactions?(c) How does resource (e.g. food, water, and shelter) availability influence human–wildlife interactions? How does intentional or incidental supplementation of resources influence these interactions? Are effects mediated by phenotypic response or effect traits and do these traits evolve in response? Does intraspecific variation in animal diets influence these interactions?(d) How does climate influence human–wildlife interactions? Does urban warming increase human–wildlife interactions? Are these effects seasonal and do they depend on the regional climate? Can these dynamics be predicted from particular phenotypic traits?(e) How do social factors influence perceptions of human–wildlife interactions as positive, negative, or neutral?(f) Are there differences in how endothermic and ectothermic species interact with humans in response to urban environmental variables?	 	(3) Feedbacks that lead to changes in landscapes, management, and environmental factors(a) How do human–wildlife interactions in cities result in changes to human behaviour, regulations, land‐use, or land management decisions? Do these feedbacks amplify or ameliorate conflicts or increase or decrease ecosystem services/disservices?(b) How does choice of resource supplementation by humans influence animal phenotype, evolution, and community composition? How do the resulting human–wildlife interactions influence changes in resource supplementation?(c) How does the cultural discourse around urban wildlife (conversations on social media, other venues, and advertisements) influence perceptions of human–wildlife interactions and social norms and how does this influence management or policy changes?
Much of the research relevant to the SEEP framework has occurred in the USA, but more work is needed globally. A SEEP perspective emphasizes that differences in cultures and governance between regions and countries may lead to substantially different ecological patterns or relationships. Thus, efforts are needed to study the dynamics of these complex systems across cultures and governance in order to obtain a more holistic perspective, testing any potential generalities. Broad, many‐city and international comparisons are challenging logistically and financially. However, such studies are increasingly possible due to the increase in publicly available global environmental data through remote sensing and citizen science efforts (e.g. iNaturalist, eBird) if attention and contextualization are given to potential biases (Grade et al., ; Carlen et al., ), and social data such as the International Social Survey Programme, the Intergovernmental Science‐Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES), or the forthcoming city‐focused special report of The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
As urbanization continues to alter the biophysical characteristics of and relationships between and among people, animals, and the environment, understanding how social, ecological, and evolutionary systems interplay with phenotypes is critical for forming salient policies and practices surrounding the management of wildlife in cities. By applying this approach, we can, therefore, begin to diagnose why some taxa or populations of animals persist or succeed in cities whereas others do not, and under what conditions those characteristics might change. For instance, this approach may allow us to understand better why certain taxa of bees are less prevalent in hot parts of warm cities, while other taxa are less affected (Hamblin et al., ), and the potential for reducing declines through human actions, or why coyote conflicts with humans vary among cities and over time (Weaver et al., ). The SEEP framework, therefore, has significant implications for wildlife management and conservation in the age of the Anthropocene.

CONCLUSIONS
Recent papers have emphasized the linkages between social, ecological, and evolutionary processes in urban landscapes. However, they have not always explored linkages between all three simultaneously or did not provide a cohesive method for exploring these connections.
Here we argue that a focus on phenotypic response and effect traits allows us to examine linkages between social, ecological, and evolutionary processes.
We provide examples of how phenotypic traits may evolve in response to or influence ecological responses to urban climate alteration. We also illustrate how these traits can help us understand how climate influences human–wildlife interactions in cities and subsequent effects on human social systems that can lead to changes in regulations and management.
We provide guidance on how researchers can implement the SEEP framework, with an emphasis on response and effect traits.
We suggest a number of important questions that arise from focusing on traits when considering interacting social, ecological, and evolutionary processes in cities.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors contributed to the ideas and editing of this review. K. E. M. led the writing with substantial leadership support from P. D. and K. S.

REFERENCES
Climate change as a global amplifier of human–wildlife conflict
Metabolic scaling: consensus or controversy?
Urban driven phenotypic changes: empirical observations and theoretical implications for eco‐evolutionary feedback
A framework to analyze the robustness of social‐ecological systems from an institutional perspective
Hierarchical filters determine community assembly of urban species pools
Understanding preferences for tree attributes: the relative effects of socio‐economic and local environmental factors
Evolution on a local scale: developmental, functional, and genetic bases of divergence in bill form and associated changes in song structure between adjacent habitats
Complementarity in Allen's and Bergmann's rules among birds
Experimental warming transforms multiple predator effects in a grassland food web
Urbanization disrupts latitude‐size rule in 17‐year cicadas
Light pollution affects activity differentially across breeding stages in an urban exploiter: an experiment in the house sparrow (Passer domesticus)
Urbanization‐driven climate change increases invertebrate lipid demand, relative to protein—a response to dehydration
Dehydration dynamics in terrestrial arthropods: from water sensing to trophic interactions
Uber die Verhaltnisse der warmeokonomie der Thiere zu uber Grosso
Growing in cities: an urban penalty for wild birds? A study of phenotypic differences between urban and rural great tit chicks (Parus major)
Hypervolume concepts in niche‐ and trait‐based ecology
The geography of despair: environmental racism and the making of South Phoenix, Arizona, USA
Heat death in poikilotherms: is there a common cause?
Adaptive thermoregulation in endotherms may alter responses to climate change
The heat is on: genetic adaptation to urbanization mediated by thermal tolerance and body size
The tale of two climates‐Baltimore and Phoenix urban LTER sites
The intrepid urban coyote: a comparison of bold and exploratory behavior in coyotes from urban and rural environments
No fry zones: how restaurant distribution and abundance influence avian communities in the Phoenix, AZ metropolitan area
Toward a metabolic theory of ecology
Differential sensitivity of bees to urbanization‐driven changes in body temperature and water content
Interactive effects of urbanization and local habitat characteristics influence bee communities and flower visitation rates
Nature, race, and parks: past research and future directions for geographic research
A framework for contextualizing social‐ecological biases in contributory science data
Urbanization predicts flight initiation distance in feral pigeons (Columba livia) across New York City
Building a resilient coexistence with wildlife in a more crowded world
Behavioral plasticity can facilitate evolution in urban environments
Impervious surface cover and number of restaurants shape diet variation in an urban carnivore
Wealth, water and wildlife: landscape aridity intensifies the urban luxury effect
Land‐use diversity can better predict urban spontaneous plant richness than impervious surface coverage at finer spatial scales
Urbanization is associated with divergence in pace‐of‐life in great tits
Pedal to the metal: cities power evolutionary divergence by accelerating metabolic rate and locomotor performance
Visual attractiveness versus water conservation in front yard preferences in the context of drought in Melbourne, Australia
Intertroop agonistic behavior of a feral rhesus macaque troop ranging in town and forest areas in India
The functional microclimate of an urban arthropod pest: urban heat Island temperatures in webs of the western black widow spider
Ambient temperature‐mediated changes in hepatic gene expression of a mammalian herbivore (Neotoma lepida)
Multidimensional nutritional ecology and urban birds
Residential landscapes as social‐ecological systems: a synthesis of multi‐scalar interactions between people and their home environment
Physiological responses of wild zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) to heatwaves
The field metabolic rate, water turnover, and feeding and drinking behavior of a small avian desert granivore during a summer heatwave
Rural selection drives the evolution of an urban–rural cline in coat color in gray squirrels
Resilience thinking meets social theory: situating social change in socio‐ecological systems (SES) research
Black‐capped chickadees (Poecile atricapillus) alter alarm call duration and peak frequency in response to traffic noise
Urbanization‐driven changes in web building and body size in an orb web spider
Warming and drought combine to increase pest insect fitness on urban trees
Urban plants and climate drive unique arthropod interactions with unpredictable consequences
A review of wildlife ecotourism in Manaus, Brazil
Creating the park cool Island in an inner‐city neighborhood: heat mitigation strategy for Phoenix, AZ
Cloacal evaporative cooling: a previously undescribed means of increasing evaporative water loss at higher temperatures in a desert ectotherm, the Gila monster Heloderma suspectum
Socio‐eco‐evolutionary dynamics in cities
Population genetics, community of parasites, and resistance to rodenticides in an urban brown rat (Rattus norvegicus) population
Rapid evolution of ant thermal tolerance across an urban‐rural temperature cline
Evolution of plasticity in the city: urban acorn ants can better tolerate more rapid increases in environmental temperature. Conservation
Shared and unique responses of insects to the interaction of urbanization and background climate
Physiology evolves convergently but lags behind warming in cities
Drought‐vulnerable vegetation increases exposure of disadvantaged populations to heatwaves under global warming: a case study from Los Angeles
Adaptive evolution in urban ecosystems
Worldwide invasion of vector mosquitoes: present European distribution and challenges for Spain
How city traits affect taxonomic and functional diversity of urban wild bee communities: insights from a worldwide analysis
Opportunities for behavioral rescue under rapid environmental change
Light pollution forces a change in dung beetle orientation behavior
Vocal traits and diet explain avian sensitivities to anthropogenic noise
Exposure to Pb impairs breeding success and is associated with longer lifespan in urban European blackbirds
Mammal diversity and metacommunity dynamics in urban green spaces: implications for urban wildlife conservation
Influence of heavy metal contamination on urban natural enemies and biological control
Environmental impacts of artificial light at night
Scaling of total evaporative water loss and evaporative heat loss in birds at different ambient temperatures and seasons
Effects of metabolic level on the body size scaling of metabolic rate in birds and mammals
Insect responses to heat: physiological mechanisms, evolution and ecological implications in a warming world
Primary blood‐hosts of mosquitoes are influenced by social and ecological conditions in a complex urban landscape
Evaluating the use of semi‐structured crowdsourced data to quantify inequitable access to urban biodiversity: a case study with eBird
Using functional traits to predict pollination services: a review
Winter range expansion of a hummingbird is associated with urbanization and supplementary feeding
A trait‐based conceptual framework to examine urban biodiversity, socio‐ecological filters, and ecosystem services linkages
Global change and the ecology of cities
Ecological homogenization of residential macrosystems
Ecological homogenization of urban USA
Plasticity in thermal tolerance has limited potential to buffer ectotherms from global warming
Activity niches outperform thermal physiological limits in predicting global ant distributions
Physiological thermal limits predict differential responses of bees to urban heat‐Island effects
Does use of backyard resources explain the abundance of urban wildlife?
Mammalian body size is determined by interactions between climate, urbanization, and ecological traits
Climate change and health in cities: impacts of heat and air pollution and potential co‐benefits from mitigation and adaptation
Responsibility, equity, justice, and inclusion in dynamic human–wildlife interactions
Lead exposure is correlated with reduced nesting success of an urban songbird
The effects of historical housing policies on resident exposure to intra‐urban heat: a study of 108 US urban areas
Socioeconomics drive urban plant diversity
Remote sensing of the urban heat Island effect across biomes in the continental USA
Maternal nesting behaviour in city dragons: a species with temperature‐dependent sex determination
Impact of air conditioning systems on the outdoor thermal environment during summer in Berlin, Germany
City limits: heat tolerance is influenced by body size and hydration state in an urban ant community
Evolution of life in urban environments
Trait‐dependent tolerance of bats to urbanization: a global meta‐analysis
A review of the effects of artificial light at night in urban areas on the ecosystem level and the remedial measures
Modelling the ecological niche from functional traits
The potential and realized foraging movements of bees are differentially determined by body size and sociality
The effects of human socioeconomic status and cultural characteristics on urban patterns of biodiversity
Urban living can rescue Darwin's finches from the lethal effects of invasive vampire flies
Urbanization hampers biological control of insect pests: a global meta‐analysis
Recent advances in insect thermoregulation
Getting ahead of the curve: cities as surrogates for global change
Adaptive evolution in cities: progress and misconceptions
Ecological connectivity research in urban areas
Bringing birdwatching closer to home: developing urban birdwatching as a mean of sustainable tourism
Municipal regulation of residential landscapes across US cities: patterns and implications for landscape sustainability
Who is abuzz about bees? Explaining residents' attitudes in Phoenix, Arizona
Examining the potential to expand wildlife‐supporting residential yards and gardens
Human–wildlife interactions and coexistence in an urban desert environment
Habitat loss and thermal tolerances influence the sensitivity of resident bird populations to winter weather at regional scales
Predicting changes in community composition and ecosystem functioning from plant traits: revisiting the holy grail
The conservation value of residential yards: linking birds and people
Foraging ecology of black bears in urban environments: guidance for human‐bear conflict mitigation
Biologia Futura: adaptive changes in urban populations
Social norms, yard care, and the difference between front and back yard management: examining the landscape mullets concept on urban residential lands
Evaporative cooling via panting and its metabolic and water balance costs for lizards in the American southwest
Brownfields to greenfields: environmental justice versus environmental gentrification
Integrating metabolic performance, thermal tolerance, and plasticity enables for more accurate predictions on species vulnerability to acute and chronic effects of global warming
Only habitat specialists become smaller with advancing urbanization
Mechanical traits as drivers of trophic interaction between macrodetritivores and leaf litter
Elephants over the cliff: explaining wildlife killings in Tanzania
Body size responses to the combined effects of climate and land use changes within an urban framework
In a nutshell, a reciprocal transplant experiment reveals local adaptation and fitness trade‐offs in response to urban evolution in an acorn‐dwelling ant
The behavioral trade‐off between thermoregulation and foraging in a heat‐sensitive species
Urbanization impacts on evapotranspiration across various spatio‐temporal scales
Implications of animal water balance for terrestrial food webs
Variation in arthropod hydration across US cities with distinct climate
Animal water balance drives top‐down effects in a riparian forest—implications for terrestrial trophic cascades
Water on an urban planet: urbanization and the reach of urban water infrastructure
Ecosystem structure and function along urban‐rural gradients: an unexploited opportunity for ecology
Influences of urban land use on the frequency of scorpion stings in the Phoenix, Arizona, metropolitan area
The physiology of heat tolerance in small endotherms
Urbanization, biodiversity, and conservation: the impacts of urbanization on native species are poorly studied, but educating a highly urbanized human population about these impacts can greatly improve species conservation in all ecosystems
A social‐ecological‐technological systems framework for urban ecosystem services
Urban warming drives insect pest abundance on street trees
Body‐size shifts in aquatic and terrestrial urban communities
Urban evolution comes into its own: emerging themes and future directions of a burgeoning field
Bill size variation in northern cardinals associated with anthropogenic drivers across North America
Cool birds: facultative use by an introduced species of mechanical air conditioning systems during extremely hot outdoor conditions
Environmental justice and southern California's “riskscape”: the distribution of air toxics exposures and health risks among diverse communities
Are human‐induced changes good or bad to dynamic landscape connectivity?
The Mouse‐To‐Elephant Metabolic Curve: Historical Overview
Physiological and behavioral mechanisms of thermoregulation in mammals
City sicker? A meta‐analysis of wildlife health and urbanization
Field metabolic rate and body size
Historic redlining and urban health today in U.S. cities
Repeatability and phenotypic plasticity of fish swimming performance across a gradient of urbanization
Inequalities in noise will affect urban wildlife
Carabid beetle assemblages along urban to rural gradients: a review
Wildlife affordances of urban infrastructure: a framework to understand human‐wildlife space use
The coyote in the cloud
Human–wildlife conflict and coexistence
Urban green spaces and vector‐borne disease risk in Africa: the case of an unclean forested park in Libreville (Gabon, Central Africa)
The global impact of land‐use change: to understand global change, natural scientists must consider the social context influencing human impact on environment
City size and the urban heat Island
Adaptive comanagement for building resilience in social–ecological systems
Energy burden and air conditioning adoption in new York City under a warming climate
Traffic noise inhibits cognitive performance in a songbird
A general framework for analyzing sustainability of social‐ecological systems
A new framework for urban ecology: an integration of proximate and ultimate responses to anthropogenic change
Contesting and resisting environmental gentrification: responses to new paradoxes and challenges for urban environmental justice
Human‐wildlife conflicts and drought in the greater Calakmul region, Mexico: implications for tapir conservation
Managing biological control services through multi‐trophic trait interactions: review and guidelines for implementation at local and landscape scales
Predators like it hot: thermal mismatch in a predator–prey system across an elevational tropical gradient
Extreme hot weather has stronger impacts on avian reproduction in forests than in cities
Urban areas are favouring the spread of an alien mud‐dauber wasp into climatically non‐optimal latitudes
Are animals shrinking due to climate change? Temperature‐mediated selection on body mass in mountain wagtails
Anthropogenic noise decreases urban songbird diversity and may contribute to homogenization
Time for a change: dynamic urban ecology
Mammalian functional diversity and trait responses to anthropogenic and environmental factors across the contiguous USA
Increasing rat numbers in cities are linked to climate warming, urbanization, and human population. Science
A roadmap for urban evolutionary ecology
A multi‐scalar approach to theorizing socio‐ecological dynamics of urban residential landscapes
Shape‐shifting: changing animal morphologies as a response to climatic warming
One strategy does not fit all: determinants of urban adaptation in mammals
Urban water crises driven by elites' unsustainable consumption
The ecological and evolutionary consequences of systemic racism in urban environments
The evolutionary consequences of human–wildlife conflict in cities
Overlooked and misunderstood: how urban community gardeners perceive social wasps and their ecosystem functions
Systemic racism alters wildlife genetic diversity
Acute toxicity and bioaccumulation of common urban metals in Bombus impatiens life stages
Metals could challenge pollinator conservation in legacy cities
Tree crown traits and planting context contribute to reducing urban heat
How do suburban coyote attacks affect residents' perceptions? Insights from a New York case study
Reciprocal human‐natural system feedback loops within the invasion process
Convergent surface water distributions in U.S. cities
Acclimation capacity underlies susceptibility to climate change
Evolution in ecological field experiments: implications for effect size
Disturbance type and species life history predict mammal responses to humans
Demographics, behaviours, and preferences of birdwatchers and their implications for avitourism and avian conservation: a case study of birding in Nonggang, southern China
Behavioral thermoregulation in mammals: a review
The effects of urbanisation on ecological interactions
Blue‐space availability, environmental quality and amenity use across contrasting socioeconomic contexts
The role of hyperthermia in the water economy of desert birds
Spatial and temporal patterns of problem polar bears in Churchill, Manitoba
Co‐managing human–wildlife conflicts: a review
Bird migration advances more strongly in urban environments
Disruption of energy homeostasis by food restriction or high ambient temperature exposure affects gonadal function in male house finches (Haemorhous mexicanus)
The costs of keeping cool: behavioural trade‐offs between foraging and thermoregulation are associated with significant mass losses in an arid‐zone bird
Mapping form and function in urban areas: an approach based on urban metrics and continuous impervious surface data
Garden size, householder knowledge, and socio‐economic status influence plant and bird diversity at the scale of individual gardens
A phylogenetic approach to total evaporative water loss in mammals
Urban densification causes the decline of ground‐dwelling arthropods
Towards a trait‐based quantification of species niche
Feeling the heat: source–sink mismatch as a mechanism underlying the failure of thermal tolerance
Changes in taste neurons support the emergence of an adaptive behavior in cockroaches
Barn swallow nest predation by a recent urban invader, the Taiwan whistling thrush – implications for the evolution of urban avian communities
The more things change: species losses detected in Phoenix despite stability in bird–socioeconomic relationships
A collaborative social‐ecological research approach to inform & address urban coyote management challenges
Effect of species‐level trait variation on urban exploitation in mammals
Unifying functional trait approaches to understand the assemblage of ecological communities: synthesizing taxonomic divides
Coexistence across space and time: social‐ecological patterns within a decade of human‐coyote interactions in San Francisco
Linking locomotor performance to morphological shifts in urban lizards
The role of biotic interactions in shaping distributions and realised assemblages of species: implications for species distribution modelling
Trait‐based ecology of terrestrial arthropods
Meta‐analysis reveals that pollinator functional diversity and abundance enhance crop pollination and yield
Universal model for water costs of gas exchange by animals and plants
Assessing the effects of landscape design parameters on intra‐urban air temperature variability: the case of Beijing, China
Evidence for the evolution of thermal tolerance, but not desiccation tolerance, in response to hotter, drier city conditions in a cosmopolitan, terrestrial isopod
Body sizes of carnivores commensal with humans have increased over the past 50 years
The built environment, climate change, and health: opportunities for co‐benefits
Do cities simulate climate change? A comparison of herbivore response to urban and global warming
Responses of arthropod populations to warming depend on latitude: evidence from urban heat islands
Habitat and species identity, not diversity, predict the extent of refuse consumption by urban arthropods
Can behaviour and physiology mitigate effects of warming on ectotherms? A test in urban ants