Deep learning approach to predict autism spectrum disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Background
The use of the deep learning (DL) approach has been suggested or applied to identify childhood autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The capacity to predict ASD, however, differs across investigations. Our study’s objective was to conduct a meta-analysis to determine the DL for ASD in children’s classification accuracy.
Methods
Eligibility criteria were designed according to the purpose of the meta-analysis; PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, and Web of Science Database were searched for articles published up to April 16, 2023, on the accuracy of DL methods for ASD classification. Using the Revised Tool for the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies (QUADAS-2) to assess the quality of the included studies. Sensitivity, specificity, areas under the curve (AUC), summary receiver operating characteristic (SROC), and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were compiled by using the bivariate random-effects models.
Results
A total of 11 predictive trials based on DL models were included, involving 9495 ASD patients from 6 different databases. According to bivariate random-effects models’ results, the overall sensitivity, specificity, and AUC of the DL technique for ASD were, 0.95 (95% CI = 0.88–0.98), 0.93 (95% CI = 0.85–0.97), and 0.98 (95%CI: 0.97–0.99), respectively. Subgroup analysis results found that different datasets did not cause heterogeneity (meta-regression P = 0.55). The Kaggle dataset’s sensitivity and specificity were 0.94 (95%CI: 0.82-1.00) and 0.91 (95%CI: 0.76-1.00), and with 0.97 (95%CI: 0.92-1.00) and 0.97 (95%CI: 0.92-1.00) for ABIDE dataset.
Conclusions
DL techniques has satisfactory sensitivity, specificity, and AUC in ASD classification. However, the major heterogeneity of the included studies limited the effectiveness of this meta-analysis. Further trials need to be performed to demonstrate the clinical practicability of DL diagnosis.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12888-024-06116-0.

Background
A neurological illness called autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by deficiencies in social communication, constrained interests, and repetitive activities. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the global prevalence of ASD is estimated at 0.76%, which is about 16% of the total global child population. Additionally, in the US, the average percentage of ASD diagnosis made by parents in 2016 was marginally higher at 2.5%. A thorough psychiatric evaluation as well as the requisite psychological assessment, which takes time and is subject to subjectivity, are required for the diagnosis of ASD.
The technique of brain network analysis using resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), which has advanced quickly has received wide attention. fMRI can decode perceptual and semantic information from the human cerebral cortex in a non-invasive manner, and functional brain imaging activates specific brain regions visually by measuring blood flow and metabolism. Measured with fMRI, the temporal cortex of ASD patients has an enhanced emotional response to errors, while no such change in typical control (TC) patients. A large body of research has now analyzed the differences in brain networks between resting and normal individuals with autism, suggesting the feasibility of using neuroimaging abnormalities as biomarkers for ASD diagnosis. For example, Orru et al. used artificial intelligence algorithms to analyze fMRI data are vital to working with neuroimaging abnormalities as biomarkers for the diagnosis of ASD.
Given its capacity for automatic data comprehension, deep learning (DL) has become more popular among different identification techniques. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Deep Neural Network (DNN), recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), and the bidirectional long short-term memory (BLSTM) model are DL techniques that have been utilized or suggested to identify ASD in young children. Currently, more studies are using machine learning techniques to categorize or detect ASD. These studies include brain imaging, facial imaging, the analysis of physical biomarker data, the behavioral assessment of autistic people, and the evaluation of clinical data using machine learning techniques. Recently, as the largest open-source dataset available, both the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) and the Kaggle ASD Children Facial Image Dataset al.lowed for employing automated techniques, find ASD. The facial image based on the Kaggle dataset was utilized by Alsaade et al. to identify children with autism using a number of deep CNN-based transfer learning techniques. According to their assessment, the accuracy varied from 91 to 78%. Similar findings were also reached by Alam et al.. Using a deep learning methodology along with the F-score feature selection method based on the ABIDE dataset, Zhang et al. claimed that the accuracy was 70.9%. Moreover, previous meta-analysis have shown that DL has higher accuracy in predicting ASD compared with standard machine learning (SML).
However, there were few articles on the use of different DL techniques for the treatment or diagnosis of autism (21%), and further information on predictive reliability and validity is urgently needed. The diagnostic ability varies across research, which may be influenced by a number of constraints, even though numerous studies have demonstrated that DL for ASD in children is a reliable diagnostic tool. In order to assess the efficacy of DL for the diagnosis of ASD in children, we wanted to do this meta-analysis taking into account the limitations of single studies.

Methods
According to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) statement, this meta-analysis was conducted and reported. The analysis utilized methods advocated by the Cochrane Collaborative Working Group on Diagnostic Test Accuracy and the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ).

Search strategy
As of April 16, 2023, PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, and the Web of Science databases were searched for articles on the reliability of deep learning techniques for the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders. (Deep learning OR Neural Networks, Computer) AND (autism spectrum disorder) were among the MeSH search phrases. The Supplementary Table 1 contained a detailed search technique. The bibliographies of pertinent reviews were looked through to find more studies.

Selection criteria
ASD participants were the target population, the index test was an image-based deep learning technique, the outcomes were the diagnostic utility of deep learning, and the reference standard was clinical categorization. Duplicate published studies, case studies, animal trials, reviews, conference papers, and protocols were all excluded. Two researchers examined the entire texts of possibly suitable papers and separately evaluated the articles’ relevance to the study from the titles and abstracts that had been collectively screened.

Data extraction
Data extraction was done by two separate researchers (Yang Ding and Heng Zhang), and any discrepancies were worked out by a third reviewer or by conversation. Name of first author, year of publication, location, sample size, dataset, method, feature extraction, aim, TP, FP, FN, and TN values were among the details we gathered. Considering that each included study may have used more than one deep learning model to predict ASD, this study only extracted the results of the models with the best predictive effect from each study and included them in the meta-analysis.

Quality assessment
Using the QUADAS-2, two independent researchers evaluated the quality of every study included. According to four criteria—patient selection, index test, reference standard, flow, and timing—QUADAS-2 for meta-analysis of observational research rates studies.

Statistical analysis
The pooled estimates of sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative likelihood ratios (PLRs and NLRs), diagnostic odds ratios (DORs) and the AUCs of summary receiver operating characteristic (SROC), along with the 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were summarized using the bivariate random-effects models based on sensitivity and specificity pairs. Area under the receiver operating characteristic summary curve (AUC) was determined. To examine the degree of heterogeneity among all studies, Cochrane Q and I2 statistics were utilized. Heterogeneity was shown by I2 > 50% or P 0.05. Additionally, subgroup analyses, sensitivity analysis, and meta-regression were carried out in the current study. The funnel plot by Deeks was used to examine publication bias. Fagan plots were also employed. There were statistically significant differences (P < 0.05). Stata V.14.0 (Stata Corp LP) was utilized for statistical analysis.

Results

Study selection
Initially, 25,144 studies were search as potentially relevant studies. However, 15,953 articles were excluded due to duplication and the type of study. Based on studies’ title and abstracts, 9132 records were excluded. After reviewing the full text, 48 records were removed. Therefore, 11 articles the subjects of this meta-analysis (Fig. 1). Search strategies for all the databases we searched were included in Supplementary Material Table 1.
Flow-chart showing the article-screening process
Characteristics of the included studies in the meta-analysis
Study	Location	Sample size	Dataset	Model	Feature extraction	 	Subah et al. 	Bangladesh	866	ABIDE	AAL atlas, BASC atlas, CC200 Atlas, and Power atlas	Brain Imaging	 	Alsaade et al. 	Saudi Arabia	300	Kaggle	NASNetmobile, Xception, and DarkASDNet	face images	 	Ahammed et al. 	Canada	472	ABIDE-I, NYU	DarkASDNet	brain images	 	Lu et al. 	USA	230	Kaggle and East Asian	VGG16	face images	 	Zhang et al. 	China	1035	ABIDE-I	AE + F-score	Brain Imaging	 	Wang et al. 	USA	787	SSC	deepAutism	Common variants	 	Nogay et al. 	USA	1831	ABIDE	DCNN	Brain Imaging	 	Alam et al. 	USA	300	Kaggle	EfficientNetB0, MobileNetV2, ResNet50V2, VGG19, and Xception	face images	 	Saranya et al. 	India	3334	KFAD-2020	FACS-CNN	face images	 	Ahmed et al. 	India	280	Kaggle	MobileNet	face images	 	Hasan et al. 	Malaysia	60	own dataset	Kinematic-SWDA	statistical and joint

Study characteristics
The sample size ranged from 60 to 3334 in the included studies. There were 4 of the 11 included studies analyzed facial images based on Kaggle dataset, and 4 analyzed brain images ABIDE dataset. The publication year ranged from 2017 to 2022. Four studies were from UAS, two from India, one from China, one from Bangladesh, one from Canada, one from Malaysia, and one from Saudi Arabia. Deep learning models included NASNetMobile, VGG19, Xception, ResNet50V2, Power atlas, etc. The detailed information was demonstrated in Tables 1 and 2.
Classification performance of deep learning for ASD in the included studies
Study	Model	TP	FP	FN	TN	 	Subah et al. 	AAL atlas	68	4	12	90	 	Subah et al. 	BASC atlas	75	7	6	86	 	Subah et al. 	CC200 Atlas	74	9	7	85	 	Subah et al. 	Power atlas	69	3	11	90	 	Alsaade et al. 	NASNetmobile	121	35	29	115	 	Alsaade et al. 	Xception	127	36	23	114	 	Alsaade et al. 	Xception	129	40	21	110	 	Ahammed et al. 	DarkASDNet	227	16	9	220	 	Lu et al. 	VGG16	112	8	3	107	 	Zhang et al. 	AE + F-score	357	130	148	400	 	Wang et al. 	deepAutism	423	57	33	274	 	Nogay et al. 	DCNN	938	0	0	893	 	Alam et al. 	EfficientNetB0	136	19	14	131	 	Alam et al. 	MobileNetV2	137	22	13	128	 	Alam et al. 	ResNet50V2	135	16	15	134	 	Alam et al. 	VGG19	132	16	18	134	 	Alam et al. 	Xception	138	12	12	138	 	Saranya et al. 	FACS-CNN	1534	133	133	1534	 	Ahmed et al. 	MobileNet	131	4	9	136	 	Hasan et al. 	Kinematic-SWDA	28	3	2	27

Study quality
In Supplementary Material Tables 2 and Supplementary Material Fig. 1, QUADAS-2 results were presented. The index test was low risk, while patient selection, flow, and timing were both.

Performance of DL methods for ASD
Figure 2 showed the pooled sensitivity of DL methods for ASD. Among the 11 included studies, the sensitivity of DL methods for ASD ranged from 0.71 (95% CI = 0.67–0.75) to 1.00 (95% C = 1.00–1.00). When pooling the studies, the combined sensitivity of DL methods for ASD was 0.95 (95% CI = 0.88–0.98), and the I2 value was 98.46%.
Forest plot of pooled sensitivity and specificity of deep learning approach for detecting autism spectrum disorder
Figure 2 displays the specificity of DL techniques used in each included investigation, with values ranging from 0.73 (95% CI = 0.66–0.80) to 1.00 (95% CI = 1.00–1.00). Additionally, the I2 value was 98.2%, and the combined specificity of the DL techniques was 0.93 (95% CI = 0.85–0.97).
The PLR and NLR were depicted in Fig. 3 separately. The pooled PLR had a substantial amount of heterogeneity (I2 = 98.04%) and was 14.48 (95% CI = 5.66–37.01). With significant heterogeneity (I2 = 98.64%), the total NLR was 0.05 (95% CI = 0.02–0.14).
Forest plot of pooled positive and negative likelihood ratios of deep learning approach for detecting autism spectrum disorder
AUC was 0.98 (95%CI: 0.97–0.99), as well. Figure 4 depicted the ROC curve overall.
The summary receiver operating characteristic (SROC) curve of deep learning for detecting autism spectrum disorder
The post-test probability was 94% of LR-positive and 5% of LR-negative, while the prior likelihood was 50%. Fagan’s plot was in Fig. 5.
Fagan diagram evaluating the overall detection value of deep learning for autism spectrum disorder

Subgroup analysis
Based on the various datasets (Kaggle and ABIDE dataset), we performed subgroup analysis. According to the meta-regression results (P = 0.55), different datasets was not the cause of the heterogeneity. The Kaggle dataset’s sensitivity and specificity were 0.94 (95%CI: 0.82-1.00) and 0.91 (95%CI: 0.76-1.00) respectively. The sensitivity and specificity for the ABIDE dataset were 0.97 (95%CI: 0.92-1.00) and 0.97 (95%CI: 0.92-1.00), respectively. Pooled diagnostic data were shown in supplementary Fig. 2 of the supporting documentation.

Publication bias
Sensitivity analysis indicated our results were stable. Supplementary material Fig. 3 reported the results of sensitivity analysis. Deek’s plot showed that no significant prejudice in publications was found (p = 0.58) (Fig. 6).
Deek’s funnel plot for the publication bias

Discussion
Researchers and academics have increased their efforts to understand the causes of autism, as well as to detect autism early and give behavioral developmental therapy choices for those with autism, as the number of children with autism has been rising recently. Early behavioral interventions can only reduce autistic individuals’ communication and behavioral deficits, and the earlier the intervention, the greater the hope of restoring normal functioning. Therefore, it is essential to diagnose ASD patients in early stage. Recently, many researchers have proposed diagnostic methods based on electroencephalographic signals (EEG) or magnetic resonance images (MRI). However, these methods are more aimed at exploring the pathogenesis of autism and lack some practicality. More and more studies show that DL technology can be used to classify ASD. Our study also found that the DL approaches for diagnosing ASD could achieve high accuracy.
According to the results of current analysis, the sensitivity, specificity, and AUC scores of the DL methods were 95%, 93%, and 98%, respectively. The results are consistent with previous studies. To distinguish between ASD and TD, for instance, Xu et al. built a deep learning model incorporating LSTM and CNN. This DL technique had a high classification accuracy, with a sensitivity of 97.1% and a specificity of 94.3%. The findings of the DL were satisfactory when compared to the conventional methods. Ma et al. reported that the DL method exhibited a higher accuracy, precision, recall, and AUC, compared with conventional approaches. Based on the above quantitative analysis data results, DL has shown a leap beyond traditional clinical evaluations and SML in improving the accuracy and timeliness of diagnosis in early ASD detection, analysing the data from neuroimaging, behavioural observation and speech, and achieving possible outcome improvements.
Furthermore, our results indicated that the performance of DL for ASD based on ABIDE dataset was significantly better than that based on the Kaggle dataset. ABIDE dataset information is from 17 international sites, and includes 402 ASD and 464 control subjects. Up to now, ABIDE data set has gone through 3 iterations of updating, and the latest ABIDE Preprocessed version, with the support of the International Neuroimaging Datasharing Initiative (INDI), has realized the preprocessing of 1112 data sets composed of structural and resting state functional MRI data and a large number of phenotypic information. The data came from 16 international imaging sites, with neuroimaging data from 539 patients with ASD and 573 typical controls. Data processing was done by five different teams, further improving the accuracy and usability of the images. Information from the Kaggle dataset is sourced from online resources including webpages and Facebook pages. and includes 2,940 face images (autistic children and nonautistic children). Since this is an individually published dataset, the images are not pre-processed. The ratio of white children to non-white childrenin the dataset is 10:1, its ability to predict ASD in children coloured race is relatively low, and the clinical practicability of the hypothesis that facial features assist in diagnosing autism is still a matter of debate. Consequently, there is reason to be concerned about the dataset’s image quality. To the best of our knowledge, DL techniques perform very satisfactorily when using ABIDE data for ASD classification.
Our results indicated that relying on the powerful feature extraction ability of DL approaches, further research should keep following the latest technology of DL approaches and combine it with the diagnostic functions of children with ASD. The accuracy of assisted diagnosis would be improved by incorporating the latest technologies in DL approaches into the diagnostic tasks of children with ASD. Because ASD patients are affected by individual variability, we need to continue to expand the current dataset, especially in particular; the videos of children with ASD will be used to increase the diversity of the sample. In addition, Lu et al. believed that racial and ethnic aspects in DL-based ASD screening of facial photos are crucial to the viability and accuracy of the solution. In addition, Alsaade et al., for example, adopted different high-level deep learning models to diagnose ASD and found that the Xception model had the best diagnostic performance. Therefore, it is also an important research direction to clarify the influence of different deep learning models on the accuracy of ASD diagnosis.
Some notable limitations were observed in this meta-analysis. First, our results may be impacted by the small number of included research. This meta-analysis included only 11 studies. Second, publication bias and English language bias could exist because only English papers were included in our study. The incomplete inclusion of researches may cause our analysis to underestimate or overestimate the predictive significance of DL for ASD. Third, the protocols for this systematic review and meta-analysis were not registered. However, given previous evidence that protocol registration does not affect outcome reporting bias, the credibility of the results of this study should not be affected. Finally, our results remained a relatively high level of heterogeneity, the results of our analysis should be treated with caution. While the dataset could be a reason of heterogeneity in this study, different models, ethnicity, and number of images also influenced the heterogeneity. More importantly, our findings point to the value of DL in predicting ASD, and future research should focus on the impact of different DL models and model training datasets on prediction accuracy to clarify the framework for future DL models that can be used in clinical practice.

Conclusions
DL technique has satisfactory predictive sensitivity and specificity in ASD classification. Considering that the major heterogeneity limits the validity of the meta-analysis, our findings need to be treated with caution. Comparison of prediction accuracy of different models and datasets may become the focus of research in the future.

Electronic supplementary material
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Abbreviations
ASD
Autism spectrum disorder
WHO
World Health Organization
fMRI
functional magnetic resonance imaging
DL
Deep learning
CNNs
convolutional Neural Networks
RNNs
recurrent neural networks
BLSTM
bidirectional long short-term memory
ABIDE
Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange
CNN
convolutional neural network
PRISMA
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses
AHRQ
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
TP
true positive
FP
false positive
FN
false negative
TN
true negative
CIs
confidence intervals
AUC
areas under the curve
SROC
summary receiver operating characteristic
EEG
electroencephalographic signals
MRI
magnetic resonance images
SAE
stacked autoencoder
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Yang Ding and Heng Zhang contributed equally to this work.

Author contributions
(I) Conception and design: TQ (II) Administrative support: TQ(III) Provision of study materials or patients: DY (IV) Collection and assembly of data: DY(V) Data analysis and interpretation: HZ (VI) Manuscript writing: All authors(VII) Final approval of manuscript: All authors.

Funding
The study was supported by Top Talent Support Program for Young and Middle-aged People of Wuxi Health Committee (HB2023083) and Maternal and Child Health Research Project of Jiangsu Province Health Committee (F202308).

Data availability
All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this published article.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Risk of autistic spectrum disorder in offspring with parental mood disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Autism spectrum disorder: definition, epidemiology, causes, and clinical evaluation
Kogan MD, Vladutiu CJ, Schieve LA, Ghandour RM, Blumberg SJ, Zablotsky B, Perrin JM, Shattuck P, Kuhlthau KA, Harwood RL et al. The prevalence of parent-reported Autism Spectrum Disorder among US children. Pediatrics 2018, 142(6).
Exploring high-order correlations with deep-broad learning for autism spectrum disorder diagnosis
Children with high functioning autism show increased prefrontal and temporal cortex activity during error monitoring
Using support Vector Machine to identify imaging biomarkers of neurological and psychiatric disease: a critical review
Differential deactivation during mentalizing and classification of autism based on default mode network connectivity
Characterizing autism spectrum disorder by deep learning spontaneous brain activity from functional near-infrared spectroscopy
An Automated Assessment Framework for atypical Prosody and Stereotyped idiosyncratic phrases related to Autism Spectrum Disorder
Pokorny FB, Schuller B, Marschik PB, Brueckner R, Falck-Ytter T. Earlier Identification of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder: An Automatic Vocalisation-Based Approach. In: Interspeech 2017: 2017; 2017.
Prevalence and diagnosis of neurological disorders using different deep learning techniques: a Meta-analysis
The Geneva Minimalistic Acoustic Parameter Set (GeMAPS) for Voice Research and Affective Computing
Neuroimaging in neurodevelopmental disorders: focus on resting-state fMRI analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity
Neuroimaging-based biomarkers in psychiatry: clinical opportunities of a paradigm shift
Accuracy of machine learning algorithms for the diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder: systematic review and Meta-analysis of Brain magnetic resonance Imaging studies
Alsaade FW, Alzahrani MS. Classification and Detection of Autism Spectrum Disorder Based on Deep Learning Algorithms. Comput Intell Neurosci 2022, 2022:8709145.
Identifying children with autism spectrum disorder based on their face processing abnormality: a machine learning framework
Application of supervised machine learning for behavioral biomarkers of Autism Spectrum Disorder based on Electrodermal Activity and virtual reality
Computer Vision Analysis for Quantification of Autism Risk Behaviors
Autism AI: a new autism screening system based on artificial intelligence
Piosenka G. Detect autism from a facial image. https://www.kagglecom/cihan063/autismimage-dataaccessed on 2021.
The autism brain imaging data exchange: towards a large-scale evaluation of the intrinsic brain architecture in autism
Alam MS, Rashid MM, Roy R, Faizabadi AR, Gupta KD, Ahsan MM. Empirical study of Autism Spectrum Disorder diagnosis using facial images by Improved transfer Learning Approach. Bioeng (Basel) 2022, 9(11).
Zhang J, Feng F, Han T, Gong X, Duan F. Detection of Autism Spectrum disorder using fMRI functional connectivity with feature selection and Deep Learning. Cogn Comput 2022.
Deep learning applications for the classification of psychiatric disorders using neuroimaging data: systematic review and meta-analysis
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Chapter 8: Meta-analysis of test performance when there is a gold standard 2020. Available athttps://www.effectivehealthcareahrqgov/products/methods-guidance-tests-metaanalysis/methods/AccessedAccessed June 10.
QUADAS-2: a revised tool for the quality assessment of diagnostic accuracy studies
Meta-analysis in clinical trials
Measuring inconsistency in meta-analyses
Asymmetric funnel plots and publication bias in meta-analyses of diagnostic accuracy
Subah FZ, Deb K, Dhar PK, Koshiba T. A Deep Learning Approach to Predict Autism Spectrum Disorder using multisite resting-state fMRI. Appl Sci 2021, 11(8).
DarkASDNet: classification of ASD on functional MRI using deep neural network
Lu A, Perkowski M. Deep Learning Approach for Screening Autism Spectrum disorder in children with Facial Images and Analysis of Ethnoracial Factors in Model Development and Application. Brain Sci 2021, 11(11).
Diagnostic classification and prognostic prediction using Common Genetic variants in Autism Spectrum Disorder: genotype-based deep learning
Selcuk Nogay H, Adeli H. Diagnostic of autism spectrum disorder based on structural brain MRI images using, grid search optimization, and convolutional neural networks. Biomed Signal Process Control 2023, 79.
Facial Action Coding and Hybrid Deep Learning Architectures for Autism Detection
Ahmed ZAT, Aldhyani THH, Jadhav ME, Alzahrani MY, Alzahrani ME, Althobaiti MM, Alassery F, Alshaflut A, Alzahrani NM, Al-Madani AM. Facial features detection system to identify children with autism spectrum disorder: Deep Learning models. Comput Math Methods Med 2022;4:1–9.
Use of statistical approaches and artificial neural networks to identify gait deviations in children with autism spectrum disorder
[Treatment of a serious autistic disorder in a child with Naltrexone in an oral suspension form]
[Feature exaction and classification of autism spectrum disorder children related electroencephalographic signals based on entropy]
Functional connectivity classification of autism identifies highly predictive brain features but falls short of biomarker standards
Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism
Rakhimberdina Z, Liu X, Murata AT. Population Graph-based Multi-model Ensemble Method for Diagnosing Autism Spectrum Disorder. Sens (Basel) 2020, 20(21).
Abnormal amygdala functional connectivity and deep learning classification in multifrequency bands in autism spectrum disorder: a multisite functional magnetic resonance imaging study
Cameron C, Yassine B, Carlton C, Francois C, Alan E, András J, et al. The Neuro Bureau Preprocessing Initiative: open sharing of preprocessed neuroimaging data and derivatives. In Neuroinformatics 2013, Stockholm, Sweden.
Autistic C. Concerns with ‘Autistic Children Facial Dataset’ Dataset. Kaggle. Available online: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/imrankhan77/autistic-children-facial-data-set (accessed on 10 October 2024).
Rajaram M. Concerns with ‘Detect Autism’ Dataset. Kaggle. Available online: http://www.kagglecom/melissarajaram/concerns-withdetect-autism-dataset(accessed on 6 August 2021).
Single volume image Generator and Deep Learning-based ASD classification
Classification of autism spectrum disorder by combining brain connectivity and deep neural network classifier
Majority of systematic reviews published in high-impact journals neglected to register the protocols: a meta-epidemiological study