Connective tissue disease‐associated interstitial lung disease: an approach to treatment amidst an expanding evidence base
ABSTRACT
Connective tissue disease‐associated interstitial lung disease (CTD‐ILD) comprises a heterogenous group of conditions characterised by immune‐mediated fibro‐inflammatory pulmonary injury. Although the disease course is variable, CTD‐ILD can progress to respiratory failure and thus has a profound impact on morbidity and mortality. Systemic sclerosis (SSc), rheumatoid arthritis, idiopathic inflammatory myositis, Sjogren disease systemic lupus erythematosus and mixed connective tissue disease can all manifest or present with ILD. Histological injury in CTD‐ILD is diverse and pharmacological management, when indicated, is typically centred around corticosteroids and various immunosuppressive or anti‐fibrotic agents. Until recently, treatment decisions have been extrapolated from the evidence base available for SSc‐related ILD. Many recent trials and prospective studies have evaluated treatment options in a range of CTD‐ILD, thus guiding therapeutic intervention. Amidst an expanding evidence base, this comprehensive review describes new management strategies in CTD‐ILD with a focus on evidence from clinical trials. Supportive care and minimising treatment‐associated adverse effects remains paramount in this population with complex respiratory pathology and frequent co‐morbidities.

Introduction
Interstitial lung disease (ILD) can occur in systemic connective tissue diseases (CTDs) and has a significant impact on morbidity and mortality. The term CTD‐ILD encompasses a heterogenous group with diversity in underlying CTD, histopathology, radiological findings and clinical presentation. The latter can range from subclinical disease to rapidly progressive respiratory failure. Pooled prevalence varies according to the underlying CTD; 56% (95% confidence interval (CI) 39–72) in mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD), 47% (95% CI 44–50) in SSc, 41% (95% CI 33–50) in idiopathic inflammatory myositis (IIM), 17% (95% CI 12–21) in Sjogren disease (SjD), 11% (95% CI 7–15) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and 6% (95% CI 3–10) in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
The management of CTD‐ILD can be challenging, owing to aforementioned disease heterogeneity, variation in progression between individuals, and limited availability of highly efficacious treatments. Historically, therapeutic decisions have been extrapolated from trials evaluating the treatment of SSc‐related ILD (SSc‐ILD), however, recent studies have included patients with a range of CTD and therefore provide guidance in the management of these conditions. In this paper, we review the current understanding of CTD‐ILD and present available treatment options amidst this expanding evidence base.

Histopathological patterns and radiologic correlates
The pathogenesis of CTD‐ILD is complex and remains poorly defined. Environmental triggers such as cigarette smoke and infection are possible inciting factors, in the context of genetic and immunological susceptibility. Ultimately, immune‐mediated pulmonary injury ensues, resulting in inflammation, fibrosis or a combination of both. Over time, dysregulated repair pathways lead to aberrant tissue remodelling and progressive fibrosis.
CTD‐ILD manifests in a range of histopathological patterns, all with distinct radiological correlates. Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) is the most common pattern except in RA, where usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) predominates. Other pathologies include organising pneumonia (OP), lymphoid interstitial pneumonia and diffuse alveolar damage. Table 1 summarises the histopathological and radiological findings in a range of CTD‐ILD.
Common histopathological and radiological findings in CTD‐ILD
ILD pattern	Histopathology	HRCT findings	Commonly associated CTD	 	UIP	Interstitial fibrosis with honeycombing and fibroblastic foci. Typically minimal inflammationChanges are temporally heterogeneous	Reticulation with architectural distortion, resulting in traction bronchiectasis and honeycombingSubpleural distribution with an apicobasal gradientGGO generally absent or sparse	RA, SSc, IIM, MCTD	 	NSIP	Interstitial inflammation, lymphocyte predominant; some degree of fibrosisChanges are temporally homogenousCan be subcategorised into cellular (inflammatory) or fibrosing (fibrotic) NSIP, which can coexist	Bilateral GGO +/− patchy consolidation; peripheral distribution with apicobasal gradient, usually with subpleural sparingArchitectural distortion is less common but may have traction bronchiectasis in fibrotic NSIPHoneycombing is absent or sparse	SSc, IIM, MCTD, RA	 	OP	Intraluminal granulation tissue polyps and organising pneumonia in distal airspaces and alveoliMild chronic interstitial inflammation Changes are temporally homogenous	Multifocal, bilateral patchy consolidation, may have ‘reverse halo’ sign; Peri‐bronchial or subpleural distributionLung architecture usually preserved	IIM, RA	 	DAD	Diffuse alveolar oedema, hyaline membrane formation and extensive fibroblastic proliferation.Can progress to fibrosis after 1 weekChanges are temporally homogenous	Diffuse or multifocal GGO with consolidationFibrotic changes with architectural distortion in later stages	RA, SLE, IIM (especially amyopathic)	 	LIP	Dense interstitial mononuclear infiltrateLymphoid hyperplasia with predominant peri‐lymphatic distribution	Diffuse GGO with centrilobular or subpleural nodules.Thickening of broncho‐vascular bundles and can develop honeycombing. Thin‐walled perivascular cysts are common	SjD, MCTD
CTD, connective tissue disease; DAD, diffuse alveolar damage; GGO, ground‐glass opacity; HRCT, high‐resolution computer tomography; IIM, idiopathic inflammatory myositis; ILD, interstitial lung disease; LIP, lymphoid interstitial pneumonia; MCTD, mixed connective tissue disease; NSIP, nonspecific interstitial pneumonia; OP, organising pneumonia; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SjD, Sjogren disease; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; SSc, systemic sclerosis; UIP, usual interstitial pneumonia.
A subset of CTD‐ILD patients with pulmonary fibrosis may develop progressive pulmonary fibrosis (PPF), marked by worsening respiratory symptoms, radiological progression and declining lung function. PPF carries a worse prognosis, similar to that of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), and thus requires an aggressive treatment approach.
High‐resolution computer tomography (HRCT) is the primary imaging modality for diagnosis and monitoring in CTD‐ILD. Radiological patterns are predictive of the underlying histopathology; however, more than one radiological pattern and histopathology can occur in the same patient. As such, disease extent and progression are more critical than establishing the exact pathology.

Management
CTD‐ILD treatment is centred around corticosteroids, other immunosuppressants and antifibrotic agents. A holistic approach shoulder consider CTD‐ILD subtype, disease extent and trajectory, extra‐pulmonary CTD manifestations and patient comorbidities. When available, collaborative care in a multidisciplinary team (MDT) helps navigate complex management decisions.

Indications for treatment
In mild or stable disease, treatment is usually deferred with close monitoring of clinical features and lung function. Conversely, severe or progressive disease generally warrants prompt treatment. HRCT and pulmonary function tests (PFTs) are useful to assess disease extent and progression. Using these parameters, Goh et al. proposed stratification of disease severity in SSc‐ILD as follows: extensive disease (associated with poorer prognosis) is characterised by HRCT disease extent >20%, or 10%–30% disease extent with accompanying forced vital capacity (FVC) <70% of predicted, while limited disease is defined as HRCT disease extent <20%, or 10%–30% disease extent with FVC >70% predicted. The applicability of this grading to other CTD‐ILD remains uncertain.
Clinical progression, as proposed by the Outcomes Measures in Rheumatology (OMERACT) initiative, can be defined as FVC decline ≥10%, or FVC decline of 5%–10% in addition to ≥15% decline in diffusion lung capacity of carbon monoxide (DLCO). Recent international consensus guidelines have defined PPF by the presence of at least two of the following three criteria: worsening symptoms, absolute decline in FVC ≥5% or DLCO ≥10% within 1 year follow‐up and radiological evidence of disease progression.
These criteria are not absolute and an individualised approach accounting for the natural history of specific CTD‐ILDs remains essential in guiding treatment initiation.

Goals of treatment
Therapeutic goals in CTD‐ILD vary depending on the relative degrees of pulmonary inflammation and/or fibrosis. In inflammatory ILD patterns, such as cellular NSIP and OP, anti‐inflammatory agents may induce partial or even complete resolution. Conversely, disease regression is not expected in fibrotic phenotypes such as UIP and fibrotic NSIP, where the goal of treatment is to halt or slow disease progression.

Corticosteroids
Despite a lack of high‐quality evidence supporting their efficacy, corticosteroids have been the cornerstone of CTD‐ILD management, favoured for their rapid‐onset anti‐inflammatory effects. Compelling observational data highlight CTD‐ILD with an OP pattern as particularly responsive to corticosteroids, though there are comparatively lower efficacy and remission rates compared to idiopathic OP. In fibrotic phenotypes, such as RA‐related UIP (RA‐UIP), corticosteroids are unlikely to be efficacious and there is contention around their utility. Although patients with NSIP generally respond to immunosuppression, complete resolution is uncommon, especially if there is significant fibrosis. Nonetheless, the 2023 American College of Rheumatology (ACR)/American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST) guidelines conditionally recommend corticosteroids as first‐line treatment in all CTD‐ILDs, excluding SSc‐ILD due to the risk of precipitating scleroderma renal crisis. This risk is attenuated with the use of prednisone‐equivalent doses ≤15 mg daily. Similar precautions are also advised in IIM‐related ILD (IIM‐ILD) and MCTD‐related ILD (MCTD‐ILD) when SSc‐related clinical features or autoantibodies are present. Rapidly progressive or severe disease requires high‐dose parenteral corticosteroids due to the risk of mortality. There is no consensus regarding corticosteroid taper, and this is adapted according to disease control and the development of corticosteroid‐related adverse effects.

Evidence base
This section reviews the major clinical trials regarding therapeutic agents in CTD‐ILD and their implications on management. Notably, recent studies have broadened the treatment evidence base in CTD‐ILD beyond SSc (Table 2).
Summary of key trials in the treatment of CTD‐ILD
Trial	Year	Population	Phase	Follow‐up	Drug investigated	Relevant outcome variables	Summary	 	SLS‐I	2006	145 SSc‐ILD	III	12 months	CYC	Oral CYC (72 pts) versus PBO (73 pts)	I: pFVC%; II: pTLC%, pDLCO%, PR‐D	Compared to PBO, oral CYC had a modest but significant increase in pFVC%. Oral CYC also had improvements in pTLC% and PR‐D, but not in pDLCO%.	 	FAST	2006	45 SSc‐ILD	NA	12 months	CYC‐AZA	PDN + IV CYC + maintenance oral AZA (22 pts) versus PBO (23 pts)	I: pFVC%, pDLCO%; II: Chest HRCT extent and pattern, PR‐D	At FU, improvement in pFVC% was modest but not statistically significant. Secondary outcome was not achieved	 	SLS‐II	2016	126 SSc‐ILD	II	24 months	MMF versus CYC	MMF for 24 months (63 pts) versus oral CYC for 12 months followed by PBO for 12 months (63 pts)	I: pFVC%; II: pDLCO%, chest HRCT quantitative fibrosis scores, PR‐D	Comparable but modest improvements between MMF and CYC treatment groups in pFVC%, chest HRCT quantitative fibrosis scores and PR‐D. MMF treatment arm experienced a small but significant reduction in decrease in pDLCO%. MMF was better tolerated overall.	 	FaSScinate trial	2016	87 early, active SSc	II	48 weeks	TCZ	TCZ (43 pts) versus PBO (44 pts)	EE: pFVC%, pDLCO%	Smaller but non‐significant decline in pFVC% in TCZ group compared to PBO. Change in pDLCO% was similar between TCZ and PBO.	 	FocuSSced trial	2018	210 early, active SSc	III	48 weeks	TCZ	TCZ (104 pts) versus PBO (106 pts)	II: pFVC%	At 48 weeks, change in pFVC% from baseline significantly favoured TCZ over PBO.	 	RECITAL	2023	97 CTD‐ILD	II	48 weeks	RTX versus CYC	RTX (49 pts) versus IV CYC (48 pts)	I: FVC (mL), II: DLCO (mL/min/kPa), PR‐D	Comparable but modest improvements between RTX and CYC groups in change in FVC, DLCO and PR‐D.	 	EVER‐ILD	2023	122 NSIP, including 43 with CTD‐ILD	III	6 months	RTX‐MMF versus PBO‐MMF	Concurrent RTX + MMF (63 pts) versus concurrent PBO + MMF (59 pts)	I: pFVC%, II: PR‐D, pDLCO%, chest HRCT, PFS	Significantly improved pFVC% and PFS in RTX group compared to PBO at 6 months. PR‐D, chest HRCT and change in pDLCO% were not significantly different between groups.	 	SENSCIS	2019	576 SSc‐ILD	III	12 months	Nintedanib	Nintedanib (288 pts) versus PBO (288 pts)	I: FVC (mL), II: pDLCO%, PR‐D	Nintedanib significantly reduced annual rate of decline in FVC. pDLCO% mildly declined in both groups, though was not significantly different. Modest improvement in PR‐D in nintedanib, that was not significantly different to PBO.	 	INBUILD	2023	663 non‐IPF PPF, including 170 with autoimmune ILD	III	12 months	Nintedanib	Nintedanib (332 pts) versus PBO (331 pts)	I: FVC (mL), II: Composite ILD QOL score, PFS	Nintedanib significantly reduced decline in FVC compared to PBO. Despite this, QOL scores and PFS were not significantly different between groups.	 	ASSIST	2011	19 SSc‐ILD	II	12 months	HSCT versus CYC	HSCT (10 pts) versus CYC (9 pts)	pFVC%, pDLCO% and Chest HRCT disease quantitation	HSCT significantly improved pFVC% and chest HRCT disease quantitation compared to CYC. No effects on pDLCO% between groups were observed.	 	ASTIS	2014	156 SSc‐ILD	II	24 months	HSCT versus CYC	HSCT (79 pts) versus CYC (77 pts)	I: EFS, II: pFVC%, pTLC%	HSCT significantly improved pFVC% and pTLC% compared to CYC. HSCT group also demonstrated significantly better EFS at the 24 months.	 	SCOT	2018	73 SSc‐ILD	II	54 months	HSCT versus CYC	HSCT (36 pts) versus CYC (37 pts)	II: EFS	HSCT significantly improved EFS. Pulmonary function data was not available.
I, primary outcome; II, secondary outcome; ASSIST, American Scleroderma Stem Cell versus Immune Suppression Trial; ASTIS, Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation International Scleroderma; AZA, azathioprine; CTD‐ILD, connective tissue disease‐related interstitial lung disease; CYC, cyclophosphamide; EE, exploratory endpoint; EFS, event‐free survival; EVER‐ILD, RTX and MMF combination in patients with ILD; FU, follow‐up; HRCT, high‐resolution computer tomography; HSCT, haemopoietic stem cell transplant; ILD, interstitial lung disease; IPF, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis; IV, intravenous; PBO, placebo; pDLCO%, percent predicted diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide; PDN, prednisone; PFS, progression‐free survival; pFVC%, percent predicted forced vital capacity; PPF, progressive pulmonary fibrosis; PR‐D, patient reported dyspnoea; pTLC%, percent predicted total lung capacity; QOL, quality of life; RECITAL, RTX versus IV CYC in patients with CTD‐ILD; SCOT, Scleroderma: CYC or Transplantation Trial; SLS, Scleroderma Lung Study; SSc, systemic sclerosis; TCZ, tocilizumab.

Cyclophosphamide
The 2023 ACR/CHEST guidelines conditionally recommend cyclophosphamide (CYC) as a first‐line agent in CTD‐ILD or in progressive or rapidly progressive disease.
Two randomised double‐blind placebo‐controlled trials (RDBPCTs) have evaluated the efficacy of CYC in SSc‐ILD: Scleroderma Lung Study‐I (SLS‐I) and Fibrosing Alveolitis in Scleroderma Trial (FAST). In SLS‐I, 145 patients received either oral CYC (1–2 mg/kg/day) or placebo for 12 months, with a 12‐month follow‐up. Patients receiving CYC experienced a 2.53% (95% CI 0.28–4.79, P < 0.03) increase in predicted FVC% (pFVC%) at 12 months, which was associated with a statistically significant improvement in quality of life, dyspnoea and functional capacity. Lung function improvements were sustained at 18 months, but pFVC% was comparable to the placebo group at 24 months. These findings suggest a role for ongoing immunosuppression beyond 12 months.
FAST involved 45 patients with SSc‐ILD. Participants in the treatment arm received low‐dose maintenance prednisone and monthly intravenous (IV) CYC for 6 months, followed by 6 months of maintenance oral azathioprine (AZA). The trial demonstrated a strong but non‐significant trend favouring the treatment arm, with a mean 12‐month difference in adjusted change in pFVC% of 4.19% (95% CI 0.57–8.95, P = 0.08). However this was not associated with improvements in radiological disease or dyspnoea scores.

Mycophenolate mofetil
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is a well‐tolerated oral inhibitor of purine synthesis that induces cytostasis in lymphocytes and subsequent immunosuppression.
In Scleroderma Lung Study‐II (SLS‐II), subjects with SSc‐ILD were randomised to high‐dose oral MMF (1.5 g twice daily) for 24 months, or oral CYC for 12 months followed by placebo for 12 months. Of 126 evaluated patients, there was modest but comparable improvement (P = 0.24) in lung function in both groups at 24 months; change in pFVC% was 2.88% (95% CI 0.53–3.84) in the CYC group and 2.19% (95% CI 1.19–4.58) in the MMF group. This corresponded to symptomatic improvement in both groups as per patient‐reported outcomes. Overall, MMF was better tolerated and associated with fewer adverse events.
Given the finding of non‐inferiority to oral CYC and favourable safety profile, MMF is a suitable therapeutic alternative in SSc‐ILD management. The ACR/CHEST guidelines have extrapolated from this evidence, now conditionally recommending MMF as first‐line therapy in all CTD‐ILD, in addition to progressive or rapidly progressive disease.

Tocilizumab
Tocilizumab (TCZ), a monoclonal interleukin 6 receptor antibody, has been assessed in SSc‐ILD in two major RDBPCTs: faSScinate and focuSSced. The former assessed the impact of subcutaneous TCZ (162 mg weekly) on the primary outcome of change in modified Rodnan skin score (mRSS) in 87 patients with early, active SSc. Although this outcome was not reached, secondary outcome analysis demonstrated a smaller FVC decline in the TCZ arm at 24 weeks. This benefit did not persist at 48 weeks. TCZ was relatively safe and well‐tolerated, though there was a higher incidence of serious infections such as osteomyelitis. In the larger phase III, focuSSced trial, 210 patients with early, active SSc were randomised to receive TCZ (162 mg weekly) or placebo over 48 weeks. While the trial also did not achieve its primary endpoint of change in mRSS, a subgroup analysis involving 136 patients with baseline SSc‐ILD revealed superior stabilisation of lung function in the TCZ arm compared with placebo at 48 weeks.
Based on these trials, TCZ can be considered a relatively safe option for stabilising lung function in SSc‐ILD, though further studies are required to evaluate its efficacy in other CTD‐ILD subtypes. ACR/CHEST guidelines conditionally recommend TCZ as first‐line therapy in SSc‐ILD and MCTD‐ILD, in addition to progressive disease in SSc‐ILD, MCTD‐ILD and RA‐related ILD (RA‐ILD). Due to the paucity of available evidence, it is not currently recommended in rapidly progressive ILD (RP‐ILD).

Rituximab
Rituximab (RTX), a chimeric monoclonal, anti‐CD20 B‐cell‐depleting antibody, is increasingly used in the treatment of CTD‐ILD, supported by numerous observational studies and two recent RDBPCTs: the RTX versus IV CYC in patients with CTD‐ILD in the UK (RECITAL) and RTX and MMF combination in patients with ILD (EVER‐ILD) trials.
RECITAL was a 24‐week phase II study comparing IV RTX (1000 mg on days 1 and 15) with IV CYC (600 mg/m2 body surface area, monthly for six doses) in patients with severe or progressive CTD‐ILD. Among the 97 evaluated participants, 44 (45%) had IIM, 37 (38%) had SSc and 16 (16%) had MCTD. The primary endpoint, the 24‐week rate of change in FVC from baseline, increased but was not significantly different between both groups. Thus, CYC and RTX both led to comparable improvements in FVC at 48 weeks, 6‐min walk test (6MWT), DLCO, overall survival, progression‐free survival (PFS) and time to treatment failure. Although the RTX arm had similar risk of infection compared to the CYC arm, there were fewer serious adverse events. Cumulative corticosteroid exposure and the maintenance immunosuppression dose was also lower in the RTX group.
EVER‐ILD, a 24‐week phase III study, examined the efficacy of RTX in addition to MMF, in treating NSIP associated with CTD‐ILD, idiopathic NSIP or interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features. Participants were eligible if they had a diagnosis by MDT and failed first‐line therapy. Participants were randomised to receive IV RTX or placebo, with both groups also receiving oral MMF (total dose 2 g daily) for 6 months. Of the 122 participants, 43 had underlying CTD (23 with SSc, eight with IIM, seven with SjD, three with RA and two with MCTD). The addition of RTX had a significantly positive impact on lung function; the change in pFVC% at 6 months from baseline was +1.60% in the RTX arm compared with −2.01% in the placebo arm (difference 3.60% (95% CI 0.41–6.80), P = 0.0273). Furthermore, 6‐month PFS was significantly greater in those treated with combined RTX and MMF (hazard ratio 0.47 (95% CI 0.23–0.96), P = 0.03). Dual therapy still demonstrated reasonable safety; while the RTX group experienced more frequent infections, these were primarily non‐severe viral infections.
These trials establish RTX as a viable immunosuppressive treatment option in CTD‐ILD management, particularly in cases of relapse, progression or severe disease. While the safety profile remains reassuring even when combined with MMF, these trials are limited by their short duration. Based on current evidence and expert consensus, the 2023 ACR/CHEST treatment guidelines conditionally recommend RTX in first‐line therapy for CTD‐ILD, as well as for progressive disease and in RP‐ILD.

Antifibrotic agents
Nintedanib and pirfenidone are two antifibrotic agents with established efficacy in slowing disease progression in IPF. There is increasing evidence from clinical trials supporting their use in fibrotic CTD‐ILD, including PPF.
Nintedanib, an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor, was first evaluated in SENSCIS, a phase III RDBPCT involving 576 SSc patients with disease onset <7 years and pulmonary fibrosis. Stable doses of immunosuppressants including low‐dose corticosteroids, MMF or methotrexate were permitted at baseline. The primary endpoint analysis demonstrated significantly reduced rate of decline in FVC, with a between‐group difference of 41.0 mL/year (95% CI 2.9–79.0, P = 0.04) favouring nintedanib. However, dyspnoea scores were not significantly different at 52 weeks. Nintedanib was well‐tolerated, with diarrhoea being the most frequent adverse event, affecting 218 (76%) patients.
Pirfenidone, an oral pyridine derivative with antifibrotic and anti‐inflammatory properties, regulates cytokines such as TGFβ and TNF. The Treatment for Rheumatoid Arthritis and Interstitial Lung Disease 1 (TRAIL1) trial, a phase II RDBPCT, evaluated the efficacy of pirfenidone compared to placebo in 123 patients with RA‐ILD. At 52 weeks, the pirfenidone group experienced a significantly slower decline in lung function, as evidenced by an annual change in pFVC% (−1.02% vs −3.21%, P = 0.0028). However the composite primary endpoint (decline in FVC >10% or death) and dyspnoea score was comparable between groups. Unfortunately, TRAIL1 was terminated early due to slow recruitment and therefore the results should be interpreted with caution.
More recently, a phase III RDBPCT (INBUILD) evaluated the efficacy of nintedanib in 663 patients with non‐IPF PPF, of whom 170 had underlying autoimmune disease (89 with RA, 39 with SSc, 19 with MCTD, seven with SjD, two with SLE, two with IIM and nine with other conditions). Patients were excluded if they were taking concomitant immunosuppression including oral corticosteroids exceeding prednisone‐equivalent 20 mg daily. The nintedanib group experienced a significantly smaller decline in a mean annual absolute FVC of −80.8 mL, compared to −187.8 mL in the placebo group (between‐group difference 107.0 mL (95% CI 65.4–148.5), P < 0.001). Despite this, health‐related quality‐of‐life scores were similar between groups.
Accounting for recent evidence and expert consensus, the 2023 ACR/CHEST guidelines have proposed the following: nintedanib is conditionally recommended as a first‐line agent for SSc‐ILD, though consensus was not reached regarding RA‐ILD. Pirfenidone, contrarily, is not recommended in any first‐line therapy. In progressive disease, nintedanib may be considered for all types of CTD‐ILD, while pirfenidone is only conditionally recommended for RA‐ILD. Due to insufficient evidence, antifibrotic agents are not recommended in RP‐ILD.

Autologous haemopoietic stem cell transplant
European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR) guidelines recommend consideration of autologous haemopoietic stem cell transplant (aHSCT) in select SSc patients with rapidly progressive disease at risk of organ failure. As transplant‐related mortality is up to 23%, careful case selection with referral to specialist centres is paramount in optimising outcomes.
Both the smaller American Scleroderma Stem Cell versus Immune Suppression Trial (ASSIST) and larger Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation International Scleroderma (ASTIS) trial demonstrated an improvement in lung function and other disease parameters following aHSCT compared to CYC in patients with diffuse SSc and internal organ involvement. Although aHSCT was associated with significantly higher early mortality in the first year of the ASTIS trial, event‐free survival at 4 years favoured the aHSCT arm. This was similarly reflected in the Scleroderma: CYC or Transplantation trial (SCOT), which evaluated the safety and efficacy of myeloablative aHSCT, using dose‐reduced IV CYC and additional total body irradiation, compared to CYC. Long‐term event‐free survival was significantly greater at 54 months in the aHSCT arm and still remained superior at 72 months.

Additional management strategies
In addition to standard therapies, CTD‐ILD management should include supportive and non‐pharmacological management strategies as discussed below.

Pulmonary rehabilitation
Pulmonary rehabilitation involves exercise training, education and behaviour modification. Patients with ILD may benefit from a consequent improvement in functional capacity, dyspnoea and exercise tolerance.

Palliative care and oxygen supplementation
Palliative care in ILD patients focuses on symptom relief and quality of life. Common pharmacological interventions include opioids for dyspnoea and benzodiazepines for anxiety‐related breathlessness. Opioids may also be considered in persistent cough. Non‐pharmacological interventions such as fans, psychotherapy and breathing exercises may also relieve symptoms.
Supplementary oxygen can be prescribed for adults with severe chronic resting hypoxaemia or significant exertional hypoxaemia on room air. This may improve exercise capacity, dyspnoea and quality of life.

Smoking cessation
Smoking cessation, using pharmacological and non‐pharmacological interventions, is a priority in this disease group as tobacco smoke exposure leads to poorer outcomes in ILD.

Pulmonary hypertension in CTD‐ILD
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) can be seen in all CTD and carries a poorer prognosis. Identifying World Health Organisation (WHO) Group 1 PH is crucial as these patients benefit from vasodilator therapy, with improvements in mortality, exercise tolerance and functional capacity. However, the same benefits are not seen in PH secondary to CT‐ILD (WHO Group 3), though trials are ongoing.

Gastro‐oesophageal reflux disease
Gastro‐oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) is a common comorbidity in CTD‐ILD, particularly in SSc patients with oesophageal dysfunction, though a definitive causal link with ILD remains undetermined. Updated international guidelines no longer endorse the use of antacids to improve respiratory outcomes in IPF, though there are no specific recommendations for CTD‐ILD. Treatment of GORD may alleviate the distressing symptom of cough.

Vaccination and opportunistic infection management
Patients with CTDs are vulnerable to infections, attributable to intrinsic immunodeficiency, parenchymal lung injury or immunosuppressive treatment. Vaccination is essential in preventing infections, though timing is crucial, due to reduced immunogenicity in the setting of immunosuppression, particularly RTX. Guidelines regarding vaccination scheduling applicable to patients with CTDs have been developed by ACR and EULAR.
Opportunistic infections, including Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, Hepatitis B virus and latent tuberculosis infection reactivation, can have severe consequences in patients with advanced lung disease or those receiving immunosuppression. Screening of infective exposures prior to immunosuppression and selective prophylaxis is vital in mitigating this risk, in accordance with comprehensive guidelines by EULAR in 2022.

Lung transplantation
Lung transplantation (LT) is a treatment option for carefully selected patients with CTD who have advanced ILD and/or PH that has progressed despite maximal medical therapy. It is associated with improved long‐term morbidity and mortality, with a 5‐year post‐transplant survival of 46%, similar to that seen in IPF. Although ILD has emerged as the leading indication for LT globally, CTD accounts for a modest 564 (0.9%) of 63 530 lung transplants performed between 1995 and 2018. Concomitant management of GORD is crucial, particularly in SSc, as untreated reflux can lead to progressive lung allograft dysfunction.

Conclusion
The management of CTD‐ILD remains challenging, often necessitating a collaborative, multidisciplinary approach to optimise patient outcomes. In recent years, data from major clinical trials has transformed the treatment of CTD‐ILD, offering clinicians confidence in an expanding inventory of therapeutic options including corticosteroids, both biologic and non‐biologic immunosuppressants, antifibrotic agents and aHSCT. Despite new guidelines proposed by ACR/CHEST, management must still be individualised according to various patient and disease factors. As our understanding of CTD‐ILD pathogenesis continues to evolve, there is potential for development of more targeted therapeutics that modulate key biological pathways. Future clinical research should also prioritise optimal treatment duration and management of aggressive disease phenotypes. Lastly, non‐pharmacological and supportive therapies are integral to holistic care in CTD‐ILD, optimising symptom control and minimising treatment‐related complications.

References
Diagnosis and management of connective tissue disease‐associated interstitial lung disease in Australia and New Zealand: a position statement from the Thoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand
Prevalence, imaging patterns and risk factors of interstitial lung disease in connective tissue disease: a systematic review and meta‐analysis
Interstitial lung disease in connective tissue disease – mechanisms and management
Collagen vascular disease‐related lung disease: high‐resolution computed tomography findings based on the pathologic classification
Progressive fibrosing interstitial lung diseases: current practice in diagnosis and management
Interstitial lung disease in systemic sclerosis: a simple staging system
Connective tissue disease‐associated interstitial lung diseases (CTD‐ILD) – report from OMERACT CTD‐ILD Working Group
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (an update) and progressive pulmonary fibrosis in adults: an official ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT clinical practice guideline
The role of inflammation and fibrosis in interstitial lung disease treatment decisions
Current and emerging drug therapies for connective tissue disease‐interstitial lung disease (CTD‐ILD)
Comparison between cryptogenic organizing pneumonia and connective tissue disease‐related organizing pneumonia
2020 Guide for the diagnosis and treatment of interstitial lung disease associated with connective tissue disease
2023 American College of Rheumatology (ACR)/American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST) guideline for the treatment of interstitial lung disease in people with systemic autoimmune rheumatic diseases
Cyclophosphamide versus placebo in scleroderma lung disease
A multicenter, prospective, randomized, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled trial of corticosteroids and intravenous cyclophosphamide followed by oral azathioprine for the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis in scleroderma
Mycophenolate mofetil versus oral cyclophosphamide in scleroderma‐related interstitial lung disease (SLS II): a randomised controlled, double‐blind, parallel group trial
Safety and efficacy of subcutaneous tocilizumab in adults with systemic sclerosis (faSScinate): a phase 2, randomised, controlled trial
Tocilizumab in systemic sclerosis: a randomised, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled, phase 3 trial
Rituximab versus intravenous cyclophosphamide in patients with connective tissue disease‐associated interstitial lung disease in the UK (RECITAL): a double‐blind, double‐dummy, randomised, controlled, phase 2b trial
Rituximab and mycophenolate mofetil combination in patients with interstitial lung disease (EVER‐ILD): a double‐blind, randomised, placebo‐controlled trial
Nintedanib for systemic sclerosis‐associated interstitial lung disease
Nintedanib in progressive fibrosing interstitial lung diseases
Autologous non‐myeloablative haemopoietic stem‐cell transplantation compared with pulse cyclophosphamide once per month for systemic sclerosis (ASSIST): an open‐label, randomised phase 2 trial
Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation vs intravenous pulse cyclophosphamide in diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis: a randomized clinical trial
Myeloablative autologous stem‐cell transplantation for severe scleroderma
Effects of 1‐year treatment with cyclophosphamide on outcomes at 2 years in scleroderma lung disease
Safety and efficacy of subcutaneous tocilizumab in systemic sclerosis: results from the open‐label period of a phase II randomised controlled trial (faSScinate)
Safety, tolerability, and efficacy of pirfenidone in patients with rheumatoid arthritis‐associated interstitial lung disease: a randomised, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled, phase 2 study
Update of EULAR recommendations for the treatment of systemic sclerosis
Autologous stem cell transplantation in systemic sclerosis: a systematic review
Pulmonary rehabilitation for adults with chronic respiratory disease: an official American Thoracic Society clinical practice guideline
Home oxygen therapy for adults with chronic lung disease. An official American Thoracic Society clinical practice guideline
Tobacco smoking is associated with combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema and worse outcomes in interstitial lung disease
Pulmonary hypertension associated with connective tissue disease
2022 ESC/ERS guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary hypertension
Vaccination in adult patients with auto‐immune inflammatory rheumatic diseases: a systematic literature review for the European league against rheumatism evidence‐based recommendations for vaccination in adult patients with auto‐immune inflammatory rheumatic diseases
2019 update of EULAR recommendations for vaccination in adult patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases
2022 American College of Rheumatology guideline for vaccinations in patients with rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases
2022 EULAR recommendations for screening and prophylaxis of chronic and opportunistic infections in adults with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases
Survival and extrapulmonary course of connective tissue disease after lung transplantation
The international thoracic organ transplant registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: thirty‐sixth adult lung and heart‐lung transplantation report‐2019; focus theme: donor and recipient size match