The legend of the response evaluation criteria in solid tumors: A historical overview The legend of the response evaluation criteria in solid tumors: a historical overview
Abstract
Methods
In this review, the historical development of tumor response criteria is examined and an interview was conducted with one of the original researchers behind the original study. This study, published nearly five decades ago, assessed tumor size through palpation and measurements of simulated tumor masses (“balls under mattresses”). The methodology used in that early study as well as in subsequent research that has influenced modifications of the current response evaluation criteria was critically evaluated.
Results
The current tumor response criteria trace back to a 1976 study by Moertel and Hanley, which relied on palpation to measure tumor size. The key outcome, a 50% reduction in the product of the longest perpendicular diameters of the most measurable tumor mass, formed the basis for later criteria. The World Health Organization criteria adopted these thresholds for response and introduced a 25% increase as a cutoff for progression. Later, unidimensional measurements replaced two‐dimensional ones, with adjusted thresholds accordingly. These criteria further inspired the development of specialized response criteria such as Choi, mRECIST, and PERCIST.
Conclusion
By analyzing the evolution of RECIST, it is highlighted that these criteria are not fixed standards but rather the product of a series of pragmatic choices and compromises rooted in their historical context. With advances in technology, including artificial intelligence and volumetric imaging, it is timely to reassess the reliability of current criteria and explore new approaches to tumor response evaluation.
We critically examined the historical development, strengths, and limitations of tumor response evaluation criteria, including its foundational experiment in 1976. Response assessment criteria are often perceived as fixed standards, but their development reveals a need for refinement and the emergence of improved alternatives.

BACKGROUND
Sydney Farber, one of the fathers of modern oncology, first discovered the effects of chemotherapy on cancer cells by studying leukemia. Although rare, leukemia enabled Farber to count the number of tumor cells under the microscope, before and after treatment, enabling precise measurement of drug effectiveness. Measurement has been fundamental to scientific advancement, playing a crucial role in understanding and improving medical treatments. Solid tumors, which often reside as primary tumors or metastases deep underneath the skin of the patient, cannot be measured with the same level of detail. Years later, new response evaluations were developed for evaluating the response of anticancer drugs in clinical trials: the World Health Organization (WHO) and Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) v1.1. These response evaluation criteria strive to offer an objective and reproducible evaluation, which is particularly useful for comparing results of different trials. According to RECIST, the reaction of a tumor to a drug can be classified as progressive disease (PD), stable disease (SD), partial response (PR), or complete response (CR). Each of these response categories is based on a combination of radiologist’s visual assessment (unequivocal progression and the appearance of new lesions) and measurement of the increase or decrease in the diameters of up to five lesions (a maximum of two per organ), commonly referred to as target lesions.
Because these criteria have different limitations in different tumor types, modified tumor‐specific criteria have been developed, such as those for hepatocellular carcinoma, thymic malignancies, gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs), and pleural mesothelioma. Additionally, new tumor measurement criteria have been introduced for imaging modalities other than computed tomography (CT) scans. For example, the Positron Emission Tomography Response Criteria in Solid Tumors (PERCIST) have been developed to evaluate tumors using positron emission tomography (PET) scans. Although these criteria are embedded in current guidelines, trial protocols, and are internalized by clinicians in their routine assessments, the origin and evolution of RECIST are often unknown to the medical and scientific community. Understanding the development of tumor assessment criteria is necessary because these criteria are important for assessing the effectiveness of cancer treatments, especially as imaging technologies and artificial intelligence (AI) continue to advance. With the introduction of AI‐aided criteria, it is important to revisit the underlying assumptions and data these criteria are based on. By doing so, we can determine whether these assumptions are still valid and whether encountered challenges can be overcome. Thus, in this historical review, we aim to outline the steps that led to the creation of the currently used tumor assessment criteria. By evaluating how these criteria were developed, we hope to critically assess their assumption and help in the future development of new comprehensive AI‐based criteria.

The origin of the tumor assessment criteria (1976)
We began with a specific aspect of RECIST: its 20% to 30% thresholds, and traced it back to Charles Moertel and James Hanley. In 1976, when oncology was in its early stages, they published “The Effect of Measuring Error on the Results of Therapeutic Trials in Advanced Cancer.” At that time, “measuring” meant physical palpation of subcutaneous tumors. Their study aimed to determine the threshold at which oncologists could confidently detect changes in tumor size. The experiment used 12 solid spheres simulating tumors (1.8–14.5 cm in diameter), placed under foam layers representing subcutaneous tissue and the abdominal wall. Sixteen oncologists measured the spheres' diameters using rulers or calipers, recording two perpendicular diameters to approximate size. The study endpoints included group bias, individual bias, and precision of repeated measurements by the same or different investigators. Results revealed significant biases and variance. There was a negative group bias ranging from 1% to 18% and inconsistencies in rounding conventions. Repeat measurements showed errors: 19% of investigators mistakenly reported >25% tumor regression and 19% reported >50% progression. For different investigators measuring the same tumor, 25% reported >25% regression and 32% reported >25% progression. The authors concluded that a 50% reduction in the product of perpendicular diameters was the only reliable criterion for tumor response, given a measurement error of 7% to 8%. However, progression thresholds were inconclusive because of errors (18%‐32%). Moertel and Hanley recommended criteria for objective response: (1) a ≥50% reduction in the product of the longest perpendicular diameters; (2) no increase >50% in other areas of disease; (3) no new areas of disease; and (4) results observed at least 2 months after therapy onset. They made no recommendations for progression thresholds.

The first guideline in solid tumors: WHO criteria (1981)
Three years after Moertel and Hanley's study, WHO created the first guidelines for evaluating the response to anticancer treatment in clinical trials. These guidelines introduced four categories for assessing objective response: CR, PR, SD, and PD. They adopted some criteria from the original study, such as using bidimensional measurements and requiring a reduction of at least 50% in the product of the longest perpendicular diameters of the most clearly measurable tumor mass to classify a PR. In addition to the original study, WHO introduced a requirement that the response must be confirmed after 4 weeks. They also introduced that for CR the disappearance of all known lesions must be confirmed at 4 weeks; for SD, neither PR nor PD criteria are met; and for PD, they adopted the 25% threshold for progressive disease from the Moertel and Hanley paper, despite the original article not recommending this due to a measurement error of 32%. That this study was not perfectly conducted becomes clear in the interview we conducted with Dr. James Hanley, the statistician responsible for the original research. See Appendix 1.

Move toward unidimensional diameters and the introduction of RECIST 1.0 (2000)
In 1994, a task force was established by the National Cancer Institute of the United States, the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group, and the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC), with the aim of evaluating the WHO response criteria based on the experience and knowledge acquired since the publication of the criteria. In 1999, Keith James and his team proposed a new approach to tumor assessment. At that time, the assumptions that tumors resemble spheres and their response to chemotherapy follows a logarithmic pattern (i.e., strong initial effect, waning over time) were commonly accepted. Based on these assumptions, they suggested that “a simple sum of the maximum diameters of individual tumors is more linearly related to cell kill than the sum of bidimensional products,” suggesting there be a shift from bidimensional area to unidimensional diameter.
Because the measurements changed from area to diameter, the cutoffs for objective response needed to be recomputed. For a spherical tumor, the product of the perpendicular diameters represents the area of the largest square that can encircle the tumor. A 50% decrease in the area of this square corresponds to a decrease of approximately 29.3% (rounded to 30%) in one of the diameters. This formula also applies to rectangles (and thus to any elongated, nonspherical lesions) as long as the shrinkage is uniform for both axes, percentage‐wise (see Figure 1).
Conversion of bidimensional regression and progression cutoffs to unidimensional cutoffs.
The authors also adapted the WHO criteria for PD, applying the same formula. Therefore, a 25% decrease in the area of the square became 11.2%. It is unclear from the original work how 20% was derived from the 12% cutoffs. The conversion of tumor response thresholds from 50% in two dimensions to 25% in one dimension seems logical geometrically. However, the transposition of the 25% progression threshold in two dimensions to a 20% increase in one dimension is harder to rationalize (see Figure 1).
These new unidimensional cutoffs were tested against their bidimensional counterparts in a retrospective cohort of 569 patients enrolled in phase II/III trials across various cancer types, including breast (n = 220), melanoma (n = 190), ovarian (n = 45), brain (n = 31), colorectal (n = 31), soft‐tissue sarcoma (n = 28) and non‐small cell lung cancer (n = 24). Comparing PR vs non‐PR classes (PD + SD) between unidimensional and bidimensional systems, the authors observed agreement in 94% of the cases. Comparing PD between unidimensional and bidimensional systems (in the n = 128 that had it recorded as endpoint) 33% had best overall response PD according to WHO criteria, 21% with the new system. Based on this evaluation, the task force changed the definition of PR from a 50% to a 30% decrease confirmed at 4 weeks, and the definition of PD from a 25% increase to a 20% increase. To validate the changes in the RECIST 1.0 data from various studies involving more than 4000 patients were compared to the WHO criteria. They also adapted the concepts of “target” and “nontarget” lesions, as well as “measurable” and “nonmeasurable” disease. Measurable lesions were defined as lesions with the longest diameter of ≥10 mm on CT, ≥20 mm on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or visible on conventional radiographs at baseline. Target lesions were (up to a maximum of 10 measurable lesions), with no more than five per organ, that were summed to obtain the sum of the longest diameters (SLD). PD was defined based on the SLD instead of an increase above the threshold in any lesion in the WHO criteria. And so new criteria were born: RECIST 1.0 (see Figure 2).
Timeline of the tumor assessment criteria.

Not all tumors are spheres: the modified RECIST for pleural mesothelioma (2004)
RECIST has since been used for all solid tumors. However, the criteria sometimes proved less suitable for certain solid tumors. One such tumor was pleural mesothelioma. Because of the crescent shape of pleural mesothelioma, it was difficult to interpret a representative “longest unidimensional diameter.” Additionally, RECIST assumed tumors were spherical, which is clearly not the case for pleural mesothelioma. In 2004, this was addressed by Byrne and Nowak, who developed modified RECIST for measuring tumor response. The idea was straightforward: instead of measuring the tumor diameter, the criteria shifted toward measuring the tumor thickness, perpendicular to the chest wall or mediastinum. The SLD of target lesions became the sum of tumor thickness measured in two positions at three different levels on a transverse CT scan. All remaining criteria for CR, PR, SD, and PD remained the same, with the exception of PR, which required confirmation after 4 weeks.

Response as change in tumor density: the Choi criteria (2007)
Another tumor type for which RECIST 1.0 proved less suitable was gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs), primarily because these tumors show only minor changes in size after treatment with targeted therapy (imatinib) but exhibit a visible increase in their intralesional necrotic component. In 2007, Choi et al. postulated that tracking tumor density (i.e., the pixel intensity on the CT scan) along with size would be a better predictor of metabolic response. Fluorodeoxyglucose PET (FDG‐PET) in fact had already demonstrated high sensitivity in detecting early responses and predicting long‐term responses to imatinib in patients with metastatic GISTs. In a study of 40 patients with metastatic GIST receiving imatinib, a decrease of ≥10% in SLD and ≥15% in density (Hounsfield Units) showed excellent correlation (97% specificity, 100% sensitivity) with metabolic response. Consequently, PR cutoffs were adapted accordingly, whereas PD cutoffs were changed to an increase in the sum of diameters by ≥10% with no new lesions observed. CR and SD criteria remained the same as in RECIST.

RECIST 1.1 (2009)
Since the clinical implementation of RECIST 1.0, several questions emerged, which were clarified in the updated RECIST 1.1 criteria guideline in 2009. The database for this analysis had now been expanded to scans from more than 6000 patients. The following issues were addressed: Can using fewer than 10 lesions be done without impacting the overall response in trials? Can RECIST be applied to trials where, instead of response, progression is the primary endpoint? Can new imaging techniques, such as MRI and FDG‐PET, be used to assess tumor response? Is confirmation of response after 4 weeks necessary? Finally, is there a need to define a different approach for assessing lymph nodes as these do not disappear after CR? The changes that were introduced were the following: The reduction in the number of lesions from a maximum of 10 to five in total, and from a maximum of five to two per organ. This was based on retrospective analysis of multiple trials that showed that reducing the lesion number did not lead to significant loss of information. Also, RECIST could be applied to phase III trials where the endpoint was progression instead of response. And detailed guidance was provided on the use of MRI and PET‐CT in the application of RECIST. Additionally, Bogaerts et al. demonstrated that response rates increase when the confirmation scan is eliminated. The requirement for a confirmation scan was retained only for nonrandomized trials with response as the primary endpoint. For all other studies, the confirmation scan requirement was removed. Last, lymph nodes were added as potential target lesions, and to be considered measurable and pathologically enlarged, a lymph node had to be greater than ≥15 mm in short axis when assessed by CT scan.

PERCIST criteria (2009)
Shortly after the publication of the RECIST 1.1 criteria, Wahl et al. aimed to review the WHO, PET EORTC, RECIST 1.0, and RECIST 1.1 criteria and study the limitations of these criteria when using a PET scan instead of a CT scan. The authors stated that an increase in tumor 18F‐FDG uptake indicates disease progression, whereas a decline indicates disease response. The authors also concluded that the EORTC PET response criteria, in use since 1999, were useful at that time given the limited data available, but also identified that there was room for improvement in using PET scans to assess treatment effects. Standard uptake lean body mass (SUL) was widely accepted as a standard quantitative parameter in PET/CT. Based on a review of studies using 18F‐FDG PET to assess early treatment response, new tumor assessment criteria were proposed using the SUL: PERCIST. According to these criteria, disease response is assessed as a continuous variable expressed as the percentage change in the sum of lean body mass (SULpeak). CR is defined as the complete resolution of FDG uptake within the target lesion, PR as a ≥30% decrease in FDG SULpeak of the target tumor, SD as neither PR, CR, nor PD, and PD as a ≥30% increase in FDG SULpeak or the appearance of new 18F‐FDG‐avid lesions.

Modified RECIST for hepatocellular carcinoma (2010)
Another tumor type for which the RECIST 1.1 criteria proved to be not entirely suitable was hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), especially because the treatment effect was not always accompanied by a change in tumor size. Moreover, in HCC the enlargement of lymph nodes and development of ascites could lead to misinterpretation of disease progression under RECIST 1.1. In 2010, a panel of experts from the European Association for the Study of the Liver proposed amendments to the RECIST 1.0 guideline for HCC. Similarly to Choi, the panel considered changes in the density of the tumor, where the reduction in viable tumor induced by treatment was considered response. RECIST was adapted as following: first, an increase of 20% in the SLD of active target lesions for PD instead of a 20% increase in SLD of target lesions in general. Second, the minimal measurable short axis for lymph nodes short axis is increased from 15 mm to 20 mm. Third, ascites and pleural effusions are excluded from “unequivocal PD” unless they are cytological confirmed as malignant. Fourth, a minimal size requirement of 10 mm and peritumoral ring enhancement is added for appearance of new lesions.

ITMIG‐modified RECIST (2014)
Like mesothelioma, thymoma spreads along the pleura. To address this challenge, the International Thymic Malignancy Interest Group (ITMIG) advised developing new tumor assessment consensus criteria based on existing literature. The ITMIG group noted that RECIST version 1.1 limits pleural assessment to two lesions and requires measuring their long‐axis diameters. However, the reproducibility of long‐axis measurements for pleural tumors is inferior to that of short‐axis measurements. These proposed criteria were partly similar to mRECIST for pleural mesothelioma, as both tumor types share a pleural growth pattern. Criteria include unidimensional measurements by summing dimensions of up to six lesions across two sites at three levels. Additionally, pleural measurements will use the short axis from axial images instead of the long axis. Unlike mRECIST, lymph nodes are considered a separate organ, and up to two lymph nodes with a minimum short‐axis size of ≥15 mm can be measured.

Response that looks like progression: iRECIST (2017)
RECIST was developed based on chemotherapy trials. With the advent of immunotherapy and trials comparing chemotherapies to immunotherapies, a novel tumor response phenomenon emerged: pseudoprogression. This is characterized by initial lesion growth or new lesion appearance (PD), followed by sustained PR, supposedly from immune system activation causing tumor‐zone inflammation. Seymour et al. introduced iRECIST for immunotherapy trials. In 2017, the RECIST working group developed consensus guidelines for using RECIST 1.1 in immunotherapy trials, reintroducing the requirement for a confirmation scan at least 4 weeks after initial progression signs. Criteria for CR, PR, and SD remained unchanged, but confirmation of PD was required. New lesions were defined as those observed on confirmatory scans or as an increase in their size (≥5 mm for the sum of new lesions), needing confirmation by follow‐up. The mandatory follow‐up scan was crucial to avoid premature treatment cessation in pseudoprogression cases.

Revised modified RECIST in malignant pleural mesothelioma version 1.1 (2018)
After the publication of mRECIST for pleural mesothelioma, a revised version with updates was introduced. In 2018, the minimum measurable disease size was reduced from 10 mm to 7 mm. Consistency in measurement was emphasized, requiring the same observer and display settings for all CT scans. Lymph nodes, as in ITMIG criteria, were added to the total measurement, taken from RECIST 1.1. Observers should select up to six pleural measurements at baseline, with no more than two per CT section, across three sections separated by at least 1 cm. This closely resembles the previous mRECIST guideline, which lacked clarity on whether exactly or up to six lesions were required. In the validated dataset, up to, but not exactly, six pleural sites were used. Last, new nonpleural lesions or pleural thickening meeting measurement criteria were considered progressive disease.

Additional challenges in current tumor measurement criteria
Current tumor measurement criteria face several challenges that contribute to variability and limit their clinical utility. One major source of inter‐reader variability is the inconsistent selection of baseline target lesions, which significantly impacts response assessment. For example, a retrospective study comparing target lesion selection in lung carcinoma patients by local reviewers versus blinded independent central reviewers found that local investigators selected fewer target lesions per patient on average than the central reviewers (2.9 vs. 3.4 per patient, respectively). Another study assessing consistency among three radiologists revealed that only 33% of target lesions were consistently identified by all three readers. Kuhl et al. assessed the relationship between target lesion selection using RECIST 1.1 and therapeutic response classification in patients with advanced‐stage cancer undergoing systemic anticancer treatment. They found that when target lesion selection was concordant, intra‐observer agreement was high. However, when target lesion selection was not concordant, agreement was significantly reduced (κ = 0.58; 95% CI, 0.54–0.62). Additionally, tumor response can be heterogeneous across different organs. Criteria for progression of nontarget disease also remain unclear, particularly whether progression can be based on a few growing lesions or requires overall worsening. The classification of baseline lymph nodes that subsequently enlarge as “new lesions” also lacks standardization. Furthermore, pleural lesions are often difficult to measure reproducibly, and peritoneal carcinomatosis is frequently unmeasurable. Fluid accumulations such as pleural effusions and ascites may be nonmalignant and are unreliable indicators of disease progression. The role of PET‐CT imaging raises additional questions, such as how to classify metabolically active lymph nodes that do not meet RECIST 1.1 size criteria but are suspected to be malignant.

FUTURE OUTLOOK
In this review, we have traced the history of tumor assessment criteria, allowing us to examine their fundamental assumptions. Current criteria can be traced to a 1976 study where tumor size was assessed by palpation. The key question remains whether these criteria provide the accuracy and reproducibility needed to confidently assess tumor response, given adjustments and potential mathematical inaccuracies. Although not feasible at the time, modern techniques, such as AI, now enable accurate volumetric assessments. For example, the ARTIMES study is among the first to apply AI‐based volumetric criteria. Validation remains crucial for any new proposal. Another deep learning model developed for lung cancer screening has demonstrated reliable performance in detecting both benign and malignant pulmonary nodules on clinically indicated CT scans. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration–cleared chest X‐ray AI program qXR‐LN is currently used as a second reader, providing results that are compared with the radiologist’s interpretation. Several other studies have investigated the role of artificial intelligence in lung cancer screening using chest radiographs. Whether artificial intelligence will ultimately surpass traditional tumor measurement criteria remains to be seen. But until then, the legend of RECIST deserves to be told.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Illaa Smesseim: Conceptualization; Investigation; Writing ‐ original draft; Methodology; Visualization; Writing ‐ review & editing; Formal analysis; Data curation; and Resources. Kevin B. W. Groot Lipman: Methodology; Writing ‐ review & editing; Formal analysis; and Data curation. Ferry Lalezari: Methodology; Writing ‐ review & editing; Formal analysis; and Data curation. Jacobus A. Burgers: Conceptualization; Investigation; Visualization; Methodology; Formal analysis; Supervision; and Data curation. Stefano Trebeschi: Conceptualization; Investigation; Writing ‐ original draft; Methodology; Visualization; Writing ‐ review & editing; Formal analysis; Data curation; and Supervision. The scientific guarantor of this publication is Illaa Smesseim.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
Jacobus A Burgers has received research support from MSD (sponsored the study financially and provided the medication). The other authors declare no conflicts of interest.

METHODOLOGY
Retrospective review
Observational
Performed at one institution

Supporting information

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

REFERENCES
A tribute to Sidney Farber‐‐the father of modern chemotherapy
New response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1)
Reporting results of cancer treatment
The effect of measuring error on the results of therapeutic trials in advanced cancer
Measuring response in solid tumors: unidimensional versus bidimensional measurement
New guidelines to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer, National Cancer Institute of the United States, National Cancer Institute of Canada
Modified RECIST criteria for assessment of response in malignant pleural mesothelioma
Measurement of clinical and subclinical tumour response using [18F]‐fluorodeoxyglucose and positron emission tomography: review and 1999 EORTC recommendations. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) PET Study
Principles and technology of PET scanning
Correlation of computed tomography and positron emission tomography in patients with metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor treated at a single institution with imatinib mesylate: proposal of new computed tomography response criteria
Individual patient data analysis to assess modifications to the RECIST criteria
Recommendations for the assessment of progression in randomised cancer treatment trials
From RECIST to PERCIST: evolving considerations for PET response criteria in solid tumors
Fluorine‐18 FDG PET/CT and new NIMS grading system for chemotherapy response in breast cancer
Modified RECIST (mRECIST) assessment for hepatocellular carcinoma
A practical guide from the International Thymic Malignancy Interest Group (ITMIG) regarding the radiographic assessment of treatment response of thymic epithelial tumors using modified RECIST criteria
iRECIST: guidelines for response criteria for use in trials testing immunotherapeutics
Revised modified Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors for Assessment of Response in Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma (version 1.1)
A call for objectivity: radiologists' proposed wishlist for response evaluation in solid tumors (RECIST 1.1)
Discrepancies of assessments in a RECIST 1.1 phase II clinical trial ‐ association between adjudication rate and variability in images and tumors selection
Variability in assessing treatment response: metastatic colorectal cancer as a paradigm
Validity of RECIST version 1.1 for response assessment in metastatic cancer: a prospective, multireader study
Artificial intelligence‐based diagnosis of asbestosis: analysis of a database with applicants for asbestosis state aid
ARTIMES: Automated response evaluation to treatment in mesothelioma
Deep learning for the detection of benign and malignant pulmonary nodules in non‐screening chest CT scans
FDA Clears AI Software for Enhanced Lung Nodule Detection on Chest X‐Rays: Diagnostic Imaging
A systematic review: the role of artificial intelligence in lung cancer screening in detecting lung nodules on chest X‐rays