CKD-Associated Pruritus: A Patient-Centered Approach to Reduce Symptom Burden
Chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus (CKD-aP) has been shown to have a negative impact on many aspects of patients’ health-related quality of life, as well as clinical outcomes. Despite this, CKD-aP is often underrecognized and underdiagnosed. There are a variety of patient-reported outcome tools that can be used to measure the severity of pruritus symptoms more effectively than conventional medical assessments, as well as capture information on the impact of pruritus on patients’ health-related quality of life. However, these instruments are not often used, leading to the failed identification of unpleasant symptoms, underappreciation of symptom burden, and missed opportunities for treatment. In this perspective, we combine the opinions of key clinicians and stakeholders to emphasize the need for timely and efficient CKD-aP diagnosis and treatment and to show a clear need for a paradigm shift toward a symptom-focused approach to chronic kidney disease and CKD-aP management, as well as providing practical advice on how to implement this in the clinical setting.

Introduction

Clinical Burden of Chronic Kidney Disease-Associated Pruritus
Chronic kidney disease (CKD)-associated pruritus (CKD-aP) is a bothersome and disabling symptom commonly affecting patients with CKD, including those treated with hemodialysis (HD) and peritoneal dialysis. At least 37% of patients with CKD-aP receiving HD are at least moderately bothered and 7% are extremely bothered by pruritus, while a large, multinational study found that 43% of patients receiving peritoneal dialysis were at least moderately bothered by pruritus.
There is a growing awareness of the impact of severe pruritus on patients’ health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and overall symptom burden. In various cohorts, pruritus has been associated with reduced HRQoL, poorer employment rates, sleep quality, and social functioning. Improvements in HRQoL following pruritus treatment have also been described. HRQoL impairments with increasing pruritus severity correspond to poor outcomes for patients with CKD, including increased HD recovery time; missed HD sessions; intravenous antibiotic, erythropoiesis-stimulating agent, and iron use; and mortality.

Underrecognition and Underdiagnosis of CKD-aP
Multiple groups have highlighted the need to rapidly diagnose and effectively manage symptoms affecting HRQoL in patients receiving HD, including patient-centered initiatives such as Standardised Outcomes in Nephrology-Haemodialysis (SONG-HD), advocacy group initiatives such as the Living Well with Kidney Disease and Effective Symptom Management Consensus Conference, and clinical practice recommendations such as those from Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes.
Despite this, CKD-aP prevalence is frequently underestimated. Variations in CKD-aP presentation, severity, and duration may contribute to this. Additionally, there is a lack of patient awareness of CKD-aP—leading to some patients not reporting their pruritus to their nephrology care team—as well as a lack of health care professional (HCP) awareness, leading to patients not being asked about their pruritus.
Real-world evidence suggests that nephrologists use a range of therapies to treat CKD-aP; however, most studies supporting their clinical use focus on antipruritic efficacy, without assessment of the impact on HRQoL. Consequently, CKD-aP related HRQoL is sometimes poorly understood and managed in the real-world setting.
Growing research and expert opinion highlight the need for a paradigm shift toward a symptom-focused approach to CKD and CKD-aP management. Patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) represent an effective approach to establishing symptom-based and patient-centric diagnosis and management by capturing information on HRQoL and symptom burden that cannot be quantified by conventional medical assessments, particularly as the precise pathogenesis of CKD-aP remains unclear. Despite this, PROMs may be underused in the clinic.
Examples of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures Suitable for Monitoring the Severity and Impact of CKD-aP
Patient-Reported Outcome Measure	Aspect Measured (Presence/Severity/ Impact on QoL)	Number of Items	Format	 	5-D itch scale	SeverityImpact on QoL	9	WrittenNumeric scale5 domains measured: duration, degree, direction, disability, and distributionPruritus-specific	 	Brief itch inventory	Impact on QoL	5	WrittenNumeric scale5 items covering impact of itch on: mood, normal work, relations with other people, sleep, and enjoyment of lifeAlso includes a diagram to identify areas of the body where itch occursPruritus-specific	 	IPOS-Renal	Impact on QoL	23	Not pruritus-specific, but contains a question on itching (question 20)	 	Patient Global Impression of Change (PGIC)	SeverityImpact on QoL	1	WrittenComparison of symptoms between 2 time points (from “much better” to “much worse”)Not pruritus-specific, but can be used to monitor improvement or worsening in pruritus symptoms	 	Skindex-10	SeverityImpact on QoL	10	Written3 domains: disease, mood/emotional distress, and social functioning.Pruritus-specific	 	Sleep Quality Numeric Rating Scale	Impact on QoL	1	WrittenNumeric scaleNot pruritus-specific, but is used to monitor sleep, which is affected by pruritus	 	Worst Itch Numeric Rating Scale (WI-NRS)	Presence/severity	1	WrittenNumeric scalePruritus-specific
Abbreviations: CKD-aP, chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus; IPOS, Integrated Palliative Outcome Scale; QoL, quality of life; WI-NRS, Worst Itching Intensity Numerical Rating Scale.
The Worst Itch Numeric Rating Scale.
Although some PROMs are single questions, many combine multiple questions that can be grouped into domains describing various symptoms and their impact on day-to-day life and may identify symptoms that patients find particularly affect their HRQoL. Various PROMs have been validated for use in CKD; some describe general health while others provide specific insights into the impact of CKD and pruritus. Pruritus-specific PROMs, such as Worst Itching Intensity Numerical Rating Scale, Skindex-10, or the Brief Itch Inventory (Table 1), have been shown to better record the relationship between pruritus and HRQoL than more general equivalents, such as the 12- and 36-Item Short-Form Health Surveys. The Worst Itching Intensity Numerical Rating Scale (Fig 1) is a validated 1-question numeric rating tool that provides a fast and easy-to-understand method for detecting and monitoring CKD-aP and might be simple to use in clinical practice. Other measures have been used in different clinical trials, and there are studies now that show these HRQoL assessments provide consistent results.
This perspective combines nephrologists’, dermatologists’, and other clinicians’/stakeholders’ opinions to highlight the effect of CKD-aP on HRQoL and the need to diagnose and treat pruritus in a patient-centric manner. The value of PROMs and a discussion of how a team-based approach should be put into place for the management of CKD-aP is presented. Practical guidance on the use of PROMs in clinical management is available in several publications.

A Patient-Centered Approach to CKD-aP Diagnosis and Treatment

A Patient-Centered and Symptom-Based Approach to CKD-aP Diagnosis
Diagnosis of CKD-aP is complicated by underrecognition, underreporting, variable presentation, and lack of awareness of its impact on HRQoL and outcomes by both HCPs and patients, as well as by comorbid conditions and medication use that may confound diagnosis.
Suggestions to improve recognition and diagnosis of CKD-aP include patient education, increased awareness among multidisciplinary clinicians, implementation of international guidelines for HCPs, and broader screening by incorporating PROMs (such as the Integrated Palliative care Outcome Scale, Kidney Disease Quality of Life Instrument, etc.) early and throughout the routine management of CKD.
Aspects for consideration and the role of PROMs in the primary assessment of patients with CKD-aP. 5D-itch, 5-D itching scale; Ca2+, calcium; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CKD-aP, chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus; CRP, C-reactive protein; DLQI, dermatology quality of life index; KDQOL-SF, Kidney Disease Quality of Life-Short Form; Hb, hemoglobin; ISS, itching severity scale; MOS, Medical Outcomes Study; NRS, numerical rating scale; P, phosphorus; PROM, patient-reported outcome measure; PTH, parathyroid hormone; QoL, quality of life; SADS, Self Assessed Disease Severity; VAS, visual analog scale; VRS, verbal rating scale; WBC, white blood cell. PROMs associated with each aspect of the evaluation are presented as arrows. Drawn from information in Jha et al.
Plans for CKD-aP diagnosis using PROMs to provide a clear, patient-centered understanding of symptom burden can be found in the literature and are summarized in Fig 2. These reports discuss how initial evaluation should include an assessment of the history and description of pruritus, stage of CKD and risk factors for CKD-aP, skin examination to exclude other dermatologic conditions, and an impact assessment of CKD-aP on HRQoL. In this initial evaluation, PROMs provide a systematic method by which the history and description of pruritis and its effect on HRQoL can be evaluated and documented. Instruments measuring pruritus severity, such as the visual analog scale or verbal rating scale, alongside those measuring the impact on quality of life, such as 5D-itch or Skindex-10, are necessary to fully understand the patient experience at diagnosis, and establish a baseline to determine the effectiveness of treatment. Longitudinal and routine review of pruritus and HRQoL is recommended to monitor treatment efficacy and potentially minimize the impact of CKD-aP on outcomes. Therefore, PROMs that are quick and simple for patients to complete should be used to encourage routine assessment and monitoring following diagnosis.

Use of PROMs to Support a Patient-Centered Approach to CKD-aP Treatment
Studies suggest that patients with CKD-aP value outcomes that directly improve day-to-day living—such as sleep, physical function/activity, and energy levels—in addition to or even above that of clinical outcomes. For instance, the international SONG-HD initiative found that patients and caregivers placed more emphasis on lifestyle-related outcomes such as ability to travel and dialysis-free time than HCPs, who were more focused on clinical outcomes such as mortality and hospitalization. In another study, more patients hypothetically agreed to undergo an intense in-center HD regimen if this intervention could lead to improvements in well-being as opposed to increased survival of ≤6 years. These studies further highlight the need for a symptom-focused approach to CKD and CKD-aP management, which is already being implemented in some clinical trials. For example, the phase 3 KALM-1 and -2 studies, which investigated the safety and efficacy of difelikefalin for the treatment of CKD-aP, monitored the change in HRQoL outcomes during difelikefalin treatment.
Inclusion of PROMs early in the patient journey can highlight symptoms that particularly impact HRQoL, allowing these to be prioritized during treatment. Furthermore, the use of PROMs throughout the patient journey enables HCPs in the patient’s extended care team to incorporate symptom burden—an underused metric—into routine clinical practice and to monitor how it changes over time.

The Importance of Considering Symptom Clusters
Assessment of pruritus should consider whether it is presenting alone or within a symptom cluster. Symptom clusters are defined as a group of related or co-occurring symptoms that have the potential to synergistically impact patient well-being. Patients experience a variety of unpleasant symptom clusters during dialysis, such as sleep disturbance, depression, and pain, which have been described in the literature.
Proposed symptom cluster in patients with CKD-aP. Figure based on information from Ahdoot et al. CKD-aP, chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus.
In a prospective, multicenter HD study, in addition to 43% of patients reporting pruritus, 30% and 21% of patients reported co-existing dry skin and dry mouth, respectively. In a 2022 review, a symptom cluster was proposed in which CKD-aP was associated with disturbed sleep, fatigue, pain, anxiety, depression, and restless legs syndrome, potentially with a common biological mechanism (Fig 3). The authors noted that although these symptoms synergistically affected HRQoL, they were poorly managed in the real-world setting and represented an opportunity to improve patient welfare.
Coexisting symptoms may share a common underlying biological etiology; hence, addressing one symptom in the cluster may improve the others, as well as improve clinical outcomes. Therefore, effective treatment of CKD-aP may alleviate other CKD-associated symptoms and overall symptom burden in dialysis patients. Further research is needed to determine whether the provision of effective treatment in these cases could be supported by PROMs.
In other chronic disease states such as chronic pain and cancer, evidence suggests that patients receiving PROMs felt more engaged with their symptom management, experienced better HRQoL, and had improved outcomes compared with patients not receiving this approach. In patients receiving HD, it has been reported that the results of PROMs could be predictive of mortality.

Justification of Prioritizing Diagnosis and Management of CKD-aP
In the clinical setting, there are sometimes barriers to the prioritization of CKD-aP management, despite this potentially improving overall patient well-being and outcomes.
For example, multiple studies have shown that alleviation of pruritus leads to an improvement in HRQoL. The phase 3 trials, KALM-1 and KALM-2, reported clinically meaningful improvements in pruritus-related HRQoL, as measured by 5D-itch and Skindex-10, because pruritus improved in patients receiving the κ-opioid receptor agonist, difelikefalin, versus placebo. Simultaneous improvements in pruritus and HRQoL have also been reported in patients with CKD-aP receiving pregabalin, cold cream followed by gabapentin or dexchlorpheniramine, and cooled baby oil.
There are also data indicating improvements in clinical outcomes following improvement in pruritus. Evidence from the large-scale Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study suggests that mortality, hospitalizations, missed HD treatments, or withdrawal from HD are higher among patients who experience more severe pruritus than among those who are not bothered by CKD-aP. Similarly, another study noted more missed HD sessions and increased medication use, including intravenous iron, antibiotics, or erythropoietin-stimulating agents, in patients with more severe pruritus.
To our knowledge, long-term data demonstrating the effect of antipruritic interventions on survival, hospitalization, or dialysis compliance in patients with CKD-aP have not yet been reported. However, a 4-year follow-up of patients enrolled in the German Epidemiological Haemodialysis Itch Study showed improved HRQoL in patients no longer experiencing chronic pruritus than those with pruritus. Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study data showed that adjusting for sleep quality could nullify the associations between mortality risk and pruritus severity, suggesting that impaired sleep may be a mediator of CKD-aP and adverse outcomes.
Emerging data indicate that treatment of a single symptom may have the potential to affect other symptoms in the same cluster, which may improve overall symptom burden. Post hoc analyses of the phase 3 studies, KALM-1, KALM-2, and Study 3105, reported a correlation between improvement in pruritus severity and improvements in sleep quality measured by the Sleep Quality Numeric Rating Scale and 5D-itch. A trend toward improved sleep was also noted in the randomized placebo-controlled trial of nalbuphine, although no changes in pruritus-related HRQoL were observed. Meanwhile, a trial of 50 patients reported reduced pruritus intensity in patients receiving the antidepressant sertraline versus placebo, potentially via modulation of calcium or phosphorus levels.
Analgesic effects of difelikefalin have also been reported in patients experiencing osteoarthritic or postoperative pain, indicating an overlapping role for peripheral κ-opioid receptors in pruritus and pain. Additionally, there is no evidence of addictive potential, and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not labeled difelikefalin as a scheduled compound. Further research is needed to define the precise relationships between individual symptoms within clusters and to determine the therapeutic validity of destabilizing a cluster by targeting a single symptom or common biological mechanism.
The reported efficacy of difelikefalin in improving both CKD-aP severity and associated HRQoL factors, such as sleep, as well as its FDA approval and low potential for addiction, makes it a promising treatment option for patients and HCPs alike, while its cost-effectiveness may be appealing to payors. Therefore, we would advise that approved treatments indicated for CKD-aP, such as difelikefalin, are raised at all clinical decision-making levels.

The Roles of Patient Education and Care Team Collaboration in Patient-Centered Management of CKD-aP

Education and Advocacy for Patients With CKD-aP
Roles for patient education in advocacy in CKD-aP management, both at the individual patient level and wider policy level. CKD, chronic kidney disease; CKD-aP, chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus; HCP, health care professional; PROM, patient-reported outcome measure.
Patient education is a cornerstone in improving the patient-centricity of CKD-aP treatment and emphasizing the importance of symptom-based care on both an individualized patient level and on the broader scale of clinical management using a shared decision-making approach (Fig 4).
To enable patient-centricity on an individual basis, patient education, advocacy, and shared decision making should be encouraged throughout the patient journey. This has also been requested by the patient community. In a small study by van der Willik et al, patients expressed a desire to actively lead their treatment journey as part of a trusting relationship with HCPs, who take a guiding role.
Patients should be made aware of the link between kidney disease and pruritus via predialysis literature or in conversations with HCPs, for example, to encourage reporting of pruritus symptoms in the context of advanced non–dialysis-dependent CKD and dialysis. For instance, a patient information pamphlet and video developed by Ragazzo et al were based on expert review of relevant information listed by patients and used patient-friendly language to define CKD-aP and its links to kidney disease, list lifestyle changes and nonmedicated moisturizers available to reduce symptoms, and invite patients for further discussion with their HCP.
Patients should be made aware of the potential links between pruritus and other cluster symptoms, such as sleep, pain, and mental health.
Patients should be made aware of their rights, feel empowered to ask about their medications and test results, and be encouraged to discuss treatment satisfaction, treatment adherence, and adverse effects with HCPs. Patient bills of rights are available which, while not specific to CKD-aP, could be used as a starting point for conversations with patients that will allow them to understand their rights and encourage them to play an active role in treatment decisions.
Patients should be encouraged to advocate for personalized care that prioritizes symptoms that matter most to them. The benefits of PROMs should be communicated throughout the patient journey by each HCP that cares for the patient. A PROM advocate could be selected from the care team to manage this.
Patients should be enabled to define their treatment goals based on their values and priorities, with treatment decisions made with patient preference in mind.
Patients should be aware of the existence, benefits, and limitations of commonly used FDA-approved treatments—as well as investigational options—available to address their symptoms. Provision of this information should take into consideration local health care guidelines and the policies of patients’ insurance providers. Patient awareness and decision making could be supported by providing patients with access to patient case studies and testimonials.
To promote inclusion and engagement in shared decision making, all communications should include patient-centered terminology, align with the health literacy of the patient, and be open, transparent, and clear.
We recommend the following actions to increase patient awareness of CKD-aP:
The importance of patient involvement in decision making was emphasized at the 2021 Living Well with Kidney Disease and Effective Symptom Management Consensus Conference, as well as in a consensus statement by the Renal Physicians Association.
Because direct interaction between patients and HCPs may be limited in the real-life setting, attendees at the Living Well with Kidney Disease and Effective Symptom Management Consensus Conference also suggested the introduction of symptom management clinics using PROMs to encourage discussions around symptom burden and treatment efficacy.
On a broader scale, patient involvement and input in designing research studies that address clinical and knowledge gaps, clinical decision making, and discussions around policy have the potential to elevate the priorities of patients to the forefront of CKD-aP management.
The involvement of patient consultants or patient and caregiver advocacy groups with HCPs and policymakers, as suggested in Fig 4, could identify current unmet needs, symptoms that matter most to patients, and support systemic change to prioritize patient-centered decision making.

Care Team Collaboration in CKD-aP Management
Multidisciplinary and patient-centric approach to CKD-aP management. CKD-aP, chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus.
Care team collaboration (Fig 5) is suggested to provide the best care for patients with CKD.
Although recommendations for the exact composition of patient care teams for CKD differ, data support the benefits of multidisciplinary approaches for survival, hospitalization, and disease progression. Additionally, models of multidisciplinary clinics for CKD have been shown to be cost effective.
Attendees at the Living Well with Kidney Disease and Effective Symptom Management Consensus Conference noted the need for open and frequent communication between relevant HCPs within a multidisciplinary patient care team, while emphasizing the need to provide a guiding role to support patient-driven decisions. HCPs should be encouraged to discuss symptoms with all members of the patient care team to incorporate relevant perspectives on the correct therapeutic approach. All participants in multidisciplinary discussions should feel empowered to use PROMs and have ownership of patient-centric disease management.
While nephrologists may represent the main treatment decision maker, patients may discuss symptoms with primary care professionals and/or members of their care team in the dialysis setting (advanced practice providers, nurses, dietitians, social workers, and technicians), and be able to bring an advocate to these meetings.
This further emphasizes the need for team-wide communication. However, communication or discussion of the patient’s needs must not delay treatment. Indeed, while a referral to dermatologists may be necessary to exclude dermatological conditions before CKD-aP diagnosis by a nephrologist, Jha et al argued that given the severity of CKD-aP on patient outcomes, any report of pruritus by patients with advanced kidney disease should prompt a diagnosis of CKD-aP, without the need to dismiss confounding variables beforehand.

Conclusion
Ensure that all members of the care team appreciate the importance of CKD-aP to both HRQoL and clinical outcomes, and stress the need for prompt diagnosis, treatment, and management.
Empower patients to play an active role in their treatment by using patient-friendly language (both verbally and in written form) and including patients in decision making.
Use PROMs to assess and diagnose pruritus and to raise patient awareness of CKD-aP and encourage patient-centered treatment.
Use PROMs data so that PROM use can have the maximum impact on diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes, and confirm with patients that the information they provide is being incorporated into their care plan.
Organize cross-disciplinary care teams so that patient data can be shared quickly and efficiently to maximize care while minimizing delays.
Encourage payers to ensure reimbursement and, therefore, access to treatments specifically indicated for CKD-aP to improve not only HRQoL, but also key clinical outcomes such as mortality, and to potentially improve the cost-effectiveness of CKD treatment.
The patient voice is an important consideration in providing optimal care, and multidisciplinary care teams that consider patients’ needs and wishes are important to improving CKD management. However, practical guidance is dispersed across publications and websites and sometimes elusive, leading to a lack of cohesive and global treatment ideals. Therefore, we recommend the following to improve patient care:

References
Self-reported pruritus and clinical, dialysis-related, and patient-reported outcomes in hemodialysis patients
Prevalence and outcomes of chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus: international results from Peritoneal Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study
Clinical characteristics and outcomes of end-stage renal disease patients with self-reported pruritus symptoms
A longitudinal study of uremic pruritus in hemodialysis patients
The course of chronic itch in hemodialysis patients: results of a 4-year follow-up study of GEHIS (German Epidemiological Hemodialysis Itch Study)
Pruritus in haemodialysis patients: international results from the Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS)
Pruritus in hemodialysis patients: results from the Japanese Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (JDOPPS)
Chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus significantly impacts on quality of life of patients on haemodialysis and associates with increased levels of serum calcium and phosphorus
Itching in dialysis patients: impact on health-related quality of life and interactions with sleep problems and psychological symptoms-results from the RENINE/PROMs registry
The relationship between chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus and health-related quality of life: a systematic review
Health-related quality of life in the Dialysis Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS)
Association between changes in quality of life and mortality in hemodialysis patients: results from the DOPPS
Standardised outcomes in nephrology initiative
Living well with kidney disease and effective symptom management: consensus conference proceedings
KDIGO 2020 clinical practice guideline for diabetes management in chronic kidney disease
Current practices in CKD-associated pruritus: international nephrologist survey
Obstacles to early diagnosis and treatment of pruritus in patients with chronic kidney disease: current perspectives
International comparisons of prevalence, awareness, and treatment of pruritus in people on hemodialysis
Chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus
Interventions for itch in people with advanced chronic kidney disease
Novel approach to unpleasant symptom clusters surrounding pruritus in patients with chronic kidney disease and on dialysis therapy
Patient-reported outcomes in patients with chronic kidney disease and kidney transplant-part 1
Deutsche dermatologische gesellschaft: diagnostik und therapie des chronischen pruritus
Chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus: impact on quality of life and current management challenges
European S2k guideline on chronic pruritus
Difelikefalin for treating pruritus in people having haemodialysis: Technology appraisal guidance (TA890)
The 5-D itch scale: a new measure of pruritus
Validation of the IPOS-Renal symptom survey in advanced kidney disease: a cross-sectional study
Comparing patient global impression of severity and patient global impression of change to evaluate test-retest reliability of depression, non-small cell lung cancer, and asthma measures
Evaluation of the impact of fibromyalgia on patients' sleep and the content validity of two sleep scales
The Worst Itch Numeric Rating Scale for patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis
The high correlation between survey assessments for chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus, and its associations with clinical outcomes
Practical use of patient-reported outcome measures in chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus
Do you feel itchy? A guide towards diagnosis and measurement of chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus in dialysis patients
Developing a set of core outcomes for trials in hemodialysis: an international Delphi survey
Patient preferences for in-center intense hemodialysis
A phase 3 trial of difelikefalin in hemodialysis patients with pruritus
Efficacy of difelikefalin for the treatment of moderate to severe pruritus in hemodialysis patients: pooled analysis of KALM-1 and KALM-2 phase 3 studies
Symptom clusters: concept analysis and clinical implications for cancer nursing
Advancing symptom science through symptom cluster research: expert panel proceedings and recommendations
Dialysis symptom index burden and symptom clusters in a prospective cohort of dialysis patients
Patient-centred approaches for the management of unpleasant symptoms in kidney disease
Survey of primary-care providers on perceived benefits of and barriers to PainTracker
Symptom monitoring with patient-reported outcomes during routine cancer treatment: a randomized controlled trial
Do patient-reported measures of symptoms and health status predict mortality in hemodialysis? An assessment of POS-S Renal and EQ-5D
Comparison of pregabalin with doxepin in the management of uremic pruritus: a randomized single blind clinical trial
Gabapentin versus dexchlorpheniramine as treatment for uremic pruritus: a randomised controlled trial
Effect of baby oil on pruritus, sleep quality, and quality of life in hemodialysis patients: pretest-post-test model with control groups
Sertraline can reduce uremic pruritus in hemodialysis patient: a double blind randomized clinical trial from Southern Iran
Difelikefalin improves itch-related sleep disruption in patients undergoing haemodialysis
A multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of nalbuphine ER tablets for uremic pruritus
Will peripherally restricted kappa-opioid receptor agonists (pKORAs) relieve pain with less opioid adverse effects and abuse potential?
Evaluation of the abuse potential of difelikefalin, a selective kappa-opioid receptor agonist, in recreational polydrug users
NDA/BLA Multi-disciplinary Review and Evaluation NDA 214916 KORSUVA (difelikefalin) solution
Cost effectiveness of difelikefalin compared to standard care for treating chronic kidney disease associated pruritus (CKD-aP) in people with kidney failure receiving haemodialysis
Shared decision-making in the appropriate initiation of and withdrawal from dialysis
Discussing results of patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) between patients and healthcare professionals in routine dialysis care: a qualitative study
Reasons for underreporting of uremic pruritus in people with chronic kidney disease: a qualitative study
Development and validation of a uremic pruritus treatment algorithm and patient information toolkit in patients with chronic kidney disease and end stage kidney disease
Dialysis patients’ bill of rights and responsibilites
Patient bill of rights
Multidisciplinary care in patients with chronic kidney disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Multidisciplinary chronic kidney disease clinic practices: a scoping review
Can a multidisciplinary approach slow renal progression in CKD patients?
Effects of multidisciplinary models of care for adult pre-dialysis patients with chronic kidney disease: a systematic review
The effectiveness of multidisciplinary care models for patients with chronic kidney disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Interdisciplinary care clinics in chronic kidney disease
The interdisciplinary chronic kidney disease clinic: end of the beginning, not beginning of the end
Cost-effectiveness of multidisciplinary care in mild to moderate chronic kidney disease in the United States: a modeling study
Complete author and article information provided before references.