Evaluation of the efficiency of at least 24-hour observation of transition to oral diuretic therapy before discharge on 30-day outcomes in acute heart failure patients: a comparative systematic review and meta-analysis
Background
Acute heart failure (AHF) patients face high risks of readmission and mortality post-discharge. Transitioning from intravenous (IV) to oral (PO) diuretics before discharge is recommended to improve patient stability. However, the effectiveness of a prolonged observation period on oral diuretics (> 24 h) before discharge is still unclear.
Objective
This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the effects of an extended (at least 24 h) oral diuretic response observation period prior to discharge on 30-day outcomes, including mortality, rehospitalization, and length of stay in patients with acute heart failure (AHF).
Methods
A comprehensive literature search was conducted across multiple databases, including PubMed/Medline, Embase, and Cochrane, up to November 2024. The study followed the PRISMA guidelines and was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42024608663). Seven retrospective observational studies involving 14,417 AHF patients were included. The Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale was applied to assess the risk of bias.
Results
The meta-analysis found no significant reduction in mortality (OR: 0.85; 95% CI [0.53–1.36]) or heart failure re-admissions (OR: 0.99; 95% CI[0.93–1.05]) for patients observed for at least 24 h after oral diuretic transition compared to those with shorter or no observation. All-cause readmission outcomes also showed no significant difference (OR: 1.02; 95% CI [0.71–1.47]). However, a longer LOS was observed in patients with extended observation (mean difference: 2.14 days; 95% CI [1.26–3.03]).
Conclusion
Extended, at least 24-hour observation after the transition to oral diuretics therapy was significantly associated with an increased LOS but not an improvement in 30-day mortality or readmission rates in AHF patients.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12872-025-05212-7.

Introduction
Patients hospitalized for acute heart failure (AHF) face an increased risk of readmission and mortality, with approximately 20 to 25% experiencing non-elective readmission within 30 days of discharge. Fluid overload is the primary cause of hospitalizations for patients with decompensated AHF. Diuretics have long been the cornerstone of treatment for alleviating acute symptoms of congestion and maintaining euvolemia. Both the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association and the European Society of Cardiology heart failure guidelines strongly recommend the use of intravenous (IV) diuretics to achieve successive decongestion, followed by a transition from IV to oral (PO) diuretics prior to discharge. This transition aims to improve stability and reduce hospital readmissions of HF patients post-discharge by ensuring an adequate dose conversion from IV to PO. Based on this recommendation, many institutions delay discharge for at least 24 h after euvolemic patients complete an extended observation of the transition from IV to oral diuretics therapy. The evidence regarding the effectiveness of this timing in transitioning patients to PO diuretics is limited. Several studies have compared the outcomes between patients with AHF who were and were not discharged after at least 24 h of inpatient PO diuretic therapy. However, only a few observation data support the efficacy of a 24-hour observation period after transitioning from IV to PO diuretics in patients with AHF.
Maintaining patients on oral diuretics for 24 h or more extends the duration of each hospital stay and increases the cost of care. The benefits of transitioning from IV to oral diuretics for at least 24 h before discharge need further evaluation to determine the appropriateness of this practice. This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to assess the utility of observing the transition to oral diuretics for at least 24 h and its effect on 30-day outcomes, including all-cause mortality, rehospitalization, and length of stay.

Methods
The study was reported in accordance with the recommendations outlined in the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) protocol. PRISMA 2020 Checklist is available in the Supplementary material (Supplementary Table 1). The study protocol has been registered with PROSPERO under the registration number (CRD42024608663).

Search strategy and selection criteria
Flow diagram for selection of studies included in the systematic review and the meta-analysis
We searched PubMed/Medline, Embase, and Cochrane from inception to the 1 st of November 2024 without language restriction. We also searched Google Scholar, the International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP), The US Clinical Trials Registry, the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ANZCTR), the Clinical Trial Registry in Japan, International Standard Randomized Controlled Trial Number Registry (ISRCTN registry), EU Clinical Trials, Nederland’s Trial Register, and Randomized Controlled Trial Number Registry (ISRCTN registry), EU Clinical Trials, Nederland’s Trial Register, and the bibliographies of the included studies and recent review articles to identify any additional relevant studies. The search terms used were “heart failure”, “cardiac failure”, “heart decompensation”, “cardiac decompensation”, “heart incompetence”, “cardiac incompetence”, “congestive heart failure”, “congestive cardiac failure”, “cardiac insufficiency”, “heart insufficiency”, “decompensated heart failure”, “decompensated cardiac failure”, “myocardial failure”, “myocardial insufficiency”, “chronic heart failure”, “chronic cardiac failure”, “chronic cardiac insufficiency”, “chronic heart insufficiency”, “heart decompensation”, “cardiac decompensation”, “diuretic”, “diuretic agent”, “diuretic drug”, “diuretic medication”, “diuretics”, “administration, oral”, “drug administration, oral”, “oral administration”, “oral drug intake”, “p.o. administration”, “p.o. dosage”, “p.o. dose”, “p.o. drug administration”, “p.o. drug intake”, “per os drug administration”, “oral drug administration”, “oral”, “24hr”, “24 hr”, and “24 hours”. Two independent reviewers (LA, YT) conducted the initial screening for eligible studies in three phases: first, evaluating the titles, followed by a review of the abstracts in the second phase. In the third phase, full texts were assessed according to the study inclusion criteria (Fig. 1). Any reviewer disagreements were resolved through consensus or consulting a third reviewer (AA). We included randomized controlled trials (RCTs), cohort studies, and case-control studies that compared the outcomes of the observational duration (at least 24 hours vs. less than 24 hours) after oral diuretic transitioning among patients with AHF treated with intravenous diuretics.

Data extraction and quality assessment
All required data were extracted using a pre-designed Excel sheet that included the following information: publication year, study design, sample size, baseline characteristics of included patients, including age, sex, ejection fraction, total intravenous and oral diuretic dose on admission and discharge, average observational time on oral diuretics (hours), heart failure mortality, all-cause mortality, 30-day heart failure rehospitalization, all-cause rehospitalization, and length of stay. Two reviewers independently assessed the risk of bias. The quality of the included observational studies was evaluated using the Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale (NOS). Duplicate records were excluded using the reference manager Mendeley. Pre-proof articles, editorials, studies with different interventions, and reviews were also excluded from our research.

Statistical analysis
A meta-analysis was performed utilizing a random-effects model to calculate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for mortality risk, 30-day readmission, and heart failure readmission. The mean difference in length of hospital stay (LOS) was also calculated. Heterogeneity between studies was assessed using predictive interval and the I² statistic, with 25%, 50%, and 75% indicating low, moderate, and substantial heterogeneity, respectively. Publication bias was evaluated through visual inspection of funnel plots. All statistical analyses were conducted using R software (version 4.3.1; R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2023) with the meta and metafor packages.

Results
Out of 687 records identified in the literature search, 13 articles remained for full-text evaluation after screening titles and abstracts and removing duplicates. The systematic review included 7 trials. Studies were excluded from full-text exclusion due to different interventions (n = 2), editorial (n = 1), pre-proof articles (n = 2), and reviews (n = 1) (Fig. 1). Four hundred and seventy were excluded because they did not align with the aim of this review based on the interventions of interest and measured outcomes (Fig. 1). All the seven studies included were retrospective observational studies; quality assessment of most of the included studies revealed a score range between 7 and 8, indicating good quality, except 2 were graded 6 to the limited description of ascertainment of exposure and the comparability of cohorts (Table 1); Details on NOS quality assessment are available in (Supplementary Table 2).
This systematic review included 7 studies that met the inclusion criteria and involved 14,417 hospitalized AHF patients who received IV or oral diuretics for < 24 h before discharge; 12,925 patients were transitioned from IV to PO diuretics for a full day prior to discharge (Table 1).
Characteristics of the included studies
Study	Study Design	Sample Size	Patients Characteristics	Average Observation Time on Oral Diuretics (hours)In < 24 h vs. at least 24 h Groups	NOS	 	 Alshibani et al. 2024	Multicenter retrospective record review	400	Age: 63 (13)Female: 53%EF: 21[27.4–60.4]Total IV loop diuretic dose^at admission (mg/day): 160 [60–200]Total PO loop diuretic dose^at discharge (mg/day): 80 [48–127]	8.5 [0–21] vs. 80 [48–127]	8	 	 Epstein et al. 2022	Retrospective study	285	Age: 66.3 (15.3)Female: 32%EF: 37.2 (19)Total PO loop diuretic dose^at discharge (mg/day): 95 (73.3)GDMT at Discharge: *• RAAS inhibitors: 62% vs. 60%• Beta-blockers: 85% vs. 84%• MRA: 28% vs. 26%	8.91 (9.2) vs. 48.5 (33.8)	8	 	 Ingrassia et al. 2015	Retrospective study	2179	Age: 74Female: 48.5%EF: 25.4 (19)	NR	6	 	 Laliberte et al. 2017	Retrospective study	123	Age: 58.8 (14)Female: 30%EF: 24.3 (25.4)Total IV loop diuretic dose^at admission (mg/day): 78 (76)Total PO loop diuretic dose^at discharge (mg/day): 121(78)GDMT at Discharge: *• RAAS inhibitors: 54.8% vs. 60.7%• Beta-blockers: 74.2% vs. 78.7• MRA: 46.8% vs. 39.3%	7.6 (9.1) vs. 86.0 (122.2)	8	 	Miranda et al. 2023• MDR cohort• Yale multicenter cohort	Retrospective study	468	Age: 64.3 (13.7)Female: 34%EF: 40 (18)Total IV loop diuretic dose^ at admission (mg/day): 40 [20–120]Total PO loop diuretic dose^ at discharge (mg/day): 80 [40–160]	At least 24 (NR) vs. 0	8	 	10,408	Age: 74 (14)Female: 49%	At least 24 (Not reported) vs. 0	 	 Mohammad et al. 2021	Retrospective cohort study	314	Age: 62.5 (16.3)Female: 36.2%EF: 24.5 (15.5)Total IV loop diuretic dose^at admission (mg/day): 74 (55)Total PO loop diuretic dose^at discharge (mg/day): 83 (69)	Not reported	7	 	 Wu et al. 2020	Retrospective study	240	Age: 63Female: 45%	Not reported	6
(MDR) Mechanisms of Diuretic Resistance The average number reported as Mean (SD) or Median [IQR] according to the distribution of observed data of each study included ^Furosemide equivalence, GDMT: Guideline-directed medical therapies, NR: Not reported, RAAS: Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, *: In < 24 h vs. at least 24 h groups, MRA: Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist

Mortality outcomes
30-day mortality outcomes in patients who had at least 24 hours of observation on oral diuretics compared to those with no observation or less than 24 hours of observation
Out of the seven studies included, three reported mortality outcomes for both groups. Patients who received at least 24 h of observation on oral diuretics before discharge did not show a significant reduction in mortality compared to those who were discharged without observation or with less than 24 h of observation (OR: 0.85; 95% CI [0.53–1.36]) (Fig. 2).

All cause of re-admission outcomes
Results of all-cause readmission when comparing at least 24 hours of observation of transitioning to oral diuretics versus no observation or less than 24 hours of observation
Six out of the seven studies included reported all causes of re-admission. The results indicate substantial heterogeneity (I²=67%), with no significant difference between the two groups (OR: 1.02; 95% CI [0.71–1.47]) (Fig. 3).

HF re-admission outcomes
Out of the seven studies included, five specifically reported the incidence of HF readmission. The results indicated that patients who received at least 24 h of observation while on oral diuretics before their discharge did not experience a significant reduction in HF readmissions compared to those who were discharged without any observation or with less than 24 h of observation (OR: 0.99; 95% CI [0.93–1.05]). The results also show a moderate level of heterogeneity, with an I² value of 65% (Fig. 1S).

Length of stay (LOS) outcomes
Results of the mean difference in LOS when comparing at least 24 hours of observation for transitioning to oral diuretics versus no observation or less than 24 hours of observation
Most studies indicate that patients who were observed for at least 24 h while on oral diuretics experienced a longer LOS than those who were discharged without or with less than 24 h of observation. The mean difference in LOS was 2.14 days, with a 95% CI of [1.26–3.03]. This finding demonstrates high heterogeneity, with an I² value of 89%. (Fig. 4). The heterogeneity was explored by sensitivity analyses by excluding a study each time. The removal of Alshaiban et al. resulted in a reduction of heterogeneity, as indicated by an I2 value of 65.4%. This exclusion was associated with a mean difference in LOS of 1.61 days with a 95%CI [1.06,−2.17]. Similarly, excluding Miranda et al. study reduced the heterogeneity to I2 = 70.8% with a mean difference in LOS of 2.38 days with a 95%CI [1.52,−3.25.].(Supplemental Figs. 6–11 S).

Discussion
This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the utility of extended in-hospital observation (at least 24 h) after the transition to oral diuretics for euvolemic and stable AHF patients. The current guidelines suggest transitioning to oral treatment prior to discharge if the patient is stable and maintaining the patient on the lowest effective dose to maintain euvolemia to reduce re-hospitalizations and mortality rates. However, the guidelines do not specify how long a patient should be observed in the hospital. Furthermore, there have been no RCTs that identify the appropriate duration for observation or compare the outcomes of extended observation periods with shorter observations of less than 24 h or with the absence of observation entirely. Although there is no consensus or supporting RCTs, some institutions worldwide continue to monitor patients for at least 24 h prior to hospital discharge,6,9though the utility of this practice remains unclear.
This systematic search identified 7 retrospective observational studies that evaluated different oral diuretic observation period durations in patients with AHF. The meta-analysis findings indicated that an extended observation period of the oral diuretic therapy for AHF patients prior to discharge (at least 24 h) was not associated with a significant reduction in 30-day mortality compared to those who were discharged without observation or with less than 24 h of observation. Moreover, extended observation of the transition to oral diuretic therapy has not been associated with a significant reduction in all-cause or HF 30-day readmission rates.
Most individual studies did not show any advantage of prolonged in-hospital observation during the transition to oral diuretic therapy. Only two studies found notable benefits. The first, by Alshibani et al., demonstrated a significant reduction in all-cause hospital admissions within 30 days with extended observation (at least 24 h); however, no significant difference was observed specifically regarding HF readmissions. The second study, which was relatively smaller in size compared to the others, is the one by Laliberté et al., which showed a significant reduction in HF readmissions with extended observation. However, this study, published in 2017, is the oldest among the relevant studies. Since then, additional guideline-directed medical therapies (GDMT), including sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitors (ARNI), have been incorporated into standard HF care and have demonstrated effectiveness in reducing HF hospitalization rates and overall mortality that perhaps exceed the benefits observed in the extended observation of oral diuretic therapy prior to discharge.
Additionally, our meta-analysis indicated that extended in-hospital observation after the transition to oral diuretics was associated with a significant increase in LOS., with a mean difference of 2.14 days compared to shorter or no observation. Extended hospital stays without added clinical benefits for this patient group can significantly raise healthcare costs for patients, their families, and healthcare systems. The average cost of heart failure hospitalization was reported to be $125,000 per patient annually for the US healthcare system. Additionally, longer stays heighten the risk of patients acquiring hospital-associated infections, especially among elderly patients, which can complicate recovery and necessitate further treatment. A report from the Kyoto Congestive Heart Failure Registry included 2399 patients without any obvious infectious disease upon admission, revealing that elderly patients with multiple comorbidities were associated with the development of newly diagnosed infections after admission for AHF. These newly diagnosed infections after admission were associated with higher in-hospital and post‐discharge mortality. Moreover, prolonged hospitalizations may delay the initiation of rehabilitation or recovery processes that are more effectively conducted in familiar or supportive environments, ultimately negatively impacting patients’ quality of life.
The overall results of our research did not support in-hospital observation (at least 24 h) after the transition to oral diuretics. It is essential to highlight the retrospective nature of the studies included and the potential confounding variables that may have influenced their results. Additionally, the variability among these studies arises from differences in study populations’ characteristics, healthcare systems, and the continuity of care provided. For instance, the proportion of non-compliant patients and those with advanced stages of HF could contribute to increased mortality risk and higher rates of HF hospitalization over a shorter observation period. The impact of non-compliance on HF hospitalization cannot be dismissed, as this issue was not addressed in the analysis of the studies included. Interventions aimed at improving medication adherence among HF patients have demonstrated enhanced outcomes. A systematic review indicates that such interventions significantly reduce readmissions and lower mortality rates in HF patients. 22 Additionally, it is unclear whether the included studies addressed the referral to outpatient multidisciplinary clinics, which provide close follow-up with patients soon after discharge. Such intervention has proven to reduce 30-day readmissions and improve overall patient outcomes.
To address the limitations inherent in their retrospective nature, most studies conducted multivariate analyses, considering factors such as left ventricular ejection fraction, age, gender, and HF exacerbation. However, other potential confounders, like whether the patient was on optimal GDMT prior to discharge and baseline NT-proBNP levels, may have influenced either positively or negatively. Prospective controlled studies are essential to validate the findings of our research [, ].
Since all the studies included in our analysis were observational studies, estimating the causal effect of the observational duration after transitioning to oral diuretics in euvolemic patients with AHF on patient outcomes cannot be concluded. One strategy to overcome this is to compare the duration of observation in a target emulation trial approach. Designing an emulation trail is beyond the scope of this analysis, but such design should at least include eligibility criteria, assignment of treatment strategies, assignment procedures, outcomes, the start of follow-up at time zero, causal contrast, and statistical methods. Whether the 7 observational studies included in our analysis adhered to a trial emulation method is not known; thus, in the absence of an RCT, rigorous target trial emulation is needed to answer these questions.
While this systematic review provides valuable insights, several limitations exist beyond the previously mentioned issue related to the retrospective nature of the included studies. First, the findings may not be applicable in all contexts, particularly in healthcare settings without an outpatient intravenous diuretic clinic. Furthermore, the results may not pertain to patients with known diuretic resistance, who require close monitoring and extended observation to assess the effectiveness of oral diuretic therapy. Research indicates that diuretic resistance affects 20–30% of advanced HF patients and necessitates more intensive treatment, which is often associated with poorer clinical outcomes. In facilities without outpatient intravenous diuretic clinics, the inability to deliver timely and effective fluid management could further worsen hospital readmission rates and patient morbidity. Given these considerations, it is crucial to tailor observation time to meet the specific needs of the population and the healthcare infrastructure. These findings suggest that prolonged in-hospital observation may not provide clinical benefits in reducing mortality or readmissions, warranting reconsideration of discharge protocols in stable AHF patients. Future research should focus on filling these gaps by conducting prospective studies that categorize patients based on their adherence to treatment, the severity of their HF, and their access to specialized care facilities. This approach will yield more detailed insights into how to optimize care pathways.

Supplementary Information
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Authors’ contributions
L.A. led the project and contributed equally with Y.T. to the systematic search, agreed on the studies to be included, evaluated them, extracted the data, and wrote the manuscript. M.A. developed the search strategy and identified the search terms, conducted the statistical analysis, and participated in revising the manuscript.A.R.A. contributed to the conceptualization and review of the manuscript. L.F.B. assisted with revising and finalizing the manuscript. M.S.A. contributed to managing the project and to the conceptualization and review of the manuscript.

Funding
LFB is supported by NIH/NHLBI K23HL150311. The remaining authors declare no funding sources to disclose.

Data availability
The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Declarations

Ethical approval and consent to participate
Given the nature of the study design (Meta-analysis), consent to participate was not require.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Association of the hospital readmissions reduction program with mortality among medicare beneficiaries hospitalized for heart Failure, acute myocardial Infarction, and pneumonia
Characteristics and outcomes of patients hospitalized for heart failure in the united states: rationale, design, and preliminary observations from the first 100,000 cases in the acute decompensated heart failure National registry (ADHERE)
2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure
2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management of heart failure: A report of the American college of Cardiology/American heart association joint committee on clinical practice guidelines
Konerman MC, Bozaan DA, Adie S et al. Michigan medicine inpatient diuretic guideline for patients with acute decompensated heart failure. Ann Arbor (MI): Michigan Medicine University of Michigan. 2022. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK589894/
Association between oral loop diuretics duration before discharge and hospital readmission in acute decompensated heart failure: A multicenter retrospective cohort study
Impact of transitioning patients to oral diuretics 24 hours before discharge from heart failure hospitalization on 30 day outcomes
Observation of patients transitioned to an oral loop diuretic before discharge and risk of readmission for acute decompensated heart failure
Ingrassia J, Marino E, Shivamurthy P, Perucki W, Soucier R, Francis S. Diuretics within 24 hours of discharge. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014. [cited 2024 Nov 28]2014;63(12):A532. Available from: https://www.jacc.org/doi/10.1016/S0735-1097(14)60532-
In-Hospital observation on oral diuretics after treatment for acute decompensated heart failure: evaluating the utility
Trial of oral diuretics prior to discharge is not associated with improved outcomes in decompensated heart failure
Frequency of transition to oral loop diuretics prior to discharge
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement
Wells GA, Shea BJ, O’Connell D et al. The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) for assessing the quality of nonrandomised studies in meta-analyses. 2000. https://www.ohri.ca/programs/clinical_epidemiology/oxford.asp
Mendeley. (n.d.). Mendeley reference manager. [Computer software]. Mendeley Ltd. Retrieved from https://www.mendeley.com
SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: a meta-analysis of the EMPEROR-Reduced and DAPA-HF trials
Angiotensin-neprilysin Inhibition versus Enalapril in heart failure
Outpatient Follow-Up visits to reduce 30-Day All-Cause readmissions for heart Failure, COPD, myocardial Infarction, and stroke: A systematic review and Meta-Analysis
Multidisciplinary heart failure clinics are associated with lower heart failure hospitalization and mortality: systematic review and Meta-analysis
Pagnesi, M., Metra, M., Cohen-Solal, A., Edwards, C., Adamo, M., Tomasoni, D., Lam,C. S. P., Chioncel, O., Diaz, R., Filippatos, G., Ponikowski, P., Sliwa, K., Voors,A. A., Kimmoun, A., Novosadova, M., Takagi, K., Barros, M., Damasceno, A., Saidu,H., Gayat, E., … Davison, B. Uptitrating treatment after heart failure hospitalization across the spectrum of left ventricular ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023;81(22), 2131–44. 10.1016/j.jacc.2023.03.426.
Correlation between NT probnp and left ventricular ejection fraction in elderly patients presenting to emergency department with dyspnoea
Seko, Y., Kato, T., Morimoto, T., Yaku, H., Inuzuka, Y., Tamaki, Y., Ozasa, N., Shiba,M., Yamamoto, E., Yoshikawa, Y., Yamashita, Y., Kitai, T., Taniguchi, R., Iguchi,M., Nagao, K., Jinnai, T., Komasa, A., Nishikawa, R., Kawase, Y., Morinaga, T., …KCHF Study Investigators. Newly diagnosed infection after admission for acute heart failure: From the KCHF registry. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021;10(22):e023256. 10.1161/JAHA.121.023256.
Medication adherence interventions improve heart failure mortality and readmission rates: systematic review and Meta-Analysis of controlled trials
Overview of the socio-economic consequences of heart failure
Bozkurt, B., Fonarow, G. C., Goldberg, L. R., Guglin, M., Josephson, R. A., Forman, D. E., Lin, G., Lindenfeld, J., O'Connor, C., Panjrath, G., Piña, I. L., Shah, T., Sinha, S. S., Wolfel, E., & ACC’s Heart Failure and Transplant Section and Leadership Council 25. Cardiac rehabilitation for patients with heart failure: JACC Expert Panel. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77(11), 1454–69. 10.1016/j.jacc.2021.01.030.
Clinical impact and associated factors of delayed ambulation in patients with acute heart failure
Fu E. L. Target trial emulation to improve causal inference from observational data: what, why, and how?. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology :JASN. 2023;34(8):1305–14. 10.1681/ASN.0000000000000152.
Target trial emulation: A framework for causal inference from observational data
Target trial emulation: applying principles of randomised trials to observational studies
Diuretic resistance predicts mortality in patients with advanced heart failure