Maximizing Efficiency of Artificial Intelligence-Enabled Ambient Scribes in Outpatient Settings: A Pragmatic Approach to Structuring the Patient Appointment
The introduction of artificial intelligence (AI)-assisted documentation tools, such as ambient scribes, has promised to save time and reduce clinician burnout. Ambient scribe technology has begun to deliver, showing reduction in cognitive burden, greater efficiency in documentation, and improved engagement with patients, although the long-term impact on burnout and patient safety have yet to materialize. Additionally, little is known about the quality of AI generated documentation or the shift in cognitive workload. Finally, the AI scribe decides what details from the transcript will be included in the documentation, which can exclude important factors of, for example, the social history and contextual details. This filtering is important for practices that are highly conversational.
A Clinical Vignette to Enhance the Usability of Ambient Scribes During a Representative Unstructured Patient Appointment
Clinical case: A 58-year-old woman presented for a post-hospital follow-up. She has a pertinent history of poorly controlled type 2 diabetes and hypertension. She was recently admitted for cellulitis of the left lower extremity.	 	Note section	Instructions	Example	 	 	Preappointment	 	Preappointment documentation is most useful for patients returning for chronic conditions or general medical examination but offers limited advantages for new problems or patients as the intra-appointment topics and conversation can be difficult to anticipate.	 	Read dates aloud when documenting the patient’s history. This provides a reference to what is being discussed.	 	Example: “The patient experienced a … on June 19, 2023, for which she had … placed on the same date. Her follow-up TTE on July 24, 2023, demonstrated a normal ejection fraction.”	 	Problem list	Add items from problem list for easy reference later/linkage.	“Today we will be discussing the patient’s lower extremity cellulitis, obesity, and type 2 diabetes.”	 	History	Verbalize history of the problem (if ambient scribe does not take previous notes into account).	“The patient was admitted on August 12, 2025, for nonpurulent cellulitis of the left foot and ankle not responsive to outpatient trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. In hospital she was initially treated with IV vancomycin and discharged on oral amoxicillin with doxycycline. There was no associated ulcer. Due to inability to afford the prescribed semaglutide, and missing doses of metformin, …”	 	 	Verbalize relevant testing, imaging, and other results.	“During admission her white blood cell count trended down from 14 to 9, and her CRP down trended from 5.06 to 1.79. Her A1C was found to be 9.3”	 	SDOH	Verbalize any SDOH, family history, or other items of relevance.	“She does have financial difficulties and is underinsured.”(Pause recording)	 	Intra-appointment	 	Maintain the human element of the appointment through conversation and engagement with the patient, even if the discussion is unrelated to the appointment (ie, the chitchat4). Reference back to the specific problem or topic you were talking about to keep LLMs attention.	 	Example: During the examination the patient indicates knee pain and proceeds to casually talk about her dog “Sparky”.	 	Clinician: “I’m glad Sparky is doing well. Regarding the pain in your right knee, …”	 	In the United States, for Medicare to consider a diagnosis billable, the “M.E.A.T.” criteria (Monitor, Evaluate, Assess, Treat) must be documented in the patient's medical record. Similarly, mapping diagnoses to hierarchical condition categories (HCCs) ensures proper billing and coding. The progress note must include HPI, physical exam, and the medical decision-making process. Verbalizing these items will dramatically improve the initial note quality and completeness.	 	Consent	Before starting the ambient scribe, ask the patient for permission to use the ambient scribe tool during the appointment to assist with taking notes.	“Before we get started, I have this tool that helps with my note taking and other documentation. It basically listens to our conversation and summarizes what we talked about. Is it alright if I use it today?”	 	 		(The patient agrees)	 	 		“Okay, great. I will start it now and just let know if you would like me to stop it at any time.”	 	 		(Resume recording)	 	HPI	Acquire an agenda and combine with pre appointment—you may want to write it down.	“Today I am hoping we can discuss your recent skin infection, or cellulitis, as well as find a way to help you control your blood sugar better in the context of type 2 diabetes. Are there any other problems or concerns you would like to discuss?”	 	 	Reference back often what specific problem or complaint you are taking about to keep LLMs attention.	“From a cellulitis standpoint, …”	 	 		“From a diabetes standpoint, …”	 	Physical examination	To bring the LLM’s attention to the physical examination, verbalize your findings as you are conducting the exam. This helps the LLM but also flows more naturally as the patient can associate what you are saying to each part of the examination.	“On exam heart and lungs are good. Heart reveals a stable grade II/VI systolic murmur heard at the base. There is an area of erythema on the dorsum of the left foot and ankle that is approximately 6 × 10 cm and has receded substantially from the marker line drawn in the emergency department. There is mild associated edema and warmth. There are no visible skin abrasions or ulcers.”	 	 	Verbalize items the patient references/gestures to specific areas of the body. For example, during the exam the patient points to the lateral right knee and states she’s been having pain recently.	“I understand you are feeling some pain on palpation in the lateral right knee.”	 	A&P	Reference back to agenda and try to reference close to ICD 10 coding terms.	“So today we discussed nonpurulent cellulitis of the left lower extremity and type 2 diabetes mellitus, uncontrolled, without retinopathy.”	 	 	Use words such as “I recommend”, “consider”, or say specific trigger words if your clinical practice has any.	“I recommend that for cellulitis you complete your course of antibiotics and notify me if there is a worsening of the redness or pain. For diabetes, you will work hard to take your metformin 1000 mg twice daily more consistently, and we have prescribed glipizide 5 mg daily which will be much more affordable for you. And for the knee pain, I recommend over-the-counter pain medication and reach out if it is not resolved in a few weeks.”	 	 	Verbally list follow-up items.	“I will see you back for a diabetes and hypertension follow-up in three months with a BMP and hemoglobin A1C tests.”	 	 	List out orders as they would appear in your EHR instance.	“BMP, Hemoglobin A1C in three months”	 	Sensitive topic	The patient has a sensitive item they wish to discuss but does not want it recorded.	[Patient]: Can you stop recording? I have a work-related question not related to my health. (Recording paused) The patient then begins to discuss a situation between her and her boss, who works at the same health care organization, and is wondering who in HR she should talk to.	 	Post appointment	 	 	Verbalize any after appointment cares, results, or consult items after they are completed.	(Resume recording)	 	 		“I connected with our nursing staff after the visit and recommended that the nursing team follow-up with the patient regarding their cellulitis in two days.”	 	 		(Stop recording)	 	 	Edit ambient list of problems before generation of documentation.		 	 	Review entire document for accuracy and clarity.
A&P, assessment and plan; BMP, basic metabolic panel; CRP, C-reactive protein; EHR, electronic health record; HPI, history of present illness; ICD 10, International Classification of Diseases, 10th revision; LLM, large language model; SDOH, social determinants of health; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram.
A Clinical Vignette to Enhance the Usability of Ambient Scribes During a Representative Structure Appointment (eg, Well-Child, Obstetrics, etc.)a,b
Clinical case: A 12-year-old man was accompanied by his mother for a well-child appointment and to discuss the child’s asthma and ADHD.	 	Note section	Instructions	Example	 	Preappointment	 	Problem list	Add items from problem list to the appointment diagnosis for easy reference later/linkage.	Add items such as mild persistent asthma and ADHD	 	History	Verbalize history of the problem (if ambient scribe does not take previous notes into account).	“We are going to talk about the patient’s mild persistent asthma and ADHD.”	 	 	Verbalize relevant testing, imaging, and other results.	“Regarding the patient’s asthma they were diagnosed 1 year prior with asthma with a positive methacholine challenge. They have been on albuterol only for rescue.”	 	 		Regarding the patient’s ADHD history, they were assessed in pediatric psychiatry and found to have ADHD in 2024. Adderall XR (amphetamine/dextroamphetamine) 10 mg daily since July 2024.”	 	 	Verbalize any SDOH, family history, or other items of relevance.	“Patient has a family history with mom and sister both having asthma. Also having a father who was diagnosed with adult AHDH and is on medication.”	 	 		(Pause recording)	 	Intra-appointment	 	Step through items linearly as best you can and remember SOCRATES (Site, Onset, Character, Radiation, Associated Symptom, Timing/duration, Exacerbating factors, and Severity).	 	Consent	Before starting the ambient scribe, ask the parent/guardian if it is okay to use the ambient scribe tool during the appointment to assist with taking notes. If the parent/guardian approves, proceed to obtain consent from the patient.	“Welcome back, it is great to see you two again. Before we get started, I have this tool that helps me take notes. It basically listens to our conversation and summarizes what we talked about. Is it alright if I use it today?”	 	 		(Mom agrees)	 	 		[Speaking to the patient] - “Is that okay with you too?”	 	 		(The patient agrees)	 	 		“Okay, great. I will start it now and just let know if you would like me to stop it at any time.”	 	 		(Resume recording)	 	HPI	Acquire an agenda if possible and combine it with the preappointment notes.	“Today I have that we are doing a well child exam and I would like to touch on your asthma and ADHD. Is there anything else you would like to talk about?”	 	 		[Mom mentions additional items such as a rash on her forearms he notices more in the wintertime the is itchy and not painful. They have not tried anything on the rash. No recent illnesses or changes in soaps/detergents related to the rash. Also, he fell at the park last week on her arm so could you look at it.]	 	 	Reference back often what specific problem or complaint you are taking about to keep LLMs attention or restate.	“Regarding your asthma, how do you feel it is going?” [No real issues, only using inhaler when needed… maybe once a month]	 	 		“Ok, any need to go to the emergency department or hospital for your asthma?” [No, we have not]	 	 		“Any coughing at night or wheezing during the day?” [I did have a cold a few months ago that I had a little cough that caused it to flare a bit]	 	 		“OK, your asthma was aggravated a few months ago with a cold. Did you use your inhaler?” [Yes, it helped.]	 	 		“That’s great. How about your ADHD, do you feel it is well controlled on your current regiment?” [Yes, I am doing well in school, home and getting all A’s and B’s]	 	 		“I see your weight is doing well related to your ADHD medication. Any other issues with sleep or eating.” [Nope]	 	Template	For structured appointments (eg, well child, obstetrics, etc.), verbalize the template you are about to start, then verbally step through the on-screen sections.	“Okay, let’s talk about some well child items”	 	 		“What are you eating for a diet?” [I eat…]	 	 		“How much sleep are you getting at night?” [He goes to sleep…]	 	 		“Are you getting regular exercise?” [I get exercise…]	 	 		“Any issues with urination or defecation? Any blood?” [No issues with…]	 	 		“I heard you were doing well in school but any classes you struggle in?” [I have some issues…]	 	 		“Do you go to the dentist regularly?” [He had her teeth checked…]	 	 		“How is your mood – do you ever feel sad or worry a lot of the time?” [I have not had…]	 	Physical examination	Reference short phrases if available or outload with redirection. Verbalize items the patient references or gestors to.	“On exam your lungs sound clear bilaterally – this means everything is good. Heart sounds normal without any murmur.”	 	 		“I see you pointed to your right arm – is that what you hit when you fell last week?” [Yes]	 	 		“Right forearm is not showing any signs of bruising, swelling or pain to palpation. The right arm has good strength, range of motion, and reflexes are intact.”	 	 	Verbalize laterally and location when you find something.	“Left forearm has a red papular rash in the flexor surface of the elbow with linear excoriation consistent with scratching. I also notice something similar near the frontal scalp line that is flaking.”	 	A&P	Use words such as “I recommend”, “consider”, or say specific trigger words if your clinical practice has any.	“For the ADHD, the treatment seems to be controlling your symptoms. I recommend staying on the current 10 mg Adderall XR regiment and following up in 1 year.”	 	 	Verbally list follow-up items.	“For your asthma I recommend continuing to use albuterol as needed and will update the your asthma action plan for home and school without changes.”	 	 	Verbally list out orders as they would appear in your EHR instance. Also, verbalize as you fill out each order.	“For the rash on your left forearm, it appears to be atopic dermatitis. I recommend topical 0.1% triamcinolone twice daily for 2-3 weeks or until the rash clears up.”	 	 		“And for the rash on the scalp, I recommend we get a skin scrapping of the scalp to determine if this is fungal or atopic dermatitis? If the fungal testing is positive, then I would recommend a topical antifungal shampoo and if negative then treat with Triamcinolone 0.1% daily for 1 week.”	 	 		“For the fall on the right arm a week ago. It seems like you are healing nicely and there is no bruising which is great. I would recommend continuing to monitor and if pain, weakness, favoring it or anything that concerns you comes up please reach back out and we would be happy to examine it again.”	 	Postappointment	 	 	Verbalize any after appointment cares, results, or consult items after they are completed.	“As an addendum: the scrapping was negative for fungal organism so for the rash on the scalp I would recommend use of the Triamcinolone 0.1% daily for 1 week.”(Stop recording)	 	 	Edit ambient list of problems before generation of documentation.		 	 	Review entire document for accuracy and clarity.
A&P, assessment and plan; ADHD, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; EHR, electronic health record; HPI, history of present illness; LLM, large language model; SDOH, social determinants of health.
This case represents a well-child visit, but a similar approach can be used for other templated appointments.
Clinician feedback regarding usability and note quality are mixed, with many comments related to note inconsistency, leading to a need for language edits, re-organization, and the general lack of usefulness. One of the authors (J.D.G.) has fellowship training in clinical informatics and a Master’s in engineering, lending a unique view of the intersection between medicine and AI. Over the past 2 years he has used his knowledge of informatics to inform our team’s approach to efficiently use ambient scribes in practice. This perspective aims to assist clinicians that find such tools difficult to use; informed by experience and technical knowledge and guided by 2 clinical vignettes (Tables 1 and 2).

The Basics
To address the potential impacts of ambient scribes, it is important to understand how they work and what happens inside the black box. For legitimate reasons, companies keep their exact methods and models proprietary as this is the differentiator of their product on the market. However, the underlying basic mode of operation remains constant across ambient scribe products—(1) it records audio of a patient encounter (preappointment, intra-appointment, and post appointment), (2) it transcribes live or saves the audio recording to cloud storage for future transcription, and (3) that data is run through a large language model (LLM)/processing engine to then gather a group of topics, create sections of a medical note, and display the information in the electronic health record (EHR).
The technology behind these tools is made to seem magical in many sales pitches, but it is important to remember that they all perform these same basic steps, and the generated text is simply the output from a complex statistical model predicting the most likely next word. It is probabilistic, not determinative, lending to errors. These tools are also still unable to fully document or accurately capture all the nuances of the patient encounter. We like to think of these tools as a medical student in their first month of rotation—they can often get lost when, for example, the patient changes topics randomly during the appointment.

A Little Help Can Go a Long Way
Many clinicians will need to adjust their practice to generate a useful first draft, just as we did when we went from paper clinical notes to human transcription of dictation to speech-to-text software. Assisting these tools during the appointment will reduce your workload instead of shifting it to editing.
Starting with the preappointment, we suggest verbalizing the anticipated appointment framework (problem list, history, test results, etc.) and explicitly verbalizing the details you want to show up in your notes. This helps the software structure the History of Present Illness and the Assessment and Plan (A&P) with context. On entering the room, clinicians should pause the recording and consider the patient’s experience with this technology before they resume. In accordance with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, and some state all-party consent laws, written or verbal consent must be provided by the patient, which can be documented in the clinical note. Moreover, patients have the right to decline the use of ambient listening devices. Common reasons for patient hesitation may include skepticism regarding the safety and security of technology or concerns about sensitive conversations being recorded (eg, sexual history, abuse/neglect, work-related or family-related topics). In some circumstances, it is appropriate to stop recording during a visit at the patient's request and resume when given permission.
Notably, challenging circumstances may arise with patients who are non-English speaking, have a pronounced accent, or present with a speech impediment. In these situations, ambient scribes have the potential to exacerbate health inequities and may result in inaccurate output. Nonetheless, we recommend using multilingual ambient scribe products, as they can often compensate for missed or misunderstood words and phrases during conversations. To mitigate such issues, it is advisable to employ active listening principles in restating or rephrasing patient verbiage with clear attribution to ensure appropriate context.
As mentioned, the software can make erroneous connections if the conversation in the appointment quickly transitions between topics or speakers—from the clinician, the patient, or family members. A way to minimize this is to introduce everyone at the beginning of the visit, including trainees, interpreters, and other care team members. If a nurse or trainee sees the patient before you, and your institution allows their use of the technology, this process can still be taken but a thorough review of the note/transcript for discrepancies is required. Additionally, to help reduce erroneous information we recommend falling back on your medical school training around agenda setting. We suggest getting a list of what the patient wants to discuss, before the appointment or during rooming if possible. Then you can prioritize items and time—it will also help ensure all items are mentioned for the physical exam and A&P. Verbalizing the transition from one agenda item to the next will help the software remain organized but might be a change from the usual dialogue. Additionally, when speaking with the patient, making occasional references back to the agenda item will help the model appropriately link the conversation—keeping its attention—while ensuring it retains important information during long conversations. Attention helps LLMs generate accurate text by allowing the model to focus on the most relevant parts of the conversation when generating each word, keeping the note organized and human-like. Additionally, these tools currently lack vision capabilities so verbalizing a patient’s physical motions and cues is vital. For example, when the patient points to their right hip and says, “I feel the pain in this area”, the clinician could say “ok, you have pain over the lateral right hip.”
The physical examination is difficult for many as we usually do not verbalize examination findings. It may seem unnatural to say, “on examination, heart rate and rhythm are normal without murmurs”—we usually use phrases like “your heart sounds great”. But in our experience, patients rarely notice verbalization during the appointment and if anything, it adds transparency. A first step is to mention the transition— “let’s perform the physical examination”. Some tools have features to pick up templates when simplistic phrases are mentioned, but these do not always work as designed. We cannot solely rely on the scribe to document every aspect of an examination. If verbalizing parts of an appointment is awkward or inappropriate, continue taking physical or mental notes and add those details to the generated note after the encounter. Adjustments are necessary with any technology, but our interaction with patients should not be compromised to fully fit the technology being used.
Referring to the agenda item is important when performing the A&P. Maintaining consistent wording and discussing problems in succession will help eliminate errors. It is vital to verbalize your thoughts, for example, when reviewing test results or during a follow-up appointment because this increases note usability later. When verbalizing a differential, use phrases like “things on my differential include…” or “possible diagnoses I am considering…” so the tool properly attributes this to a differential section rather than simply listing everything. As you verbalize test orders, state what happens if they are negative or positive—eg, “if the strep test is positive, I am going I recommend amoxicillin but if it is negative, then it is likely a viral infection, and I would recommend over the counter treatment.” Recording the A&P can be completed in the room with the patient, but for some clinicians it may be preferrable to record this section after dismissing the patient. On receiving the ambient scribe generated output, clinicians must diligently proofread the document in its entirety for accuracy and clarity as automation bias is a fundamental cognitive limitation in human-automation interaction. The inherent flaws of LLM generated content, including the potential for critical omissions or hallucinations, are applicable to ambient scribes. Additionally, based on the vendor’s features, look-back capabilities, and EHR integration, it may be necessary to include supplementary context, laboratory results, or information from outside the patient visit in the note to ensure comprehensive documentation before finalization.
We recognize that templates are a challenge to our colleagues in specialties that have structured appointments. Family medicine inherently focuses on multiple issues requiring more discussion and so notes are less amenable to templates. To assist, Table 2 contains a modified approach to structured appointments (eg, well child, obstetrics, etc.) by verbally stepping through on-screen sections.

Conclusion
Our recommendations are largely based on our experience with Abridge (Abridge AI, Inc), used within the EHR system Epic (Epic Systems Corporation). However, all ambient scribes on the market use the same basic mechanism, enabling our approach to function across vendor and health systems. Ambient documentation offers many benefits; however, clinicians must adjust to these tools and distinguish hype from reality. A solid comprehension of ambient scribe functionality and the corresponding adjustments to workflow practices is essential for achieving successful adoption. Ambient scribes are here to stay. We need to further adapt as functionality is added to the technology. Finally, further study is urgently needed on how these tools may shift documentation work rather than focusing on reduction in note creation time.

Potential Compteting Interests
The authors report no competing interests.

References
Clinician experiences with ambient scribe technology to assist with documentation burden and efficiency
Quality assurance during the rapid implementation of an AI-assisted clinical documentation support tool
The burden of reviewing LLM-generated content
AI-driven clinical documentation - driving out the chitchat?
Abridge. Contrary research
Exploring automation bias in human–AI collaboration: a review and implications for explainable AI