Comparative Evaluation of Stress at the Implant Bone Interface Between Short Implants and Long Implants Using BioHPP Abutment- An In vitro Study
ABSTRACT
Aim:
To compare and evaluate the stress at the implant–bone interface between short implants and long implants using BioHPP abutment.
Settings and Design:
In vitro study.
Materials and Methodology:
10 PMMA mandibular models with implants, used in the study, were divided into 2 groups, Group L—10 implants (diameter—4.5 mm; length—14 mm); Group S—10 implants (diameter—5 mm, and length—5.2 mm). BioHPP abutments were fixed over the implant fixtures in both the groups, and monolith crowns were cemented. The crowns were then loaded with an universal testing machine, and the resultant stress was recorded using a strainmeter. A comparative study is done between Groups L and S to evaluate the stress distribution at the implant–bone interface.
Statistical Analysis Used:
Descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) were used to analyze stress in both Group L and Group S. Normality was checked with the Shapiro–Wilk test, and variance equality was assessed using Levene’s test. Intergroup comparisons were made using an unpaired t test, with a P value < 0.05 considered statistically significant.
Results:
The stresses at the implant–bone interface between the Group L and Group S are statistically insignificant for all type of load application at various points of loading.
Conclusion:
Based on the results, it can be concluded that the use of long or short implants with BioHPP abutments and monolith crowns will not affect the stresses at the implant–bone interface.

INTRODUCTION
Dental implants restore masticatory function, esthetics, speech, and comfort in edentulous patients by transferring forces from the prosthesis to the bone. The resulting force at the implant–bone interface (IBI) depends on factors like bone density, implant size, abutment type, and patient-specific forces. In cases with limited bone height or the presence of vital structures, short implants are used. It is important to study whether short implants distribute stress similarly to long implants to determine their effectiveness in such clinical situations.

MATERIALS AND METHODOLOGY
In the current in vitro study, partially edentulous acrylic mandibular models with implants in the mandibular first molar areas were fabricated in the following way. Ten mandibular wax models with missing first molars were created using silicon molds. Five models received 10 Bredent BlueSKY implants (diameter: 4.5 mm, length: 14 mm), and five models received 10 Bredent CopaSKY implants (diameter: 5 mm, length: 5.2 mm) (Bredent group, Weissenhorner Str. 2, 89250 Senden—Germany) bilaterally. The models were divided into two groups: Group L—10 long implants (diameter—4.5 mm; length—14 mm); Group S—10 short implants (diameter—5 mm, and length—5.2 mm). BioHPP abutments were placed, and the models were polymerized using PMMA and injection molding technique (SR Ivocap Injection unit) [Figure 1].
Acrylic mandibular study models loaded with long and short implants with BioHPP abutment, respectively
An extraoral scanner (Shining 3D EX Pro) captured the models, and monolithic zirconia crowns were designed using CAD/CAM software and then milled (Ceramill Motion 2). Crowns were cemented over the abutments using polycarboxylate cement (Hy-Bond, Shofu Dental India, Pvt. Ltd, Delhi 110020). Cyanoacrylate resin was used to bind two linear strain gauges (KYOWA KFGS-2-120-C1-11 L1M2R) mesially and distally to the implant. A two-channel strain meter (RMS Controls, Chennai) (NABCL Certificate Number-TCS8/23/07/1501, ULR No. CC287323000005287F) was used to record the strain. A static load of 100N to the crown was applied using a universal testing machine (UTM) (Sensotech Technologies). Three loading points along the vertical axis—the buccolingual midpoint of the distal marginal ridge (DMR), the buccolingual midpoint of the mesial marginal ridge (MMR), and the central fossa—were subjected to a load of 100 N on the crowns. A jig was made specifically for applying oblique load of 100 N at 45° angle in the central fossa region [Figure 2].
Axial and oblique load application to the implant prosthesis using UTM, respectively
The micro-strain produced at the implant–bone interface (IBI) was measured using the strain meter, and the results were tabulated and analyzed.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS (version 27) (IBM corp., Armonk, USA). The average strain of distal, mesial, central, and oblique regions for both long and short implants was calculated. Descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) were used to represent stress in both groups. Normality was checked with the Shapiro–Wilk test, and variance equality was assessed using Levene’s test. Intergroup comparisons were made using an unpaired t test, with a P value < 0.05 considered statistically significant.

RESULTS
The study is to evaluate the stress at the implant–bone interface between the long implants and short implants. Descriptive statistics pertaining for the assessed study variable “strain” in both groups was represented using mean and standard deviation [Table 1]. There was a statistically insignificant difference between the compared groups for distal (P = 0.810), mesial (P = 0.529), central (P = 0.169), oblique (P = 0.218), and average strain (P = 0.447) [Table 1].
Intergroup comparison performed using unpaired t test
Group	n	Mean	Std. Deviation	P	 	Distal	L	10	96.90	4.95	0.810	 		S	10	97.40	4.17		 	Mesial	L	10	302.60	8.70	0.529	 		S	10	305.20	9.39		 	Central	L	10	85.00	4.74	0.169	 		S	10	88.20	5.25		 	Oblique	L	10	105.50	3.10	0.218	 		S	10	104.00	2.06		 	Avg.	L	10	147.50	3.64	0.447	 		S	10	148.70	3.25
Mean values for distal, mesial, central, oblique, and average strain were illustrated using bar graph in [Figure 3].
Bar graph
The results of the study revealed that there is least stress observed in the long implant models on application of axial loads; also, there is least stress observed in the short implant models on application of oblique loads, but these results were proving to be statistically insignificant on comparing both the groups. Therefore, stresses at the implant–bone interface between the long and short implants are statistically insignificant for all loads.

DISCUSSION
The aim of this study was to analyze the stress at the IBI by comparing short and long implants. The results indicated that the stress distribution at the IBI between short and long implants was comparable, suggesting no significant difference in stress generation on varying implant length. While direct detection of moments at the implant is impractical, strain on the surrounding bone can indicate the moments generated. Rodriguez et al. (1993) demonstrated that strain gauges attached to the bone substitute material can effectively simulate clinical scenarios and assess stress at the IBI. In this study, polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) resin, which mimics human cancellous bone (elastic modulus 3353 N/mm2), was used to create the study models. A newer technique was used to insert the implants into the model, ensuring complete integration with the resin. Zirconia, with its mechanical properties, biocompatibility, and aesthetic appeal, was chosen for both implant systems. It is effective in high-stress areas like molar regions. Scully’s Oxford Handbook of Dental Science states that the physiological and normal mastication force ranges from 70 to 150 N, with a maximal biting force of 500 to 700 N. Since maximal masticatory forces are not reached when grinding, the study applied a 100 N load, well below the maximum biting force, to align with previous in vitro investigations. BioHPP abutments were selected due to their biocompatibility with soft tissues and an elastic modulus comparable to bone (4 GPa). These abutments have low plaque retention, excellent abrasion resistance, and prevent allergic responses. Due to limited researches available, it was decided to incorporate BioHPP implant abutments in the current in vitro study. They did not produce any micro- or macrofractures, and they proved to be a stable abutment throughout the study. The BioHPP has lower modulus of elasticity; therefore, the BioHPP absorbs increased amount of stress from the applied load and decreases the stress transferred to the underlying bone. Also, the color of the BioHPP increases esthetic appeal of the restorations. Future in vitro and in vivo investigations comparing titanium and BioHPP abutments can be done to increase their clinical applications. The key finding of this study was that the stresses generated at the IBI of short and long implants were statistically comparable. Himmlová et al. in his study concluded varying the length of the implant does not produce a major difference in the stress at the IBI, and this is in coherence with our study. Guan et al. (2009) suggested that long implants reduce stress at the IBI due to increased bone contact. Li T et al. 2011 suggested long dental implants encourage more uniform stress distribution in bone than short implants. Their conclusions are contradicting with the current study. Other studies by Baggi et al. (2008) and Anitua et al. (2009) suggested that the diameter of the implant had a larger distribution of stress in bone than varying the implant length. Our study used short implants with a 5 mm diameter, which may have contributed to the comparable stress distribution between both implant groups. Studies by Esposito et al. (2011) and Chizolini et al. (2011) emphasized the advantages of short implants in reducing morbidity, treatment time, and costs. This study concurs with this, making short implants a viable alternative for cases with limited bone height. Xu X et al. 2020 in his meta-analysis found that biological issues from short implants occur less frequently. Moraschini V et al. 2021 advocated that there is low incidence of biological and prosthetic problems in extra-short implants. Bitinas D et al. 2021 in his review stated that short dental implants would be a good substitute for long dental implants following bone augmentation. Bérczy K et al. 2024 in his retrospective study concluded that short implants have similar success rates as long implants. This study found no significant difference in stress distribution between short and long implants, rejecting the null hypothesis. Both implant types showed similar stress patterns at the implant–bone interface. These results suggest that short implants could be a viable alternative to long implants in clinical cases, reducing the need for invasive procedures, additional surgeries, and treatment time. Further in vitro and clinical research is needed to confirm these findings and enhance the clinical application of short implants.

CONCLUSION
It may be concluded that the optimal course of treatment is to use short implants in most clinical situations. The stresses produced by the short implants at the interface between the implant and bone are similar to those of long implants. The clinicians with the knowledge of the advantages of short implants, and that of the given clinical situation, will finally choose the appropriate length of the implant. To conclude, it can be well said that the short implants are best alternative to long implants in clinical situations not only having compromised residual bone height, requiring additional surgeries, but also to reduce morbidity and treatment time.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
Implant design and stress distribution
Evaluation of strain at the terminal abutment site of a fixed mandibular implant prosthesis during cantilever loading
Young's modulus of trabecular and cortical bone material: Ultrasonic and microtensile measurements
The effect of using different crown and implant materials on bone stress distribution: A finite element study
Physiological biting force
Evaluation of strain developed around short dental implants using two different restorative materials (in vitro study)
Fracture Resistance of Titanium, Zirconia, and Ceramic-Reinforced Polyetheretherketone Implant Abutments Supporting CAD/CAM Monolithic Lithium Disilicate Ceramic Crowns After Aging
Modified PEEK resin-bonded fixed dental prosthesis as an interim restoration after implant placement
The advantages of biohpp polymer as superstructure material in oral implantology
Influence of implant length and diameter on stress distribution: A finite element analysis
Influence of bone and dental implant parameters on stress distribution in the mandible: A finite element study
Optimum selection of the dental implant diameter and length in the posterior mandible with poor bone quality-A 3D finite element analysis
The influence of implant diameter and length on stress distribution of osseointegrated implants related to crestal bone geometry: A three-dimensional finite element analysis
Influence of implant length, diameter, and geometry on stress distribution: A finite element analysis
A 3-year post-loading report of a randomised controlled trial on the rehabilitation of posterior atrophic mandibles: Short implants or longer implants in vertically augmented bone?
Short implants in oral rehabilitation
Short implants versus longer implants in the posterior alveolar region after an observation period of at least five years: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Clinical comparation of extra-short (4 mm) and long (>8 mm) dental implants placed in mandibular bone: A systematic review and metanalysis
Short implants without bone augmentation vs. long implants with bone augmentation: Systematic review and meta-analysis
Outcomes of treatment with short dental implants compared with standard-length implants: A retrospective clinical study