A community perspective of COVID-19 and obesity in children: Causes and consequences
The pandemic of childhood obesity that has been increasing over the last decade has collided with the current pandemic of COVID-19. Enforced behavioural changes have resulted in a myriad of problems for children particularly in weight management. Restricted activity is the most obvious but many other aspects of life have exacerbated biological, psychosocial, and behavioral factors identified as risks for childhood obesity. Significant effort is required to turn around the prevailing tide of weight gain necessitating changes in personal and family behavior and diet, as well as high-level governmental and educational policy. Evidence-based, focused, long-term interventions which are adequately funded are required. Enthusiasm and optimism for change coupled with public engagement by utilization of new technology as well as traditional methods offers hope for change. Public health interventions in isolation are inadequate and bolder changes to central policies and social structure are needed for sustained change. This will allow some mitigation of the affects of COVID-19 but also reduce negative outcomes in future comparable situations.

Introduction
Childhood obesity is a major and rapidly accelerating public health challenge. Recent governmental strategies to minimize the spread of COVID-19 through school closures, lockdowns, and alterations in social interaction have complicated childhood weight management efforts Widespread disruption of normal educational and social routines has affected 75% of the world's students, and, as school closure is associated with weight gain, and the precipitous nature of school closures has led to rapid increases in body mass for some children. Children with higher body mass index (BMI) have greater risk of poor outcomes from COVID-19 infections. This is in addition to having increased rates of morbidity and mortality from obesity-related chronic diseases. Other added burdens of childhood obesity are lower educational achievement and psychological distress.
COVID-19 has put more strain and burden on the healthcare system. Health inequality has been apparent for years, but the present pandemic has highlighted its effects due to the catastrophic outcomes of many of the affected obese victims of COVID-19. The biopsychosocial (BPS) model underpins the complex dynamic interactions between the biological, psychological, and social constructs causing obesity. In 2020, the world has witnessed perhaps a greater exacerbation of these biopsychosocial factors than ever before. Visualizing the effect of the pandemic from the perspective of the BPS framework allows identification of the causes and manifestations of weight gain in children. This approach will help identify strategies for weight management in children during pandemic conditions from a community perspective. We also appraise policies in th is review to mitigate the factors leading to childhood weight gain in future situations.

Biologicalfactors

Obesity and immune dysregulation; added risks of COVID-19 in obesity
The severity of many viral infections is positively correlated with obesity, and COVID-19 is no exception. Whilst children generally have mild symptoms from COVID-19 infections, those with obesity are at increased risk of serious disease. Adipose tissues is an active endocrine organ and excess causes a low grade inflammatory state with increased production of multiple proinflammatory adipokines such as leptin, TNF-α and IL-6. Inflammatory markers are raised and the pre-existing state of subclinical inflammation, heightenen by daily stress, reduces immunity to viral illnesses such as COVID-19. Children infected with COVID-19 have an altered and overactive immune system with an increased production of inflammatory markers such as such as CRP, IL-6 or IL-1. Though children have milder symptoms from COVID-19 infections, due to a differential expression of cell surface enzyme angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). The risk of severe disease increases and a child with a raised BMI is more likely to be hospitalised with COVID-19. Vulnerability is further heightened by low levels of physical activity imposed by lockdown which reduces pro-inflammatory cytokine inhibition and macrophage activation. Obesity is more common in deprived socioeconomic communities and in ethnic populations and so the observation of higher mortality and morbidity in these groups can be explained partially through immune dysregulation secondary to excess adipose tissue.
Ethnic origin also has links to severe disease via Vitamin D levels. Vitamin D deficiency has been linked to worse COVID-19 outcomes. Vitamin D is postulated to have anti-inflammatory and anti-microbial properties, decreasing the production of inflammatory cytokines. Overweight children are therefore at risk from adipose tissue activity, biome changes and vitamin D deficiency.
A further immune dysfunction common to both obese children and COVID-19 patients is an altered gut biome with changes in Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio and altered colonized Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium bacterium. An increase in opportunistic gut pathogens and reduction in beneficial commensals is seen in COVID-19 patients and thought to be related to disease severity.

Psychosocial factors and behavioural change

Family and school
COVID-19 has altered many aspects of family life that will impact on childhood weight gain. Determinents of weight are at work from birth, and factors such as maternal weight gain in pregnancy, parental smoking, infant feeding methods and parental obesity all contribute. COVID-19 lockdown may well have affected these influences.
Behavioural changes steming from school closures will have weight-related consequences. School holidays have been shown to result in weight increases and this is more pronounced in those of ethic backgrounds and those already overweight. Rapid childhood weight gain is particularly significant as a predictor of adult obesity and that experienced during school breaks is likely to be swift. Quick weight gain also predisposes children to obesity-related medical conditions, such as insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidemia in adolescence.
Reasons for this ‘holiday’ change in weight can be related to more time spent on eating, access to food, particularly unhealthy choices is easier, and eating larger food portions more frequently in the presence of others is observed. At the same time, those more deprived children experience food insecurity, having limited and unreliable access to healthy food at home. The lack of school meals can result in malnutrition and obesity. Country of origin, racial and ethnic differences are also implicated. These observations, seen in prearranged school holidays, are likely to be reflected in lockdown closures although, as these have been unplanned and prolonged, the outcomes are likely to be more significant.

Screen and media time
During lockdown, children tend to spend more time online and watching television. Concerns exist regarding the influence of repreated exposure to aggressive advertising by food manufactuers on TV, the internet and through video games. The practice of promoting unhealthy food choices directly to children has recently intensified.. Recognition of this trend, in 2020, led the UK government to place a ban on TV advertising before 9 p.m. of foods high in fat, sugar, and salt.
A focused family meal time is a recognized protective factor against obesity and this is being eroded with the observation that half of children's meals are consumed in front of a screen. Reduced recognition of the importance of meal times is associated with being overweight. Furthermore, dining in front of the television is associated with unhealthy foods and snacking

Physical inactivity
Lockdown has had substantial effects of levels of childhood physical activity. The lockdown enacted in response to COVID-19 has altered lifestyle patterns, possibly exacerbating weight gain. The forms of routine physical exercise that are ordinarily practiced by children, such as walking to and from school, have been lost, and the closure of parks and other leisure facilities has made exercise difficult. Outside activity is believed by some to increase the risk of infection; therefore, some children have been rendered housebound. Anxiety related to perceived risk, and low motivation are cited as reasons for reduced play activity. All age groups have been affected, including pre-school infants, for whom interaction with peer group friends is vital.

Psychological factors
COVID-19 has had significant effects on the mental health of both adults and children with 25% of adults and 14% of children reporting a deterioration. Parental pressures have been intensified by the pandemic, namely employment and financial insecurity, home educating and relationship strain. There have also been more incidents of domestic abuse and family breakdowns. Stresses are transmitted to children, adding to their psychological burden which naturally has a negative impact on children's wellbeing.
Reduced social interaction also causes feelings of isolation and loneliness, which can precipitate or worsen mental health disorders and such psychologial difficulties can lead to emotional eating in adolescents which in turn is associated with obesity.

Health inequalities and poverty
Health inequalities seen in vulnerable populations and ethnic groups have been highlighted during the pandemic. Poverty, ethnicity, living conditions, density of population and underlying medical conditions have had both a direct and indirect impact on both COVID-19 infections and obesity.
Food insecurity, discussed earlier, can cause long-term developmental, psychological, emotional, and physical distress, even when it is of a short duration. Vulnerable groups tend to have lower educational attainment and limited access to technology and the internet. gave food security as an example of a many recurring social problems that persists through generations when inequalities relating to education and social advancement are not addressed.

Perspectives and solutions
The impact of lockdown conditions on weight gain in vulnerable children needs acknowledgment and future planning is required to minimize resultant health problems and avoid future repetions.
As the OECD reports, many countries have developed strategies to address obesity, but often these are limited to adults. Childhood obesity tends to be neglected, and few child-specidic policies have been implemented. The high risk from severe COVID-19 infections among the obese population must intensify public health efforts to reduce childhood obesity. Addressing modifiable factors is of paramount importance and one of the most compelling is that of poverty. Other socio economical factors such as food insecurity, poor physical health and lower educational attainment, deprived communities need central policies to improve their outcomes.
Food insecurity and malnutrition emerging from a lack of food access during school closures requires direct governmental action. Provisions to bridge the gap such as the “Grab-n-Go” meal scheme in South Carolina, in which five days' worth of food was given to those normally receiving free school meals, have proved popular. This offers advantages over vouchers in that a balanced diet can be guaranteed. In the UK's “Healthy Start” scheme successfully used targeted vouchers enable low-income families with children under the age of five to receive help with milk, fruit, and vegetable costs. Highlighting healthy food choices and advocating physical activity via TV and multi-media interfaces is a beneficial means of promoting healthy behaviors among teenagers which has been utilized in the English campaign “change4life”.
It is apparent from evidence regarding the influences behind weight change during lockdown that family relationships and functioning play a significant role. Early intervention in family nutritional education such as promoting breastfeeding, weaning appropriately, regulating portion size for children, and encouraging heathy food choices, enhance self-regulation, which, as we have seen, is a key feature in maintaining a healthy weight. Improving parental skill in managing children's feeding is essential. have identified challenges such as financial and time constraints as well as a failure of parental engagement Parent-child relationship and the familial relationship to food and eating are influential in weight gain so providing education regarding diet and the provision of healthy meals and avoiding the unrealistic assumption that children will choose healthy options over unhealthy ones will be rewarding. The emergence of virtual parenting groups allows parents and professionals to share child-rearing tips, including advice on healthy eating, physical activity, and behavior management.
Psychological stress and tension, which have been exacerbated during lockdown, can also be alleviated by the practice of mindfulness. Achieved in a variety of ways, mindfulness can be comforting and relaxing. Successul use of mindfulness involving children and their parents has reduced childhood weight gain.. have used virtual reality technology effectively with positive outcomes. Such methods of delivery may be extremely valuable in times of constrained activity, as they can allow a sense of escape from COVID-19 restrictions. Already proven to improve sleep and reduce overeating, mindfulness has great potential and should be encouraged.
Although using information technology (IT) for interventions have often been sidelined in the past and considered inadequate, the evidence now suggests that both preventative and management measures can be delivered remotely and cost-effectively with high levels of engagement and client satisfaction. IT has been utilized in a number of ways; virtual parenting groups allows parents and professionals to share information and interventions for children with eating disorders. Behaviour management though personalized digital packages aimed at changing responses are being developed. Weight loss, healthy food choices, and increased physical activity have been successfully achieved in adolescents in the short term, with improvement in BMI and lifestyle changes. Teenagers have successfully increased their physical activity with the aid of mobile applications and virtual groups in New York have had positive outcomes regarding increasing physical activity. The regular monitoring of weight at home using electronic scales that transfer data to mobile applications is associated with a greater reduction in weight along with positive patient experience. The development of more culturally sensitive and appealing presentations directed at behavioural change and health promotion will engage our target audience and encourage perseverance. The smart use of personalized apps can encourage behavioral change even when children are confined to their homes.
IT or “Telehealth” can overcome many barriers associated with limited patient resources. Telehealth bypasses non-engagement because of travel issues or costs and possibly reduces patient embarrassment due to lack of visual contact. Furthermore, the evidence indicates that the feeling of being judged reduces clients’ trust in their healthcare providers; and virtual services may circumvent thisemotion and enhance engagement. “Telehealth” allows sustained continued remote care despite COVID-19 restrictions and limitations.
Childhood obesity prevention and management recommendations during COVID-19 pandemic.
Table 1
RECOMMENDED INTERVENTIONS REQUIRED FROM STAKEHOLDERS	 	Government/Regulators	 	Scale up childhood obesity prevention policies.	 	Deliver advertising promoting healthy choices during lockdown.	 	Maintain services for childhood obesity prevention.	 	Increase and support research that look at consequences of extended school closures on obesity..	 	Healthcare providers	 	Adopt service delivery that is cost-effective and COVID-19-secure by using telehealth to deliver services.	 	Support creativity in families by providing activity packs.	 	Consider modular teams for continuity of services.	 	Make mental health services available for children as well as their parents.	 	Provide vulnerable families with activity packs that will help decrease screen time.	 	Provide virtual parenting lessons aimed at behavior change.	 	Utilize self-weighing with e-scales alongside weight management discussion..	 	Offer relationship counseling to reduce family breakdown..	 	Schools	 	Prioritize physical education alongside traditional subjects during lockdown.	 	Require daily physical activity within school hours.	 	Integrate physical movement into routine lessons.	 	Social media, influencers, and technology	 	Work with governments to enhance healthier advertising options.	 	Create age-appropriate apps that encourage physical activity.	 	Create video games that discourage and decrease physical inactivity.	 	Provide mindfulness apps and virtual reality technology.	 	Utilize the appeal of apps and capitalize on their use to promote behavior change.	 	Families	 	Develop and encourage virtual education for parents to promote breastfeeding, discourage early weaning, and encourage appropriate portion sizes for infants and children and healthy food choices.	 	Self-monitor physical activity and nutritional intakes and set goals.	 	Focus and increase parents' role modeling of healthy lifestyles, physical activity, and healthy food choices.	 	Encourage children to join their parents when they go out for daily allowed exercise or walks during lockdown.
Table 1 places the complex biopsychosocial interactions that need to be considered when managing weight gain are considered along side necessary involvement of stakeholders to ensure a cohesive and effective response. Due to the very nature of the BPS model, the response needs to be multifaceted, multidisciplinary and involve a wide range of interested parties. An accurate understanding of the biopsychosocial interactions that contribute to weight gain and weight management, properly applied, will support more effective management of weight gain during and beyond the pandemic.

Implications for practice
Biopsychosocial factors that influence COVID -19 pandemic related obesity in children.
Fig. 1
The family, community, home and school environments have changed in unimaginable ways during the COVID-19 pandemic. The juxtaposition of another pandemic, that of childhood obesity, has created a perfect storm, increasing the risk of developing adiposity as well as worsening pre-existing obesity. Socioeconomic, psychosocial, cultural, genetic, behavioral, psychological, and environmental factors all play a part similar to other chronic diseases. COVID-19 has had a significant impact on many of these variables (Fig. 1 ). emphasizes the complex biopsychosocial interactions that need to be considered when managing weight gain.
Although there is no quick fix that can solve all weight management problems in children during the pandemic, interventions can still be delivered while adhering to social distancing and lockdown rules, especially through novel channels such as telehealth and software applications. However, technology alone is not enough. Close communication between parents, schools, and communities will allow integrated care, even when further lockdowns or school closures cause stress for children; this important role shows us that we must provide adequate funding for the initiatives described above.
The COVID – 19 pandemic has amplified the need for an integrated interdisciplinary approach to weight management. The collision of both the obesity and the COVID-19 pandemic due to an abrupt and dynamic change in the biopsychosocial environment has put children at an increased risk of obesity and,therefore, at increase risk of serious COVID-19 disease. To produce effective programs that will both prevent and combat childhood obesity, governments, public health organizations, educational establishments, primary health teams, and local communities must be engaged. It is essential that all stakeholders review critically the biopsychosocial needs of our children. Such an approach will aid in significantly reducing the negative impact of obesity and COVID-19.

Patient consent for publication
Not required.

Ethics approval
Not required.

Authors contributions
MT, MABK contributed to the conceptualization and carried out the literature review. MT, MABK and JEMS contributed to the writing of the review and editing of all the drafts. All authors read and approved the final version.

Funding
No funding was involved in the preparation of this review.

Declaration of competing interest
None declared.

References
The impact of COVID-19 on Abu Dhabi and its primary care response
Lifestyle behaviours during the COVID‐19–time to connect
An evaluation of holiday weight gain among elementary-aged children
When pandemics collide: the impact of COVID-19 on childhood obesity
Obesity and food-related content aimed at children on YouTube
Clinical characteristics and outcomes of hospitalized and critically ill children and adolescents with coronavirus disease 2019 at a tertiary care medical center in New York city
Telemedicine and pediatric obesity treatment: review of the literature and lessons learned
Self-determination theory as a theoretical framework for a responsive approach to child feeding
Caring for children and adolescents with eating disorders in the current COVID-19 pandemic: a Singapore perspective
Virtual reality as a promising strategy in the assessment and treatment of bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorder: a systematic review
The application of telemedicine to pediatric obesity: lessons from the past decade. Telemedicine and e-health
Effect of the holiday season on weight gain: a narrative review
Feeding low-income children during the covid-19 pandemic
Is food insecurity related to overweight and obesity in children and adolescents? A summary of studies, 1995–2009
The biopsychosocial model and the education of health professionals
Pathways of infant and childhood growth that lead to type 2 diabetes
Mobile health interventions for improving health outcomes in youth
Family mealtimes: a contextual approach to understanding childhood obesity
Obesity, COVID-19 and immunotherapy: the complex relationship!
Accelerated weight gain among children during summer versus school year and related racial/ethnic disparities: a systematic review
Adenovirus 36 and obesity in children and adolescents
Associations between mindfulness, self-compassion, difficulties in emotion regulation, and emotional eating among adolescents with overweight/obesity
Evidence that vitamin D supplementation could reduce risk of influenza and COVID-19 infections and deaths
Risk factors for rapid weight gain in preschool children: findings from a UK-wide prospective study
An ecological systems approach to examining risk factors for early childhood overweight: findings from the UK Millennium Cohort Study
The need to treat childhood obesity with holistic methods: why pediatric endocrinologists do not use multifactorial treatment
Prospective associations between socioeconomically disadvantaged groups and metabolic syndrome risk in European children. Results from the IDEFICS study
Health behaviour in school-aged children (HBSC) study: International report from the 2013/2014 survey
Childhood obesity and Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio in the gut microbiota: a systematic review
Preventing childhood obesity through a mindfulness-based parent stress intervention: a randomized pilot study
A novel interactive mobile health support system for pediatric obesity treatment: a randomized controlled feasibility trial
Effect of social media on child obesity: application of structural equation modeling with the Taguchi method
“Covibesity,” a new pandemic
Screen time and metabolic syndrome among expatriate adolescents in the United Arab Emirates
Global epidemiology of ischemic heart disease: results from the global burden of disease study
The immunopathobiology of T cells in stress condition: a review
Rapid systematic review: the impact of social isolation and loneliness on the mental health of children and adolescents in the context of COVID-19
Influenza and obesity: its odd relationship and the lessons for COVID-19 pandemic
How to deal with COVID-19 epidemic-related lockdown physical inactivity and sedentary increase in youth? Adaptation of Anses' benchmarks
African-American girls' dietary intake while watching television
Can food vouchers improve nutrition and reduce health inequalities in low-income mothers and young children: a multi-method evaluation of the experiences of beneficiaries and practitioners of the Healthy Start programme in England
Screen time for children and adolescents during the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic
A home visiting parenting program and child obesity: a randomized trial
Strategies to engage adolescents in digital health interventions for obesity prevention and management
Well-being of parents and children during the COVID-19 pandemic: a national survey
Effects of COVID-19 lockdown on lifestyle behaviors in children with obesity living in Verona, Italy: a longitudinal study
Stigma experienced by children and adolescents with obesity
Digital advertising to children
Psychological consequences of childhood obesity: psychiatric comorbidity and prevention
COVID-19-Related school closings and risk of weight gain among children
Parental influence on eating behavior
Understanding how virtual reality can support mindfulness practice: mixed methods study
The efficacy of using mobile applications in changing adolescent girls’ physical activity behaviour during weekends
Mindfulness-based group intervention in adolescents at-risk for excess weight gain: A randomized controlled pilot study
Spotlight for healthy adolescents and adolescents with preexisting chronic diseases during the COVID-19 pandemic
Family dynamics and pediatric weight management: putting the family into family-based treatment
Waist circumference is related to low-grade inflammation in youth
Children’s self-regulation in eating: associations with inhibitory control and parents’ feeding behavior
Outcomes of COVID-19: disparities in obesity and by ethnicity/race
Watching television while eating: associations with dietary intake and weight status among a diverse sample of young children
COVID-19, school closures, and child poverty: a social crisis in the making
A description of health care system factors in the implementation of universal weight management services for children with overweight or obesity: case studies from Queensland and New South Wales, Australia
Worldwide trends in childhood overweight and obesity
Zooming toward a telehealth solution for vulnerable children with obesity during coronavirus disease 2019
How much may COVID-19 school closures increase childhood obesity?
Epidemiology, clinical features, and disease severity in patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in a children’s hospital in New York city, New York
Response to children's physical and mental needs during the COVID-19 outbreak
Alterations in gut microbiota of patients with COVID-19 during time of hospitalization