The underused potential of breast conserving therapy after neoadjuvant system treatment – Causes and solutions
Breast conserving therapy (BCT), consisting of breast conserving surgery and subsequent radiotherapy, is an equivalent option to mastectomy for women with early breast cancer. Although BCT after neoadjuvant systemic treatment (NAST) has been routinely recommend by international guidelines since many years, the rate of BCT worldwide varies largely and its potential is still underused. While the rate of BCT in western countries has increased over the past decades to currently about 70%, the rate of BCT is as low as 10% in other countries. In this review, we will evaluate the underused potential of breast conservation after NAST, identify causes, and discuss possible solutions. We identified clinical and non-clinical causes for the underuse of BCT after NAST including uncertainties within the community regarding oncologic outcomes, the correct tumor localization after NAST, the management of multifocal and multicentric tumors, margin assessment, disparities of socio-economic aspects on a patient and national level, and psychological biases affecting the shared decision-making process between patients and clinicians. Possible solutions to mitigate the underuse of BCT after NAST include interdisciplinary teams that keep the whole patient pathway in mind, optimized treatment counseling and shared decision-making, and targeted financial support to alleviate disparities.
Highlights
Breast conserving therapy requires complex, multidisciplinary teamwork.
We identified reasons for its underuse after neoadjuvant treatment.
Clinical, socio-economic, and psychological factors were identified.
Solutions include interdisciplinary teams, optimized counseling, financial support.

Introduction
Breast conserving therapy (BCT), consisting of breast conserving surgery and subsequent radiotherapy, has replaced mastectomy as the standard of care for women with early breast cancer. Clinical trials demonstrated equivalent survival between BCT and mastectomy in the primary surgery as well as in the neoadjuvant setting. BCT after neoadjuvant systemic treatment (NAST) poses unique opportunities but also challenges to patients and clinicians: On the one side, NAST allows for more BCT instead of mastectomy (associated with reduced surgical morbidity) and in-vivo sensitivity testing of systemic treatment. On the other side, BCT after NAST requires extensive multidisciplinary efforts to adequately diagnose the disease, initiate NAST, monitor treatment response, localize residual cancer, conduct surgery as well as radiotherapy, and meet patient expectations in terms of oncologic and aesthetic outcomes.
Although BCT after NAST has been routinely recommend by international guidelines since many years, the rate of BCT worldwide varies largely and its potential is still underused. While the rate of BCT in western countries has increased over the past decades to currently about 70%, the rate of BCT is as low as 10% in other countries. Moreover, temporal trends of breast surgery after NAST indicate that the rate of bilateral mastectomy but not of breast conserving surgery has increased over the past decade despite increasing BCT eligibility, increasing use of NAST, and increasing complete response to NAST. In this review, we will evaluate the underused potential of breast conservation after NAST, identify causes, and discuss possible solutions.

Causes for the underuse of breast conserving therapy after neoadjuvant systemic treatment
Oncologic outcomes
There are several clinical and non-clinical reasons for the underuse of breast conserving therapy after NAST.
The oncologic safety of BCT after NAST is of outmost importance. Several prospective, randomized controlled trials have demonstrated equal overall survival and distant-disease free survival of BCT after NAST compared to adjuvant treatment. With respect to local recurrence, however, some meta-analysis suggest an increased risk of local recurrence after NAST compared to adjuvant treatment, while others do not. The 2018 EBCTCG meta-analysis included 10 randomized controlled trials (n = 4756) comparing breast surgery in the neoadjuvant with the adjuvant setting. The trials were conducted between 1983 and 2002 with a median follow-up of 9 years. Significantly higher rates of local recurrence for NAST compared to adjuvant treatment were reported after 10 and 15 years of follow-up (17.9% vs. 13.2% and 21.4 vs. 15.9%, respectively, log-rank p < 0.001). These findings led to much uncertainty regarding the use of NAST and management of subsequent surgery. Among the 10 trials included in the meta-analysis, there were two trials that did not perform any kind of surgery after NAST in case of clinical complete response (IB Bordeaux and Insitut Curie S6). Subgroup analyses showed that the risk of local recurrence after NAST compared to adjuvant treatment was greatest in these two trials (33.7% vs. 20.4% after 10 years, log-rank p = 0.002). However, also in the remaining eight trials with routine use of either mastectomy or BCT, there were significantly more local recurrences in the neoadjuvant groups (15.1% vs. 11.9% after 10 years, log-rank p = 0.010). Detailed analysis revealed significant differences in local recurrences among different surgical groups (planned vs. actual surgery): The risk of local recurrence was highest in patients initially planned for mastectomy but finally undergoing BCT, which raises concerns about adequate surgical planning (imaging, tumor localization etc.). Moreover, data on axillary surgery and radiotherapy were unknown. A similar meta-analysis, including 11 studies from 1983 to 2002 (n = 5041), stratified their findings into trials with optimal local treatment and inadequate local treatment (exclusive radiotherapy, no surgery). Increased risk of local recurrence after NAST compared to adjuvant treatment was seen only for patients with inadequate local treatment – no increased risk were seen for patients with optimal local treatment, also when they were initially planned for mastectomy but downstaged to BCT after NAST. Additionally, a more recent meta-analysis, including 14 studies from 1980 to 2014 (n = 19,819), suggests that BCT is actually associated with significantly decreased risks of all-cause mortality (hazard ratio 0.78, 95% CI 0.69 to 0.89, P < 0.001), locoregional recurrence (0.64, 95% CI 0.48 to 0.85, P = 0.002), and distant recurrence (0.70, 95% CI 0.53 to 0.94, P = 0.02) compared to mastectomy in times of modern multi-modality treatment.
Tumor localization and assessment of residual tumor extent
Thus, findings that breast surgery after NAST leads to higher risk of local recurrence may rather reflect inadequate locoregional management and illustrate the importance of adequate modern locoregional multi-modality treatment. However, modern multi-modality BCT requires high multidisciplinary team demands along the patient pathway: tumor localization and clipping, assessment of tumor multifocality/multicentricity, assessment of residual tumor extent, margin assessment, and patient preferences, which are discussed below.
Compared to the primary surgery setting, pre-operative tumor assessment is more difficult in patients undergoing NAST: Depending on tumor biological and histological subtype, different response patterns exist (concentric tumor shrinkage vs. diffuse cell loss) and a radiological complete response is observed in a large proportion of patients after NAST. Several meta-analyses showed that imaging after NAST (mammography, ultrasound, diffusion-weighted (DW) - MRI, contrast-enhanced (CE) - MRI, PET-CT) can be used to evaluate general response to NAST but that imaging is not accurate enough to definitely either confirm or exclude residual disease. Sensitivity and specificity to detect residual disease are reported as 80% and 77% for mammography, 90% and 80% for ultrasound, 93% and 82% for DW-MRI, 68% and 91% for CE-MRI, and 84% and 71% for PET-CT. Thus, patients who might be eligible for BCT require clipping of the tumor(s) prior to the initiation of NAST. The clip remains visible throughout the course of NAST and allows robust pre-operative localization of the tumor bed. As the clip itself is not visible during surgery, different techniques like wire or radioactive seed localization exist, to allow pre-operative tumor localization or intra-operative tumor identification.
In the past decade, MRI has been considered to be more sensitive in terms of response assessment to NAST and thus, in some countries, is considered the gold-standard for pre-operative tumor assessment after NAST in patients planned for BCT. However, more recent meta-analyses suggest that ultrasound and MRI show equivalent performance in both, detecting and excluding residual disease.
Multifocal or multicentric tumors
Adequate tumor localization and residual tumor assessment is crucial to enable BCT and must be considered prior to the initiation of NAST.
The breast surgical management of patients with multifocal (≥2 lesions in 1 breast quadrant) or multicentric (≥1 lesion in ≥2 breast quadrants) often leads to uncertainties for patients and clinicians, especially after NAST. Guidelines generally recommend mastectomy for patients with multicentric disease whereas BCT can be offered to patients with multifocal tumors. These recommendations originate from data in the 1980s, suggesting that BCT in multifocal/multicentric patients results in local recurrence rates as high as 40%. However, a more recent pooled analysis of 3 prospective clinical trials undergoing BCS after NAST (n = 6134) showed that LRFS, DFS, and OS of patients with multicentric or multifocal tumors were not inferior compared to patients with uni-focal tumors if clear margins can be obtained. As multifocal or multicentric tumors tend to have an unfavorable breast-tumor ratio, BCT of these patients is rather limited by oncoplastic and cosmetic outcomes than oncologic outcomes. Recent and future advances in the field of oncoplastic breast surgery may enable good cosmetic outcomes despite resection of large breast tissue volumes. Moreover, adequate pre-operative tumor localization (see above) is especially important for multicentric and multifocal tumors to obtain clear margins.
Margin assessment
Patients with multifocal or multicentric tumors can undergo BCT if adequate tumor localization is ensured and clear margins as well as a satisfying cosmetic outcome can be obtained.
Complete resection of the tumor while removing as little healthy breast tissue as possible is the aim of breast conserving surgery. The gold standard for the assessment of breast surgical margins is histopathologic evaluation of the surgical specimen. Positive margins (R1), defined as tumor touching ink, are associated with increased ipsilateral breast cancer recurrence and thus result in secondary surgical re-excision to obtain negative margins (R0), defined as no ink on tumor. Re-excision rates following BCS are about 20%. As some tumors, especially luminal and invasive lobular breast cancers, tend to show diffuse cell loss under NAST, there have been concerns regarding the safety of the “no ink on tumor” after NAST. However, the safety of “no ink on tumor” has been demonstrated for BCS after NAST: In a single-center cohort of 382 patients undergoing NAST and subsequent BCS, no significant differences in OS, DFS, and LRFS were observed for different margin widths (>2 mm, 1–2 mm, <1 mm). To avoid secondary surgical procedures, several intra-operative margin assessment techniques exist to identify positive margins immediately, e.g. gross inspection, intra-operative ultrasound, margin shaving, specimen radiography, and frozen sections. Few of these procedures have been specifically evaluated for the use after NAST. For specimen radiography, evidence suggests less accurate assessments after NAST compared to the primary surgery setting (sensitivity 36.8% vs. 19.2%, specificity 86.8% vs. 89.2%).
Socio-economic disparities in the use of breast conserving therapy
Although the safety of “no ink on tumor” for BCS after NAST has been demonstrated, some evidence suggests that the accuracy of intra-operative margin assessment to reduce secondary re-excisions might be impaired after NAST. Future research should focus on improving intra-operative margin assessment after NAST.
So far, we discussed technical and clinical uncertainties associated with BCT after NAST. However, in reality, socio-economic disparities on a patient and on a national level affect the use of BCT, too. A large evaluation of the National Cancer Database in the US from 1998 to 2011 (n = 727,927), revealed several patient-level, non-clinical factors to be associated with the use of BCT. Use of BCT was higher in patients with the highest level of education (OR 1.16, 95% CI 1.14–1.19), aged 50 years compared with younger patients (OR 1.14, 95% CI 1.12–1.15), treated in academic cancer programs compared with community programs (OR 1.13, 95% CI 1.11–1.15), and for patient residence within 28 km of a treatment facility compared with further away (OR 1.25, 95% CI 1.23–1.27). Use of BCT was lower in patients with the lowest median income (OR 0.92, 95% CI 0.90–0.94). These findings suggest that travel distance and low income, as a surrogate for patient ability or willingness to undergo BCS followed by radiotherapy, pose a relevant barrier to the receipt of BCT; patients without access to radiotherapy or for whom a longer time away from work is not acceptable economically, will opt for mastectomy, which has been demonstrated in other studies as well. On a health system level, lower rates of BCT are observed in countries with scarce radiotherapy coverage and high rates of late-stage diagnosis. For example, in China, the rate of BCT is only about 10% compared with 60% in the US. Lastly, observations that low income is associated with higher mastectomy rates are consistent with increased costs associated with NAST and radiotherapy. Offering targeted financial support to patients at high risk of experiencing financial toxicity may help eliminating costs as a barrier to receive BCT.
Shared decision-making
In addition to clinical factors, socio-economic and psychological factors influence the use of BCT. Lacking access to multidisciplinary high-quality care is a major barrier to receive BCT.
The final treatment plan is determined during a shared-decision making process between the individual patient and the clinical care team, taking into account patient preferences and clinical counseling. The shared-decision making process can be a source of major biases if not adequately addressed by patients and clinicians. The findings of the National Cancer Database analysis mentioned above reflect the observation of increasing rates of contralateral prophylactic mastectomy in recent years, especially in younger patients, despite lack of survival benefit and increased surgical complications. Although patient preferences are an important part of modern value-based health care and shared decision-making, it is also well-established that physicians with insufficient knowledge about risks of breast cancer recurrence offer prophylactic mastectomy more frequently. In addition, patients are much less likely to undergo a procedure if discouraged by their physician.
Overestimation of local recurrence risks in breast cancer occurs frequently: a cross sectional survey in Holland evaluated the average overestimation risk of individual local recurrence across different clinical professions; the average overestimation risk ranged from 15% (general practitioner, radiologist) to 3% (medical oncologist). Overestimation of local recurrence likely leads to higher patient anxiety levels which is a known risk factor for patients to opt for more aggressive treatment even when it is medically not beneficial. For example, among breast cancer patients eligible for BCT, those with high anxiety levels at the time of diagnosis are 9 times more likely to undergo unilateral or bilateral mastectomy compared to patients with low anxiety (37.3% vs. 18.3%; likelihood ratio 9.15; p = 0.002).
Another emerging source of patient anxiety and lack of standardized clinical counseling is the clinical management of germline mutations. Prophylactic mastectomy is offered to women with BRCA1/2, PALB2, and TP53 mutations due to observed lifetime risks for breast cancer of 40–80%. It must be noted, however, that the survival benefit of prophylactic mastectomy is substantial among young mutation carriers (age 25 years) but decreases rapidly when prophylactic surgery is performed later on. These findings are likely linked to observations that BCT compared to mastectomy in BRCA mutation carriers already diagnosed with breast cancer results in equivalent risks of contralateral breast cancer, disease recurrence, and death (n = 3807, median follow-up 92 months) but increased risks of local recurrence after 15 years in patients treated with BCT (HR 4.19, 95% CI: 2.79–6.31, P < 0.001). Indeed, these findings would indicate an increased risk of secondary breast cancers rather than actual local recurrences.
While the clinical management of patients with high-risk germline mutations (BRCA1/2, PALP2, TP53, lifetime risk 40–80%) remains a challenge, local therapy discussions around low-risk germline mutations (ATM, BARD, RAD51C/D, CHEK2, lifetime risk 12–30%; general population risk 12%) may be even more confusing. Treatment implications, either surgical or systemic ones, are unclear. However, increasing numbers of such low-risk mutations are reported in multigene panels, potentially leading to patient anxiety and insufficient counseling in clinical routine.
Behavioral science approaches have been suggested to help patients and clinicians understand their biases when opting for more aggressive treatment than justified by medical evidence. Besides the awareness of psychological biases, the use of modern risk assessment tools may help to improve shared-decision making. The INFLUENCE nomogram, which is approved as medical device, is a risk assessment tool that allows accurate predictions of local recurrence for individual breast cancer patients based on 13,000 patients treated in the Netherlands. Similar tools are currently developed for patients undergoing cancer-related mastectomy and breast reconstruction with respect to accurate predictions of patient-reported quality of life after surgery to facilitate individualized, informed decision-making.
In addition to clinical and socio-economic factors, psychological factors influence the use of BCT. Overestimation of local recurrence and increased patient anxiety during the shared decision-making process are a major barrier to receive BCT.

Solutions for the underuse of breast conserving therapy after neoadjuvant systemic treatment
We identified clinical and non-clinical causes for the underuse of BCT after NAST: uncertainties within the community regarding oncologic outcomes, the correct tumor localization after NAST, the management of multifocal and multicentric tumors, margin assessment, disparities of socio-economic aspects on a patient and national level, and psychological biases affecting the shared decision-making process between patients and clinicians.
Interdisciplinary teams that keep the whole patient pathway in mind.
Ideal patient pathway to enable breast conserving therapy after neoadjuvant systemic treatment.
Fig. 1
Solutions to mitigate the underuse of BCT after NAST are illustrated in Fig. 1 and include.
Optimized treatment counseling and shared decision-making
BCT demands high interdisciplinary efforts from a multidisciplinary team. The multidisciplinary care team should consist of radiologists, surgeons, radiotherapists, medical oncologists, pathologists, specialized nurses, psychologists, and administrative support staff. It is highly relevant to keep the whole patient pathway in mind during multidisciplinary care (e.g. clipping of all relevant tumor foci prior to NAST to enable BCS). The “Toolbox” initiative aims to provide detailed guidance for the multidisciplinary treatment team at all stages of the patient journey at a more granular level than clinical guidelines can ensure. Such initiatives may help overcoming uncertainties in increasingly complex patient pathways.
Financial support to mitigate disparities
As illustrated above, the uncertainties associated with BCT after NAST (within the clinical and patient community) in terms of oncologic outcomes, tumor localization, multifocality/-centricity, and margin assessment are evidently not justified. Clinicians must keep in mind that socio-economic and psychological biases (including patient anxiety due to insufficient counseling) can affect the shared decision-making process on both sides.
Providing targeted financial support to mitigate socio-economic disparities on both, patient and national level, may help improving access to BCT (especially with respect to radiotherapy and early-stage diagnosis).

Outlook
BCT requires complex, multidisciplinary teamwork. Current research focusing on important interdisciplinary intersections of BCT (i.e. tumor localization and margin assessment) may help to reduce the complexity and facilitate easier implementation of tailored treatment after NAST. First, innovative strategies for intra-operative margin assessment via confocal laser scanning microscopes are currently evaluated, which may reduce the number of secondary re-excisions. Second, machine learning algorithms have demonstrated potential to identify patients at high risk of experiencing financial toxicity during the course of their breast cancer treatment, which may enable targeted financial support. Third, the concept of an intelligent vacuum-assisted biopsy recently opened new ways for tumor localization and response assessment to NAST by reliably identifying patients without residual cancer, which may enable the omission of breast and axillary surgery for these patients.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Breast cancer, version 3.2022, NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology
Interdisciplinary screening, diagnosis, therapy and follow-up of breast cancer. Guideline of the DGGG and the DKG (S3-level, AWMF registry number 032/045ol, december 2017) - Part 1 with recommendations for the screening, diagnosis and therapy of breast Ca
Twenty-year follow-up of a randomized trial comparing total mastectomy, lumpectomy, and lumpectomy plus irradiation for the treatment of invasive breast cancer
Twenty-year follow-up of a randomized study comparing breast-conserving surgery with radical mastectomy for early breast cancer
Long-term outcomes for neoadjuvant versus adjuvant chemotherapy in early breast cancer: meta-analysis of individual patient data from ten randomised trials
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for operable breast cancer
Outcomes after breast-conserving surgery or mastectomy in patients with triple-negative breast cancer: meta-analysis
Effect of preoperative chemotherapy on the outcome of women with operable breast cancer
Preoperative chemotherapy in patients with operable breast cancer: nine-year results from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-18
Feasibility and tolerability of sequential doxorubicin/paclitaxel followed by cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil and its effects on tumor response as preoperative therapy
Preoperative chemotherapy in primary operable breast cancer: results from the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer trial 10902
Impact of neoadjuvant therapy on eligibility for and frequency of breast conservation in stage II–III HER2-positive breast cancer: surgical results of CALGB 40601 (Alliance)
Impact of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in stage II-III triple negative breast cancer on eligibility for breast-conserving surgery and breast conservation rates: surgical results from CALGB 40603 (Alliance)
Breast conservation after neoadjuvant chemotherapy for triple-negative breast cancer: surgical results from the BrighTNess randomized clinical trial
Prevalence of and factors associated with persistent pain following breast cancer surgery
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, and targeted therapy for breast cancer: ASCO guideline
Nationwide trends in mastectomy for early-stage breast cancer
Disparities in the use of breast-conserving therapy among patients with early-stage breast cancer
Trends in radical surgical treatment methods for breast malignancies in China: a multicenter 10-year retrospective study
Surgical treatment after neoadjuvant systemic therapy in young women with breast cancer: results from a prospective cohort study
Rising rates of bilateral mastectomy with reconstruction following neoadjuvant chemotherapy
Eliminating the breast cancer surgery paradigm after neoadjuvant systemic therapy: current evidence and future challenges
Multimodality imaging for evaluating response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer
Imaging neoadjuvant therapy response in breast cancer
Meta-analysis of magnetic resonance imaging in detecting residual breast cancer after neoadjuvant therapy
NCCN guidelines updates: breast cancer
Breast-conserving therapy for macroscopically multiple cancers
Results of conservative surgery and radiation therapy for multiple synchronous cancers of one breast
Impact of multifocal or multicentric disease on surgery and locoregional, distant and overall survival of 6,134 breast cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy
Knowledge gaps in oncoplastic breast surgery
SSO-ASTRO consensus guideline on margins for breast-conserving surgery with whole breast irradiation in stage I and II invasive breast cancer
Surgeon Re-excision rates after breast-conserving surgery: a measure of low-value care
Margins in breast-conserving surgery after neoadjuvant therapy
Accuracy of gross intraoperative margin assessment for breast cancer: experience since the SSO-ASTRO margin consensus guidelines
Intraoperative ultrasound guidance for palpable breast cancer excision (COBALT trial): a multicentre, randomised controlled trial
A randomized, controlled trial of cavity shave margins in breast cancer
Efficacy of intraoperative specimen radiography as margin assessment tool in breast conserving surgery
Accuracy of frozen section in intraoperative margin assessment for breast-conserving surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Does conventional specimen radiography after neoadjuvant chemotherapy of breast cancer help to reduce the rate of second surgeries?
Breast-conserving surgery in older patients with invasive breast cancer: current patterns of treatment across the United States
Access to multidisciplinary cancer care: is it linked to the use of breast-conserving surgery with radiation for early-stage breast carcinoma?
Disparities in urban and rural mastectomy populations : the effects of patient- and county-level factors on likelihood of receipt of mastectomy
Surgical management of breast cancer in China: the fudan university shanghai cancer center experience
Increasing use of contralateral prophylactic mastectomy for breast cancer patients: a trend toward more aggressive surgical treatment
Contralateral prophylactic mastectomy in the era of financial toxicity: an additional point for concern?
Physician knowledge of breast cancer recurrence and contralateral breast cancer risk is associated with increased recommendations for contralateral prophylactic mastectomy: a survey of physicians at NAPBC-accredited centers
Contralateral prophylactic mastectomy decisions in a population-based sample of patients with early-stage breast cancer
Health care professionals overestimate the risk for locoregional recurrences after breast cancer treatment depending on their specialty
Effects of high anxiety scores on surgical and overall treatment plan in patients with breast cancer treated with neoadjuvant therapy
A population-based study of genes previously implicated in breast cancer
Risk factors for metachronous contralateral breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis
The expected benefit of preventive mastectomy on breast cancer incidence and mortality in BRCA mutation carriers, by age at mastectomy
Combined breast conservation therapy versus mastectomy for BRCA mutation carriers - a systematic review and meta-analysis
Addressing the dilemma of contralateral prophylactic mastectomy with behavioral science
Improved risk estimation of locoregional recurrence, secondary contralateral tumors and distant metastases in early breast cancer: the INFLUENCE 2.0 model
Towards patient-centered decision-making in breast cancer surgery
Machine learning to predict individual patient-reported outcomes at 2-year follow-up for women undergoing cancer-related mastectomy and breast reconstruction (INSPiRED-001)
Breast conservation and axillary management after primary systemic therapy in patients with early-stage breast cancer: the Lucerne toolbox
Imaging of lumpectomy surface with large field-of-view confocal laser scanning microscope for intraoperative margin assessment - POLARHIS study
Development of machine learning algorithms for the prediction of financial toxicity in localized breast cancer following surgical treatment
Intelligent vacuum-assisted biopsy to identify breast cancer patients with pathologic complete response (ypT0 and ypN0) after neoadjuvant systemic treatment for omission of breast and axillary surgery
Identification of breast cancer patients with pathologic complete response in the breast after neoadjuvant systemic treatment by an intelligent vacuum-assisted biopsy