Evaluation, Diagnosis, and Treatment of Concomitant Movement Disorders in Genetic Epilepsies
Genetic epilepsies and developmental and epileptic encephalopathies are commonly associated with concomitant movement disorders, which can mimic seizures and/or create additional disability. Appropriate diagnosis is critical to proper management. A broad range of movement disorder phenomenologies occur among patients with genetic epilepsy, including dystonia, chorea, ataxia, myoclonus, stereotypy, tics, and Parkinsonism. For some genes, clear relationships exist between genotype and movement disorder phenotype, while in other situations, the relationship is more complex. Diagnosis of movement disorders involves elements of history, physical examination, video review, and neurophysiology. Assessment of associated impairment, distress, and/or safety concerns is important for considering risks/benefits of treatment. Movement disorders may range from severe and dangerous, requiring pharmacologic or neuromodulatory treatments such as deep brain stimulation, to relatively benign, with only reassurance and continued observation required. Appropriate treatments differ based on phenomenology and etiology, with some genes associated with tailored treatments which can provide dramatic benefit.

Introduction
Genetic epilepsies, frequently childhood onset, are often associated with additional neurodevelopmental symptoms beyond seizures. Concurrent movement disorders are common among patients with genetic epilepsy, particularly among those with developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs).   Distinguishing between seizure and movement disorder in these patients is important to optimize treatment and prevent unnecessary side effects.
Several genes are associated with both epilepsy and movement disorders, with some patients presenting with epilepsy, some patients presenting with movement disorder, and some patients with both. This phenotypic variability relates to genotype in some cases and is more complex in others.
Both the clinical presentation and the underlying etiology may influence the appropriate treatment of movement disorders associated with epilepsy. Certain disorders have etiology-specific treatment, such as the ketogenic diet in GLUT1 deficiency syndrome. In other situations, impact on life and phenomenology guide treatment decisions.
In this narrative review with several genes as case examples, we will describe common movement disorder phenomenologies, list commonly reported epilepsy and movement disorder phenotypes associated with genetic epilepsy by gene, consider the importance of genotype–phenotype associations, and review considerations for diagnosis and treatment.

Clinical Characteristics
Movement disorders are typically characterized by phenomenology, as this can inform understanding of localization and etiology and guide treatment options. Broadly speaking, movement disorder phenomenologies can be characterized as hyperkinetic, ataxic, or hypokinetic. Hyperkinetic phenomenologies are further differentiated by suppressibility, stereotyped versus patterned, posturing versus random characteristics of movement, and influence of voluntary movement on severity of movements. Movement disorders may be continuous or paroxysmal, with paroxysms frequently, but not always, associated with provoking factors, such as in the case of kinesiogenic and/or exertional dyskinesias.
Definitions and descriptions of phenomenology of hyperkinetic or ataxic movements in the pediatric population including dystonia, chorea, athetosis, myoclonus, tremor, tics, stereotypy, and ataxia have been developed and detailed elsewhere. We will review key features, helpful for differentiating these phenomenologies on exam, here.
Dystonia involves sustained or intermittent and/or jerky contractions, which can involve twisting or posturing, co-contraction of agonist–antagonist muscles. Dystonia is more variable than spasticity, and is typically worsened by voluntary movement and/or emotion.
Chorea involves ongoing random discrete involuntary movements which are often described as “dance-like” while athetosis involves more slow writhing movements. Both are associated with motor impersistence and typically worsen with voluntary movement and/or emotion.
Myoclonus involves brief lightning-like jerks due to sudden muscle contraction which are often repeated but non-rhythmic.
Tremor is a rhythmic oscillatory movement about a null-point.
Tics and stereotypies are brief, suppressible, stereotyped movements. Tics are typically associated with an urge, which young and/or nonverbal children may not be able to describe, and may be briefly suppressible. Stereotypies are repetitive movements that are often associated with excitement or emotion. Stereotypies generally begin before age three and maintain the same pattern over time while tics usually begin at later ages with a waxing and waning pattern that involves shifts in the patterned movement or sound observed.
Ataxia, a disorder of coordination rather than excessive involuntary movement, involves inability to generate an expected voluntary movement trajectory, not attributed to weakness or involuntary muscle activity. Ataxia is frequently associated with wide-based gait and/or difficulty with tandem gait, dysmetria of limbs and eyes, and oculomotor apraxia.
Parkinsonism, relatively infrequent in the pediatric population, involves resting tremor, bradykinesia (slowness of movements with decrement in amplitude of movement over time), rigidity (increased tone without velocity dependence of spasticity), and postural instability, when described in adults. Many of these features are also described in the pediatric population.
These terms have been used to characterize phenomenology of movement disorders commonly reported in patients with genetic epileptic disorders, reported in association with genes and epilepsy phenotype in Table 1. Additional movement disorder phenomenology terminology in this chart includes dyskinesia, a general term often used when overlap between dystonia, chorea, and/or athetosis occurs, ballismus, with involves large-amplitude choreiform movements, and paroxysmal tonic upgaze, a brief dystonic involuntary eye movement.
List of Genes Commonly Reported in Association With Both Epilepsy and Movement Disorders.
Gene	Epilepsy phenotype	Movement disorder phenomenology	 	15q11 (Angelman syndrome)	IESS, GE with myoclonic and atypical absence seizures	Myoclonus Dystonia Stereotypy Tremor	 	ACBD6	GE	Dystonia Tremor Parkinsonism	 	ALDH5A1 (succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency)	GE, Myoclonic seizures	Ataxia Dystonia Chorea Hypokinesia	 	ARX	IESS, Myoclonic Seizures	Dystonia, including status dystonicus Chorea Myoclonus	 	ASL (arginosuccinic aciduria)	Generalized Epilepsy, Focal Epilepsy, Atypical absence seizures	Ataxia Dystonia Tremor Movement disorders often onset in second or third decade of life	 	ATP1A3 Associated with Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood	GE, Focal Epilepsy, Absence Seizures	Dystonia (paroxysmal or continuous)	 	CACNA1A	EI-DEE, Absence Seizures	Episodic Ataxia Paroxysmal tonic upgaze Ataxia	 	CACNA1B	EI-DEE, GE	Myoclonus Dystonia Chorea	 	CACNA1E	EI-DEE, IESS, GE	Dystonia Chorea Myoclonus	 	CAD	EI-DEE, DEE, Focal seizures	Ataxia Tremor	 	DHDDS	DEE, Epilepsy with Eyelid Myoclonus	Tremor Myoclonus Ataxia including oculomotor apraxia Parkinsonism Dystonia	 	ECHS1	Epilepsy	Dystonia (can be paroxysmal exertional) Ataxia	 	FBXO28	DEE, IESS, Progressive Myoclonic Epilepsy	Dystonia Chorea Myoclonus	 	FOXG1	IESS, GE	Chorea Dystonia Stereotypy	 	FRRS1L	IESS, LGS	Chorea	 	GABRA1	EI-DEE, IESS, EMAtS	Ataxia Dystonia Myoclonus	 	GABRB2	GEFS+, EIMFS, IESS, GE, LGS	Chorea Dystonia Ataxia	 	GABRB3	GEFS+, IESS, EMAtS, DEE	“Dyskinesia” Dystonia Ataxia	 	GAMT	Febrile seizures, GE	Chorea/Athetosis Ataxia	 	GNAO1	EI-DEE or later onset milder focal and generalized seizures	Chorea Dystonia Ballismus Ataxia Myoclonus Tremor	 	GNB1	GE	Dystonia (can be paroxysmal) Myoclonus Chorea	 	GOSR2	Progressive myoclonic epilepsy	Ataxia Myoclonus Dystonia	 	GRIA3	IESS, DEE	Chorea Myoclonus Dystonia Stereotypy	 	GRIN1	IESS, EMAtS, DEE	Chorea Dystonia	 	GRIN2B	Febrile seizures, SeLECTS, DEE	Chorea Dystonia	 	HIBCH	DEE	Ataxia Dystonia, often paroxysmal	 	KCNA1	DEE, Focal Epilepsy	Episodic ataxia Paroxysmal kinesiogenic dyskinesia	 	KCNMA1	GE	Paroxysmal dyskinesia Ataxia Myoclonus	 	MECP2 (Rett Syndrome)	GE	Stereotypy Dystonia Ataxia Hypokinesia/Parkinsonism	 	MECP2 duplication syndrome	GE with multiple seizure types	Ataxia Stereotypy Chorea	 	NGLY1	EMAtS, DEE, IESS	Chorea Dystonia Myoclonus Tremor	 	NUS1	GE, EMAtS	Myoclonic tremor Ataxia including oculomotor apraxia Parkinsonism Stereotypy	 	PCDH12	Early Onset Epilepsy	Dystonia Ataxia	 	PIGN	DEE, ID + E	Chorea Ataxia Dystonia Myoclonus	 	PRICKLE1	Progressive myoclonic epilepsy	Ataxia Myoclonus Stererotypy	 	PRRT2	SeLFNE	Paroxysmal kinesiogenic dyskinesia	 	PURA	IESS, DEE, LGS	Chorea Dystonia Stereotypy	 	RHOBTB2	DEE	Dystonia ChoreaAtaxia	 	SCN1A	GEFS+, DS	Ataxia Chorea/orofacial dyskinesia Dystonia Myoclonus Tremor Parkinsonism Eyelid stereotypy	 	SCN2A	SeLFNE, DEE, EIMFS, IESS, ASD with seizures	Dystonia Complex stereotypy	 	SCN8A	SeLFNE, DEE, NDDwGE	Ataxia Dystonia (can be paroxysmal) Myoclonus (partial LOF variant)	 	SLC13A5	GE, Focal Epilepsy	Dystonia Chorea Ataxia	 	SLC2A1 (Glut1 deficiency)	Early Onset Absence Epilepsy, EMAtS, GE	Episodic ataxia Paroxysmal exertional dystonia Dystonia Chorea	 	ST3GAL5 (GM2 synthase deficiency)	Infantile Onset Epilepsy	Chorea Dystonia Stereotypy	 	STXBP1	IESS, EI-DEE, DEE	Tremor (myoclonic) Myoclonus Dystonia Stereotypy	 	UBA5	GE	Dystonia	 	VAMP2	GE, IESS	Chorea Dystonia Stereotypy	 	WARS2	GE	Parkinsonism Tremor Dystonia Chorea Myoclonus	 	WDR45	DEE	Dystonia Parkinsonism Movement Disorders onset in adulthood	 	WWOX	EI-DEE, IESS, EIMFS	Dystonia Parkinsonism	 	YIF1B	GE	Dystonia Chorea	 	ZNF142	GE	Tremor Dystonia Ataxia
Abbreviations: SeLFNE, self-limited familial neonatal epilepsy; IESS, infantile epileptic spasms syndrome; GEFS+, genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus; EIMFS, epilepsy of infancy with migrating focal seizures; DS, Dravet syndrome; EI-DEE, early infantile developmental and epileptic encephalopathy; NDDwGE, neurodevelopmental disorder with generalized epilepsy; EMAtS, epilepsy with myoclonic atonic (and tonic) seizures; GE, generalized epilepsy; LGS, Lennox–Gastaut syndrome; ID + E, intellectual disability and epilepsy.
Movement disorders can frequently be disabling, given their common interference with voluntary movement, potential for discomfort, and in severe cases, potential for injury and/or rhabdomyolysis. However, it is worth noting that movement disorders can also frequently be noticeable without being impairing or distressing. This is particularly the case for stereotypy and often for tics, but can be true of any phenomenology. Therefore, clinical evaluation of movement disorders requires both identification of phenomenology and evaluation of associated disability and distress, if any.

Genotype–Phenotype Associations
Given the clinical heterogeneity in many disorders with concomitant movement disorders and epilepsy, attention to genotype–phenotype correlations may inform clinical treatment. Increasingly, specific phenotypic patterns are related to specific variants which can have implications for treatment choices and prognostication.
For example, in SCN8A, both epilepsy and movement disorder phenotypes are associated with the genotype and functional impact. Gain-of-function (GoF) variants are frequently associated with a severe epilepsy phenotype with focal-onset seizures in infancy, while loss-of-function (LoF) variants are associated with intellectual disability without epilepsy as well as epilepsy manifest as generalized, primarily absence, seizures with onset after infancy. While movement disorders can occur in both GoF and LoF variants, chronic ataxia and myoclonus are particularly described in LOF variants. Sodium-channel blockers, particularly useful in SCN8A-related GoF disorders, are not generally effective with SCN8A LoF variants.
GNAO1-related disorders are exemplary of the clinical implications and complexity in this area. Since the first description in 2013, about 200 variants have been associated with a spectrum of movement disorders and epileptic encephalopathy, as well as variable overlap. Nearly half of the reported variants are in a handful of “hot spots,” or recurrent variants, and correlate to a particular phenotype.   For example, the most commonly reported variants at the p.R209 residue typically display a severe movement disorder with dystonia, chorea and hyperkinetic crises with a milder, non-DEE epilepsy. In contrast, variants in the p.G40 residue commonly have DEE with a milder movement disorder. While initially a dichotomous mechanism was proposed in which GoF variants were associated with movement disorders and LoF associated with epileptic encephalopathies based on a cAMP assay of downstream GTPase activity variants,   this did not fully explain the clinical heterogeneity. A third hot spot, p.G203R typically manifests as DEE and a movement disorder with hyperkinetic crises. Recently, milder later-onset dystonia, including inherited cases, have been associated with novel GNAO1 variants and presumed to be due to haploinsufficiency.   The full understanding of this heterogeneity in g-protein signaling remains incompletely understood.
Other examples of disorders in which genotype influences movement disorder phenotype include SCN1A, where GoF mutations are more likely to be associated with movement disorders,   KCNMA1, where GoF mutations often present with paroxysmal dyskinesia while LoF variants often are associated with other phenemonologies,   MECP2-related disorder (Rett syndrome) where truncating mutations are associated with more severe dystonia and rigid-akinetic syndrome,   and GRIA3 where GoF variants are more likely to be associated with movement disorders, and earlier onset of epilepsy.
By studying these correlations, clinicians can better predict disease progression, identify at-risk individuals, and tailor interventions to the unique needs of each patient, advancing personalized medicine and improving outcomes.

Diagnosis
Distinguishing movement disorders and seizures often presents a challenge in patients with epilepsy and DEEs, particularly when there is overlap in both the phenomenology and underlying genetic cause. Since genetic variants co-segregate in families presenting with diverse epilepsies and movement disorders with significant phenotypic hetereogenity,   we cannot rely on genotype alone to differentiate seizures from movement disorders. This distinction is important: misclassification of seizures and movements impacts patient care and may affect clinical trial outcomes.   Treatment for seizures and movement disorders are often vastly different.
The first step in evaluating motor symptoms in a patient with genetic epilepsy involves a history and neurologic examination, which in many cases is sufficient to identify features of specific movement disorder phenomenologies as detailed above. Assessing the influence of voluntary movement on the involuntary movement can help distinguish between movement disorders and seizure, such as with exacerbation of the involuntary movement in the case of dystonia or chorea and suppressibility with tics or stereotypy. Some paroxysmal disorders may be provoked in clinic for direct observation, such as using excitement to provoke a stereotypy or sudden movement after a prolonged rest to provoke paroxysmal kinesiogenic dyskinesia. Video recording the examination can allow for more careful evaluation for these features. However, a lack of diagnostic clarity may occur when paroxysmal movements (a) may not be observed during a clinical encounter and (b) may have a clear onset/offset which raises concern for an epileptic etiology. Some phenomenologies, such a myoclonus, could have an epileptic etiology and require further evaluation, and some movement disorder presentations may raise concern about atypical features, such as an apparent tic or stereotypy which does not appear to be suppressible.
In these situations, video EEG is the gold standard for distinguishing epileptic from non-epileptic events including movement disorders. It should be noted that there are many other etiologies of paroxysmal non-epileptic events apart from movement disorder. Many of these are specifically described in genetic epilepsies and DEEs, including neuro-irritability related to internal or external stimuli, autonomic dysfunction, severe behavioral disturbances, and catatonia.   Therefore, the absence of epileptic findings on EEG is not sufficient to diagnose movement disorder as the etiology of a paroxysmal event.
Further complicating EEG interpretation is the observation that only 21% of focal aware (formerly “simple partial”) seizures have ictal EEG change on scalp EEG.   Synchronized cortical activity from a minimum of 6 cm2 and, more typically 20 cm2, is required to produce a spike on scalp EEG.   Therefore, a “negative” ictal scalp EEG does not exclude seizures. This highlights the importance of also considering history and physical examination in distinguishing seizures from movement disorders and other types of spells. Videos of events, now commonplace with smartphones, are also fairly accurate when viewed by trained experts.
Additional neurophysiologic evaluations, such as surface electromyography (EMG), can be helpful for distinguishing movement disorder phenomenologies, sometimes in combination with surface EEG. In the case of surface EMG, electrodes are placed on muscles involved in the abnormal movements, ideally including agonist/antagonist muscle pairs on both sides of the body to allow for evaluation of synchrony between limbs and coherence between agonist/antagonist muscles. Methods for acquiring and evaluating this data are well detailed by Hallett et al   Surface EMG synchronized with video can allow for objective evaluation of exacerbation and/or suppression of involuntary movements with voluntary movement or other stimuli. It can also be a useful adjunct in distinguishing between phenomenologies and localizing the neuroanatomical origin of myoclonus.
Considering the special case of myoclonus, distinguishing origin of the myoclonus is challenging and frequently requires adjunctive neurophysiologic studies. For epileptic myoclonus, this is typically (but not always) associated with spikes or polyspikes on scalp EEG, synchronized with short burst duration (<50 ms) surface EMG activity. Epilepsia partialis continua is an exception as it can be EEG-negative given highly focal origin and involves burst duration which is often longer than 50 ms. Particularly in DEEs, careful consideration of epileptic myoclonus is indicated for patients with semi-rhythmic myoclonus which can clinically resemble tremor.
Non-epileptic cortical myoclonus may be diagnosed by identifying a cortical potential prior to myoclonus onset using jerk-locked back-averaging of the EEG. Subcortical origins of myoclonus, such as thalamus-basal ganglia, reticular, propriospinal, spinal, or peripheral, carry their own neurophysiologic signature whose identification can help guide treatment choices.
While less studied than myoclonus, other types of movement disorders can be distinguished by neurophysiologic features, such as via surface EMG. For example, dystonia involves prolonged bursts of muscle activity which may be tonic, phasic, or rhythmic and abnormal activation of agonist/antagonist muscles (co-contraction) or contralateral muscles (overflow).
Finally, it should be noted that as patients with genetic epilepsies can have concurrent movement disorders and seizures, the identification of a movement disorder does not exclude the potential for seizure and vice-versa, as many patients will have both, potentially presenting at different ages.

Treatment
Treatment of movement disorders in DEEs is often guided by phenomenology, but in some circumstances, treatment can be more precision-based when there are known interventions for a specific disorder or genotype. Not all movement disorders require treatment; less than half of patients in a recently-described cohort required treatment for their movement symptoms.   For many movement disorders, the risks and potential side effects of treatment may outweigh the benefits, and each family may have different preferences and values regarding the risks and benefits of treatment. Pharmacotherapy can be considered when the movements cause distress or interrupt function, or if there is potential for harm from the movements. Stereotypies, for example, are generally not harmful and so do not typically require treatment. In rare circumstances where stereotypies pose risk of injury or are otherwise disruptive, behavioral treatment is the first-line approach,   but may be of limited utility for individuals with DEE due to associated developmental delay or cognitive impairment. Some additional movement phenotypes may also lack effective treatments. For example, there are no approved symptomatic therapies for ataxia, though 4-aminopyridine has shown benefit in spinocerebellar ataxia and KCNA1 cohorts. Overall, these studies have small sample sizes and it is hard to generalize these results to other causes of ataxia.
Chorea, dystonia, and myoclonus are hyperkinetic movement disorders that are more likely to require treatment. Common pharmacologic agents used for dystonia include levodopa, anticholinergic agents such as trihexyphenidyl, benzodiazepines, baclofen, clonidine, or VMAT2 inhibitors such as tetrabenazine. Chemodenervation is also effective for treating dystonia, but best suited for focal dystonia or targeting a more problematic body region. Treatment options for chorea include dopamine blockade with typical or atypical antipsychotics, or dopamine depletion with VMAT2 inhibitors. For severe hyperkinesis, deep brain stimulation, particularly in individuals with GNAO1, has been helpful in preventing further hyperkinetic crises.   DBS has been used as rescue for status dystonicus with benefit for hyperkinetic movement disorders associated with other genetic epilepsies, including SCN2A, UBA5, and GNB1. Non-epileptic myoclonus is often treated with anti-seizure medications similar to those used in myoclonic epilepsies; levetiracetam, valproate, and benzodiazepines are often implemented. However, efficacy may vary based on the localization of the myoclonus (cortical vs subcortical vs segmental).
Paroxysmal dyskinesias, although still consisting of dystonia, chorea, and ataxia in isolation or combination, may differ in their treatment compared to the more continuous movement phenotypes discussed above. Paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD), often associated with variants in PRRT2, usually responds extremely well to very low doses of sodium channel blockers. Paroxysmal movement disorders in RHOBTB2 are also reported to respond to sodium channel blockers.   Paroxysmal exercise-induced dyskinesia (PED), which can be phenotypically differentiated from PKD in that more sustained exercise induces the abnormal movements rather than onset of exercise, is associated with GLUT1 deficiency syndrome and variants in SLC2A1. First-line treatment of PED associated with GLUT1 is with use of ketogenic diet. Paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia (PNKD) episodes due to the N999S variant in KCNMA1 are often triggered by excitement (as in cataplexy) or tactile stimuli and exhibit a remarkable response to lisdexamfetamine.   In episodic ataxia due to variants in KCNA1 (EA1) or CACNA1A (EA2), episodes frequency or intensity can be reduced with carbonic anhydrase inhibitors such as acetazolamide.
Additionally, many inborn errors of metabolism are associated with both epilepsy and movement disorder. Dietary and/or gene therapies which address underlying metabolic deficient and/or toxic accumulations can also reduce movement disorder and epilepsy symptoms. Examples from genes listed in Table 1 include GAMT, where both epilepsy and movement disorders improve with creatine supplementation,   and CAD, which is treatable with uridine supplementation.

Discussion
The approach to the patient with concomitant epilepsy and movement disorder from a genetic disorder is challenging, but an evaluation that jointly considers phenomenology, impact, and etiology of a patient's movement disorder is essential to prevent inappropriate or unnecessary treatment and treat disabling symptoms in a tailored manner. Evaluation for movement disorders in genetic epilepsy should extend beyond consideration of movement disorder in the differential diagnosis for paroxysmal spells and include physical examination for continuous movement disorders such as dystonia or chorea which may impact functional abilities, comfort, and/or safety. In some situations, etiology-specific treatment targeted to underlying genetic diagnosis can impact both seizures and movement disorders. We provide a summary of our recommended approach to possible movement disorders in a patient with genetic epilepsy in Figure 1.
Suggested approach to patient with genetic epilepsy to evaluate for possible concomitant movement disorder.
This review and the medical literature overall have several limitations regarding this broad topic. Descriptions of movement disorders associated with epilepsy as reported in the literature may skew towards more severe phenotypes. For example, we found that stereotypies were infrequently mentioned as movement disorders associated with genetic epilepsy, but when a cohort of patients with genetic DEEs were evaluated for movement disorder characterization, stereotypy was the most commonly identified phenomenology.   Poor ascertainment likely results in under-reporting of movement disorders in these patients. Additionally, inconsistent and overlapping terminology can create challenges in a broader understanding of this topic. Frequently, subjectivity is required for distinguishing movement disorder phenotypes and/or treatment response in clinical practice, which can also limit scholarly descriptions.

Conclusion
Movement disorders are commonly associated with genetic epilepsy and require proper identification and a tailored diagnostic and therapeutic approach is needed to provide best patient care.
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
ORCID iDs: Megan Abbott https://orcid.org/0009-0007-8692-0770
Laura Tochen https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8174-6338
John M. Schreiber https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0615-2497

References
Movement disorders in patients with genetic developmental and epileptic encephalopathies
Definition and classification of hyperkinetic movements in childhood
Task force on childhood motor disorders. Classification and definition of disorders causing hypertonia in childhood
Taskforce on childhood motor disorders. Definition and classification of negative motor signs in childhood
Presenting patterns of genetically determined developmental encephalopathies with epilepsy and movement disorders: a single tertiary center retrospective cohort study
Dystonia in angelman syndrome: a common, unrecognized clinical finding
Myoclonus in angelman syndrome
Epilepsy in Angelman syndrome: a scoping review
Bi-allelic ACBD6 variants lead to a neurodevelopmental syndrome with progressive and complex movement disorders
The continuously evolving phenotype of succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency
Combination of infantile spasms, non-epileptic seizures and complex movement disorder: a new case of ARX-related epilepsy
The spectrum of movement disorders in young children with ARX-related epilepsy-dyskinesia syndrome
A novel ARX loss of function variant in female monozygotic twins is associated with chorea
The ARX story (epilepsy, mental retardation, autism, and cerebral malformations): one gene leads to many phenotypes
Status dystonicus due to missense variant in ARX: diagnosis and management
The incidence of movement disorder increases with age and contrasts with subtle and limited neuroimaging abnormalities in argininosuccinic aciduria
Natural history of epilepsy in argininosuccinic aciduria provides new insights into pathophysiology: a retrospective international study
The phenotypic continuum of ATP1A3-related disorders
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood: genotype–phenotype correlations in a cohort of 39 Italian patients
CACNA1A-associated epilepsy: electroclinical findings and treatment response on seizures in 18 patients
Clinical and genetic characterization of CACNA1A-related disease
Deciphering developmental disorders study, UK10 K consortium, NIHR BioResource, Millichap JJ, Carvill GL, Clayton-Smith J, Maher ER, Raymond FL, Kurian MA. Bi-allelic loss-of-function CACNA1B mutations in progressive epilepsy-dyskinesia
Seizure and movement disorder in CACNA1E developmental and epileptic encephalopathy: two sides of the same coin or same side of two different coins?
De novo pathogenic variants in CACNA1E cause developmental and epileptic encephalopathy with contractures, macrocephaly, and dyskinesias
Expanding the clinical and genetic spectrum of CAD deficiency: an epileptic encephalopathy treatable with uridine supplementation
De novo DHDDS variants cause a neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorder with myoclonus
DHDDS mutation: a rare cause of refractory epilepsy and hyperkinetic movement disorder
Complex neurological phenotype associated with a De Novo DHDDS mutation in a boy with intellectual disability, refractory epilepsy, and movement disorder
DHDDS and NUS1: a converging pathway and common phenotype
DHDDS related epilepsy—report of familial cases and review of the literature
ECHS1 deficiency and its biochemical and clinical phenotype
Delineating the neurological phenotype in children with defects in the ECHS1 or HIBCH gene
Hyperkinetic movement disorder in FBXO28-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy
Cognition and evolution of movement disorders of FOXG1-related syndrome
The hyperkinetic movement disorder of 1-related epileptic–dyskinetic encephalopathy
Delineation of the movement disorders associated with FOXG1 mutations
Epilepsy and outcome in FOXG1-related disorders
Boricua founder variant in FRRS1L causes epileptic encephalopathy with hyperkinetic movements
Loss-of-function mutations in FRRS1L lead to an epileptic-dyskinetic encephalopathy
GABRA1-related disorders: from genetic to functional pathways
Natural history study of STXBP1-developmental and epileptic encephalopathy into adulthood
GABRB2 working group. Characterization of the GABRB2-associated neurodevelopmental disorders
Mutations in GABRB3
The genetic landscape of epilepsy of infancy with migrating focal seizures
GAMT deficiency
Electro-clinical features and long-term outcomes in guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT) deficiency
Phenomenology and clinical course of movement disorder in GNAO1 variants: results from an analytical review
Movement disorder in GNAO1 encephalopathy associated with gain-of-function mutations
Genotype–phenotype correlation and treatment effects in young patients with GNAO1-associated disorders
Clinical course of six children with GNAO1 mutations causing a severe and distinctive movement disorder
Results of the first GNAO1-related neurodevelopmental disorders caregiver survey
Spectrum of neurodevelopmental disease associated with the GNAO1 guanosine triphosphate-binding region
Myoclonus-dystonia caused by GNB1 mutation responsive to deep brain stimulation
Novel genetic and phenotypic expansion in GOSR2-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy
A detailed description of the phenotypic spectrum of north sea progressive myoclonus epilepsy in a large cohort of seventeen patients
A de novo GRIA3 variant with complex hyperkinetic movement disorder in a girl with developmental delay and self-limited epilepsy
The c.2477G > A variant causes an exaggerated startle reflex, chorea, and multifocal myoclonus
Gain-of-function and loss-of-function variants in GRIA3 lead to distinct neurodevelopmental phenotypes
GRIA3 missense mutation is cause of an x-linked developmental and epileptic encephalopathy
GRIN1 mutations cause encephalopathy with infantile-onset epilepsy, and hyperkinetic and stereotyped movement disorders
Delineating the GRIN1 phenotypic spectrum
GRIN2B encephalopathy: novel findings on phenotype, variant clustering, functional consequences and treatment aspects
Clinical spectrum of KCNA1 mutations: new insights into episodic ataxia and epilepsy comorbidity
Dominant-negative mutation p.Arg324Thr in KCNA1 impairs Kv1.1 channel function in episodic ataxia
Familial paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia is associated with mutations in the KCNA1 gene
Calcium-sensitive potassium channelopathy in human epilepsy and paroxysmal movement disorder
An emerging spectrum of variants and clinical features in KCNMA1-linked channelopathy
Movement disorders in Rett syndrome: an analysis of 60 patients with detected MECP2 mutation and correlation with mutation type
Epilepsy in Rett syndrome: association between phenotype and genotype, and implications for practice
Further delineation of the MECP2 duplication syndrome phenotype in 59 French male patients, with a particular focus on morphological and neurological features
Electroencephalographic and epilepsy findings in mecp2 duplication syndrome. a family study
Mutations in NGLY1 cause an inherited disorder of the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation pathway
Prospective phenotyping of NGLY1-CDDG, the first congenital disorder of deglycosylation
Delineating the epilepsy phenotype of NGLY1 deficiency
NUS1 And epilepsy-myoclonus-ataxia syndrome: An under-recognized entity?
The phenotypic spectrum of PCDH12 associated disorders - five new cases and review of the literature
PIGN encephalopathy: characterizing the epileptology
PRICKLE1 progressive myoclonus epilepsy in southern Italy
PRRT2 mutations cause benign familial infantile epilepsy and infantile convulsions with choreoathetosis syndrome
Movement disorders in PURA syndrome: a video case series
PURA-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy: phenotypic and genotypic spectrum
RHOBTB2 mutations expand the phenotypic spectrum of alternating hemiplegia of childhood
Exploring the spectrum of RHOBTB2 variants associated with developmental encephalopathy 64: a case series and literature review
Genotype–phenotype correlations in RHOBTB2-associated neurodevelopmental disorders
The gain of function SCN1A disorder spectrum: novel epilepsy phenotypes and therapeutic implications
Not all SCN1A epileptic encephalopathies are Dravet syndrome
Extending the phenotype related to SCN1A gene: arthrogryposis, movement disorders, and malformations of cortical development
SCN1A gain-of-function mutation causing an early-onset epileptic encephalopathy
Beyond dravet syndrome: characterization of a novel, more severe SCN1A-linked epileptic encephalopathy
The phenotypic spectrum of SCN2A-related epilepsy
A novel splicing SCN2A mutation in an adolescent with low-functioning autism, acute dystonic movement disorder, and late-onset generalized epilepsy
SCN2A encephalopathy
Deep brain stimulation for status dystonicus in a toddler with SCN2A-related disorder
Clinical and electrophysiological features of SCN8A variants causing episodic or chronic ataxia
EuroEPINOMICS RES consortium CRP. The phenotypic spectrum of SCN8A encephalopathy
The spectrum of intermediate SCN8A-related epilepsy
Partial loss-of-function of sodium channel SCN8A in familial isolated myoclonus
Epilepsy and EEG phenotype of SLC13A5 citrate transporter disorder
Characterizing a rare neurogenetic disease, SLC13A5 citrate transporter disorder, utilizing clinical data in a cloud-based medical record collection system
Understanding the spectrum of SLC2A1-associated disorders
Glucose transporter-1 deficiency syndrome: the expanding clinical and genetic spectrum of a treatable disorder
From splitting GLUT1 deficiency syndromes to overlapping phenotypes
GM3 synthase deficiency in non-Amish patients
ST3GAL5-related disorders: a deficiency in ganglioside metabolism and a genetic cause of intellectual disability and choreoathetosis
STXBP1 stop-loss mutation associated with complex early onset movement disorder without epilepsy
Assessing the landscape of STXBP1-related disorders in 534 individuals
A description of novel variants and review of phenotypic spectrum in UBA5-related early epileptic encephalopathy
Mutations in the neuronal vesicular SNARE VAMP2 affect synaptic membrane fusion and impair human neurodevelopment
Mutation of the WARS2 gene as the cause of a severe hyperkinetic movement disorder
Quantitative retrospective natural history modeling of WDR45-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy – a systematic cross-sectional analysis of 160 published cases
Early-onset epileptic encephalopathy as the initial clinical presentation of WDR45 deletion in a male patient
WWOX developmental and epileptic encephalopathy: Understanding the epileptology and the mortality risk
Truncating mutations in YIF1B cause a progressive encephalopathy with various degrees of mixed movement disorder, microcephaly, and epilepsy
Expanding the mutational landscape and clinical phenotype of the YIF1B related brain disorder
Biallelic variants in ZNF142 lead to a syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder
Distinguishing loss-of-function and gain-of-function SCN8A variants using a random forest classification model trained on clinical features
A multi-disciplinary clinic for SCN8A-related epilepsy
Genotype-phenotype correlations in SCN8A-related disorders reveal prognostic and therapeutic implications
Global modified Delphi consensus on diagnosis, phenotypes, and treatment of SCN8A-related epilepsy and/or neurodevelopmental disorders
Highlighting the dystonic phenotype related to GNAO1
PRRT2 mMutations in familial infantile seizures, paroxysmal dyskinesia, and hemiplegic migraine
Appropriate selection of participants for clinical trials in epilepsy
Catatonia in autism and other neurodevelopmental disabilities: a state-of-the-art review
Clinical and electroencephalographic features of simple partial seizures
Intracranial EEG substrates of scalp ictal patterns from temporal lobe foci
Value of smartphone videos for diagnosis of seizures: Everyone owns half an epilepsy monitoring unit
Evaluation of movement and brain activity
The diagnostic value of clinical neurophysiology in hyperkinetic movement disorders: a systematic review
Neurodevelopmental movement disorders—an update on childhood motor stereotypies
4-Aminopyridine is a promising treatment option for patients with gain-of-function KCNA2-encephalopathy
Clinical, radiological and pathological features of a large American cohort of spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA27B)
Deep brain stimulation is effective in pediatric patients with GNAO1 associated severe hyperkinesia
Deep brain stimulation for medically refractory status dystonicus in UBA5-related disorder
Treatment of myoclonus
Lisdexamfetamine therapy in paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia associated with the KCNMA1-N999S variant