Evaluation of the efficacy of salmon calcitonin nasal spray on bone healing following surgical removal of impacted third molar: a randomized controlled study
Objectives
To assess the efficacy of salmon calcitonin spray on postoperative pain, serum calcitonin levels, and bone healing after surgical removal of impacted mandibular third molar.
Materials and Methods
This prospective study included 100 patients who required surgical removal of impacted mandibular third molars under local anesthesia. Group I included 50 patients who received intranasal serum calcitonin spray, and Group II included 50 patients who did not receive serum calcitonin spray. The postoperative pain was evaluated on the 1st, 3rd and 7th days. The serum osteocalcin levels were assessed at 1 month, and bone density was evaluated at the 3rd month postoperatively.
Results
The severity of pain was less in Group I on days 3, and 7 postoperatively compared to Group II (P<0.05). The postoperative serum calcitonin level was higher in Group I compared to Group II (P<0.05), and the bone density was greater in Group I when compared to Group II evaluated at the 3rd month postoperatively (P<0.05).
Conclusion
The results of our study delineate that Group I patients had better efficacy in controlling pain and improved bone healing with calcitonin nasal spray when compared to Group II patients.

I. Introduction
The primary objective of a clinician after third molar removal was to regain the patient’s masticatory function and restore aesthetics. Numerous drawbacks have been advocated post-surgery, including pain, paresthesia, edema, and delayed wound healing. The severity of postoperative sequel can be effectively assessed using inflammatory biomarkers, such as, blood counts, C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Whilst neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) and platelet-lymphocyte ratio (PLR) accurately predict the systemic and chronic inflammatory conditions. The postoperative bone healing was influenced by various local and systemic factors, and habits such as smoking and alcoholism6 complicate wound healing. Various methods have been employed such as the utilization of bone grafting techniques which acts as an osteoinductive material helps in preservation of the alveolar bone and enhances bone formation, nutritional supplementations includes proteins, minerals and vitamins, platelet-rich fibrin, bone morphogenic proteins, stem cells and medications have highly favored patient compliance postoperatively.
Calcitonin is a calciotropic hormone, used in the management of osteoporosis, Paget’s disease, and hypercalcemia. Calcitonin has been widely used by orthopedic surgeons as an adjunct modality and as a therapeutic agent in the management of fractures and bone-related disorders. Clinically, calcitonin is known for its effectiveness in reducing postoperative pain and decreasing the excretion of hydroxyproline and resultant bone loss. However, only a few animal studies have been assessed on the alveolar bone healing using calcitonin spray.
Gabopoulou et al. compared the analgesic effects of opioids combined with salmon calcitonin in patients with complete hip arthroplasty under epidural anesthesia. The authors found that salmon calcitonin, when combined with local anesthesia, produced analgesic effects; hence, calcitonin administration remains an alternative for the control of acute postoperative pain. Lucchesi and Kwok presented a case of chronic osteomyelitis and subsequent mandibular fracture. The patient was subcutaneously administered 50 units of salmon calcitonin daily, which eventually relieved bone pain and improved bone healing. Moreover, no studies have analyzed the utility of salmon calcitonin through the nasal route.
The present study was aimed to focus on the effect of salmon calcitonin spray on bone healing following surgical removal of an impacted mandibular third molar.

II. Materials and Methods

1. Study design
This present study was conducted on 100 patients who reported to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Madha Dental College and Hospital, Chennai, for the surgical extraction of impacted mandibular third molars. Ethical clearance for the present study was obtained from the Institutional Ethical Review Board of Madha Dental College and Hospital (MDCH/IEC/2022/07) and registered with the Clinical Trial Registry of India (CTRI/2025/09/094339). The nature of the study was explained in detail to all the participants included in the study. Informed written consent was also obtained from all the study subjects. Inclusion criteria were: Systemically healthy Subjects between 18-40 years of age with impacted mandibular third molars, American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) I. Exclusion criteria were: Patients with known systemic diseases, patients with periapical pathology, patients other than ASA I, patients with history of allergies, bleeding disorders, pregnant and lactating mothers, and patients with metabolic disorders.

2. Sample size estimation
A pilot study included 10 patients. Based on the outcomes of the pilot study, the sample size was calculated using the statistical software G*Power 3.1.9.7 with effect size 0.32, power 95% and 95% confidence interval. The total sample size for the present study was estimated to be 100 patients (50 in each group).

3. Blinding
In this study, double blinding was performed, with the operating surgeon and the investigator unaware of the use of intranasal calcitonin spray. The investigator was a third person who was not related to the study. The assistant surgeon instructed the procedure for administering intranasal calcitonin nasal spray to the patients. The patient and the assistant surgeon were not blinded.

4. Randomization and allocation
The patients included in this study were randomly allocated into groups through a block randomization method. Patients who chose Block A were received intranasal calcitonin spray, whereas those who chose Block B were not administered with calcitonin spray. Allocation concealment was carried out by a third person who was not involved in the study.

5. Groups
Group I included 50 patients who received intranasal salmon calcitonin spray, and 50 patients in Group II did not receive the nasal spray.

6. Surgical procedure
The procedure of third molar removal was performed under a sterile aseptic environment by a single experienced Oral surgeon. Preoperative intraoral site preparation was done using 5% povidone-iodine solution. Inferior alveolar nerve block was administered with 2% lidocaine hydrochloride and 1:80,000 adrenaline. Ward’s incision was placed using a no 15 scalpel, and a full-thickness mucoperiosteal flap was raised with a periosteal elevator. Bone guttering was performed using a conventional straight hand piece and #702 tapered fissure carbide bur under copious saline irrigation. The tooth was then elevated and retrieved from the socket using forceps. The extracted sockets were then examined for remnants and irrigated well using saline. The sockets were then closed primarily with simple interrupted sutures using 3-0 silk. The patients in Group I were administered intranasal serum calcitonin spray (Calcinase; Cipla Industries). This intranasal calcitonin spray was prescribed at a dose of 200 IU (0.09 mL), delivered as 1 puff per day for 30 postoperative days. Patients in Group II were not administered calcitonin nasal spray. The postoperative instructions were given to patients of both groups and prescribed with antibiotics and analgesics (cefixime 200 mg tablet and ketorolac 10 mg tablet twice daily for three days).

7. Follow up assessments
The patients in both groups were analyzed for postoperative pain, serum osteocalcin levels and bone healing. The postoperative pain was evaluated on the 1st, 3rd and 7th days using a visual analogue scale (VAS). The serum osteocalcin levels (ng/dL) were assessed by collecting 2 mL of blood sample from participants of both groups after 30 days. Bone healing was evaluated at the 3rd month postoperatively using cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT), which was recorded in grayscale values.(Fig. 1, 2) The CBCT examination was performed using Carestream CS9300C (Carestream Dental) with 8×8 cm field of view and 180 µm voxel resolution. The region of interest selection was determined at the cervical, middle and apical regions of the newly formed bone. The measures obtained at each region were recorded and averaged. Inter-observer assessments were performed to ensure the reliability and reproducibility of results.

8. Statistical analysis
The data were entered in a Microsoft Excel 365 spreadsheet and evaluated using SPSS software (IBM SPSS Statistics ver. 20.0; IBM). The postoperative parameters, such as the pain and serum osteocalcin levels, were statistically analyzed using the Mann-Whitney U test and bone regeneration was analyzed using Friedman’s two-way ANOVA test. The statistical significance was set at P<0.05.

III. Results
The present study included 100 patients, who required surgical removal of impacted mandibular third molars. Among 100 patients, 34 were male and 66 were female, with a mean age of 34 years. The obtained data were evaluated statistically using the Mann-Whitney U test through IBM SPSS Statistics ver. 20.0.(Table 1, Fig. 3-5)

1. Pain (VAS)
The severity of pain was less in Group I when compared to Group II with a mean difference (standard deviation [SD]) of 1.64 (1.00) on day 3 and 0.12 (0.33) on day 7 which showed a statistical significance of P<0.05 for Group I respectively.

2. Calcitonin levels (ng/dL)
The postoperative serum calcitonin level in Group I was 68.972 (7.48) and 58.685 (6.38) in Group II, which showed a statistical significance of P<0.05 for Group I, respectively.

3. Bone healing (gray scale value)
The bone healing in Group I was 144.60 (22.53) and in Group II, it was 126.66 (20.75) at the 3rd month postoperatively which showed a statistical significance of P<0.05 for Group I, respectively.

IV. Discussion
The study was to evaluate the effect of salmon intranasal calcitonin nasal on postoperative outcomes, such as pain, calcitonin levels, and bone healing after mandibular third molar removal.
Third molar removal presents with various postoperative complications, which can be better assessed through inflammatory biomarkers (CRP, NLR and PLR) and managed through non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Yilmaz et al., emphasized that CRP, NLR and PLR values had a significant correlation with the postoperative VAS scores and analgesic consumption by the patients. However, edema and trismus had no significance with the values of biomarkers. This determines biomarkers as reliable indicators of patient comfort during healing and aids in implementing the desired postoperative care. The NSAIDs are effective in controlling pain of different intensities, which range from mild, moderate to severe. However, NSAIDs possess numerous adverse effects, such as psychological, gastrointestinal, renal disturbances and drug-to-drug interactions. These adverse effects can be altered by the utilization of intranasal calcitonin spray, which was considered superior to other available anti-inflammatory drugs.
Zhou et al. compared the efficacy of diclofenac and calcitonin in 109 patients with type 1 Modic changes and low back pain. Sixty-two patients received 50 IU of calcitonin intramuscularly, and 47 patients were prescribed diclofenac 75 mg once daily for 4 weeks. The results suggested that the calcitonin group showed significant improvement compared with the diclofenac group in controlling type I Modic changes and low back pain. Schwartz et al. investigated the effects of salmon calcitonin 100 IU per 1 mL of saline, administered 5 times a week for 6 weeks, among 13 patients presented with atypical facial pain. However, the study was withdrawn due to a high dropout rate caused by calcitonin-related side effects. The author emphasized the need for future studies on calcitonin delivered through the nasal route to reduce such adverse effects and to obtain more consistent and reliable results.
Calcitonin is synthesized in the thyroid gland by the parafollicular cells, which helps in the maintenance of bone turnover by preventing the activity of bone resorption. The normal secretion of calcitonin levels is 0.5 mg/day and 0.2 ng/mL, respectively. Calcitonin can be administered safely through oral and parenteral routes, which is accompanied by several complications. Calcitonin, administered through the oral route, is degraded by the gastric acids due to its polypeptide structure, and the bioavailability of the drug is also reduced. Patients with liver disturbances may not metabolize the orally administered drug because the first-pass metabolism of the drug occurs in the liver. Hence, the efficacy achieved through these supplements is minimal. These shortcomings are counteracted by administration of calcitonin through the nasal route, which is directly absorbed by the nasal mucosa and enters the bloodstream, bypassing the liver. Calcitonin reaches its maximum efficacy within one hour of administration ensuring better bioavailability.
The present study evaluated pain between groups on the 1st, 3rd and 7th postoperative days. The action of calcitonin occurs through both central and peripheral systems. Peripheral action occurs through serotoninergic and catecholaminergic receptors, and the central system is through the release of beta-endorphin, which is a neuropeptide that works on the opioid receptors as an agonist. The intensity of pain in Group I was less when compared to Group II patients, which showed a statistical significance of P<0.05. While Yazdani and Ahmadpour showed a statistical insignificant difference between the intervention and control groups. The author also stated that calcitonin nasal spray would be an effective medication in controlling pain if the required analgesic consumption is minimised. Tarantino et al. emphasized that the intensity of intranasal calcitonin spray is high, and also, the duration of analgesic action is longer when compared to other routinely available analgesics.
The present study assessed calcitonin levels after 30 days and bone healing at the 3rd month postoperatively. Calcitonin implies positive bone turnover by decreasing both the action of bone resorption and the formation of new osteoclasts, angiogenesis. Group I patients showed a high calcitonin level and advanced bone healing when compared to Group II patients (P<0.05), which had a positive association with Trovas et al. and with Lucchesi and Kwok. Both osteoblastic and osteoclastic activity occurs simultaneously; hence a decrease in the osteoclasts eventually decreases the osteoblasts. This signifies that calcitonin nasal spray used for a longer duration may show minor differences in the osteocalcin concentration.
Intranasal calcitonin spray is safer when compared to other routes of administration. However, calcitonin is associated with numerous adverse effects, which include nasal irritation, sinusitis, rhinitis, epistaxis, hypersensitivity reactions, and potential for malignancy. Ninety-seven percent had mild to moderate effects, and only 10% had severe effects with calcitonin administration. Flushing and nausea was experienced in patients administered through parenteral or intramuscular routes. Wells et al. found no relationship between calcitonin and malignancy. In the present study, none of our patients experienced any adverse effects.
Calcitonin nasal spray must be of prime importance when compared to other available analgesics. Firstly, the patients experience complete relief of pain in situations such as post-surgical pain, neuropathies, and migraine. Secondly, the administration of intranasal calcitonin spray is simple, safer, and does not show any significant adverse effects. Thirdly, calcitonin nasal spray can be used in patients with disturbances in the liver, renal, and gastrointestinal systems to minimise the dose of required analgesics.
The present study had a few limitations: The sample size was small; hence, studies with larger samples would yield better results with calcitonin nasal spray. The study design was single-centred, with a relatively short follow-up period, and bone healing was assessed solely on radiological parameters. Mentally challenged and geriatric patients may have difficulty using a nasal spray, as it requires manual administration of calcitonin.

V. Conclusion
Salmon-calcitonin nasal spray is an effective and adjuvant treatment modality to other routinely available analgesics in controlling postoperative pain and advanced bone healing. The technique of nasal spray is simple and easy to administer, which can even be utilized in patients with altered systemic conditions. The results of our study delineate that Group I patients had better efficacy and excellent postoperative outcomes with calcitonin nasal spray when compared to Group II patients.
Authors’ Contributions
Study conception and design was performed by H.N. and S.C. Material preparation, data collection and analysis were performed by D.A.P., D.N., and K.K.P. The first draft of the manuscript was written by B.R. and G.S.S., and all authors commented on previous versions of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
No funding to declare.
Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
This study was performed in line with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Approval was granted by the Institutional Ethical Review Board of Madha Dental College and Hospital (MDCH/IEC/2022/07). Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
Consent for Publishing Photographs
Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of this article and accompanying images.
Conflict of Interest
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.

References
Is it possible to predict the postoperative sequelae following third molar surgery using hematological biomarkers?
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein in acute inflammation
Factors influencing fracture healing
Diabetes and its effect on bone and fracture healing
Smoking and impaired bone healing: will activation of cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway be the bridge?
Delayed fracture healing in alcohol abusers-a preliminary retrospective study
Evaluation of efficacy of low intensity pulsed ultrasound in facilitating mandibular fracture healing-a blinded randomized controlled clinical trial
Combining platelet rich fibrin with different bone graft materials: an experimental study on the histopathological and immunohistochemical aspects of bone healing
Pharmacological agents and bone healing
A prospective study on the effectiveness of newly developed autogenous tooth bone graft material for sinus bone graft procedure
Effect of calcitonin on alveolar wound healing
Effect of osteoporosis medications on fracture healing
Research progress in calcitonin gene-related peptide and bone repair
Scientific considerations for generic synthetic salmon calcitonin nasal spray products
Epidural calcitonin: does it provide better postoperative analgesia? An analysis of the haemodynamic, endocrine, and nociceptive responses of salmon calcitonin and opioids in epidural anesthesia for hip arthroplasty surgery
Long term antibiotics and calcitonin in the treatment of chronic osteomyelitis of the mandible: case report
[Effect of intravenous acetaminophen versus fentanyl on postoperative pain after transurethral lithotripsy]
Good clinical practice guide for opioids in pain management: the three Ts - titration (trial), tweaking (tailoring), transition (tapering)
[Calcitonin as an analgesic agent: review of mechanisms of action and clinical applications]
Clinical efficacy of calcitonin compared to diclofenac sodium in chronic nonspecific low back pain with type I Modic changes: a retrospective study
Effects of salmon calcitonin on patients with atypical (idiopathic) facial pain: a randomized controlled trial
Intranasal salcatonin (salmon calcitonin). A review of its pharmacological properties and role in the management of postmenopausal osteoporosis
Oral calcitonin
Intranasal and intramuscular human calcitonin in female osteoporosis and in Paget's disease of bones: a pilot study
Involvement of kappa-opioid receptor mechanisms in the calcitonin-induced potentiation of opioid effects at the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenocortical axis
Effect of calcitonin on healing duration, function and pain relief in patients with maxillofacial fractures. A pilot study
A randomized trial of nasal spray salmon calcitonin in men with idiopathic osteoporosis: effects on bone mineral density and bone markers
Calcitonin prevents bone loss but decreases osteoblastic activity in ovariohysterectomized beagle dogs
Salmon calcitonin: a review of current and future therapeutic indications
Calcitonin nasal spray and increased cancer risk: a population-based nested case-control study
Calcitonin increases invasiveness of prostate cancer cells: role for cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A in calcitonin action
Calcitonin in reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome and other painful conditions
Analgesic efficacy of calcitonin for vertebral fracture pain
The effectiveness of calcitonin on chronic back pain and daily activities in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis
Does salmon calcitonin cause cancer? A review and meta-analysis
Efficacy of salmon calcitonin in complex regional pain syndrome (type 1) in addition to physical therapy
Cone-beam computed tomography showing bone healing evaluated at 3rd month in Group I.
Cone-beam computed tomography showing bone healing evaluated at 3rd month in Group II.
Postoperative outcomes of pain evaluated at 1st, 3rd and 7th day between Group I and Group II.
Postoperative outcomes of calcitonin levels evaluated after 30 days between Group I and Group II.
Postoperative outcomes of bone healing evaluated at 3rd month between Group I and Group II.
Mann-Whitney U test for the statistical significance of pain, serum calcitonin level and Friedman’s two-way ANOVA test for Bone healing between Group I and Group II
Parameter	Mean difference (standard deviation)	P-value*	 		 	Group I	Group II	 	Pain, VAS				 	Day 1	7.26 (1.01)	7.36 (1.27)	0.934	 	Day 3	1.64 (1.00)	3.04 (1.47)	0.001	 	Day 7	0.12 (0.33)	0.50 (0.86)	0.016	 	Calcitonin level (ng/dL)				 	Preoperative	65.718 (8.01)	62.734 (9.45)	1.032	 	Postoperative	68.972 (7.48)	58.685 (6.38)	0.018	 	Bone healing, GSV				 	Immediate	106.02 (24.07)	101.20 (20.67)	0.085	 	3rd month	144.60 (22.53)	126.66 (20.75)	0.008
(VAS: visual analogue scale, GSV: gray scale value)
*P<0.05 was set to be statistically significant.