Image guided endonasal endoscopic approach to different clivus pathologies
Different pathologies can affect the clivus region. Despite the challenging anatomical location and complexity of neuro-vasculature, the introduction of the endoscopic endonasal technique opens a new field in skull base surgery and recently represents a less invasive alternative for the surgical management of pathological lesions occupying the clival region. The purpose of this study is to demonstrate the use of the endoscopic endonasal approach as a therapeutic approach for multiple uncommon pathologies presenting in the clivus region.
Methodology
This case-series study was reported from a tertiary referral hospital in Dammam, Saudi Arabia. The study reports on five cases that underwent an image-guided endoscopic endonasal approach to different clivus pathologies in the hospital.
Results
The study included five patients that were diagnosed with five different clival pathologies, for whom the endonasal endoscopic approach was used for resection and/or biopsy. Among five patients, (80 %) were males. The age of patients ranged from 23 to 47. The mean age (±SD) was 36.6 (±8.3). Pathologies diagnosed were clivus chordoma (20 %), clivus lymphoma (20 %), metastatic cancer (20 %), invasive fungal rhinosinusitis (IFRS) clivus (20 %), and multipl myeloma (20 %).
Conclusion
When compared to other transcranial techniques, the image guided endoscopic endonasal approach to the clival area is safe, effective, and allows greater vision of that region. We demonstrated in this study that the endonasal approach to the clival area may be used to treat a variety of clival pathologies.
Highlights
Different pathologies can affect the clivus region. Despite the challenging anatomical location and complexity of neuro-vasculature, the introduction of the endoscopic endonasal technique opens a new field in skull base surgery.
Recently endoscopic endonasal technique represents a less invasive alternative for the surgical management of pathological lesions occupying the clival region.
When compared to other transcranial techniques, the endoscopic endonasal approach to the clival area is safe, effective, and allows greater vision of that region.
We demonstrated in this study that the endonasal approach to the clival area may be used to treat a variety of clival pathologies.

Introduction
The clivus (Latin: slope or hill) is a bony structure with a wide shallow depression located at the central base of the skull. It is formed when the basal portion of the occipital bone combines with the body of the sphenoid bone at the sphenooccipital synchondrosis.
Different pathologies can affect this region. Chordomas and chondrosarcomas are among the most common tumors of the clival area. However, literature shows other kinds of lesions, such as metastasis, lymphoma, fibrous dysplasia, ectopic adenoma, plasmocytoma, osteoblastoma, osteochondromas, neurenteric cyst, osteosarcoma, giant cell tumor, fibroma, and hemangiomas.
Clival lesions are surgically challenging to treat due to the complex anatomy of this area, with critical neurovascular structures that are located in close proximity. The clival area can be surgically approached via multiple surgical routes. Historically, open surgical access to the clival area via conventional surgical approaches involving extensive bone drilling and neurovascular manipulation carries a risk of significant morbidity and limits their uses.
Currently, the introduction of the endoscopic endonasal technique opens a new field in skull base surgery and recently represents a less invasive alternative for the surgical management of pathological lesions occupying the clival region. The endoscopic endonasal approach has a wider operative view facilitating access to the entire base of the skull with the best magnification and less neurovascular manipulation. Furthermore, the result of using the endoscopic endonasal approach in compression to traditional approaches is superior because this novel technique minims the complications leading to a better surgical outcome.

Methodology

Study design
This study is a case series reported from a tertiary care referral hospital and a literature review.

Study population
The study included five subjects who underwent a computer-aided image-guided endoscopic endonasal approach to different clivus pathologies in the hospital. The study did not follow up nor perform survivorship analysis; however, for full disclosure, the clinicopathological records and management plans applied to the included subjects are reported. The work has been reported in line with the PROCESS criteria.

Ethical considerations
Our center's ethics board gave us permission to access all relevant medical files, office papers, pictures, and surgical, and pathological reports. All operations were carried out in accordance with the ethics committee's recommendations regarding patient confidentiality. Age, sex, symptoms, tumor location, and size, as well as surgical margin assessment, were all retrieved.

Study aim
The purpose of this study is to demonstrate the use of the image guided endoscopic endonasal approach as a therapeutic approach for multiple uncommon pathologies presenting in the clivus region.

Literature review
In surgeries involving the sinus system or the anterior skull base, minimally invasive methods have become common practice. Image-guided surgery, which is widely utilized in other fields (such as neurosurgery, orthopedic surgery, and maxillofacial surgery), is a novel technique that might help certain patients with medically resistant nasal pathologies who are undergoing functional EES. It also increases the number of operations on non-infectious disorders of the sinuses, orbits, and anterior skull base that can be treated with minimally invasive EES.
Certainly, a solid understanding of anatomy is required for administering safe EES. On the other hand, malformations, previous procedures, and severe polyposis might make intraoperative orienting difficult, putting the patient in danger. Image-guided navigation system (IGNS) is a valuable tool for surgeons in recognizing anatomic landmarks in complex situations, which reduces surgeon stress and improves patient safety. IGNS minimizes the likelihood of significant intracranial or intraorbital complications by enhancing surgical precision. It also has a three-dimensional imaging capability and a sagittal reconstruction, which considerably increases EES accuracy and precision in complex areas (such as the frontal recess).
Because visualization in multiple sectional planes enhances comprehension of normal and abnormal anatomy, computer-aided EES technology is also useful for training. There is evidence that computer-aided EES increases surgical efficiency and reduces resident learning curves.
As previously stated, preoperative scanning offers computed tomography data that is later employed. This implies that any tissue changes that occur during surgery are not visible on the monitor. An intraoperative computed tomogram with IGNS updating might be a solution to that problem. On the other hand, an intraoperative computed tomography scanner is costly, prolongs the surgery, and takes up more area in the operating room. Furthermore, the surgeon practising EES is primarily concerned with bone landmarks and thus unaffected by soft tissue changes. As a result, it is widely acknowledged that using an intraoperative computed tomogram to update computed tomography data is not advised for EES.
For instrument localization inside the surgical field, IGNS can use either electromagnetic (radiofrequency) or optical (infrared) signals. In order to monitor head position, most systems need patients to wear specific headsets during operation.
Stelter et al. 2006 determined that computer-guided navigational devices are so accurate that the chance of the surgeon being misled is low. The research also claims that data preparation took less than five minutes. The amount of time it took to prepare and register patients was determined by the approach employed and the user's previous expertise. In one case, the front ethmoidal artery was incised despite the use of a precise operating computer. There were no cerebrospinal fluid leaks, optic nerve lesions, retrobulbar hematomas, or intracerebral hemorrhage in any of the 368 patients. There were no deaths in this incident.
According to Chu (2006), the qualities of FESS aided by a navigation system include the capacity to pilot the relative locations of the operating instruments properly in three dimensions, the ability to remove lesions more thoroughly, and the inability to reveal vessel placements. The operational time was lowered as the number of patients operated on rose. Blood loss, on the other hand, rose as the surgeries got more vigorous. FESS with a navigation system, on the other hand, is a safe technique for treating individuals with chronic paranasal sinusitis.
Casiano & Numa Jr. 2009 conducted a study among otolaryngology residents without ethmoidectomy experience to perform ESS on the human cadaveric specimen with and without computer-assisted surgery (CAS). The study found a significant difference (P = .001) between the CAS (97 %) and non-CAS (76.8 %) groups in the mean accuracy of recognizing essential anatomical features. Furthermore, the findings suggest that, while not statistically significant, the operational time in the CAS group looked to be longer (average of 67 vs 80 min). Only the group that did not use CAS experienced three serious intracranial problems.
Fried et al. conducted a study to evaluate the efficacy of image-guidance technologies. They reviewed 55 patients' experiences with the Instatrak System. In this multicenter trial, surgeons who used the device were asked to assess how the device influenced the surgical operation on a five-point scale (range from 2 [very much decreased] to +2 [very much increased]). For revision cases, the average answer was +1.78, whereas, for main instances, it was +1.53. In this study, no unfavourable responses were reported by any of the surgeons. The authors cautioned, however, that this method should not be used as the only way of determining location. The foundation of functional ESS is anatomical knowledge, which can only be gained through cadaver dissection and experience.
The benefits and drawbacks of three-dimensional CT intraoperative localization for functional ESS were studied by Roth et al. in 1995. They did a retrospective evaluation of 220 patients who had ESS over the course of a year and found 12 individuals (5 %) who had ESS in combination with intraoperative localization. According to the authors, the average additional time for registration was 20 min. Eight more patients (4 %) were not chosen for intraoperative localizations but were recognized as possible good candidates following surgery, according to the investigators. At the time of surgery, these individuals had substantial scarring of the skull base or posterior ethmoid. Preoperative nasal endoscopy and CT scans were shown to be ineffective in predicting which individuals would be good candidates for intraoperative localization in that research.

Results
The study included five patients that were diagnosed with five different clival pathologies, for whom the endonasal endoscopic approach was used for resection and/or biopsy. Among five patients, (80 %) were males. The age of patients ranged from 23 to 47. The mean age (±SD) was 36.6 (±8.3). Pathologies diagnosed were clivus chordoma (20 %), clivus lymphoma (20 %), metastatic cancer (20 %), IFRS clivus (20 %), and multiple myeloma (20 %). There were no anatomical variants found in the patients. Moreover, no surgical complications have occurred. However, complete surgical resection was unsure.

Case 1
Coronal view MRI with lobulated areas with honeycomb appearance of patient #1.
Fig. 1
Axial view MRI with T2 hyperintense lesion of patient #1.
Fig. 2
Sagittal view T1 MRI of patient #1.
Fig. 3
Endonasal endoscopic view of vascular clivus chordoma in patient#1.
Fig. 4
Imaging-guided approach towards clivus pathology in patient #1.
Fig. 5
Clivus chordoma was diagnosed in a 33-year-old Saudi male (case #1) and presented with progressive occipital headache, dizziness, and blurred vision for a few months. Endoscopic endonasal and neurological examinations were unremarkable. The patient underwent radiological assessment by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an extensive clivus tumor (Fig. 1, Fig. 2, Fig. 3). The patient underwent image-guided endonasal endoscopic excision of a large vascular clivus chordoma using the binostril technique combined with the neurosurgery team. Fig. 4 (Endoscopic view of vascular clivus chordoma tumor). Fig. 5 (imaging-guided endoscopy). The patient underwent follow up using MRI for one week, 3 months, and 6 months postoperatively.

Case 2
Axial CT view with bony erosion of skull base and sphenoid sinuses of patient #2.
Fig. 6
CT sagittal view bone window with bone destruction of skull base of patient #2.
Fig. 7
Axial MRI view with homogenous contrast enhancement of the lesion of patient #2.
Fig. 8
Endonasal endoscopic approach to clivus lymphoma in patient #2.
Fig. 9
Clivus Lymphoma was diagnosed in a 37-year-old male (case #2) with a previous history of lymphoma and was treated for 2 years. Back in remission, he again presented with non-specific headache and neck pain. Imaging revealed clivus lesion (Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8). The patient underwent an image-guided endonasal endoscopic biopsy of the clivus lesion, which turned out to be clivus lymphoma (Fig. 9).

Case 3
Axial view CT of patient #3.
Fig. 10
Coronal view CT of patient #3.
Fig. 11
Endoscopic view of the lesion in patient #3.
Fig. 12
CT image coronal, sagittal and axial view with bony window with erosion and destruction of the clivus in patient #3.
Fig. 13
Metastatic cancer was diagnosed in a 47-year-old woman (case #3), a known case of breast cancer on remission, and presented with occipital headache, unsteadiness, and neck pain. Imaging (Fig. 10, Fig. 11) revealed a clivus lesion (Fig. 12). Image-guided endonasal endoscopic biopsy of a bony clivus lesion (Fig. 13) was done. The final histopathology report showed metastasis of breast cancer to the clivus.

Case 4
Axial view CT with Soft tissue infiltration and extension of the infection into the intracranial compartment of patient #4.
Fig. 14
Sagittal view MRI with Soft tissue infiltration and destruction of the clivus of patient #4.
Fig. 15
CT image coronal, sagittal and axial view with destruction of the clivus bone in patient #4.
Fig. 16
Invasive fungal rhinosinusitis was diagnosed in a 23-year-old Saudi male (Case #4) known case of allergic rhinitis, bronchial asthma, and allergic fungal sinusitis underwent sinus surgery in a local hospital. Referred for revision surgery for extensive fungal sinusitis involving all sinuses, skull base, and clivus as shown in (Fig. 14: CT, Fig. 15: MRI). The patient underwent a successful image-guided endoscopic sinus surgery to remove his fungal mucin and mud from the sinuses (Fig. 16), skull base, and clivus (Fig. 14, Fig. 15). The patient underwent follow up using rigid nasal endoscopy weekly for 3 months.

Case 5
Strabismus: The eyes may appear crossed or misaligned due to the inability of the lateral rectus muscles to move the eyes outward.
Nystagmus: Involuntary, rhythmic movements of the eyes may be present due to the lack of coordination between the affected eye muscles.
Limited eye movement: The patient may have difficulty moving their eyes outward, leading to restricted eye movement.
Axial view CT with Lytic lesions in the clivus, appear as areas of bone destruction or erosion of patient #5.
Fig. 17
Anterior rhinoscopy approach to patient #5.
Fig. 18
Multiple myeloma was diagnosed in a 43-year-old Saudi male (case #5). The patient presented with blurred vision, headache, and abnormal gait. He is not known to have any medical illness. He is vitally stable, conscious, alert, and oriented with GCS (15/15). Further investigations revealed diabetes mellitus (DM) and low sodium related to high blood sugar. The patient underwent radiological assessment by CT and revealed osteolytic bone lesions; the largest is located at the S1 and S2 vertebrae with an enhancing soft tissue component (Fig. 17). Anterior rhinoscopy was done and revealed a patent airway with bilateral abducent (VI) nerve palsy (Fig. 18). During anterior rhinoscopy, the healthcare provider observe certain signs that could suggest bilateral abducens nerve palsy. These signs may include:
Imaging-guided endoscopy in patient #5.
Fig. 19
A posterior-superior septectomy was then performed, and the biopsy showed plasma cell neoplasm consistent with multiple myeloma (Fig. 19).

Discussion
The clival region may be involved in numerous disorders. The most common clival lesions are chordomas, but meningiomas, chondroma, and chondrosarcoma may also occur. The clivus is the unpaired basilar portion of the occipital bone extending obliquely from the anterior aspect of the foramen magnum to join the basisphenoid bone just inferior to the dorsum sellae. Chordomas are rare tumors arising along the craniospinal axis, accounting for approximately 0.1 %–0.2 % of all intracranial tumors. Chordomas are most commonly encountered in male patients between the fourth and fifth decades of life. They are slowly growing tumors; as a result, they are often diagnosed late with local infiltration of the surrounding tissue. Furthermore, these tumors are difficult to diagnose and treat due to a high rate of recurrence, even after multiple surgeries.
Clinically, chordomas have different presentations, depending on their location. Intracranial chondromas may present with chronic intractable headaches, cranial neuropathy, and other rarer symptoms such as subarachnoid hemorrhage, cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea, and epistaxis. Several authors have reported that patients often present with cranial neuropathies, particularly the abducens nerve palsy (cranial nerve VI). Dehdashti et al. reported diplopia was the most common presenting symptom and was encountered in seven patients out of twelve patients. unlike in our case, the patient mainly presented with a headache with an unremarkable neurological examination.
Various imaging modalities aid in making the differential diagnosis. Plain radiographs may reveal local bony erosion and scattered calcifications. On computed tomography (CT), chordomas have decreased attenuation and hyperdense regions. In addition, it may demonstrate the erosion of nearby structures and exhibit an inner calcified matrix. MRI is the imaging modality of choice because it can assess the degree of neural element involvement. On brain MRI, bony expansion is a typical feature, along with hypointensity on T1-weighted images and hyperintensity on T2-weighted images. A final diagnosis can only be made based on a perioperative biopsy using various analytical techniques.
In terms of treatment, Surgical removal is the best method in the treatment of clival chordomas. This treatment makes clival chondromas a challenging surgical disease due to the deep location in the skull base and the presence of important neurovascular structures. However, rasurgical treatment of anterior skull base, clival, and retroclival lesions has undergone significant changes over the last decades. Traditionally, open surgical access was used to gain access to the clival chordomas through the anterior and lateral approaches. Recently, the introduction of the endoscopic endonasal technique opens a new field in skull base surgery as a less invasive alternative for the surgical management of clival chordomas. The endoscopic endonasal approach provided a good operative view that allows gross total resection (GTR) of clival chordomas. on the other hand a study published gross total resection of clival chondroma was achieved in 52.9 % of patients. Similarly, another study reported the results of the endoscopic endonasal approach for clival chordomas in 6 patients; gross total resection was achieved in 3 cases of clival chordomas. In our case, as the endonasal endoscopic approach is considered an alternative approach to these lesions, the patient underwent image-guided endonasal endoscopic for excision of a large vascular clival chordoma using the binostril 500.
Lymphoma is the malignant monoclonal proliferation of lymphoid cells in separated tissue masses of the immune system, such as the lymph nodes, spleen, and bone marrow. Although approximately 10 % of the patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma present with extranodal disease in the head and neck region. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma may occur at any age, but the peak incidence is in the 60s. Patients often present with a rapidly enlarging symptomatic mass at a single node or at an extranodal site. Primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of bone (PLB) is an unusual condition, accounting for 1–2 % of all malignant lymphoma, 3–5 % of all extranodal lymphoma, and only 7 % of all primary bone tumors, with femoral localization being the most common, and initial involvement of the skull base being the less common in this singular group. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is the most common type of malignant lymphoma, representing 30–40 % of adult cases; it has a slight male predominance. Common sites in the head and neck include Waldeyers ring, salivary glands, nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses, thyroid gland, and orbit. In the later course of the disease, there will be involvement of the bone marrow. The diagnosis of lymphoma is challenging and cannot be made simply from clinical findings and imaging. In fact, the clinical picture is extremely variable. Radiological features alone cannot be used to diagnose PLB as it has a variable radiological appearance that may or may not show bone erosion, sclerosis, and expansion. Once the diagnosis is established, staging must be performed as the extent of the disease has prognostic value. If left untreated, diffuse B-cell lymphomas are fatal because of their aggressive nature. After the surgical biopsy, the most common treatment is chemotherapy. Primary lymphoma of the central nervous system (PCNSL) may occur in immunocompetent and immunocompromised patients. Among PCNSL, T-cell tumors represent a very small entity ranging from 1 %–3.6 %. Most PCNSL are found intra-axially; however, several reports have shown lymphomas arising from the skull base, preferentially in the apical clivus and sellar region. Most of these tumors were of B-cell origin. The most common tumors involving the clivus include chordomas, metastases, meningiomas, nasopharyngeal carcinomas, and pituitary adenomas.
Chordomas, which are the most frequent tumor in this region, represent only 0.1–0.2 % of all intracranial tumors. Managing clival lesions using a minimally invasive approach presents numerous therapeutic challenges because of the close proximity of surrounding critical structures, including the basilar artery, internal carotid artery, brain stem structures, and cranial nerves. Metastases in the clivus are rare: Abducens nerve palsy was noted to be the most common specific presenting symptom [61.9 %], so the patients presented with headache and diplopia. The most common causes identified were prostate cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, and thyroid follicular carcinoma. Hence, completing a review of symptoms may be essential to raise suspicion of a primary lesion elsewhere. Furthermore, this diagnosis should be strongly considered in patients with a personal history of malignancy. The radiological features of clivus metastases do not appear to be characteristic. One feature that may help distinguish metastases from chordoma-like tumors on MRI images is hypo-intensity in T2 weighted images, as a result of the higher cellular density and lower cytoplasm/nuclear ratio in metastases. If left untreated, the tumors are rapidly fatal because of their aggressive nature, while, conversely, they respond well to chemotherapy and radiation. With intensive chemotherapy, complete remission is achieved in 60–80 % of patients. Fungal sinusitis consists of a heterogeneous group of disorders, with variety in the affected patient population, offending agents, mechanism of disease, clinical presentation, histopathology, imaging appearances, treatment, and overall prognosis. In people with normal immune function, fungal growth is kept in check. With impaired host immunity, fungi can invade host mucosa and cause invasive disease. Fungal sinusitis is broadly classified into two major groups: invasive and non-invasive forms. Invasive fungal sinusitis is defined by the presence of fungal hyphae within the mucosa, submucosa, bone, or blood vessels of the paranasal sinuses. It should be noted that although the distinction between invasive and non-invasive forms is suggested based on the clinical presentation, imaging evidence and/or histopathologic confirmation are required. Patients with non-invasive forms typically present with chronic sinusitis that fails to respond to repeated courses of antibiotics and surgeries. Invasive fungal sinusitis usually occurs with an acute onset characterized by fever, cough, and occasionally nasal mucosal ulceration. Usually, this invasive form is seen in immunocompromised patients. Invasive fungal sinusitis is subdivided into acute invasive fungal sinusitis, chronic invasive fungal sinusitis, and chronic granulomatous invasive fungal sinusitis. Conversely, non-invasive fungal sinusitis is defined by the absence of hyphae within the mucosal and other tissues of the paranasal sinuses. Non-invasive fungal sinusitis is subdivided into allergic fungal sinusitis and fungus ball (fungal mycetoma).
We presented a rare case of multiple myeloma presented with many osteolytic lesions; the largest is at the clivus, and significantly blurred vision. Extramedullary plasmacytoma is an interesting but rare demonstration of multiple myeloma at diagnosis. Out of 822 patients with plasma cell neoplasm in a previous series, only 3 % had extramedullary plasmacytomas as the first presentation.
The most common symptoms of single sphenoid sinus illnesses are headache and II, III, IV, and VI cranial nerve palsies, in contrast to other paranasal sinus lesions that typically show nasal obstruction, epistaxis, and nasal discharge. Before the tumor grows and spreads to the sinus wall, these symptoms are typically nebulous and unclear. As a result, the majority of patients have advanced disease by the time of diagnosis.

Conclusion
When compared to other transcranial techniques, the endoscopic endonasal approach to the clival area is safe, effective, and allows greater vision of that region. In this region, successful endoscopic operations rely on the development of modern endoscopes, surgical tools, and operative materials, but they also rely on the surgeon's anatomical knowledge, mastery of endoscopic surgical procedures, and a multidisciplinary approach. We demonstrated in this series that the endonasal approach to the clival area might be used to treat a variety of clival pathologies.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Dalia Al Arfaj: data collection and analysis.
Fatimah Jamal Al Saeed: data collection and analysis.
Dhaidan Aalshammari: writing the original manuscript draft.
Haifa Alanazi:, review and editing of the manuscript.
Mahmoud Taha: review of the manuscript.
Ali Al Momen: study concept, data analysis, and final approval of manuscript.

Consent
Written and informed consent was obtained from all the 5 patients for the publication and accompanying images.

Ethical approval
Ethical approval by IRB for case reports is not needed in this institution.

Guarantor
Dr. Ali Al Momen

Research registration number
Not applicable.

Funding
This work was not supported by any forms of funding.

Difficulties of the study
1. Limited availability of advanced imaging technology: Obtaining high-quality images for image-guided endoscopic procedures may be challenging in a hospital setting with limited access to advanced imaging technology.
2. Patient selection and consent: Identifying suitable patients for image-guided endoscopic procedures and obtaining informed consent can be challenging, as the risks and benefits of the procedure may not be well understood by patients or their families.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this paper.

References
A comprehensive review of the clivus: anatomy, embryology, variants, pathology, and surgical approaches
Endoscopic endonasal transclival approach to tumors of the clivus and anterior region of the posterior cranial fossa: an anatomic study
Surgery for clival lesions: open resection versus the expanded endoscopic endonasal approach
Solitary lesions of the clivus: what else besides chordomas? An extensive clinical outlook on rare pathologies
Solitary nonchordomatous lesions of the clival bone: differential diagnosis and current therapeutic strategies
Current therapeutic options and novel molecular markers in skull base chordomas
Endoscopic approach to clival chordomas: the northwestern experience
Endoscopic transnasal surgery of clival lesions: our experience
Endoscopic endonasal minimal access approach to the clivus: case series and technical nuances. Operative
Surgical results of an endoscopic endonasal approach for clival chordomas
Image-guided functional endoscopic sinus surgery
Image-guided transnasal endoscopic surgery of the paranasal sinuses and anterior skull base
Frameless computer-aided surgery system for revision endoscopic sinus surgery
Image-guided surgery of the anterior skull base
Computer-assisted surgery of the paranasal sinuses: technical and clinical experience with 368 patients, using the vector vision compact® system
Endoscopic sinus surgery under navigation system—analysis report of 79 cases
Efficacy of computed tomographic image–guided endoscopic sinus surgery in residency training programs
Image-guided endoscopic surgery: results of accuracy and performance in a multicenter clinical study using an electromagnetic tracking system
Advantages and disadvantages of three-dimensional computed tomography intraoperative localization for functional endoscopic sinus surgery
New frontiers in managing clival tumors—the extended endoscopic endonasal approach
Endoscopic resection of clival malignancies
Endoscopic endonasal transclival approaches: case series and outcomes for different clival regions
Clival chordoma: case report and review of recent developments in surgical and adjuvant treatments
Expanded endoscopic endonasal approach for treatment of clival chordomas: early results in 12 patients
Spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea: Ainitial presentation of clival chordoma
Clival chordomas: a pathological, surgical, and radiotherapeutic review
Endoscopic resection of chordomas in different clival regions
The extended endoscopic approach to perisellar and skull base lesions: is one nostril enough?
Primary B-cell lymphoma of the clivus: case report
Primary lymphoma of the skull base: report of two cases
Primary meningeal T-cell lymphoma at the clivus mimicking a meningioma
Burkitt lymphoma involving the clivus
Clivus metastases: report of seven patients and literature review
Socioeconomic factors in the diagnosis of allergic fungal rhinosinusitis. Otolaryngology—head and neck
Fungal rhinosinusitis: a categorization and definitional schema addressing current controversies
Fungal Sinusitis
Imaging features of invasive and non-invasive fungal sinusitis: a review
Comparison of extramedullary plasmacytomas with solitary and multiple plasma cell tumors of bone
An unusual presentation of multiple myeloma with unilateral sudden vision loss: a case report
Preferred reporting of case series in surgery (PROCESS) 2023 guidelines

Data availability
The data used to support the findings of this study are included within the article. Also, they are available from the corresponding author upon request.