Tethered cord syndrome (TCS) and constipation in children: a multifaceted approach (literature review)
Tethered cord syndrome (TCS) is estimated to affect approximately 25 per 100 000 live births. Despite advancements in medical knowledge and technology, the persistence of this issue is attributed to challenges in early detection and limited awareness, often resulting in undiagnosed cases until adulthood. Constipation serves as a noteworthy symptom in children with TCS, yet it frequently goes unnoticed or is ascribed to other causes, leading to delayed diagnosis and negatively impacting a child’s quality of life. The aim of this manuscript is to explore the relationship between TCS and constipation in children, focusing on the prevalence, clinical manifestations, diagnostic challenges, and existing treatment methods by synthesizing information from relevant literature. Ultimately, the goal is to shed light on the multifaceted aspects of TCS and its connection to constipation, emphasizing the need for a comprehensive, multidisciplinary approach to effectively manage this condition in children. Notably, nerve dysfunction that affects bowel motions is often the cause of constipation in children with TCS. A multimodal strategy that includes pharmaceutical treatments, dietary changes, and novel techniques, like neuromodulation and biofeedback therapy, is required for effective management. Given its safety and tolerance in children, key findings emphasize the effectiveness of osmotic laxatives, especially polyethylene glycol (PEG), as a first-line treatment for chronic constipation. Physical therapies, such as pelvic floor physiotherapy and biofeedback, show promise in enhancing rectal sensation and bowel coordination. Bowel function is typically improved with neurosurgical intervention to reduce spinal cord tethering, although there are risks, including re-tethering. Minimally invasive surgical techniques are promising, but more research is needed. Social and intellectual developments are negatively impacted by psychological effects, which are common and include anxiety and depression associated with chronic gastrointestinal problems. In conclusion, addressing constipation in children with TCS necessitates a multimodal strategy and collaborative efforts across different disciplines for optimal management.

Introduction

HIGHLIGHTS
Investigating tethered cord syndrome (TCS) among children with constipation is high yield as 25 per 100 000 live births has been challenged by it.
Constipation as a presenting complaint was found in 58% of patients with TCS.
Although medical and surgical modalities fostered better outcomes, endoscopic approaches may have a potential area for future goals.
Management of TCS is not possible solely through health professionals; the active participation of family and community is also necessary.
Physical therapy and psychological intervention are often neglected in TCS management emphasizing an equivocal execution.
The causes of primary and secondary tethered cord syndrome – created using biorender.com & Flaticon.com.
Tethered cord syndrome (TCS) is a functional abnormality of the spinal cord caused by the fixation of its caudal extremity due to non-elastic structures. Typically originating during infancy or childhood, it often accompanies spinal dysraphism or congenital deformities affecting the spinal cord. The incidence of TCS is estimated at 1 in 4000 births and is more common among females. TCS can be due to a primary cause or a secondary cause (Fig. 1). Primary TCS refers to the abnormal fixation of the spinal cord to the spinal column, which can be caused by congenital anomalies or other physiological or anatomical conditions. In instances of secondary TCS, there is a disruption in the typical anatomy of the caudal spinal cord due to factors, such as infections, fibrosis, or tumors.
During intrauterine growth, the spinal column develops disproportionately faster than the spinal cord. By weeks 6–7 of gestation, the conus medullaris undergoes a cephalad shift towards a higher lumbar level, and its relocation, usually at or above the L1/L2 interspace, can be observed through ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging. The filum terminale, an elastic band stabilizing the conus medullaris, allows for its free movement during spinal flexion/extension and skeletal growth. When the filum terminale is compromised, tension increases on the conus medullaris, hindering its normal ascent and resulting in secondary cord tethering.
The etiology of cord tethering is complex, influenced by genetic and environmental factors. Risk factors include scar tissue anchoring the spinal cord in individuals with myelomeningocele, potentially causing cord retethering. Tethered spinal cord and other anomalies are estimated to occur in 20% of individuals with scoliosis.
Some useful diagnostic tools for diagnosing constipation in tethered cord syndrome (TCS) patients (Note: There are no standardized latest criteria or guidelines for the diagnosis of constipation in TCS patients)
Diagnostic category	Criteria/description	Details/significance in TCS	References	 	Rome IV Criteria for Constipation	Straining during ≥25% of defecationsHard stools in ≥25% of defecationsSensation of incomplete evacuation in ≥25% of defecationsSensation of anorectal blockage in ≥25% of defecationsManual maneuvers in ≥25% of defecationsFewer than 3 bowel movements per week	Standard criteria used in diagnosing constipation in general populations. Relevant to TCS for initial assessment, though the cause is neurogenic in TCS cases.	Aziz et al, 2020	 	Neurogenic Bowel Dysfunction (NBD)	Impaired bowel motility or coordination between nerves and musclesDelayed colonic transitWeakened pelvic floor muscles	TCS often leads to NBD due to spinal cord tethering affecting the nerves that control bowel function.	Borgstedt-Bakke et al, 2020	 	Associated Neurological Findings	Lower limb weakness, sensory changesBladder dysfunction – e.g., urinary retention or incontinenceScoliosis or other spinal abnormalities	Neurological findings are crucial in diagnosing TCS-related constipation. TCS often affects the lumbosacral region, leading to bowel and bladder dysfunctions.	Borgstedt-Bakke et al, 2020	 	Radiological Imaging (MRI)	Tethered spinal cordLow-lying conus medullarisOther spinal anomalies (lipomas, fatty filum)	MRI is essential to confirm spinal cord tethering and associated bowel dysfunction due to compression/stretching of nerves.	Otto et al, 2023	 	Symptom Onset and Progression	Gradual worsening of symptoms, especially in childhood or adolescenceBowel and bladder dysfunction worsens over time with growth (increasing spinal tension)	In TCS, constipation typically worsens over time, especially during growth spurts, exacerbating tethering.	Pang et al, 1982	 	Gastrointestinal Transit Studies	Delayed colonic transit time due to impaired nerve signalsSlow movement of bowel contents	These studies help assess the degree of neurogenic bowel dysfunction in TCS patients.	Lew et al, 2007	 	Surgical Response	Improvement in bowel function post-surgical untethering of the spinal cord	Significant improvement in constipation symptoms post-surgery further supports the neurogenic cause linked to TCS.	Liu et al, 2023	 	Bowel Diaries	Track frequency, consistency, and effort of bowel movements using tools like the Bristol Stool Chart	Helps in the practical assessment of bowel function over time. Useful for documenting improvements or deterioration in TCS patients.	Hara et al, 2024
Diagnosing TCS is challenging, especially in pediatric patients (Table 1). The proposed radiological diagnostic criteria for cases presenting with symptoms of TCS include the identification of a filum terminale with a diameter exceeding 2 mm and/or a conus medullaris positioned below the level of L1–2. However, the existing literature reports several cases where patients exhibit clinical symptoms of TCS despite not meeting the specified criteria for filum terminale thickness and conus medullaris level.
TCS is categorized into three groups based on symptom classification: Category 1 includes symptoms that are reversible; Category 2 comprises symptoms that are partially reversible or irreversible; and Category 3 consists of asymptomatic individuals. Symptoms may manifest during growth spurts or from abrupt mechanical stretching of the fixed spinal cord at any age. Common presentations involve cutaneous, musculoskeletal, or vertebral abnormalities identified during routine childhood examinations. Moreover, certain children with spinal dysraphism exhibit notable neurological impairment from birth. Dysregulated innervation affecting bladder and sphincters can lead to neurogenic functional changes, resulting in urinary and bowel symptoms. Identifying such alterations is challenging, particularly in young children not yet achieving continence or cooperating with assessments. In individuals with myelomeningocele, the sluggish rate of clinical deterioration typically contributes to the delayed identification of TCS. It is also challenging to identify small neurological changes because of the pre-existing neurological abnormalities. Early detection will result from thorough neurological, orthopedic, and urological (urodynamic investigations) examinations, as well as increased awareness of the potential for tethered cord. In addition to exacerbating neurological and musculoskeletal symptoms, a delayed diagnosis of TCS has a substantial negative impact on quality of life and can lead to developmental delays, psychological suffering, and social disengagement in children. Furthermore, because untreated TCS necessitates complicated procedures and the management of advanced symptoms, it eventually raises healthcare expenses. It is necessary to evaluate some high-risk patients prospectively for TCS. Nogueira et al suggested that all individuals with VACTERL syndrome (Vertebral abnormality, Anal imperforation, Cardiac deformity, Tracheoesophageal fistula, Renal abnormalities, and Limb deformities) be screened for TCS prospectively. According to Mitsuka et al, a sibling or twin of an affected individual should have an investigation done as soon as possible if they exhibit symptoms consistent with spinal dysraphism. Routine urological and neurological examinations in at-risk groups may increase the effectiveness of detection efforts.
Constipation can be defined as a decrease in frequency of stools or difficulty and pain in passing hard stools. The duration needed for diagnosis of constipation is a minimum period of symptoms lasting for 2 weeks. Constipation is a common concern in pediatric health, affecting 5% of school-aged children and leading to around 2.5 million annual visits to physicians. Constipation can be broadly classified into functional, chronic idiopathic, and secondary/pathological types. Functional constipation is by far the most common type seen in children, with an estimated prevalence of nearly 30% in the world. Chronic idiopathic constipation is the rarest subtype where no cause can be identified. Secondary/pathological constipation can be due to structural causes, drugs, or other comorbid diseases, such as TCS. A retrospective review of patient charts performed by Metcalfe et al at a single institute showed that constipation and fecal incontinence were the presenting feature of occult TCS in 58% of the patients.
Ideally, bowel control occurs first in toddlers, followed by bladder control. If bladder control is attained by the child without bowel control, it warrants further investigation. In children who are not toilet-trained, the diagnosis of TCS may be challenging because bowel-bladder dysfunction is very commonly seen in this population. As a result, TCS in children is often missed until adulthood. Research by Nanigian et al highlighted the substantial impact of fecal incontinence and constipation on the quality of life within family cohorts, as objectively assessed through the Fecal Incontinence and Constipation Quality of Life (FIC QOL) instrument To effectively manage TCS, a multidisciplinary strategy combining the expertise of neurologists, urologists, gastroenterologists, physical therapists, and psychologists is necessary. Such collaborative care ensures comprehensive therapy, which attends to the affected children’s emotional and developmental needs in addition to their medical problems.
Overview of multimodal approaches to treat constipation in children with tethered cord syndrome (TCS) – Created with biorender.com & Flaticon.com.
The aim of this narrative review is to investigate the specific relationship between TCS and constipation in pediatric patients. This review will explore the prevalence and clinical manifestations of constipation in individuals with TCS, examining its impact on their quality of life. Furthermore, the paper aims to elucidate the challenges associated with diagnosing constipation in the context of TCS and to evaluate the existing treatment modalities (Fig. 2) for managing constipation in individuals affected by TCS. By consolidating current knowledge on this specific aspect of TCS, the goal is to provide valuable insights for clinicians, researchers, and healthcare providers, ultimately contributing to improved understanding, diagnosis, and management of constipation in pediatric patients with TCS.

Method
A comprehensive literature search was conducted across PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Embase to identify studies relevant to TCS presenting as constipation. The search utilized predefined key terms, such as “tethered cord syndrome,” “constipation,” “spinal dysraphism,” and “bowel dysfunction,” with Boolean operators – AND/OR – to combine and refine results. Studies were included if they were published in English, involved human subjects, and addressed the link between TCS and constipation. Eligible sources included original research articles, case reports, and reviews, while non-English publications, animal studies, and abstracts without accessible full texts were excluded. Titles and abstracts of all retrieved articles were screened independently by two reviewers, followed by a full-text review for eligibility. Any discrepancies were resolved through discussion and consensus. This literature review synthesizes findings on the management approaches for constipation in TCS, highlighting significant findings and identifying research gaps.

Medical Interventions

Surgical considerations and outcomes in TCS
Children diagnosed with TCS typically undergo surgery shortly after birth. However, limited experience exists, especially with asymptomatic infants presenting with tethered cord conditions. Various studies indicate that untreated TCS heightens the risk of neurological deficits, with surgical intervention being considered for individuals prone to developing neurological impairments. Electrophysiological data reveal a significant reduction in TCS issues following surgery, especially when performed at an early age, preventing irreversible neurological abnormalities in affected children.
Current estimates suggest that up to 50% of patients may benefit from surgical intervention. The outcome of TCS surgical treatment varies depending on the extent of spinal cord damage due to structural abnormalities. Yamada categorized TCS into “true” TCS, associated with filum terminale abnormalities and caudal myelodysplasias, and “partial” TCS, linked to lumbar myelomeningocele and other conditions. The decision for surgical treatment is based on this distinction. However, in some cases, surgical intervention may exacerbate TCS symptoms instead of improving them.
Recent studies suggest surgery is suitable for cases of occult TCS, where the conus position is typical, and even for asymptomatic patients with an evidence of MRI of a tethered cord. Regardless of the situation, a personalized strategy and evaluation of various prognostic factors are essential. Surgical prognosis depends on irreversible structural alterations in the spinal cord at the tethering site and in more cranial segments.
A study by Geyik et al reported surgical outcomes in 162 pediatric TCS patients, with the majority being female. Of these patients, 73.4% had secondary TCS. Hypertrichosis was the most common physical finding in children with secondary TCS, while split cord malformation was the most prevalent accompanying deformity. Improvements in neurological and urological conditions were observed in 17.2% and 11.5% of patients post-surgery, respectively.
While heading the era of innovative technical modalities for approaching desirable outcomes with minimal invasiveness, implications of accessing untethered cords via endoscopic translaminar or interlaminar approach fostered flourishing feedback over the open surgical approach. Fluoroscopic-guided smaller skin incisions (2 cm) followed by an exploration of the surgical corridor with X-tub (Medtronic, Inc., Memphis, TN) has been implied currently during detethering the cord, yielding an impact in reverting the deceased functional axis – i.e., bowel tone – via electromyographic (EMG) monitoring. Surprisingly, a 1 cm skin incision recently reported satisfactory outcomes with successful cord untethering. In addition to a shorter postoperative hospital stay and minimal blood loss reduced CSF leakage. Onder et al also experienced negligible re-tethering episodes endoscopically compared to open one carrying significant post-operative scarring secondary to gross tissue damage with ultimate exacerbations on bowel symptoms. Following the electromyographic evaluation of the anal sphincter during the endoscopic release of tethered cord postulated its pronounced influence over open surgery to avoid the range of complications as observed by Tredway et al . Post-operative scarring and muscular atrophy in an open approach may be avoided in endoscopic tools, a possible reason behind marked facilitation in bowel function implying it in young children suffering from TCS as revealed in a study. For instance, complications, such as CSF accumulation, compressive hematoma, muscular trauma, persistent inflammation, and fibrosis, in open procedures may present with progression in presenting bowel symptoms requiring attention towards techniques with the least invasiveness.

Post surgical persistence of constipation
In pediatric patients with TCS, bowel dysfunction, including constipation and soiling, is a significant concern both pre- and postoperatively. While surgical release of the tethered cord can improve many symptoms, including neurological deficits and bladder dysfunction, bowel dysfunction often persists even after surgery.
While studies on tethered cord syndrome have shown significant improvement in various symptoms, including back pain, motor weakness, and urological dysfunction, the outcomes for bowel dysfunction, particularly in pediatric patients, are less consistently reported. Solmaz et al reported urological improvement in 20% of 49 children but did not provide specific data on bowel dysfunction. Bowman et al found improvement in lower extremity function in 70% of children with myelomeningocele but did not report specific data on bowel dysfunction. Kearns et al reported a 44% improvement in urodynamic studies in 34 children after tethered cord repair, but did not provide specific data on bowel function.
Overall, while surgical correction of TCS can offer significant improvements, persistent bowel dysfunction remains a challenging issue in the pediatric population. Further research into the mechanisms underlying this persistence and more effective postoperative interventions is needed to enhance patient outcomes.

Medication strategies for constipation in TCS children
In TCS, constipation serves as an indication of nerve dysfunction impacting bowel movements. Managing constipation in these individuals often necessitates a comprehensive, multimodal approach. The treatment of intestinal dysfunction may involve the use of various medications, with careful consideration given to the selection and dosage based on the specific circumstances of each patient. The primary objectives of constipation management involve promoting the passage of soft, painless stools and preventing the reaccumulation of waste. This is achieved through a combination of educational efforts, daily maintenance routines, use of stool softeners, behavioral adjustments, and dietary modifications. In some cases, initiating treatment may require the initial step of fecal disimpaction.

Osmotic laxatives
Osmotic laxatives, such as lactulose and polyethylene glycol, are preferred over stimulant laxatives, such as senna and bisacodyl, for the following reasons: (a) osmotic laxatives are well tolerated for extended periods of time; (b) many stimulant laxatives are not licensed for use in young children; and (c) behavioral modification and long-term treatment success are not achievable with dependence on stimulant laxatives.
Polyethylene glycol: Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is the preferred laxative for both maintenance and disimpaction treatments. Adverse effects associated with PEG include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and abnormal electrolyte levels. Numerous studies have assessed the efficacy of PEG and lactulose, revealing that PEG leads to a significantly higher number of defecation episodes. Over the past few years, the US Food and Drug Administration has received multiple reports of neuropsychiatric issues, such as tics, tremors, and obsessive–compulsive behavior, in children receiving PEG 3350. However, current knowledge relies solely on personal observations regarding any potential link between PEG and neuropsychiatric episodes.
Lactulose and Lactitol: The artificial disaccharides lactose, lactitol, and lactulose undergo fermentation by bacterial enzymes in the colon, leading to the production of low-molecular-weight acids. This process results in an osmotic effect, increasing intraluminal fluids. Additionally, the acids contribute to a reduction in fecal pH, promoting colonic peristalsis. Lactulose is considered a safe option for individuals of all ages and has stronger evidence supporting its effectiveness compared to mineral oil and magnesium hydroxide. Therefore, it is recommended for maintenance treatment when PEG is not readily available.
Clinical evaluation with evidence-based data regarding efficacy and safety profile between these two groups may guide clinicians in achieving respective goals in TCS. An in-depth, comparative analysis of effectiveness with either modality validated far greater improvements in stool frequency, softening, and ease of stool passage in PEG than the lactulose. Furthermore, safety charts with lactulose were determined to be non-satisfactory compared to PEG as higher frequency of bloating, abdominal pain, painful defecations, voluminous stools, and larger fecal mass were reported with lactulose. To summarize, PEG in pediatric constipation approached valuable safety and efficacy goals than lactulose which may have better outcomes in alleviating constipation in TCS.
Magnesium hydroxide: A study comparing PEG with magnesium hydroxide demonstrated a statistically significant increase in defecation frequency with PEG. Conversely, a recent study found no discernible differences in adverse events and treatment success between the two laxatives. Common side effects of magnesium hydroxide include bloating, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Due to the elevated risk of hypermagnesemia in children with renal failure, the administration of magnesium hydroxide should be approached cautiously.

Stimulant laxatives
By activating the enteric neural system, stimulant laxatives improve intestinal peristalsis and secretion. Anthraquinones – like senna – and diphenyl methanes – like bisacodyl and sodium picosulfate – are two categories into which stimulant laxatives can be separated. Despite the paucity of well-conducted trials in children, these medications are frequently administered as adjunctive care and are seen as safe and effective. Although stomach pain is a typical side effect, stimulant laxatives are often well tolerated.
Diphenyl methanes: Sodium picosulfate and bisacodyl are examples of diphenyl methanes. Colonic bacteria or brush border enzymes hydrolyze diphenyl methanes into their active metabolites, which stimulate colonic secretion and peristalsis. The stimulating impact of bisacodyl on children’s colonic peristalsis was confirmed by a recent investigation including 165 children with treatment-refractory constipation, which indicated that 93% of the children experienced high-amplitude propagating contractions after intraluminal administration of bisacodyl. The only way to deliver sodium picosulfate is orally, and it affects intestinal peristalsis in a manner similar to that of oral bisacodyl. Abdominal pain, nausea, and diarrhea are common side effects of sodium picosulfate and bisacodyl.
Anthraquinones: Various anthraquinones present in senna undergo breakdown by gut bacteria into pharmacologically active metabolites. Numerous studies have reported severe perineal dermatitis and blister formation on the feet as adverse effects of senna in children with constipation. Additionally, an evaluation of 796 children with functional constipation or constipation due to different organic disorders retrospectively examined the negative effects of senna. Blisters and rash were documented in 2.2% of this population, with larger doses of senna and diaper-wearing children being associated with this outcome. Caution should also be taken when using senna, as it may lead to melanosis coli.
As far as the long-term effects of stimulant laxatives are concerned, except for the dose-dependent events of abdominal pain and diarrhea, a safe role has emerged recently, which ruled out the relative false perceptions. For instance, the dependency concept with bisacodyl was unveiled by exploring its poor gut mucosal and blood–brain barrier penetrance. Similarly, recent concepts of gut damage with it were not well studied since that may diversify its implications. Colon cancer based on chronic use of anthanoids has been subsided with the recent studies denying the fear regarding its long-term role in cancer onset. The blister evolution with senna was acknowledged with its night use or abusive doses rather than long-term use. The concepts of senna-related tolerance were not found in recent large data-based studies establishing an older innovation with furnished concepts.

Lubricants
Lubricants exert their laxative effect by lubricating or softening feces. Mineral oil is a commonly used lubricant that remains unmetabolized by the colon or small intestine. Comparative studies between PEG and mineral oil indicated no observable difference in the increased frequency of defecation after a month of treatment. However, the research quality was deemed extremely low due to insufficient data and a high risk of bias. Another study suggested that, in comparison to senna, mineral oil resulted in reduced fecal incontinence and an increased frequency of bowel movements. Over time, several instances of severe adverse effects associated with mineral oil, such as digestive tract granulomas and lipoid pneumonia, have been documented.

Enemas
Enemas are liquid solutions administered intrarectally, containing substances that can stimulate the release of intestinal fluid or enhance gut motility. Some enemas employ a combination of these mechanisms and may include multiple substances. Adverse effects reported include anal soreness and stomach pain. In a study examining the correlation between enema solutions – such as sodium phosphate, pink lady, or soap suds – and stool production – categorized as small, medium, or large– no statistically significant associations were found. Additionally, all enemas were linked to a low incidence of side effects, primarily mild, including vomiting and abdominal pain. However, its use for chronic constipation in infants and young children must not maintained for a longer time as it may lead to fatal complications. Aside from rectal epithelial injury followed by strictures development, enema-induced water and electrolyte imbalance may cause QT interval prolongation, acute renal failure, intravascular hemolysis, and certain neurological disturbances.
Antegrade continence enemas (ACE) are an effective option for children with functional or organic constipation refractory to conventional treatments. The procedure involves introducing irrigation fluid, such as tap water or saline, sometimes combined with stimulant laxatives, into the colon via a surgically created access point. This is achieved through a Malone appendicostomy, where the appendix is connected to the abdominal wall, or a cecostomy, and a tube is placed in the cecum. Techniques vary, including open, laparoscopic, and minimally invasive percutaneous approaches using image-guidance or endoscopy. While clinical efficacy is comparable between methods, complication rates differ.
A substantial number of patients with neurogenic bowel dysfunction, such as those with spina bifida, may require surgical interventions like the ACE procedure. ACE promotes effective and more natural bowel emptying by flushing from the proximal colon, addressing limitations of rectal enemas, which often fail to fully empty the colon. This technique is particularly beneficial for patients who cannot tolerate rectal enemas or seek greater independence.
Adolescents frequently utilize ACE, which offers significantly higher autonomy and satisfaction compared to methods like transanal irrigation. For individuals with concurrent bladder and bowel dysfunction, surgical options may include both ACE and urinary diversions, such as Mitrofanoff or Monti channels. In these cases, careful consideration is needed to allocate anatomical resources, like the appendix, based on clinical priorities. Transanal irrigation remains a viable alternative when preservation of the appendix is necessary for other procedures.

Neurosurgical intervention for constipation in TCS children
The primary goal of the untethering (tethered cord release) surgery is to lift the tethered to decrease the stretching of the taper tension, which in turn controls the progression of symptoms and reduces additional damage to nerve function. Constipation can be alleviated, and overall bowel function can be enhanced with surgical treatment that releases tension from the spinal cord. A study has shown that surgical untethering improves bowel and bladder symptoms in a pediatric patient. It is also important to consider the potential risks associated with untethering surgery, particularly the risk of tethering due to fibrous adhesions induced by the surgical procedure. Although minimally invasive endoscopic spinal cord untethering has demonstrated encouraging outcomes in adult patients, leading to reduced scarring, further research is necessary to evaluate its feasibility and potential as an alternative to traditional untethering surgery in the pediatric population.

Physical therapy
The application of physical therapies for addressing constipation in individuals with TCS lacks comprehensive documentation and established practices, given that the primary approach to managing TCS typically involves surgical interventions. Nevertheless, there are notable considerations regarding the incorporation of physical therapy for TCS patients.
It has been noted that individuals with milder presentations of TCS may not exhibit symptoms in childhood. However, neurological complications may arise later in life due to repetitive spine movements like flexion, extension, or trauma, potentially worsening the symptoms. Therefore, it is imperative to educate patients on maintaining appropriate posture, gait, and functional movements during both every day and recreational activities. This knowledge is crucial for reducing the gradual tension exerted on the spinal cord.
The following physical interventions have been outlined for the treatment of constipation.

Pelvic floor physiotherapy
Pelvic floor exercises are designed to regulate the contractions of pelvic muscles in coordination with abdominal and recto-anal muscles. These exercises encompass various elements, including balance training to maintain effective toilet posture, emphasis on abdominal breathing and synchronized straining, sensory training to enhance perception – such as recognizing the sensation of rectal fullness to initiate evacuation– and appropriate muscle relaxation techniques. Pelvic floor physiotherapy (PPT) involves the implementation of motor relearning programs that emphasize intentional and repetitive practice to achieve a remedy. A study demonstrated that children assigned to the group receiving both physiotherapy and laxatives reported a higher frequency of defecation compared to those who received only laxatives. Another study comparing PPT and standard medical care in functional constipation reported greater efficacy of PPT compared to standard medical care alone.

Biofeedback therapy
Biofeedback training (BFT) operates on the principle of operant conditioning, asserting that reinforced behaviors are more likely to be repeated and refined over time, whether they are complex or simple. BFT, as an instrument-based modality, employs visual, verbal, and auditory feedback to help individuals understand and correct pathological patterns. The therapy’s benefits for constipation can be outlined in two key aspects:
BFT aims to address dyscoordination in the functioning of abdominal, rectal, and anal sphincter muscles, facilitating standardized and thorough evacuation. The therapy also seeks to improve the sensing ability of the rectum in individuals with compromised rectal sensation.
During the procedure, individuals assume the correct posture and are guided to initiate diaphragmatic breathing and simultaneous straining efforts. They monitor their intrarectal pressure on a screen, receiving visual feedback, while healthcare professionals provide auditory feedback. Subsequently, sensory conditioning of the rectum occurs to elevate the threshold for defecatory sensations. This involves periodic inflations of a rectal balloon, with participants trained to perceive the sensation of rectal fullness at progressively lower volumes.
One study highlighted the effectiveness of BFT as a treatment option for constipation attributed to pelvic floor dysfunction. Another clinical trial indicated that BFT is effective for short-term management of chronic constipation, although no evidence of long-term benefit was reported. In a systematic review comparing the use of BFT in adults and children with chronic constipation, benefits were noted in adults, but there was insufficient evidence to support its use in the pediatric population.

Neuromodulation
Neuromodulation, a recently growing area of interest, involves the electrical stimulation of nerves to regulate their function. It encompasses both invasive and non-invasive options, such as implantable or transcutaneous sacral nerve stimulators, percutaneous or transcutaneous posterior tibial nerve stimulators, and interferential therapy.
Sacral nerve stimulation involves the application of a low-amplitude current to the sacral nerve through the sacral foramen, aiding in defecation and incontinence control. A prospective analysis of long-term outcomes in 25 patients with chronic constipation and incontinence (including two cases due to tethered cord) revealed a reduction in the use of enemas or laxatives. Another study demonstrated improvements in bowel and bladder function with sacral nerve stimulation. Additionally, a prospective study examining the effects of sacral nerve stimulation in 30 children and adolescents with refractory constipation reported an increase in the frequency of defecation, which gradually improved with each follow-up.
Interferential nerve stimulation is a non-invasive method involving the stimulation of the abdominal wall or pelvic floor, and it can be performed by physiotherapists or at home. In a randomized controlled study, the effectiveness of interferential electrical stimulation plus pelvic floor muscle exercises was compared with pelvic floor muscle exercises plus sham stimulation. Treatment outcomes were significantly improved for the population in the case group compared to the population in the control group.
The utilization of PTT, BFT, and nerve stimulation, which have proven effective in functional constipation, can be justified for non-functional neurogenic constipation, such as constipation in TCS. These interventions target neuromuscular dysfunction, enhance nerve–muscle communication, address sensory deficits, promote bowel regularity, and reduce reliance on laxatives. Their success in improving symptoms in related conditions suggests their potential applicability in the context of non-functional neurogenic constipation. However, further research, including prospective studies and clinical trials, is needed to establish their efficacy and suitability for this specific condition.

Nutritional approaches

Increased dietary fiber intake
To manage constipation, dietary changes, especially fiber intake, are essential. Fiber promotes regularity in the intestine by increasing the weight of the stool, improving transit time and the overall health of the intestine. The recommendations for fiber vary depending on age and gender. The American Heart Association recommends 19 g of fiber for children <4 years old and 25 g of fiber for children 4–8 years old. There are 2 types of fiber: soluble and insoluble. Soluble fibers are found in oats, barley, and legumes, while insoluble fibers are found in whole grains, nuts, and vegetables. In the intestine, soluble fiber helps retain water, thus allowing the stool to move faster. Soluble fiber allows the stool to expand and move out of the colon during this period. Insoluble fibers draw water into the intestine and increase the time for the passage of feces through the intestine. A study showed that increasing intake of fibers to 17 g/day (stage 1) in children reduced constipation and significantly reduced the use of laxatives. The increase in fiber intake to 21 g/day (stage 2) further reduced the use of laxatives in children with constipation.

Fiber supplements
Although fiber supplements are useful in some cases, they should be used with caution in the treatment of constipation in children. The importance of a balanced and fiber-rich diet, which adapts to age-specific recommendations, remains the basis for effective and long-term treatment of constipation in children. It is important to monitor and use personalized techniques to address children’s gastrointestinal problems regularly to ensure their well-being.

Hydration
Hydration is extremely important in the treatment of constipation. To soften the stools, it is generally necessary to drink sufficient water. Insufficient hydration causes a stiff, dry stool and worsens discomfort. In this hydration process, sodium and potassium levels should be monitored. The balance of electrolytes is particularly important for influencing the health of the intestine. The complete therapy of constipation in TCS includes both water consumption and electrolyte balance. The use of fruits, such as bananas, for potassium or electrolyte supplements, as well as adequate intake of fluids, improved effective management of constipation.

Coffee consumption
Study in children has indicated that consumption of caffeinated coffee can lead to increased gut motility, suggesting a potential role in alleviating constipation. A possible mechanism is augmentation of gut motility through the inhibition of acetylcholinesterase by caffeine, thereby enhancing acetylcholine activity.While the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) discourages caffeine consumption in children, a study indicates that moderate caffeine intake typical for children and adolescents is generally considered safe. However, it suggests that higher doses exceeding 400 mg of caffeine could potentially pose risks to their health.

Probiotics
A clinical trial evaluating the efficacy of supplementing children with lactulose and Lactobacillus GG did not demonstrate any additional advantages for treating constipation compared to treatment with lactulose alone. Another study comparing the effectiveness of probiotics containing Lactobacillus casei ramnosus to a placebo revealed no notable distinction in constipation outcomes. Substantial additional clinical trials are needed before endorsing probiotics as a standard remedy for constipation.

Nutritional counseling
Educating parents and patients about nutrition is crucial to dispelling any misinformation. Continuous nutritional counseling, with ongoing monitoring, is essential. The focus of nutritional guidance should be on promoting fiber intake, offering a recommended meal list, and stressing the significance of maintaining proper hydration. This approach proves beneficial in addressing constipation and improving overall outcomes. Tailored nutritional support is necessary for patients with TCS post-surgery to meet their specific needs and prevent deficiencies. Therefore, nutritional counseling encompasses providing information on sufficient fiber intake, hydration, and nutritional supplements, coupled with continuous support and education.

Psychological considerations
Even though approximately 30% of children experience bowel dysfunction, innovative research on neurogenic bowel dysfunction (NBD) has stagnated in recent years. NBD is secondary to neural tube defects – spina bifida or tethered cord injury – and manifests clinically as either constipation, incontinence, or both. Constipation was documented as a major complaint in 74% of children with neural tube defects in a study by Chong. The overstimulation of the external anal sphincter with loss of rectal sensation and normal colonic compliance is strongly suggestive of constipation in NBD.
A variety of adverse psychosocial implications secondary to chronic constipation have been identified in pediatric groups. Emotional vulnerability, behavioral under-development, family burnout, academic output, and fragile social immunity were highlighted as issues of central importance interrupting the achievement of necessary mental milestones among children with TCS. Timely identification of such hazards along with stepwise resolution may improve mental health and avoid its chronic impact on physical health.

Emotional stress

Anxiety
Painful defecation due to impacted stool or anal fissure secondary to chronic constipation elicits withholding habits in children to overcome pain-related fear. Withholding lowers rectal motility and further intensifies fecal matter mass, ultimately leading to incontinence. In one study, fecal incontinence was found in 84% of children with chronic constipation as the chief complaint. Thus, a vicious cycle of pain, fear, and constipation with or without incontinence may arise in the constipated child. Repeated episodes of such events may contribute to the establishment of emotional distress in the form of anxiety among young people. One study showed that children with constipation were significantly more likely to be diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorders (GAD) or obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD). Another study revealed that approximately 35% of children with chronic constipation experience anxiety as a result of the constipation.
Constipation may trigger a situational crisis and emotional instability in children. For instance, considering defecation a shameful act in constipated children may unveil emotional strain in the form of anger and aggression. Additionally, negative social interactions resulting from chronic constipation and incontinence, such as a blaming parental attitude, denial of social assistance, dependence, inability to participate in recreational activities, or separation from friends, further poses irreversible psychological strain and intensifies fear and anxiety. Two recent studies found that children with chronic constipation were more likely to experience emotional symptoms such as emotional liability. Similarly, one study found that chronic constipation was psychologically draining for children, resulting in an increased diagnosis of GAD (3.4%), phobias (4.3%), and separation anxiety (4.3%).

Depression & hopelessness
Depression was identified in approximately 14% of young children with persistent constipation as evidenced by psychological evaluation. Chan et al hypothesized that failed coping capability toward chronic constipation creates stress, which may be externalized as aggression or internalized as depression and anxiety. Depression is documented more often in patients with chronic constipation and fecal incontinence. Persistent incontinence-related stress may provoke withdrawal from social participation, which may trigger depressive symptoms.
Prolonged dependence on parents or other adults due to altered bowel habits traumatizes the growing mind, which may lead to low self-esteem, isolation, an inferiority complex, loss of hope, or depression. Children with fecal incontinence may feel unable to participate in school, recreational activities, games, and other social encounters due to their incontinence, which may lead to hopelessness.

Behavioral manifestations in children
Behavioral problems are common in constipated children, with one study estimating that 27% exhibit externalizing behaviors – i.e., aggression, reactive, and/or agitated – and 36% internalizing behaviors – i.e., prohibited, shameful, or dormant.

Obsessive behaviors
Obsessive behavior may manifest in children with constipation as a result of avoiding painful defecation and adopting a retentive attitude, which can further exacerbate constipation. Prominent obsessions in children with constipation include having a baggy rectal vault, frequent fecal incontinence, recurrent abdominal pain, and large-volume stools.

Social isolation and self-esteem
Children progress through various stages of maturation, including cognitive, social, and psychological, with the establishment of complex emotional attachments and strong beliefs or conceptualization. Stress about neurological defects with chronic constipation can delay the maturation process. Children may adopt self-isolation or social withdrawal strategies as a maladaptive response to chronic constipation.
To the best of our knowledge, few data statistically speaking about the prevalence of psychological manifestations in TCS. Recent clinical experience shared the existence of emotional problems – i.e., anxiety, depression –, behavioral issues, and peer relationship outcomes among children of TCS in proportions of 46.5%, 23.3%, and 44.2%, respectively. Similar results were presented during the pre-operative period of TCS, where 53.0% and 40.9% of children suffered from emotional disturbances, including anxiety, depression, and social withdrawal. However, a large data-based study evaluating the prevalence of anxiety, depression, and social breakage is still lacking and must be comprehended as a future research goal.

Family dynamics

Parental stress
To cope with chronic constipation in children, parents may engage in various activities that may disrupt familial life both physically and psychologically. For instance, giving more time for multiple toileting, providing regular doses of laxatives, or multiple anal interventions during infant years may affect parenting for other siblings. Moreover, dealing with such issues imposes an economic burden on the patient’s family, which could be a risk factor for psychological disorders in other family members.

Family support
Parents take care of the physical and mental health of their children with chronic constipation by facilitating recreational activities and addressing igniting factors of their stress. Parents also play a fundamental role in following medical advice from healthcare professionals, psychiatrists, and psychologists for the mental well-being of their children.

Educational and social implications
Apart from the impact of chronic constipation on the psychology of children, it also affects educational careers and causes social distractions which must be mitigated.

Academic performance
A lack of adaptability and coping skills to deal with chronic constipation hinders academic activities. Educational performance is often difficult to optimize for children with constipation due to persistent pain, fecal incontinence, cleanliness issues, lack of concentration, and risk of recurrent infections. A worsening educational situation may arise in the form of hopelessness due to wastage of time in managing constipation-related issues among older children, especially among those who have experienced recurrent failed treatment modalities. Multiple hospital admissions and absences from school for medical appointments may also cause poor grades.

Peer relationships
An interview-based study found that constipation and incontinence caused children to have negative social experiences and ultimately withdraw from peer relationships. Fecal leakage, disgusting odors, required incontinence aids, or more needing resting time during school settings were recognized as hindering factors for peer relationships. Issues of leakage due to fecal incontinence caused dissociation from peer relationships with a hopelessness to rebuild social connections. Excluding such children from sports teams and other recreational games at the school level further weakens social strength.

Coping strategies and interventions
The inherent psychological aspects associated with TCS-induced constipation underscore the need for a cooperative effort involving the patient, their family, and healthcare provider to ensure the preservation of a high quality of life.

Role of health care personnel
Healthcare providers can expedite the resolution of psychological issues by addressing bowel concerns through supportive care and employing advanced therapies to minimize pain, which are key triggers for psychosocial stress. Professionals in the healthcare sector need to formulate strategies to alleviate painful incidents during a person’s time in educational institutions, workplaces, or recreational settings. Furthermore, they should receive training in creating tools for assessing quality of life and developing programs for their implementation on a national and international scale. Maintaining regular contact with a psychologist can serve as a catalyst for cultivating a more positive life.
Assessment of family proficiency in managing the home environment for such children is crucial, necessitating the formulation of a comprehensive protocol to enhance family functionality. For children aged 3–5 years, psychiatrists and psychologists should guide families in fostering psychosocial behaviors by demonstrating affection, providing enjoyable learning opportunities, and fostering independence over time. As children progress to the 6–12 age group, healthcare professionals should educate them on handling negative social behaviors, nurturing positive peer relationships, and instilling optimism.
For children above 10 years, active participation in various community programs such as sports, camps, and scouts is encouraged to instill a sense of social norms. Offering executive functions as part of supervised internships and assessing positive outlook and skillful attitudes are essential components of this developmental process.

Community support
Demonstrating independence in addressing psychological concerns related to TCS-induced constipation can be achieved through engaging recreational activities, well-organized bowel programs, and involvement in societal activities, all with the active participation of the family. Creating an interactive community setting can contribute significantly to overcoming these challenges. It is imperative to strategically plan favorable and impactful educational experiences with a supportive approach to mitigate the overlooked psychological aspects of TCS-related constipation.
To enhance accessibility, public training and awareness initiatives should be implemented, utilizing multimedia, print media, and literature to disseminate positive encouragement and empower individuals in their battle against this condition.

Strategies for psychological interventions
Amongst available data various treatment options have been rationalized for psychological support among children facing challenges of physical ailments – i.e., constipation in TCS – but concrete guidelines towards such interventions are yet to be explored.

Cognitive behavioral intervention (CBI)
Implying CBI among such populations may improve disease-related anxiety and depression. As reflected in various studies defining its potential role in a marked reduction of experienced depressive symptoms, and maintenance of anxiety-free periods with a build-in momentum of control over physical symptoms. Various psychologists explored an effective way of preventing new-onset psychological issues where CBI was reinforced not only for the patients themselves but for the family as well.

Behavioral training/counseling sessions
Regular home visits, telephonic communications, sessions at physical health settings, face-to-face visits, and positive reinforcement at various intervals during the disease progression must be established at each level which may force patients and family members to face challenges without assuming stress.

Therapeutic motivational interventions
Inculcating solutions in writing for common challenges at home or during hospitalization may strengthen their thought process for stress management. Web-based or video-assisted programs performing coping strategies by children may enhance acceptance for better survival and reduce hopelessness vibes.

Wish intervention
The psychotherapist determined better efficacy of wish intervention in reducing anxiety /depression and marked improvement in self-esteem, quality of life, and self-care. This intervention intends to ask for wishes to be fulfilled with subsequent completion in a short period, which develops positivity, leading to fighting challenges with heightened courage and joy.

Establishing organizations
Development of organizations solely for identifying psychological issues and solving them among TCS patients via structured plans and guides. Such groups must be aimed at sustaining qualitative life by addressing each inciting factor behind stress existence among TCS patients, especially developmental, economic, educational, and family factors. The introduction of games through trained personnel for growing children and distraction strategies may influence self-structured coping maneuvers by the patients.

Conclusion
In summary, while functional constipation is a prevalent issue in children, the presence of constipation should prompt healthcare professionals to consider the possibility of TCS as a differential diagnosis. Early identification, followed by prompt intervention, holds the potential to enhance the quality of life for affected children. Beyond the physical symptoms imposed by constipation, there is a notable psychological impact on children, emphasizing the significance of timely diagnosis and intervention.
The treatment of constipation due to TCS in children involves a comprehensive approach, encompassing medical interventions, nutritional strategies, and physical therapy. Future research should focus on developing standardized diagnostic criteria for TCS that are specifically suitable for pediatric populations, as well as establishing better screening strategies for children who present with constipation. To identify the best methods for treating constipation in children with TCS, comparative studies are also required to assess the efficacy of several treatment modalities, including osmotic laxatives, physical treatments, and neurosurgical procedures. In addition to improving patient outcomes and lowering healthcare costs related to delayed diagnosis and treatment, these initiatives will aid in directing clinical practice.
Sponsorships or competing interests that may be relevant to content are disclosed at the end of this article.
Published online 27 February 2025

Ethical approval
Not applicable.

Consent
Not applicable.

Sources of funding
The authors received no financial support for this research and/or authorship of this article

Author’s contribution
A.H.: conceptualization, visualization, writing – review & editing, writing – original draft; M.I.: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis; D.B.S.: writing – original draft, methodology, writing – review & editing; N.L., P.K.S.: writing – original draft, methodology, investigation; S.H., Abdullah; D.K.: writing – original draft, writing – review & editing, supervision; A.A.: conceptualization, visualization, supervision, writing – review & editing, writing – original draft.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Research registration unique identifying number (UIN)
Not applicable.

Guarantor
Digbijay Kunwar.

Provenance and peer review
Not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed.

Data availability statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding author.

References
Pathophysiology of tethered cord syndrome: correlation with symptomatology
Prevalence of primary tethered cord syndrome associated with occult spinal dysraphism in primary school children in Turkey
Pediatric tethered cord release: an epidemiological and postoperative complication analysis
Spinal cord traction, vascular compromise, hypoxia, and metabolic derangements in the pathophysiology of tethered cord syndrome
MR imaging determination of the location of the normal conus medullaris throughout childhood
Sonographic determination of the position of the conus medullaris in premature and term infants
Tethered cord syndrome in children: a review
Tethered cord syndrome: a review of the literature from embryology to adult presentation
An approach to the diagnosis and management of Rome IV functional disorders of chronic constipation
The incidence and effect of tethered cord release for tethered cord syndrome in patients with myelomeningocele: a population-based study
Tethered cord syndrome: role of imaging findings in surgical decision-making
Tethered cord syndrome in adults
Tethered cord syndrome: an updated review
Surgical treatment of tethered cord syndrome showed promising outcome in young children with short duration
Diagnosis and management of tethered cord syndrome
Myxopapillary ependymoma and fatty filum in an adult with tethered cord syndrome: a shared embryological lesion?
Pathophysiology of tethered cord syndrome and similar complex disorders
Tethered cord syndrome in childhood: diagnostic features and relationship to congenital anomalies
Patients with urinary incontinence often benefit from surgical detethering of tight filum terminale
Tethered cord syndrome: a study of 35 patients
Tethered cord in children: a clinical classification with urodynamic correlation
Tethered cord syndrome in identical twins
Treatment of the occult tethered spinal cord for neuropathic bladder: results of sectioning the filum terminale
Urological evaluation of tethered cord syndrome
Evaluation and management of tethered cord syndrome in occult spinal dysraphism: recommendations from the international children’s continence society
Development and validation of the fecal incontinence and constipation quality of life measure in children with spina bifida
Intraoperative neuromonitoring for tethered cord surgery in infants: challenges and outcome
Neurosurgical management of conus lipoma in Canada: a multi-center survey
Feasibility of intraoperative monitoring of motor evoked potentials obtained through transcranial electrical stimulation in infants younger than 3 months
Spinal lipoma of the filum terminale: review of 174 consecutive patients
Endoscopic spinal cord untethering using a 1 cm skin incision technique in pediatrics: a technical case report
A novel minimally invasive technique for spinal cord untethering
Endoscopic untethering of tight filum terminale: an operative technique
Endoscopic spinal tethered cord release: operative technique
Disparities in indications and outcomes reporting for pediatric tethered cord surgery: the need for a standardized outcome assessment tool
Tethered cord syndrome in childhood: special emphasis on the surgical technique and review of the literature with our experience
Tethered cord release: a long-term study in 114 patients
Urodynamic studies in spinal cord tethering
Managing functional constipation in children
Chronic constipation in infants and children
Comparison of polyethylene glycol-electrolyte solution vs polyethylene glycol-3350 for the treatment of fecal impaction in pediatric patients
Osmotic and stimulant laxatives for the management of childhood constipation
Efficacy of polyethylene glycol 3350 as compared to lactulose in treatment of ROME IV criteria-defined pediatric functional constipation: a randomized controlled trial
PEG 3350 versus lactulose for treatment of functional constipation in children: randomized study
An update of pharmacological management in children with functional constipation
Role of polyethylene glycol in the treatment of functional constipation in children
Functional constipation in childhood: current pharmacotherapy and future perspectives
Evaluation and treatment of functional constipation in infants and children: evidence-based recommendations from ESPGHAN and NASPGHAN
A randomised, double-blind study of polyethylene glycol 4000 and lactulose in the treatment of constipation in children
Polyethylene glycol vs. lactulose in infants and children with functional constipation: evidence-based medicine viewpoint
Lactulose versus Polyethylene Glycol for Chronic Constipation
Efficacy, safety, and acceptability of polyethylene glycol 3350 without electrolytes vs magnesium hydroxide in functional constipation in children from six months to eighteen years of age: a controlled clinical trial
Management of functional constipation in children: therapy in practice
Characterization of the colonic response to bisacodyl in children with treatment-refractory constipation
Are Senna based laxatives safe when used as long term treatment for constipation in children?
Bisacodyl: a review of pharmacology and clinical evidence to guide use in clinical practice in patients with constipation
Liquid paraffin: a reappraisal of its role in the treatment of constipation
Clinical efficacy and safety of polyethylene glycol 3350 versus liquid paraffin in the treatment of pediatric functional constipation
Lubricant versus laxative in the treatment of chronic functional constipation of children: a comparative study
Lipoid pneumonia in children following aspiration of mineral oil used in the treatment of constipation: high-resolution CT findings in 17 patients
Lipoid pneumonia: a silent complication of mineral oil aspiration
Management of functional constipation in children and adults
A comparison of the efficacy of enema solutions in pediatric emergency department patients
Systematic review: the adverse effects of sodium phosphate enema
Tube cecostomy versus appendicostomy for antegrade enemas in the management of fecal incontinence in children: a systematic review
Prevention and management of complications in various antegrade enema procedures in children: a review of the literature
Modified cecal flap neoappendix for the Malone antegrade continence enema procedure: a novel technique
A comparison of Malone appendicostomy and cecostomy for antegrade access as adjuncts to a bowel management program for patients with functional constipation or fecal incontinence
Pediatric bowel management options and organizational aspects
Bowel management program in patients with spina bifida
Peristeen anal irrigation as a substitute for the MACE procedure in children who are in need of reconstructive bladder surgery
Midline defects in FG syndrome: does tethered spinal cord contribute to the phenotype?
Retethering: a neurosurgical viewpoint
Minimally invasive endoscopic spinal cord untethering: case report
Adult tethered cord syndrome
Pathophysiology of adult tethered cord syndrome: review of the literature
Physiotherapy interventions for functional bladder and bowel dysfunctions in neurologically normal and otherwise healthy children
Effectiveness of pelvic physiotherapy in children with functional constipation compared with standard medical care
The use of abdominal muscle training, breathing exercises and abdominal massage to treat paediatric chronic functional constipation
The technical aspects of biofeedback therapy for defecation disorders
Effects of biofeedback therapy on anorectal function in obstructive defecation
Dyssynergic defecation and biofeedback therapy
Efficacy of biofeedback therapy in children with functional constipation
Efficiency of biofeedback therapy for chronic constipation in children
ANMS-ESNM position paper and consensus guidelines on biofeedback therapy for anorectal disorders
Current state of neuromodulation for constipation and fecal incontinence in children: a systematic review
Controversies in the management of functional constipation in children
Sacral nerve stimulation for constipation and fecal incontinence in children: long-term outcomes, patient benefit, and parent satisfaction
Sacral nerve stimulation: a promising therapy for fecal and urinary incontinence and constipation in children
Sacral neuromodulation in children and adolescents with chronic constipation refractory to conservative treatment
Home transcutaneous electrical stimulation therapy to treat children with anorectal retention: a pilot study
Effects of interferential electrical stimulation plus pelvic floor muscles exercises on functional constipation in children: a randomized clinical trial
Using a decision tree to guide bowel management in Spina Bifida
Bowel management for patients with myelodysplasia
Dietary fibre intake and constipation in children with severe developmental disabilities
What do we know about dietary fiber intake in children and health? The effects of fiber intake on constipation, obesity, and diabetes in children
Bowel function and care: guidelines for the care of people with spina bifida
Effect of caffeine on colonic manometry in children
Caffeine inhibits acetylcholinesterase, but not butyrylcholinesterase
Review: trends, safety, and recommendations for caffeine use in children and adolescents
Symptoms attributed to consumption of caffeinated beverages in adolescents
Probiotics for treatment of chronic constipation in children
Constipation in children: novel insight into epidemiology, pathophysiology and management
Neurogenic bowel dysfunction in children and adolescents
Gastrointestinal problems in the handicapped child
Chronic childhood constipation: a review of the literature and the introduction of a protocolized behavioral intervention program
Anxiety disorders in children with functional constipation: a case-control study
Psychological disorders in patients with chronic constipation
Emotional and behavioural problems in children and adolescents: the role of constipation
Clinical findings, child and mother psychosocial status in functional constipation
Psychological aspects in bladder and bowel dysfunction
Chronic functional constipation and encopresis in children in relationship with the psychosocial environment
Differing coping mechanisms, stress level and anorectal physiology in patients with functional constipation
Prevalence and associated clinical characteristics of behavior problems in constipated children
Relationship between neurogenic bowel dysfunction severity and functional status, depression, and quality of life in individuals with spinal cord injury
Psychological differences between children with and without chronic encopresis
A proposed model of psychodynamic psychotherapy linked to Erik Erikson’s eight stages of psychosocial development
66 - Urodynamic evaluation and psychological-behavioral profile of pre-operative and post-operative in children with tethered cord syndrome
The effect of detethering surgery on the bladder function and psychology of children with primary tethered cord syndrome
Predictors of paternal versus maternal stress in families of children with neural tube defects
Clinical features, psychological issues and management of constipation in childhood
Quality of life: guidelines for the care of people with spina bifida
Psychosocial and family functioning in spina bifida
Health-related quality of life in children with myelomeningocele: a systematic review of the literature
Self-management and independence guidelines for the care of people with spina bifida
Family functioning guidelines for the care of people with spina bifida
A review of the role of cognitive-behavioral therapy on anxiety disorders of children and adolescents
The role of emotion regulation and executive functioning in the intervention outcome of children with emotional and behavioural problems
Psychological interventions for mental health disorders in children with chronic physical illness: a systematic review
Effects of nursing intervention models on social adaption capability development in preschool children with malignant tumors: a randomized control trial
The effectiveness of psychosocial interventions for psychological outcomes in pediatric oncology: a systematic review
Exploring how ‘wish-granting’ interventions foster wellbeing for children with life-threatening health conditions and their families: a qualitative study
The effects of the Make a Wish intervention on psychiatric symptoms and health-related quality of life of children with cancer: a randomised controlled trial
Effects of a combined physical and psychosocial training for children with cancer: a randomized controlled trial