Molecular exploration of host-pathogen interactions in severe Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection through a multi-level data integration approach
Introduction
Understanding host-pathogen interactions is crucial for explaining the variability in sepsis outcomes, with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) remaining a significant public health concern. In this work, we explored PA-human host interaction mechanisms through a data integration workflow, focusing on protein-protein and metabolite-protein interactions, along with pathway modulation in affected organs during severe infections.
Methods
A scoping literature review enabled us to construct a domain-based infection network encompassing pathogenesis concepts, molecular interactions, and host response signatures, providing a wide view of the relevant mechanisms involved in severe bacterial infections.
Results
Our analysis yielded a literature-based comprehensive description of PA infection mechanisms and an annotated dataset of 189 PA-human interactions involving 151 proteins/molecules (109 human proteins, 3 human metabolites, 34 PA proteins, and 5 PA molecules). This dataset was complemented with gene expression analysis from in vivo PA-infected lung samples. The results indicated a notable overexpression of proinflammatory pathways and PA-mediated modulation of host lung responses.
Discussion
Our comprehensive molecular network of PA infection represents a valuable tool for the understanding of severe bacterial infections and offers potential applications in predicting clinical phenotypes. Through this approach combining omics data, clinical information, and pathogen characteristics, we have provided a foundation for future research in host-pathogen interactions and the mechanistic grounds to build dynamic computational models for clinical phenotype predictions.

Introduction
Sepsis caused by multi-drug resistant pathogens remains a leading cause of mortality in intensive care units (ICU) and represents a significant public health concern. While it is established that microbial infection outcomes depend heavily on host conditions and spatial interactions between microbes, hosts, and other microorganisms, many molecular details of these complex relationships remain unexplored. Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) is one of the most common pathogens for nosocomial infections, and, along with Acinetobacter baumannii and Enterobacterales resistant to carbapenems, it was listed among critical priority pathogens for World Health Organization. The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) has included PA in its antimicrobial resistance surveillance program. As an opportunistic human pathogen particularly affecting Cystic Fibrosis (CF) patients, PA’s clinical significance stems from multiple drug resistance mechanisms, numerous virulence factors, and biofilm production capabilities, enhancing its infection and host colonization potential. Recently, computational approaches have aided in unraveling mechanistic insights of PA infections. A network-assisted experiment allowed the identification of novel genes for virulence and antibiotic resistance, confirmed through experimental validation, showing cross-resistance against multiple drugs due to the same genes. In another effort, a real-time deep-learning model was applied to sepsis patients aiming to estimate prognostic outcomes from early infection phases. The model addressed baseline acuity, comorbidities, seasonal effects, and secular trends over time, unraveling the strategic significance of computational modeling to improve the clinical outcomes in sepsis patients.
Mechanistic computational modeling, omics data analysis, and clinical research have emerged as crucial tools for bridging the gap between conceptual models and clinical practice in infectious diseases. By structuring key pathophysiological mechanisms and identifying conceptual domains, molecular diagrams provide novel insights into biomedical knowledge. The value of network-based exploratory and molecular virus-host interactome approaches was particularly evident during the COVID-19 pandemic, where rapid identification of molecular interactions between SARS-CoV-2 and human hosts became crucial to explain the clinical manifestations, as well as enabled a timely drug repurposing). In this context, the resulting molecular maps of disease mechanisms (e.g., a Disease Map)1 provided biological meaning to apparently unrelated interactions, facilitating the mechanistic understanding of complex disease processes (. Following this paradigm, we applied similar strategies to bacterial pathogens such as PA, to uncover actionable insights about complex host interactions in severe systemic infections.
Our study presents a data integration workflow to build a molecular map of interaction between PA and human hosts in severe infection. Through extensive literature review, data curation, and gene expression meta-analysis, we have documented PA infection pathogenic mechanisms, direct protein-protein interactions (PPI), metabolite-protein interactions (MPI), and pathway activations in affected organs, organizing these findings into three conceptual domains: “cellular interaction level”, “tissue interaction level”, and “organ interaction level”.

Materials and methods

Scoping review
We conducted independent literature reviews compliant with international reference guidelines for scoping reviews. For each domain, the scoping review outcomes were processed to identify features of PA interactions with the host and the direct or indirect effects that they cause within the host itself.
Using a structured search string in PubMed (Supplementary Text 1), we identified 532 articles after excluding duplicates, non-English publications, and studies not addressing systemic infection or host-pathogen interactions. We supplemented this with 27 additional articles focusing on host response to PA infection in both mouse models and human patients through omics data analysis. During the review process, papers were evaluated in three sequential inclusion criteria: (i) title relevance; (ii) abstract consisting of three conceptual domains, and (iii) identification of specific pathogenic mechanisms in PA infection through full-text analysis. The final selection comprised 150 articles which were categorized into three interaction levels: (1) “cell interaction level”; (2) “tissue interaction level”; and (3) “organ interaction level”. Full-text articles were evaluated by the curators to define the best possible conceptual domains, following the reference methodology (PRISMA-ScR) for the assessment. Each article selected for review was independently read and evaluated by two reviewers. At the end of the evaluation, the data results were discussed and evaluated in a specific meeting of the entire working group. Each article was assigned a unique reference ID (SR) and documented in Supplementary Table 1.

Conceptual domains
First, we identified the conceptual domains that organize the information obtained from the literature, providing a hierarchical model of host-pathogen interaction, following a previous experience on mapping host-pathogen interactions in the COVID-19 Disease Map project. Three interaction levels within the host’s system were identified: cell, tissue, and organ. For each level, we further identified conceptual domains, describing the interactions with the pathogen (Figure 1). A comprehensive description of all mechanisms and PA-human interactions, along with search string, containing all search terms used in the scoping review section on PubMed, and protein abbreviation were reported in Supplementary Text 1, while a summary can be found below in the results section.
Structure of data collection and analysis workflow. For each level, we identified further conceptual domains, describing the interactions with PA molecules.
Flowchart illustrating the origins of data from humans, animal models (mice), and the pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. It details PA-host interaction domains at the cell, tissue, and organ levels, highlighting bacterial metabolism, tissue types, and organs affected. Outcomes include a review of host-pathogen interaction mechanisms, PA-human interaction network, and pathways and gene signatures induced by PA.

Molecular interaction dataset and human host - PA interactome
We documented PPI and MPI between PA and humans. All interaction details, including type, Uniprot ID, literature reference, and subdomains of the model, were compiled in the curated dataset (Supplementary Table 2). We constructed a network-based interaction model by exploring PA-host data gathered from the scoping review, following methodology established for SARS-CoV-2-human host interactions. Human PPI data was retrieved using R packages PSICQUIC and biomaRt, resulting in a comprehensive large network of 13,334 nodes and 73,584 interactions that included PA-human host interactions. The mechanisms of infection were estimated using the Random Walk with Restart (RWR) algorithm, using each PA protein as a seed and limiting the output to the 200 closest host proteins per PA protein. Network visualizations were generated using GEPHI 0.9.2. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed using the R package enrichR, testing against Reactome 2022, KEGG 2021 and WikiPathways 2023 human pathways databases.

Meta-analysis of the whole transcriptome from animal model of PA-induced sepsis
We performed a meta-analysis of gene expression in mouse lung samples comparing PA-infected tissues with healthy controls using data from two projects. The first dataset comprised 12 bulk RNAseq samples from PA-infected lung tissues (PRJNA975462; GEO: GSE233206, SRA Study SRP439193), while the second included 6 bulk gene expression samples from acute and chronic PA pulmonary infection (PRJNA793679; GEO: GSE192890, SRA Study SRP353174). SRA data was processed using Prefetch and converted to FASTQ files using the fastq-dump tool from the SRA Toolkit software v2.11.0. Reads were aligned to the mm10 mouse reference genome using HISAT2. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified using DESeq2 v.1.42.1 in R version 3.4.3, with thresholds set at Log2FC > |1| and Benjamin-Hochberg False Discovery Rate < 5% (BH-FDR). To account for batch effects between laboratories, we conducted a meta-analysis using metaRNASeq R packages, combining p-values from the two independent RNA-seq experiments using Fisher methods. The analysis focused on 21,010 genes shared between datasets, generating combined BH-adjusted p-values and average Log2FC values. Genes meeting the thresholds of Log2FC > |1| and BH FDR < 5% were classified as DEGs.

Gene enrichment on DEGs in PA infection and healthy conditions
To deliver biological meaning from the data, we performed a gene enrichment analysis using Reactome, KEGG, and WikiPathways. The enrichR R package was used to conduct gene set enrichment analysis, with significance assessed through Fisher exact test (p-value) and false discovery rate (q-value: adjusted p-value for FDR).

Results

Domain-based analysis of PA-human host interactions reveals detailed pathogenic mechanisms
To understand in detail PA infection pathogenic mechanisms, we reported many PA-human host interactions mechanisms, organizing them into three conceptual domains: cellular, tissue, and organ-level interactions.
At the cellular level, four key aspects characterize PA-host interaction: (i) bacterial adhesion/colonization (PA-Ad); (ii) bacterial invasion and innate immune response of the host (PA-In); (iii) PA exotoxins activity in infection (PA-Ex); (iv) bacterial metabolic mechanisms (PA-Met). The pathogenic mechanisms in PA infection were assigned to each domain (Table 1). PA initiates infection through flagellum and type IV pili adherence, interacting with MUC1 ectodomains via NEU1 modulation. The bacterium employs multiple adhesion strategies, including biofilm formation, psl adhesins, and various receptors binding to extracellular matrix components. During invasion, PA modifies host cell membranes through PI3K/PIP3/Akt pathway activation and uses specialized proteins like pilY1 for binding. The bacterium’s survival in macrophages relies on mgtC and oprF. The exotoxin family (exoS, exoT, exoU, exoY, exoA) facilitates pathogenesis through various mechanisms, including protein ribosylation, cytoskeleton modification, and membrane disruption.
The table summarizes the main pathogenic mechanisms in PA infection for each domain, with comprehensive conceptual analysis provided in the Supplementary Text 1: (A) cell interaction level; (B) tissue interaction level; (C) organ interaction level. This structured approach enabled us to characterize specific mechanisms and experimental models of PA infections.
Domain	Subdomain	Key molecules	Biological outcome	References	 	Cell interaction level	PA Adhesion/colonization	Flagellum, pilA	Adherence in upper respiratory tract, interaction with IRF-1		 	Flagellum,NEU1	Modulation of binding between flagellum and MUC1		 	Pilus	Interaction with asialo-GM1, asialo-GM2, glycosphingolipids; MMP7 expression induction		 	Psl	Biofilm formation, cell adhesion, flagellin-mediated NF-κB activation		 	estA, oprD, oprG, oprQ, PA3923, Paf	Binding to LAMA1 (α4, α5) and FN1		 	lecA	Binding to Gb3 and GPI- anchored CD59		 	CD18, N-glycans	PA uptake facilitation via integrin-mediated uptake		 	PA Invasion	mgtC, oprF	Macrophage survival		 	Flagellin	EGFR/TGF-α release, MUC1 phosphorylation, TLR5 association		 	IMPa	Leukocyte rolling adhesion via CD43, CD44, CD55, PSGL-1		 	pumA	NF-κB inhibition, interaction with TIRAP, MyD88, UBAP1		 	LPS	SP-A interaction, TNF-α release limitation		 	LL-37	IL-8 production inhibition, mucA mutagenesis		 	lasB	Protein degradation (elastin, collagen, laminin, IgG, C3, α1-AT, IFN-γ, IL-2)		 	LPS	MUC5AC overproduction		 	CD95/CD95 ligand	Apoptosis triggering, NF-κB/JNKs/GADD153/PLA 2 stimulation		 	PTEN-CFTR complex	PA intracellular killing promotion		 	Exotoxins	Azurin	Cell proliferation inhibition via aldolase A secretion		 	3OC12-HSL	T-lymphocyte proliferation inhibition, MAPK-p38 activation		 	PAI-1	Cyclooxygenase 2 activation in fibroblasts and ECs		 	PNC	Neutrophil death, mitochondrial dysfunction, IL-8 downregulation		 	pvrA	PC and fatty acid catabolism regulation		 	Tissue interaction level	Endothelial tissue	APOE3	NF-κB reduction in monocytes, antibacterial activity		 	exoS, exoT	Lim kinase-cofilin pathway modulation, GTPase inactivation		 	lasB/pseudolysin	Endothelial adherence disruption, cytotoxicity		 	Airway epithelial tissue	pilY1	PI3K/PIP3/Akt pathway activation, membrane remodeling		 	Flagella	TLR5 activation, neutrophil respiratory burst		 	pilA	Tight junction disruption, IRF-1 activation		 	exoA	ADAM10 interaction, leukocyte migration alteration		 	PNC	Ciliary dysfunction, mucus velocity alteration		 	PA-IL, PA-IIL	Cilia binding, airway infection facilitation		 	lasB	EC detachment via FN1/vWf degradation		 	Vav3	b1 integrin/FN1 complex formation in CF		 	CFTR	PA uptake regulation, NF- κB activation		 	Various	IL-6/CXCL8/TACE expression induction		 	Other epithelial tissues	HSPGs	Enhanced apical surface binding		 	pilA, Flagella	N-glycan and HSPG- mediated binding		 	T3SS, LPS	Barrier function disruption		 	exoS	Na/K-ATPase inhibition via FXYD3		 	T3SS components	Keratitis development, tight junction disruption		 	Fur regulator	Iron acquisition pathway regulation		 	Organ interaction level	Lungs	LPS, CFTR	PA uptake, NF-κB activation	, 	 	CFTR/TLR4/TL R5	Phagocytosis regulation, inflammatory response		 	TRPV4	Immune defense enhancement		 	Elastase	IgG cleavage, phagocytosis inhibition		 	LL-37, CLEC5A	NET formation, cytokine release		 	MIF	Lung inflammation reduction		 	Various	Altered immune cell composition, pathway regulation	,	 	–	Gut microbiota metabolism disruption		 	Bloodstream	TREM-1	Inflammatory response modulation		 	QS genes, pqsH	Systemic infection adaptation		 	Hxu system	BSI pathogenesis regulation		 	–	Blood metabolome alteration		 	–	Differential immune cell response
At the tissue level, PA affects three primary domains: (i) endothelial tissue (Endothelial Tissue - EnT); (ii) lower airway and alveolar epithelial tissue in the lung, including CF conditions (Airway Epithelial Tissue - AET); and (iii) other epithelial tissues such as desquamated bronchial and urinary epithelia (Other Epithelial Tissues - ETs). In endothelial tissue, particularly during severe infection, APOE exhibits antibacterial activity, while T3SS affects actin cytoskeleton dynamics. The bacterium adapts to blood survival by regulating metabolic pathways and virulence factors. In airway epithelial tissue, particularly relevant in CF conditions, PA flagella binds to asialoGM1 and MUC1, triggering inflammatory responses. CFTR plays a crucial role in PA uptake and inflammation. In other epithelial tissues, PA binds through HSPGs and N-glycans, with quorum sensing molecules affecting barrier integrity.
Finally, at the organ level, PA infection primarily impacts the lung and bloodstream. In lung infections, particularly in CF, PA causes intense inflammation with neutrophil infiltration and cytokine production, inducing changes in immune cell composition. The infection involves various immune mechanisms, including TRPV4, TIM3/Gal-9 signaling, and NET formation. In bloodstream infections, PA induces differential immune cell responses and affects the vascular endothelium through multiple mechanisms, such as TREM-1. The Hxu system contributes significantly to bloodstream infection capability. These multi-level interactions highlight the complexity of PA pathogenesis and its adaptive capabilities in different host environments.

PA-host proteins interaction network reveals key mechanisms modulated in humans by PA severe infection
To reveal key molecular mechanisms in PA severe infection, we collected the molecular interactions between PA and human proteins during different infection stages, which were manually curated. Analysis of 92 articles revealed multiple direct protein-protein interactions (PPI) and molecule-protein interactions (MPI), detailed in Supplementary Table 2 and annotated with Uniprot IDs, references, and model subdomains.
We identified 151 molecules: 109 human proteins, 3 human metabolites (Gangliotetraosylceramide, Phospholipid cell membrane, glycosphingolipid globotriaosylceramide), 34 PA proteins, and 5 PA molecules (3O-C12-HSL, LipidA, LPS, Exopolysaccharide, Pyocyanin), yielding 189 PA-human interactions and 7 human-human interactions. Note that the 189 interactions include multiple events involving the same molecules, while the 151 components represent unique entities within the network.
These interactions were categorized into four cellular domains: Adhesion process (PA-Ad), invasion and injury of tissue (PA-Inv), exotoxin production (PA-Ex) and bacterial metabolism (PA-Meta).
Gene enrichment analysis revealed significant pathway associations across Reactome, WikiPathways and KEGG (Supplementary Table 3). Notable enrichments included the “Pathogenic Escherichia coli Infection WP2272” pathway (WikiPathways) and “Pertussis” (KEGG) with FDR < 0.0001%. Reactome analysis highlighted three significant pathways (FDR < 0.0001%), including Programmed Cell Death R-HSA- 5357801, Toll-like Receptor Cascades R-HSA-168898, and Signaling by Interleukins R-HSA-449147. In these pathways several key proteins (e.g., exoS and exoT) would play a modulating role, such as inhibition of interleukin proteins or degradation of occludin (OCLN), a cell death regulator.
A full network of interactions between PA and human host proteins (Figure 2) enabled us to reveal the overall cell response to infection, digging up also new possible pathogenic mechanisms: the modulating effect of outer membrane proteins oprH, oprQ, and the elastase lasB on Complement Cascade Pathway (Reactome R-HSA-166658; 18/55; FDR < 0.0001%) for contrasting bacterial cell damage. These proteins also showed significant interactions with blood clotting factors, such as VWF, SERPINF2, PLAUR, PLAT, and PLG (Complement and Coagulation Cascade WP558; 20/58; FDR < 0.0001%), suggesting a potential involvement in thrombotic event. Furthermore, the role of exotoxin (exoS, exoY, and exoT) in PA infection proved central to triggering of cell toxicity through interactions with cytoplasmic 14-3-3 proteins (e.g., YWHAB).
Network of PA-human host molecular interactions, with the top 200 nearest proteins found by the Random Walk with Restart (RWR) algorithm. Nodes have different colors to show different kinds of molecules: purple, human proteins; green, PA proteins; light blue, PA molecules; orange, human proteins belonging to the complement pathway.
Network diagram displaying complex interactions among various proteins and molecules, represented by labeled nodes in different colors such as purple, green, orange, and blue. Lines connect nodes, indicating interactions or relationships in the network.

Meta-analysis of whole transcriptome of PA-infected lung tissues from mice reveals selective modulation of pro-inflammatory pathways
To better define the biological response in PA-infected lung tissues, we carried out a meta-analysis of gene expression of two bulk RNAseq datasets (GSE233206 and GSE192890) comparing PA-infected mice lung samples with healthy controls. Our meta-analysis identified 1,560 upregulated and 383 downregulated genes (Log2FC > 1; FDR BH < 5%, Supplementary Table 4). Pathway analysis of upregulated genes using WikiPathways revealed significant enrichment in inflammation-related pathways, notably “Overview of Proinflammatory and Profibrotic Mediators WP5095” (39/129, FDR < 0.0001%). Reactome analysis aligned with our scoping review findings, highlighting significant enrichment (FDR < 0.000001%) in key pathways: Cytokine Signaling in Immune System R-HSA-1280215 (145/702), Signaling by Interleukins R-HSA-449147 (109/453), Interleukin-10 Signaling R-HSA-6783783 (31/45) (Figures 3a, b). Proinflammatory pathways were found nested into Interleukins R-HSA-449147 (Homo sapiens) Reactome’s entry (Interleukin-2 family signaling R-HSA-451927; Interleukin-3, Interleukin-5 and GM-CSF signaling R-HSA-512988; Interferon alpha/beta signaling R-HSA-909733; Interferon gamma signaling R-HSA-877300; ISG15 antiviral mechanism (Homo sapiens) R-HSA-1169408; PKR-mediated signaling R-HSA-9833482; TNFR2 non-canonical NF-kB pathway R-HSA-5668541; Signaling by CSF1 (M-CSF) in myeloid cells; R-HSA-9680350. All these pathways have many key proteins for PA infection, which are described as targets for PA exoU, exoS, azu, lasB, aprA, oprF, pilA, and LPS. These results suggest that these pathways are directly involved in initiating the innate response to PA infection, but also highlight the potential role of PA molecules in modulating and limiting this response, particularly for interleukin signaling.
GSEA with WikiPathways (a) and Reactome (b), based on upregulated DEGs in PA - infected samples, obtained from meta-analysis of two infection experiments in mouse lung tissues.
Scatterplots show the top twenty GSEA pathways for WikiPathways 2023 and Reactome 2022. Each plot displays pathways against -log10 adjusted P-values. Dot size represents gene counts, while color indicates the percentage of overlapped genes. Larger dots and warmer colors correlate with higher counts and percentages, respectively.

Discussion
In this work, we present the development of a comprehensive data integration model to understand PA infection through detailed exploration of the literature and metanalysis of transcriptomics datasets, identifying specific human molecular targets for each PA molecule, pathogenic mechanisms, and host responses. In general, PA could be considered a useful example for studying severe systemic infections, given its multi-drug resistance capabilities, ability to cause acute and chronic infections in pulmonary disease patients, and its capacity to form biofilm in hypoxic conditions, which makes it extremely difficult to treat.
Firstly, the central role of exoS during infection was confirmed, while enhanced activity among exo family proteins, including exoY and exoT, was widely highlighted. ExoS functions by inhibiting several proteins of interleukin pathways and inducing the degradation of Occludin (OCLN), an integral membrane protein involved in cytokine-induced regulation of the tight junction permeability barrier, ultimately inducing cell death. Through its ADP RT activity, exoS modulates host cell apoptosis, inducing PA-infected cell death by targeting various Ras proteins. The Complement Cascade Pathway undergoes modulation by PA’s outer membrane proteins, oprH, oprQ, and elastase lasB, which trigger cytotoxic effects and adhesion through complement binding, particularly C3. This result mirrors the mechanism of activation of the complement system, in which C3 is the main actor against bacteria, through a link with oprF, a porin involved in ion transport (Na+ and Cl−) and anaerobic biofilm production. A significant finding was the interaction between oprH, oprQ, and lasB with coagulation proteins, suggesting their involvement in thrombotic processes. PA lasB’s cleavage of a C-terminal peptide FYT21 derived from thrombin inhibits activation of the transcription factors NFκ-B and activator protein 1 (AP-1). PA demonstrates sophisticated modulation of host immune responses through multiple pathways; aprA, lasB, and exoS exhibit inhibitory effects on interleukin pathways, indicating an adaptive modulation that enhances PA survival within the host. Such an effect was confirmed in PA infection, where PA-derived DnaK negatively regulates IL-1β production by cross-talk between JNK and PI3K/PDK1/FoxO1 pathways. Notably, decreased PA levels in CF patients correlate with reduced proinflammatory cytokines.
Our findings provided a broader view of molecular perturbations in PA systemic infection and served as a foundation for developing specific disease maps for severe PA infection, supporting the integration of omics data from clinical cases into predictive computational models. Future developments may incorporate text mining and AI-assisted analysis for drug target identification and digital modeling of the human immune system under infection conditions to better predict real patient outcomes and test potential therapeutic strategies in a personalized fashion.
There are some limitations worth noting. While we have documented numerous significant PA-human interactions, our model may not encompass all possible interactions. The PPI/MPI dataset requires iterative updates to incorporate new experimental findings from both in vitro, in vivo and clinical studies. Furthermore, since our interaction data derives primarily from in vitro experiments, the described pathogenic mechanisms require validation in the context of severe systemic infections. Finally, our differential expression meta-analysis, conducted in mouse models with limited sample size, provides an overview of host gene-expression signatures in PA infection but requires confirmation through clinical data.
In conclusion, our study provides a comprehensive collection and analysis of molecular mechanisms in P. aeruginosa infection, combining literature-based evidence, protein-protein interaction analysis, and transcriptomic data from in vivo studies. A detailed dataset of PA-host interactions across cellular, tissue, and organ levels was built through a systematic data integration approach. Our findings highlight the complex interplay between PA virulence factors and host responses, particularly the role of exoS in modulating interleukin pathways and the involvement of outer membrane proteins in the complement cascade. The integration of differential expression analysis from mouse models further strengthens our understanding of host response patterns, particularly in proinflammatory and immune signaling pathways. As antimicrobial resistance continues to pose significant challenges in healthcare, such a comprehensive molecular understanding may prove invaluable for applying precision medicine approaches to severe bacterial infections and improving patient-tailored treatments in severe systemic infections.
https://disease-maps.io/

Data availability statement
The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession number(s) can be found in the article/Supplementary material.

Author contributions
FM: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Software, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. CR: Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Validation, Writing – review & editing. LL: Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. SC: Data curation, Methodology, Software, Writing – review & editing. MP: Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. VD: Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. BR: Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. BS: Formal analysis, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing. GC: Formal analysis, Methodology, Validation, Writing – review & editing. LG: Funding acquisition, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. MB: Formal analysis, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing. CF: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Generative AI statement
The author(s) declare that no Generative AI was used in the creation of this manuscript.
Any alternative text (alt text) provided alongside figures in this article has been generated by Frontiers with the support of artificial intelligence and reasonable efforts have been made to ensure accuracy, including review by the authors wherever possible. If you identify any issues, please contact us.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

Supplementary material
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmed.2025.1600509/full#supplementary-material

References
Multidrug-resistant sepsis: a critical healthcare challenge.
Sepsis: a review of advances in management.
Spatial metatranscriptomics resolves host-bacteria-fungi interactomes.
Integrative omics identifies conserved and pathogen-specific responses of sepsis-causing bacteria.
Genome-scale model of Pseudomonas aeruginosa metabolism unveils virulence and drug potentiation.
Network-assisted investigation of virulence and antibiotic-resistance systems in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Impact of a deep learning sepsis prediction model on quality of care and survival.
A large-scale Boolean model of the rheumatoid arthritis fibroblast-like synoviocytes predicts drug synergies in the arthritic joint.
Multi-omics approach to COVID-19: a domain-based literature review.
Boolean modelling as a logic-based dynamic approach in systems medicine.
COVID-19 disease map, building a computational repository of SARS-CoV-2 virus-host interaction mechanisms.
SARS-CoV-2 biology and host interactions.
COVID-19: viral-host interactome analyzed by network based-approach model to study pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Looking for pathways related to COVID-19: confirmation of pathogenic mechanisms by SARS-CoV-2- host interactome.
The SARS-CoV-2 RNA-protein interactome in infected human cells.
The SARS-CoV-2 RNA interactome.
A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug repurposing.
A comprehensive SARS-CoV-2-human protein-protein interactome reveals COVID-19 pathobiology and potential host therapeutic targets.
COVID19 Disease Map, a computational knowledge repository of virus-host interaction mechanisms.
Drug-target identification in COVID-19 disease mechanisms using computational systems biology approaches.
Guidance for conducting systematic scoping reviews.
Bacterial pathogenesis.
PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation.
PSICQUIC and PSISCORE: accessing and scoring molecular interactions.
BioMart–biological queries made easy.
Random walk with restart on multiplex and heterogeneous biological networks.
Gephi: an open source software for exploring and manipulating networks.
Enrichr: a comprehensive gene set enrichment analysis web server 2016 update.
The reactome pathway knowledgebase 2024.
WikiPathways: a multifaceted pathway database bridging metabolomics to other omics research.
KEGG: new perspectives on genomes, pathways, diseases and drugs.
An integrated multi-omics analysis of identifies distinct molecular characteristics in pulmonary infections of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Single-cell transcriptomics reveals distinct cell response between acute and chronic pulmonary infection of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
The sequence read archive.
Integrating the ribonucleic acid sequencing data from various studies for exploring the multiple sclerosis-related long noncoding ribonucleic acids and their functions.
HISAT: a fast spliced aligner with low memory requirements.
Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2.
Differential meta-analysis of RNA-seq data from multiple studies.
The NEU1-selective sialidase inhibitor, C9- butyl-amide-DANA, blocks sialidase activity and NEU1-mediated bioactivities in human lung in vitro and murine lung in vivo.
The sialidase NEU1 directly interacts with the juxtamembranous segment of the cytoplasmic domain of mucin-1 to inhibit downstream PI3K-Akt signaling.
In vitro interaction of Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
The Pseudomonas aeruginosa exopolysaccharide Psl facilitates surface adherence and NF-kappaB activation in A549 cells.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa uses multiple receptors for adherence to laminin during infection of the respiratory tract and skin wounds.
Disruption of the endothelial barrier by proteases from the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa: implication of matrilysis and receptor cleavage.
Subversion of mucosal barrier polarity by pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Killing from the inside: Intracellular role of T3SS in the fate of Pseudomonas aeruginosa within macrophages revealed by mgtC and oprF mutants.
Ras effector pathway activation by epidermal growth factor is inhibited in vivo by exoenzyme S ADP- ribosylation of Ras.
Bacterial pyocyanin inducible keratin 6A accelerates closure of epithelial defect under conditions of mitochondrial dysfunction.
c-Jun NH2- terminal kinase-mediated signaling is essential for Pseudomonas aeruginosa ExoS-induced apoptosis.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa ExoT is a Rho GTPase-activating protein.
Antibacterial and anti-inflammatory effects of apolipoprotein E.
Sequential inactivation of Rho GTPases and Lim kinase by Pseudomonas aeruginosa toxins ExoS and ExoT leads to endothelial monolayer breakdown.
Requirements for Pseudomonas aeruginosa acute burn and chronic surgical wound infection.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa alters its transcriptome related to carbon metabolism and virulence as a possible survival strategy in blood from trauma patients.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa flagella activate airway epithelial cells through asialoGM1 and toll-like receptor 2 as well as toll-like receptor 5.
TLR5 as an anti-inflammatory target and modifier gene in cystic fibrosis.
Pseudomonas or LPS exposure alters CFTR iodide efflux in 2WT2 epithelial cells with time and dose dependence.
CFTR is a pattern recognition molecule that extracts Pseudomonas aeruginosa LPS from the outer membrane into epithelial cells and activates NF-kappa B translocation.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa pili and flagella mediate distinct binding and signaling events at the apical and basolateral surface of airway epithelium.
The junctional integrity of epithelial cells is modulated by Pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum sensing molecule through phosphorylation-dependent mechanisms.
Galectin-9 signaling through TIM-3 is involved in neutrophil-mediated Gram-negative bacterial killing: an effect abrogated within the cystic fibrosis lung.
TRPV4 protects the lung from bacterial pneumonia via MAPK molecular pathway switching.
CLEC5A is critical in Pseudomonas aeruginosa-induced NET formation and acute lung injury.
The type III toxins of Pseudomonas aeruginosa disrupt epithelial barrier function.
Single-cell RNA-sequencing of peripheral blood mononuclear cells reveals widespread, context-specific gene expression regulation upon pathogenic exposure.
Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-1 inhibitor targeted to endothelium decreases cell activation.
High-level expression of cell-surface signaling system hxu enhances Pseudomonas aeruginosa bloodstream infection.
Pseudomonas-epithelial cell interactions dissected with DNA microarrays.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor enhances Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm formation, potentially contributing to cystic fibrosis pathogenesis.
Intranasal immunization strategy to impede pilin-mediated binding of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to airway epithelial cells.
Structure-function analysis of the adherence-binding domain on the pilin of Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains PAK and KB7.
The Gb3-enriched CD59/flotillin plasma membrane domain regulates host cell invasion by Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Distinct contributions of CD18 integrins for binding and phagocytic internalization of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of and TLR5 association with the MUC1 cytoplasmic tail through EGFR activation.
Inhibition of Pseudomonas aeruginosa virulence: characterization of the AprA-AprI interface and species selectivity.
A Pseudomonas aeruginosa TIR effector mediates immune evasion by targeting UBAP1 and TLR adaptors.
Induction of TNF-alpha release from human buffy coat cells by Pseudomonas aeruginosa is reduced by lung surfactant protein A.
Cationic antimicrobial peptides promote microbial mutagenesis and pathoadaptation in chronic infections.
Evaluation of the ability of LL-37 to neutralise LPS in vitro and ex vivo.
Effect of pseudomonas elastase on human mononuclear phagocyte alpha 1-antitrypsin expression.
Regulator of G-protein signaling 4 suppresses LPS-induced MUC5AC overproduction in the airway.
CD95/CD95 ligand interactions on epithelial cells in host defense to Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator attaches tumor suppressor PTEN to the membrane and promotes anti Pseudomonas aeruginosa immunity.
Cross-talk between cancer and Pseudomonas aeruginosa mediates tumor suppression.
Bacterial quorum sensing molecule induces chemotaxis of human neutrophils via induction of p38 and leukocyte specific protein 1 (LSP1).
Pseudomonas aeruginosa autoinducer enters and functions in mammalian cells.
Proinflammatory interactions of pyocyanin and 1-hydroxyphenazine with human neutrophils in vitro.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa pyocyanin induces neutrophil death via mitochondrial reactive oxygen species and mitochondrial acid sphingomyelinase.
PvrA is a novel regulator that contributes to Pseudomonas aeruginosa pathogenesis by controlling bacterial utilization of long chain fatty acids.
TLR expression on neutrophils at the pulmonary site of infection: TLR1/TLR2-mediated up-regulation of TLR5 expression in cystic fibrosis lung disease.
CD14 mediates Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). endocytosis and spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk). and interferon regulatory transcription factor 3 (IRF3). activation in epithelial cells and impairs neutrophil infiltration and Pseudomonas aeruginosa killing in vivo.
Chromosomal gfp labelling of Pseudomonas aeruginosa using a mini-Tn7 transposon: application for studies of bacteria- host interactions.
The role of Type III secretion system in the pathogenesis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa microbial keratitis.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa triggered exosomal release of ADAM10 mediates proteolytic cleavage in trans.
ERK1/2 activation modulates pyocyanin-induced toxicity in A549 respiratory epithelial cells.
Inhibition of the bacterial lectins of Pseudomonas aeruginosa with monosaccharides and peptides.
Vav3 Mediates Pseudomonas aeruginosa adhesion to the cystic fibrosis airway epithelium.
Bacterial induction of TNF-alpha converting enzyme expression and IL-6 receptor alpha shedding regulates airway inflammatory signaling.
Translocation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa from the intestinal tract is mediated by the binding of ExoS to an Na,K-ATPase regulator.
A metaproteomics approach to elucidate host and pathogen protein expression during catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTIs).
Type III secretion system translocator has a molten globule conformation both in its free and chaperone-bound forms.
Functional importance of cystic fibrosis immunoglobulin G fragments generated by Pseudomonas aeruginosa elastase.
Gut microbiota protected against pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia via restoring Treg/Th17 balance and metabolism.
Major transcriptome changes accompany the growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in blood from patients with severe thermal injuries.
New markers for sepsis caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa during burn infection.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa exoenzyme S, a bifunctional type-III secreted cytotoxin.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa: pathogenesis, virulence factors, antibiotic resistance, interaction with host, technology advances and emerging therapeutics.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa theft biofilm require host lipids of cutaneous wound.
Revisiting the virulence hallmarks of Pseudomonas aeruginosa: a chronicle through the perspective of quorum sensing.
Expression of Pseudomonas aeruginosa toxin ExoS effectively induces apoptosis in host cells.
The outer membrane protein OprQ and adherence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to human fibronectin.
Alternative folding pathways of the major porin OprF of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Identification of OprF as a complement component C3 binding acceptor molecule on the surface of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Role of bacterial proteases in pseudomonal and serratial keratitis.
Impairment in inflammasome signaling by the chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates from cystic fibrosis patients results in an increase in inflammatory response.
Negative regulation of interleukin 1beta expression in response to DnaK from Pseudomonas aeruginosa via the PI3K/PDK1/FoxO1 pathways.
Cytokine levels in sputum of cystic fibrosis patients before and after antibiotic therapy.
Immune digital twins for complex human pathologies: applications, limitations, and challenges.