Optimizing Weaning Strategies: A Consensus-Based Approach for Complementary Feeding in the Middle East and North Africa Region
Optimal nutrition during infancy and early childhood is crucial for promoting lifelong health and well-being. Complementary feeding is a crucial phase in the nutritional journey of growing babies, as their nutritional requirements begin to surpass those provided by breast milk at approximately 4–6 months of age. While a nutritional gap, notably iron deficiency, is prevalent in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region, optimal complementary feeding practices and fortified food items such as iron-fortified infant cereals can help bridge this gap and achieve nutritional targets. Healthcare professionals play a pivotal role in providing expert guidance and support to parents during this crucial stage of development. However, the MENA region, with its diverse populations and varied weaning practices in different cultures, lacks unified guidelines specific to the region. This consensus is intended to serve as a foundation for pediatricians and primary care physicians in the MENA region to advise parents and caregivers about optimal complementary feeding practices.

INTRODUCTION
Complementary feeding, defined as the gradual introduction of solid foods along with breastfeeding or formula feeding, marks a pivotal juncture in infant development. This period, usually at 4–6 months of age, is characterized by rapid shifts in nutritional needs, which are essential for sustaining growth and fostering optimal development. Notably, breast milk or infant formula alone are inadequate to meet the increasing demand during this period, necessitating complementary foods to bridge the nutritional gap and ensure comprehensive nourishment for growing infants. Additionally, complementary feeding has the potential to instill lifelong taste preferences and dietary habits that significantly affect the mid- to long-term health of individuals. An increasing body of evidence suggests that nutrition in early stages of life can be linked to the onset of chronic non-communicable diseases such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes, and allergic diseases.
According to the American Society of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition, pediatric malnutrition is defined as “an imbalance between nutrient requirements and intake, resulting in cumulative deficits in energy, protein, or micronutrients that may negatively affect growth, development, and other relevant outcomes.” Household food insecurity, poverty, maternal malnutrition, intrauterine growth restriction, low birth weight, poor breastfeeding practices, and inadequate complementary feeding are factors responsible for primary acute malnutrition.
Children, particularly during periods of growth, are more susceptible to macro- and micronutrient deficiencies owing to their increased nutritional requirements during this crucial period. This is accentuated by inappropriate weaning practices, which further increase the risk of malnutrition, a prevalent concern in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region.

Malnutrition: causes, consequences, and complexity
The effects of malnutrition in children under the age of 5 years include underweight, stunting, wasting with or without edema (previously known as marasmus and kwashiorkor, respectively), and death in severe cases.
One of the most prevalent challenges encountered in pediatric populations is the triple burden of malnutrition, which includes undernutrition, overnutrition, and micronutrient deficiency. This multi-faceted issue has far-reaching implications for children’s health and development. According to the United Nations Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF)-World Health Organization (WHO)-World Bank (WB) Joint Child Malnutrition Estimates, globally, in 2020, approximately 149.2 million children under the age of 5 years were stunted, 45.4 million were wasted, and 38.9 million were overweight. Furthermore, a demographic and health survey conducted in Rwanda demonstrated a dramatic increase in the prevalence of stunting from 10.5% among children below 6 months of age to 49% among stunted children aged 18–23 months. This sharp increase highlights the critical need for targeted interventions to address malnutrition across different stages of early childhood.
Hidden hunger is another challenge faced by pediatric populations pertaining to the presence of multiple micronutrient deficiencies despite the consumption of energy-dense food. Commonly deficient micronutrients include iron, zinc, iodine, and vitamin A, which are produced by the consumption of an energy-dense, nutrient-poor diet. This complex issues continue to escalate in the MENA region, driven by the rising prevalence of fast-food consumption and poor dietary habits. On the other hand, paediatric obesity poses a substantial risk for adverse nutritional outcomes and paradoxically, children and adolescents with obesity often exhibit malnutrition, with high rates of micronutrient deficiencies in essential minerals and specific vitamins. Micronutrient deficiency may also play a pathogenic role in obesity-related metabolic comorbidities.

The diverse nutritional landscape of the MENA region
Countries in the MENA region vary from one another in the nature of nutritional challenges faced by them. The WHO has divided this region into overlapping country clusters regarding nutrition stages and dominant nutritional problems, including major risk factors, underlying causes, program interventions, and gaps in responses to these issues. Bahrain, Iran, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA), Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) exhibit a high incidence of overweight and obesity along with a moderate prevalence of undernutrition and micronutrient deficiencies in certain population subgroups. Conversely, countries such as Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, and Palestine are in the early stages of nutrition transition, typically displaying a moderate prevalence of overweight and obesity, moderate levels of undernutrition in specific population groups, and widespread micronutrient deficiencies/inadequacies.
Furthermore, in impoverished settings, the increased nutritional demands during pregnancy and lactation are not met. Women with suboptimal nutritional status during this critical period have children with similar nutritional deficiencies, leading to impaired physical and mental development. This creates a trajectory for stunting, heightened susceptibility to infection, and developmental delays during infancy and childhood. As these children grow, they enter adulthood with nutritional disadvantages, often resulting in lower work capacity due to early developmental delays. Women enter their reproductive years at a nutritional disadvantage and this cycle continues. Breaking the intergenerational cycle of undernutrition and micronutrient deficiency is essential to ensure a healthy future.
In addition to these challenges, a range of other nutritional issues stemming from deficiencies in both micro- and macronutrients are frequently encountered. Macronutrient deficiencies include protein-energy malnutrition, inadequate intake of carbohydrates, and insufficiency of essential fatty acids such as Omega-3 and Omega-6. Micronutrient deficiencies, on the other hand, include shortages of vital elements such as iron, folate, zinc, iodine, and vitamins A, B6, B12, C, D, E, and K, along with deficiencies in potassium and fluoride, which are among the most prevalent.
Despite abundant and year-long sunshine in the Middle East, vitamin D deficiency remains widespread owing to a lack of adequate exposure to sunlight and a scarcity of foods naturally rich in or fortified with vitamin D. Anaemia is the most prevalent nutritional disorder among children in the MENA region. Its prevalence ranges from 11.6% among school-aged children in KSA to 39.6% among preschoolers in Egypt.
Another key challenge in the MENA region is the sporadic prevalence data, which may not accurately reflect the true extent of the problem. Additionally, the study population may not be representative of the overall population. To address these limitations, studies with larger sample sizes that are more representative of the local population and encompass statistically significant populations are crucial. Such approaches can help combat these challenges, especially in diverse MENA regions, where cultural differences significantly impact weaning practices, and prevalence data remain limited.
In addition, various socioeconomic factors contribute to infant malnutrition, including cultural weaning practices, which may differ significantly across diverse cultural backgrounds. These differences, coupled with the prevalent myths surrounding complementary feeding, contribute to unhealthy weaning practices. Many infants are introduced to complementary food too late, and homemade foods with poor nutrient bioavailability or inadequate nutritional content further exacerbate this issue. Although the WHO offers recommendations for optimal breastfeeding and complementary feeding practices, their applicability may vary across countries.

Role of fortification and supplementation in complementary feeding
Food fortification or enrichment with micronutrients is an appealing and cost-effective strategy endorsed by government authorities and/or implemented by the food industry to address prevalent inadequacies and deficiencies. Food fortification is widely adopted in the Middle East. In 1999, the WHO, in collaboration with UNICEF and the Micronutrient Initiative, initiated an effort to prompt nearly all countries in the region to fortify wheat flour with iron and folic acid by 2009. Subsequently, at a joint WHO/Flour Fortification Initiative harmonization workshop held in 2012, flour fortification with iron and folic acid was made mandatory throughout the Middle Eastern region. Furthermore, some countries have explored fortification with additional micronutrients, such as vitamin A, B-complex vitamins, vitamin D, and zinc.
Iron-fortified cereals have been clinically proven to improve the nutritional status during the complementary feeding period, with numerous studies supporting their efficacy. Research conducted in India, Cameroon, and Ghana demonstrated clinically significant improvements in iron status and a reduced risk of anemia with the adoption of iron-fortified infant cereals for complementary feeding. A meta-analysis of six randomized clinical trials (RCTs) (1,250 children) found that the intervention with iron-fortified cereals reduced anaemia by 43% (risk ratio [RR]=0.57). Similarly, another meta-analysis of 11 trials involving 2,175 children found that intervention with fortified cereals increased haemoglobin concentrations (g/dL), with a median improvement of 3.44. The intervention also showed a positive effect on serum ferritin concentrations, with a median increase of 0.43 µg/L, as was examined in six RCTs.
Furthermore, a meta-analysis of three RCTs found evidence of moderate certainty that the consumption of a fortified cereal, compared to a non-fortified cereal, reduced iron deficiency (RR=0.39). These findings validate the substantial benefits of incorporating iron-fortified cereals into complementary feeding practices.
In strategies to combat undernutrition and malnutrition, a key objective is the repositioning of nutrition, focusing on strategies to enhance the nutritional well-being of individuals across all stages of life. Short-term goals should prioritize the implementation of educational programs targeting populations with the greatest vulnerability to malnutrition, including women of childbearing age, pregnant women, and children, especially during their first 1,000 days.
The development of unified recommendations for complementary feeding is essential. These recommendations should address key aspects, such as the appropriate timing of initiation, types of food to avoid, and recommended methods of introduction. Such guidelines could play a vital role in raising awareness and educating mothers about the significance of this developmental period. It is crucial that these recommendations reflect the current state of knowledge accurately.

MENA consensus on complementary feeding
The MENA region comprises a diverse population with unique cultural practices that affect weaning processes. Proper weaning practices are crucial for maintaining healthy eating habits and preventing nutritional deficiencies. However, published guidelines on complementary feeding in this region are lacking.
These consensus statements serve as a framework for pediatricians and primary care physicians in the MENA region to provide individualized weaning advice based on the patient’s cultural background and socioeconomic status.
Dr. Flavia Indrio and nine regional pediatric nutrition experts from Algeria, Egypt, KSA, Qatar, and UAE attended a consensus meeting. The meeting aimed to discuss the prevalence of deficiencies in their respective countries and formulate a consensus on optimal weaning practices. The meeting took place on 1st and 2nd March 2024, in Dubai, UAE.
A structured quantitative method was employed to facilitate discussions and reach a consensus. Before the consensus meeting, a framework of statements was prepared based on local clinical practices and discussions with experts from the region. A modified Delphi process was used to refine and establish consensus on the statements. The consensus statements and levels of agreement are presented in Table 1.
Complementary feeding consensus statements along with the mean score out of 10
No.	Statement	Mean score	Votes	 	1	Malnutrition (e.g., underweight, overweight, obesity, stunting) is common in infants and children from the MENA region.	9.5	10	 	2	Micronutrient deficiency (e.g., iron, vitamin D, zinc) is common in infants and children from the MENA region.	9.5	10	 	3	Growth charts alone are not enough to assess the nutritional status of infants and children.	9.5	10	 	4	Complementary feeding planning and counselling should be an integral part of paediatric consultations around 4–6 months of age.	9.8	10	 	5	Exclusive breastfeeding should be encouraged as much as possible, with weaning starting not earlier than the end of 4 months and no later than the end of 6 months, along with continued breastfeeding up to 2 years.	9.8	10	 	6	Complementary feeding should ensure age-appropriate intake of macro- and micronutrients.	9.6	10	 	7	Complementary feeding is the main source of iron starting from 6 months of age, and iron bioavailability should be a key consideration.	9.6	10	 	8	Vitamin C intake (from home-made food and/or fortified infant cereals) during the weaning period is essential to optimize iron absorption.	9.5	10	 	9	Complementary food needs to be rich in immunonutrients (e.g., iron, vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin D, zinc).	9.6	10	 	10	Complementary food content and texture should be age-appropriate, in line with maturation of baby’s chewing and swallowing abilities.	9.9	10	 	11	Improper complementary feeding can lead to weakened immunity, less cognitive development, and impaired physical growth.	9.8	10	 	12	Baby-led weaning may result in unreliable and unbalanced intake of macro- and micronutrients.	9.4	10	 	13	Routine home-made food alone may lead to deficiency in macro- and micronutrients.	9.3	10	 	14	Fresh cow milk should be avoided in infants <1 year of age.	10	10	 	15	Fresh cow milk is insufficient as a main nutritional source for infants and toddlers.	9.5	10	 	16	Start complementary feeding with iron-rich food (e.g., fortified infant cereals, meat, poultry).	9.5	10	 	17	Fortified infant cereals as complementary food are recommended to meet the daily needs of essential nutrients and should be considered as a preventive approach to reduce iron deficiency in at-risk populations.	9.4	10	 	18	Fortified infant cereals should be free from artificial additives (colours, flavours, and preservatives).	9.8	10	 	19	If needed, supplementation with fortification can be used together.	9.5	10	 	20	Introduce one new food at a time; some food may need to be offered several times before acceptance.	9.5	10	 	21	Introduction of allergenic food (e.g., egg and fish) should not be avoided or delayed at weaning period, either in children considered at risk for developing allergies or in those who are not at risk.	9.1	10	 	22	Pureed fruits are preferred over fruit juice below 1 year of age.	9.3	10	 	23	Adding salt or sugar to the complementary food should be avoided before the age of 1 year.	9.5	10	 	24	Unpasteurized honey should be avoided in the first year of life to prevent the risk of infant botulism.	9.5	10	 	25	Do not use food as a reward or punishment during complementary feeding (acceptance by exposure). MENA: Middle East and North Africa.	9.3	10
MENA: Middle East and North Africa.
All group members voted anonymously, and a 10-point scale was used to quantify consensus (1=strongly disagree to 10=fully agree). A vote of 6 and above indicated “agreement,” and
a vote of 10 was considered an expression of stronger agreement than 6. Consensus was considered to be achieved if over 75% of the votes were of the scale of “6, 7, 8, 9 or 10.”

Consensus recommendations

1. Malnutrition (e.g., underweight, overweight, obesity, and stunting) is common in infants and children from the MENA region
The triple burden of malnutrition, which is marked by the simultaneous presence of undernutrition, micronutrient deficiency, and obesity, continues to pose a mounting challenge in the MENA region. Among various population groups, young children are particularly vulnerable to ongoing nutritional transitions and associated shifts in dietary habits.
The modernized food environment, characterized by the increasing adoption of Western food habits and the widespread availability of energy-dense, low-nutrient foods and beverages, has the potential to influence the dietary patterns of young children. This may compromise growth, development, and nutritional status among this demographic.

2. Micronutrient deficiency (e.g., iron, vitamin D, and zinc) is common in infants and children from the MENA region
Micronutrients play a vital role in sustaining life and ensuring optimum growth and development in children. Over one-third of the population in the MENA region has iron deficiency. Surveys have estimated that 13.2 million preschool children have a serum retinol status <0.70 µmoL/L, with 0.8 million afflicted by night blindness. Approximately one-third of the population is at risk of iodine deficiency disorders, including impaired cognitive and functional development in early childhood. Additionally, despite the availability of abundant year-long sunlight and fortification practices, vitamin D deficiency is high in the MENA region. Regional MENA data are sparse and limited. Available regional data suggest the prevalence of micronutrient deficiencies.
The daily micronutrient needs can be met through supplementation- and food-based approaches. Therefore, it is imperative to accurately assess and address micronutrient deficiencies using reliable and validated biomarkers.

3. Growth charts alone are insufficient in assessing the nutritional status of infants and children
The WHO Child Growth Standards charts are based on the growth patterns of predominantly breastfed infants. Additionally, the WHO growth charts are based on anthropometric measurements and are visible only after longer periods of undernutrition. Consequently, children with poor eating habits may have overnutrition that masks other nutrient deficiencies, including micronutrient deficiencies. These aspects should be considered in conjunction with weight, linear growth, weight relative to length, and breastfeeding status, all of which are important when assessing the nutritional status of an infant. Furthermore, screening tools such as the Screening Tool for Risk on Nutritional Status and Growth (STRONGkids), Screening Tool for the Assessment of Malnutrition in Paediatrics (STAMP), Subjective Global Nutritional Assessment (SGNA), and Nutrition Evaluation Screening Tool (NEST) can be utilized to assess the nutritional risk in children. Furthermore, a complete nutrition-focused physical examination can help identify muscle wasting, subcutaneous fat loss, and edema. As prolonged malnutrition can negatively affect growth and development, feeding recommendations should be tailored based on these factors.

4. Complementary feeding planning and counselling should be an integral part of pediatric consultations around 4–6 months of age
Complementary feeding is defined as the process of starting other foods and liquids alongside breast milk or formula when milk alone no longer fulfils the infants’ nutritional requirements. According to the UNICEF Programming Guide on Infant and Young Child Feeding, complementary feeding involves introducing solid foods at the right time, diet diversity, and ensuring adequate meal frequency. The WHO provides recommends the introduction of complementary feeding.
However, despite these guidelines, suboptimal feeding practices have been reported in several countries. A regional analysis of complementary feeding conducted using the UNICEF global database highlighted that over 20% of 10 to 11-month-old infants in the MENA and South Asia regions did not consume solid foods. This translates to a delayed introduction of complementary foods in this region. Conversely, regional data describes certain complementary feeding practices in the MENA region, such as premature introduction of complementary foods and early introduction of non-milk fluids such as herbal teas and sweetened water. This disparity between recommended practices and actual behaviors may stem from inadequate knowledge of feeding practices among parents and caregivers. It is crucial to provide counselling to parents and caregivers regarding the appropriate timing and method of complementary feeding.

5. Exclusive breastfeeding should be encouraged as much as possible, with weaning starting not earlier than the end of 4 months and no later than the end of 6 months, along with continued breastfeeding up to 2 years
Owing to the notable prevalence of non-communicable diseases among children (such as micronutrient deficiencies, underweight, and overweight) in the Middle East, promoting breastfeeding and implementing proper complementary feeding practices are imperative. Approximately 6 months of age is considered appropriate for the introduction of complementary feeding, as younger infants are not physiologically prepared for anything beyond milk because of the immaturity of their gastrointestinal system and kidneys. However, if an infant shows signs of developmental readiness, complementary foods may be introduced between 4 and 6 months. Appropriate timing is essential to bridge the nutritional gap between the daily requirements and the nutrients provided by breast milk or infant formulas.

6. Complementary feeding should ensure age-appropriate intake of macro- and micronutrients
At 6 months of age, nutrient requirements increased dramatically. The recommended daily intake of calcium and vitamin D is 260 mg/day and 400 IU/day, respectively. As the child reaches the 1–3 years age range, these requirements increase to 700 mg/day and 600 IU/day, respectively. Additionally, the recommended daily intake of zinc is 3 mg/day. Vitamin A is crucial for maintaining healthy vision, with recommended dietary intake in the pediatric population ranging from 200 to 500 µg/day. Due to the rapid growth and metabolic rate during this stage, the nutrient density of complementary foods must be high.

7. Complementary feeding is the main source of iron starting from 6 months of age, and iron bioavailability should be a key consideration
Infants are born with sufficient stores of iron in their liver for the first 6 months of life. The recommended daily nutrient intake of iron, as per the Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine, in infants aged 0–6 months is 0.27 mg/day. For the first 6 months of life, the required iron is obtained from breast milk or iron-fortified infant formula. By around 4–6 months, iron stores are depleted significantly, and the content in breast milk or iron-fortified infant formula alone is inadequate to meet infants’ increasing iron requirements. Infants and toddlers are particularly vulnerable to iron deficiency during this period of rapid growth, especially when they have low iron stores at birth.
Starting from approximately 6 months of age, most iron requirements should be fulfilled through complementary foods. Therefore, it is recommended to introduce iron-rich foods, such as red meat and iron-fortified infant cereals, into the diet. Notably, the bioavailability of iron depends on the iron enhancers and inhibitors. Food should be rich in enhancers such as ascorbic acid, heme iron, and fermented vegetables. Phytate and phenolic compounds such as calcium and copper should not be coingested with iron-rich foods. According to the guidelines provided by scientific societies, the average daily iron intake for infants and toddlers ranges aged 7–12 months from 11 mg per day.

8. Vitamin C intake (from home-made food and/or fortified infant cereals) during the weaning period is essential to optimize iron absorption
Vitamin C plays a vital role in facilitating iron absorption from iron-rich foods. Therefore, in addition to consuming iron-rich foods, it is crucial to consume nutrients, such as vitamin C, that support its absorption.

9. Complementary food needs to be rich in immunonutrients (e.g., iron, vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin D, zinc)
Optimal immune function relies on a healthy immune system, which depends on adequate nutrition. Ensuring sufficient supply of energy, macronutrients, and micronutrients is crucial for the development, maintenance, and expression of immune responses.

10. Complementary food content and texture should be age-appropriate, in line with maturation of baby’s chewing and swallowing abilities
Exposure to various textures is crucial. Early exposure not only to a diversity of tastes but also to textures plays a significant role in the long-term development of a child's food preferences and feeding skills. Furthermore, early exposure to fruits and vegetables is particularly important as these food preferences can have long-term health implications.

11. Improper complementary feeding can lead to weakened immunity, less cognitive development, and impaired physical growth
Adequate breastfeeding and optimal complementary feeding are essential to promote health, support growth, and enhance infant development. In addition to timely introduction, dietary diversity is crucial. Complementary foods should include a variety of basic food groups to ensure diverse nutrient intake that meets all the nutritional needs of the growing infant. Micronutrient deficiencies, particularly iodine and iron deficiencies, have been implicated in impaired growth and cognitive development in children.

12. Baby-led weaning may result in unreliable and unbalanced intake of macro- and micronutrients
The development of food preference involves a complex interplay between biological and environmental factors. Available data suggests that infants are born with a tendency to prefer sweet tastes. Since taste preferences are created in early childhood, the food offered during complementary feeding is crucial. Evidence suggests that eating habits learned in early childhood often persist into adulthood. In addition to the preference for sweet foods, studies suggest that infants on baby-led weaning consume fewer nutrients such as iron, zinc, calcium, vitamin C, vitamin B12, and fiber than children on traditional weaning methods. Baby-led weaned infants also consume higher amounts of sodium. This important step in early childhood nutrition is not dependent on the baby’s preferences.

13. Routine home-made food alone may lead to deficiency in macro- and micronutrients
A common phenomenon in homemade complementary foods that are based on starchy roots and tubers or rice and are available in many low-income countries is their frequent shortfall in the amounts of selected essential micronutrients such as calcium, iron, and zinc. Additionally, the presence of nutrient inhibitors can reduce the bioavailability of nutrients; for example, iron absorption is reduced by the presence of calcium, phytic acid/phytates, polyphenols/tannins, and proteins from soya beans, milk, and eggs. Therefore, bioavailability is crucial for nutrient-rich homemade complementary foods. Supplementing home-made food with fortified infant cereals can help ensure optimum nutrient intake.

14. Fresh cow milk should be avoided in infants less than 1 year of age
Several studies have indicated that the consumption of cow milk between the ages of 6 and 11 months may elevate the risk of anemia, lead to blood loss in the gastrointestinal tract, and reduce blood hemoglobin and serum ferritin levels during infancy.

15. Fresh cow milk is insufficient as a main nutritional source for infants and toddlers
Cow milk is a poor source of iron and tends to contain excessive amounts of protein, fat, and energy when consumed in large quantities. It lacks optimum quantities of important nutrients, such as vitamin C and DHA, which contribute to immunity, physical growth, and mental and cognitive development in infants. A high intake of cow milk during complementary feeding can increase the risk of iron deficiency anemia and obesity. Therefore, it is not recommended as a primary drink for infants before they reach 12 months of age.

16. Start complementary feeding with iron-rich food (e.g., fortified infant cereals, meat, poultry)
Iron is an important nutrient required for nervous system development, erythropoiesis, and growth. The iron requirement of infants aged 7–12 months was the highest at 11 mg/kg/day. A deficiency in early life may have long-term neurodevelopmental consequences. Complementary feeding must include iron-rich foods such as meat, poultry, eggs, nuts, seeds, and infant cereals of oats, barley, multigrain, and rice fortified with iron.

17. Fortified infant cereals as complementary food are recommended to meet the daily needs of essential nutrients and should be considered as a preventive approach to reduce iron deficiency in at-risk populations
The bioavailability of iron from commercially fortified complementary foods is significantly higher than that from homemade non-fortified complementary foods, particularly when the latter do not contain vitamin C, which is a potent enhancer of iron absorption.

18. Fortified infant cereals should be free from artificial additives (colours, flavours and preservatives)
Artificial additives are directly linked to a series of health problems, including gastrointestinal and respiratory problems, and a predisposition to pathological conditions such as carcinogenic, allergenic, mutagenic, cytotoxic, clastogenic, and behavioral changes.

19. If needed, supplementation with fortification can be used together
While fortification can aid in achieving higher nutrient consumption levels across a broader population, supplementation serves to fulfil dietary recommendations for specific individuals. This approach allows for the provision of personalized nutritional support tailored to individual needs.

20. Introduce one new food at a time; some food may need to be offered several times before acceptance
Studies have demonstrated an increased acceptance of new foods after repeated dietary exposure.

21. Introduction of allergenic food (e.g., egg and fish) should not be avoided or delayed at weaning period either in children considered at risk for developing allergies or in those who are not at risk
Increased dietary diversity of complementary foods may play a role in preventing food allergies. Studies have shown that introducing additional food allergens by the age of 12 months reduces the likelihood of developing food allergies during the first decade of life. By consuming a wide variety of foods, individuals are exposed to a greater range of food allergens, potentially promoting tolerance.

22. Pureed fruits are preferred over fruit juice below 1 year of age
Sugar-sweetened beverages, including fruit drinks (as opposed to 100% fruit juice), often displace nutrient-dense choices. Additionally, these beverages can contribute excessive calories to the daily intake of a child.

23. Adding salt or sugar to the complementary food should be avoided before the age of 1 year
The WHO has issued a strong recommendation to reduce the intake of free sugars to less than 10% of the total energy intake in both adults and children, and a conditional recommendation to further reduce the intake of free sugars to less than 5% of the total energy intake.
Infants naturally prefer sweet tastes. Introducing them to energy-dense foods with high sugar content may lead to a reduced intake of nutrient-dense foods, which could negatively affect their growth. Moreover, early exposure to sweet foods has been linked to a higher incidence of dental caries, high prevalence of iron deficiency, and abnormal growth. Furthermore, since long-standing dietary preferences are established through familiarity, early and frequent exposure to highly palatable sweet and salty foods raises concerns regarding their potential impact on later life dietary preferences.
Additionally, regional data suggest that the early introduction of non-milk fluids, such as sweetened water and herbal teas, is a common practice in all countries in this region.

24. Unpasteurized honey should be avoided in the first year of life to prevent the risk of infant botulism
Clostridium botulinum, the bacterium present in unpasteurized honey, can colonize and produce toxins in the gastrointestinal tract of infants, typically occurring during the first year of life, resulting in infant botulism characterized by acute muscle weakness, floppiness, and respiratory failure.

25. Do not use food as a reward or punishment during complementary feeding (acceptance by exposure)
A harmful cycle may develop, wherein children exhibiting food-seeking behavior are rewarded with food by their parents. This reinforcement can potentially contribute to the formation of unhealthy eating habits such as emotional eating and fussiness.
Complementary feeding interventions have the potential to improve children’s nutritional status. These consensus statements are intended to offer a framework for pediatricians to discuss weaning and complementary feeding practices with parents. Research and meta-analyses have indicated that nutritional counselling of parents on complementary feeding can positively impact outcomes. Specifically, education on complementary feeding practices has been shown to improve height-for-age and weight-for-age metrics and significantly reduce stunting rates.
Adequate and effective complementary feeding practices affect not only an infant’s growth, development, and immediate survival, but also have lifelong implications. These practices can shape long-term health outcomes, influencing the risk of obesity and other non-communicable diseases such as hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, and type-2 diabetes mellitus.

FUTURE RESEARCH SUGGESTIONS
Further research is needed to identify and document the current barriers to the successful implementation of these recommendations. Such insights can help develop strategies to overcome these barriers and enable the successful implementation of complementary feeding guidelines.

Summary
Ensuring optimal nutrition during the critical phases of weaning is of paramount importance for promoting healthy dietary habits, lifelong health, and well-being. Cultural, social, economic, and community food practices have a great influence on malnutrition in children under the age of 5 years. Successful breastfeeding, the timely introduction of complementary feeding, dietary diversity, and nutrient bioavailability play crucial roles in shaping growth, development, and long-term health outcomes. Challenges such as limited awareness, sugar-dense food habits, traditional feeding practices, and lack of professional guidance result in inappropriate weaning practices, emphasizing the need for comprehensive strategies and individualized approaches. Nutritional choices, such as the use of iron-fortified infant cereals during complementary feeding, can help achieve nutritional targets and desired feeding habits. Well-formulated recommendations formed by considering local food practices support parents and caregivers in providing the best possible start in life for the next generation.
Funding: The consensus statements and supporting material presented in this paper were discussed and formulated at a consensus meeting held in Dubai, UAE. All authors received support from Nestlé Nutrition to travel and attend meetings. The views expressed in this paper are purely those of the authors, without any influence from Nestlé Nutrition.
Conflict of Interest: Dr. Flavia Indrio serves as a Speaker for BioGaia, Nestlé Nutrition Institute and Danone. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest.
Nutritional gaps and supplementation in the first 1000 days
Complementary feeding: pitfalls for health outcomes
Acute malnutrition in children: pathophysiology, clinical effects and treatment
Macronutrient balance and micronutrient amounts through growth and development
The prevalence of micronutrient deficiencies and inadequacies in the Middle East and approaches to interventions
Malnutrition in children under the age of 5 years in a primary health care setting
The global challenge of hidden hunger: perspectives from the field
Factors influencing complementary feeding practices in rural and semi-urban Rwanda: a qualitative study
Micronutrient deficiency in children and adolescents with obesity—a narrative review
Women’s health: optimal nutrition throughout the lifecycle
Main nutritional deficiencies
Evidence-based Egyptian clinical practice guidelines: for the prevention and management of iron deficiency and iron deficiency anemia in infants, children and adolescents
Efficacy of an iron-fortified infant cereal to reduce the risk of iron deficiency anemia in young children in East Cameroon
Effect of iron-fortified infant cereal on nutritional status of infants in Ghana
Micronutrient-fortified infant cereal improves Hb status and reduces iron-deficiency anaemia in Indian infants: an effectiveness study
Complementary feeding: critical considerations to optimize growth, nutrition, and feeding behavior
Total usual nutrient intakes and nutritional status of United Arab Emirates children (< 4 years): findings from the Feeding Infants and Toddlers Study (FITS) 2021
Nutrition evaluation screening tool: an easy to use screening tool for hospitalised children
Nutrition-focused physical examination in pediatric patients
Complementary feeding practices among infants and young children in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Complementary feeding practices: Current global and regional estimates
Complementary feeding in the MENA region: Practices and challenges
Complementary feeding: a position paper by the European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition (ESPGHAN) Committee on Nutrition
Iron absorption: factors, limitations, and improvement methods
Dietary approaches to iron deficiency prevention in childhood—a critical public health issue
Immune function and micronutrient requirements change over the life course
Delayed introduction of lumpy foods to children during the complementary feeding period affects child’s food acceptance and feeding at 7 years of age
Early influences on the development of food preferences
Complementary feeding: review of recommendations, feeding practices, and adequacy of homemade complementary food preparations in developing countries–lessons from Ethiopia
Impact of fortified infant cereals on the burden of iron deficiency anemia in 6- to 23-month-old Indonesian infants and young children: a health economic simulation model
Iron-rich complementary foods: imperative for all infants
Synthetic colors in food: a warning for children's health
Early introduction of allergenic foods and the prevention of food allergy
The role of sugar-sweetened beverages in the global epidemics of obesity and chronic diseases
[Infant botulism – why honey should be avoided for children up to one year]
Associations of parents’ use of food as reward with children’s eating behaviour and BMI in a population-based cohort