Policy analysis on drug-resistant tuberculosis in ASEAN member countries using a governance framework approach: a scoping review
Abstract
Drug-resistant tuberculosis (DR-TB) heavily contributes to the global challenge of antimicrobial resistance (AMR), resulting in increased morbidity among tuberculosis cases. The Association of Southeast Asian Nations is home to approximately 10% of the world’s population, accounting for almost 15% of the annual global TB incidence. Thus, this study aimed to evaluate the existing national policies on DR-TB in the region using the governance framework approach for AMR and the WHO Health System Building Blocks. A thorough search for DR-TB-related national policies was performed on the websites of official health ministries and international health organisations. A total of 118 policy documents were identified after the systematic searches, and 38 policy documents were included in the data analysis. Utilising the governance framework approach, we found that the least frequently addressed domains were antimicrobial research, equity and medicine regulation for monitoring and evaluation, policy design and implementation tools, respectively. While health workforce strategies were often detailed in these national policies, we found that financing schemes were the least frequently addressed health system building blocks. The findings of our study support the need to establish a comprehensive and consolidated policy development system following the governance framework approach and to strengthen the health system building blocks in order to achieve integrated care for patients with DR-TB as espoused by the principles of universal healthcare.

WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC
Drug-resistant tuberculosis (DR-TB) is a significant contributor to the global antimicrobial resistance (AMR) crisis, leading to increased morbidity and complicating TB management.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) region, with 10% of the world’s population, accounts for nearly 15% of the annual global TB incidence, highlighting the critical need for effective national policies to address DR-TB.

WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS
This study provides a comprehensive evaluation of DR-TB-related policies in the ASEAN region and identifies significant gaps in the coverage of key governance domains, specifically in antimicrobial research, equity and medicine regulation.

HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH, PRACTICE OR POLICY
This study has direct implications on the development of cohesive and comprehensive policies that equitably address DR-TB as it identifies under-addressed areas, such as antimicrobial research and financing mechanisms, as analysed using the governance framework approach for AMR and the WHO Health System Building Blocks.

Introduction
Drug-resistant tuberculosis (DR-TB) is part of the growing global challenge of antimicrobial resistance (AMR), resulting in decreased treatment options and increased morbidity and mortality rates among TB cases. DR-TB poses a major public health challenge that threatens decades of significant progress made in tuberculosis control, care and prevention. Isoniazid and rifampicin resistance are the most concerning, being the two most effective first-line drugs for treating tuberculosis; resistance to both drugs is defined as multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB). Both MDR-TB and rifampicin-resistant TB (RR-TB) require treatment with second-line drugs. It is estimated that 3% to 4% of individuals newly diagnosed with and 18% to 21% of those who were previously treated for TB have drug-resistant forms.
Despite the decreasing overall incidence of TB over recent years, this curable disease continues to be a critical challenge for countries of lower economic wealth as over 95% of TB cases and deaths disproportionately come from low-to-middle-income countries. Southeast Asia, commonly defined under the context of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), is composed of a number of low- and middle-income (LMIC) countries, including Brunei, Laos, Singapore, Cambodia, Malaysia and Myanmar, and high TB burden countries such as the Philippines, Thailand and Indonesia. Collectively, these countries are home to more than 650 million people or almost 10% of the global population, accounting for almost 15% of the annual global TB incidence. Given the large number of cases in the region, this translates to a significant proportion of global morbidity and mortality from MDR-TB and RR-TB annually. Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic has interrupted TB diagnosis and treatment services, leading to delayed access to TB care and follow-up visits. Thus, there is a critical need to evaluate and assess national government policies on DR-TB in ASEAN member countries.
The fundamental intricacies of AMR demand a nuanced and systematic approach to governance and policy implementation. Anderson et al. developed a comprehensive framework, incorporating LMIC perspectives, to aid legislators in designing, implementing, monitoring and evaluating AMR national action plans. In the cyclical framework, there are three governance areas, namely: (1) policy design, (2) implementation mechanisms and (3) monitoring and evaluation with 18 separate domains integrated under each area: strategic vision, participation, coordination, accountability, transparency, sustainability and equity, surveillance, antimicrobial stewardship, infection prevention and control, education, public awareness, medicine regulation, fostering research and development and facilitating market access to novel products, reporting, feedback mechanisms, effectiveness and AMR research. Similarly, the WHO Health System Building Blocks is an analytical framework describing health systems while breaking them into six fundamental components: (1) leadership and governance, (2) service delivery, (3) health systems financing, (4) health workforce, (5) medical products and (6) health information systems. This tool is used to examine and appraise global health systems, pinpointing strengths, gaps and potential areas for reform and enhancement. While established frameworks such as Walt and Gilson’s Policy Triangle excel at analysing policy development processes, and Kingdon’s Multiple Streams Framework effectively explains agenda-setting dynamics, our combined approach using the Anderson governance framework and WHO Health System Building Blocks provides a more comprehensive evaluation of policy content and implementation capacity specifically tailored for LMIC contexts. This methodological alignment enables systematic assessment of existing DR-TB policies across diverse ASEAN health systems while identifying actionable gaps in service delivery, workforce capacity and multisectoral coordination that are critical for addressing complex AMR challenges.
This study aimed to characterise and identify gaps in national government policies on DR-TB in ASEAN member countries (ie, Brunei, Singapore, Laos, Cambodia, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam and Indonesia) using the governance framework approach of Anderson et al. for AMR and the WHO Health Systems Framework. Since numerous stakeholders are working on different levels of governance in combating antimicrobial resistance, the identification of priority areas through a standardised governance framework is needed for coordinated and effective policy formulation and development. Importantly, strengthening policies is a crucial approach to tackling one of the most critical public health threats of the region on a global, national, regional and local scale.
Specifically, this policy analysis seeks to answer the following research questions: (1) What are the characteristics of existing DR-TB policies in Southeast Asia from 2010 to 2023? (2) What is the gap in policy development benchmarked to the governance framework for the development and assessment of national action plans on antimicrobial resistance by Anderson et al (3) To what extent do the current policy documents address the WHO Health System Building Blocks?

Methods

Study design
National policy documents addressing DR-TB were obtained and extracted from published written and online reports from the websites of official health ministries and international health organisations. A policy was defined as a legislative or regulatory action, programme or standard by local government, governmental agencies, non-governmental organisations and academic institutions that directly impact DR-TB elimination. Content analysis of DR-TB policies was performed using the AMR governance framework, which includes domains of policy design, implementation tools, and monitoring and evaluation, as well as the WHO Health System Building Blocks. The line-by-line analysis was performed independently by two researchers, and a pair discussion was done to resolve any disagreements. If conflicts remain unresolved, a third researcher resolves any disagreements. Team consensus was necessary for finalising the list of themes to improve process reliability. A review protocol was developed by the authors prior to study implementation. Ethics approval was not required for this secondary analysis of publicly available data. The details of study selection at each stage are presented using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) 2020 charting with reasons for excluding studies during full-text review (online supplemental file 1).

Search strategy
The primary information sources for this analysis are the national health ministry websites of ASEAN countries. This was supplemented by a grey literature search in the English language using and websites of international organisations, particularly the United Nations, WHO, USAid and Asian Development Bank. A detailed summary of data sources is provided in the supplementary material (online supplemental file 2 and 3).
For each health ministry or organisation website, the authors searched the resources sections for policies, publications or legislation issued between 1 January 2010 and 1 January 2023 with potential relevance to DR-TB. For websites with available search functions for resources, the following keywords were used: “drug-resistant tuberculosis”, “drug-resistant TB”, “tuberculosis control,” “national action plan”, and “national strategic plan” (online supplemental file 4 and 5). The final search results were uploaded into Covidence (Veritas Innovation) for Health deduplication and collaborative screening.

Selection criteria
The selection criteria employed for policy documents is outlined in table 1. Two reviewers independently screened each record to assess eligibility. Discrepancies were resolved through discussion or third-party adjudication. Automation tools were not used in the selection process.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for policy documents included in the study
Inclusion criteria	Exclusion criteria	 	The policy document was issued between 1 January 2010 and 1 January 2023	Any policy document published before 2010	 	The policy document was published by the health ministries at the national level or the policy document was published by international governing bodies to its constituents	The policy document is not available in English or Indonesian language	 	The eligible types of policy documents were the Resolution, Decision, Order, Announcement, Memorandum, Issuances, Note, Opinion, Notice, Notification and Reports that were transmitted from higher authority to lower authority with Command or Inform strength level. The details of eligible types of policy documents are provided in online supplemental file 2	The full text of the policy was not publicly available	 	The content of the policy document aligned with one or more domains (prevention, diagnosis, screening, treatment) in the management of DR-TB	The scope of the policy document was limited within a certain context, for example, a region-specific policy	 	The policy document targeted people with DR-TB at the national level in any of the ASEAN member countries	The policy purpose was to serve as a fact statement, for example, a technical standard or statistical data
ASEAN, Association of Southeast Asian Nations; DR-TB, drug-resistant tuberculosis.

Analytical framework
A framework (figure 1) that combines the governance framework approach for AMR and the WHO Health System Building Blocks was used to identify the current state of health policies governing the care for patients with DR-TB. This framework guided the synthesis of data and identification of gaps in policy across countries. Policies were grouped according to domains (policy design, implementation tools, monitoring and evaluation) and analysed according to the Health System Building Blocks. Through the identification of existing gaps in policies, health systems in ASEAN member countries could be realigned to enable the provision of comprehensive and integrated DR-TB care.
The analytical framework used for existing policies for drug-resistant tuberculosis in ASEAN member countries. AMR, antimicrobial resistance; ASEAN, Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Data extraction and synthesis
The articles were assessed using a jointly developed form. Essential information was extracted into a predefined data extraction template independently in Microsoft Excel, including title, authors, issue date and policy type. The content of the policy documents was analysed and coded according to the domains of policy design, implementation tools and monitoring and evaluation. Furthermore, the content of policy documents was also assessed according to the WHO Health System Building Blocks. A review of the first five policies was completed by all reviewers for training and to ensure inter-reviewer agreement. The remaining policies were evaluated by at least two reviewers independently and any discrepancies were discussed to ensure consensus. If conflicts remain unresolved, a third reviewer resolves any disagreements. Regular consensus meetings were held. Synthesis was descriptive and thematic. Sensitivity analysis or subgroup comparisons were not applicable due to the qualitative nature of the study. As this was a document analysis of policy texts, traditional risk of bias tools were not applicable. Instead, completeness and clarity of reporting in policies were noted qualitatively

Patient and public involvement
Patients and the public were not involved in the design, conduct or reporting of the research. However, the researchers aim to disseminate the study findings to stakeholders in the DR-TB AMR field, including the WHO, ASEAN ministries of health and communities with high incidence of cases.

Results

The flow of policy search, identification and selection
A total of 118 policy documents were obtained after the systematic searches, with 47 documents obtained from healthy ministry websites and 71 documents obtained from websites of international organisations. After excluding duplicate records (n=8), 110 documents remained and were screened using the title and abstract by two independent reviewers. Following the eligibility criteria, a total of 51 records were excluded (36, not policy documents; and 15, not pertaining to ASEAN countries), and a total of 59 policy documents were included for full-text review. Following full-text review, a total of 19 records were further excluded (eight, not policy documents; 10, not pertaining to ASEAN countries; two, limited scope; and one, duplicate). For the final data analysis, 38 policy documents were included (online supplemental file 6).

Characteristics of policy documents
In the identified policy documents concerning DR-TB in ASEAN countries from 2010 to 2023, the majority (64%) of the policy documents were identified to be an Order, followed by Notice (14%), Resolution (11%), Memorandum (8%), Report (6%) and Decision (3%). A total of 11 policy documents from the WHO were included in this study (online supplemental file 7).
Existing gaps in DR-TB health policies in the ASEAN member countries as analysed according to the governance framework for the development and assessment of national action plans on antimicrobial resistance
The existing gaps in DR-TB health policies in the ASEAN member countries, as analysed based on Anderson et al’s governance framework and the WHO Health System Building Blocks, are presented in figures 2–4. In the domain of policy design (figure 3), we identified strategic vision and coordination as the top priorities, addressed in 100.0% (38/38) of policy documents, and equity as the least priority, only discussed in 71.0% (27/38) of policy documents. In the domain of implementation tools (figure 3), we identified surveillance as the top priority, addressed in 86.8% (33/38) of policy documents, and regulation of medicines as the least priority, only discussed in 65.8% (25/38) of policy documents. Finally, in the domain of monitoring and evaluation (figure 3), we identified reporting to be the top priority, addressed in 97.4% (37/38) of policy documents, and antimicrobial research to be the least priority, only discussed in 65.8% (26/38) of policy documents. Regarding the WHO Health System Building Blocks (figure 4), we identified leadership and governance to be well-covered in 100.0% (38/38) of policy documents while planning for financing was lacking as it was only accounted for in 65.8% (26/38) of policy documents.
The map of DR-TB-related policy documents from 2010 to 2023 in ASEAN member countries. ASEAN, Association of Southeast Asian Nations; DR-TB, drug-resistant tuberculosis.
DR-TB-related policy documents from 2010 to 2023 in ASEAN member countries that meet the governance framework for antimicrobial resistance of Anderson et al. ASEAN, Association of Southeast Asian Nations; DR-TB, drug-resistant tuberculosis.
DR-TB-related policy documents from 2010 to 2023 in ASEAN member countries that meet the WHO Health System Building Blocks.

Discussion
In this study, we used the governance framework approach of Anderson et al for antimicrobial resistance and the WHO Health Systems Framework to evaluate existing DR-TB policies of ASEAN member countries (ie, Brunei, Singapore, Laos, Cambodia, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Thailand and Indonesia). One of the key components to combating AMR is carefully coordinated policies. However, we have identified existing gaps in these policy documents, mostly concerning AMR research, health information systems, medicine regulation, education and fostering research and development.

Governance framework approach for antimicrobial resistance

Policy design
Policy design is concerned with the general and procedural issues of AMR National Action Programs (NAPs). Particularly, the domain of equity considerations in AMR policies encompasses the dual objectives of promoting responsible usage and ensuring equitable access to essential antimicrobials. The Malaysian National Strategic Plan for Tuberculosis is notable for ensuring all people receive quality care despite disparities resulting from socioeconomic development and changing epidemics. Additionally, Myanmar and Singapore NAPs for AMR involve announcing a national AMR containment policy, implementing Antimicrobial Stewardship Programmes (AMSP) and establishing Standard Treatment Guidelines (STG) at the national level. We noted that 29.0% (11/38) of the reviewed papers failed to consider equity as a significant parameter. For instance, Laos’ Tuberculosis Control Program and the Philippines’ Programmatic Management of DR-TB equity. The absence of responsible usage and equitable access constitutes a crucial problem in reinforcing governance structures that are responsible for the appropriate distribution of antimicrobial agents according to clinical indication. Inequity manifesting as antimicrobial shortages and regulatory inadequacies contributes to the exacerbation of AMR. Inequity may prompt healthcare professionals to resort to suboptimal treatments or employ broader spectrum antimicrobials, which perpetuates high out-of-pocket expenditure that incentivises prescription bias for inappropriate antimicrobials. As such, policymakers must adopt a holistic and equity-oriented approach in AMR policy design. We suggest incorporating equity indicators in national strategic plans, such as access to essential antimicrobials, out-of-pocket expenditure, geographic distribution of AMSP and STG implementation and extent of public awareness on responsible use, among others. While the inclusion of these indicators is necessary, its feasibility remains a challenge due to factors such as the availability of disaggregated data, the strength of monitoring systems and the political and economic will to act on identified inequities.

Implementation tools
Implementation tools consist of crucial interventions contained within guidance from WHO, the Food and Agriculture Organization, the World Organization for Animal Health and the European Commission. This encompasses the domains of surveillance, antimicrobial stewardship programmes, infection prevention, health workforce education, public awareness, medicine regulation and research. In Cambodia’s National Strategic Plan to end tuberculosis, the National Tuberculosis Programme will facilitate the regulation of all anti-TB medicines in the context of the antimicrobial resistance country action plan. The primary synergy necessary to maximise implementation is built on the foundation of regulation and education. In Myanmar and Thailand’s NAP on AMR, strengthening a competent National Regulatory Agency (NRA) or Drug Regulatory Agency (DRA) is key to enforcing quality standards of antimicrobial drugs. Ensuring integrated control and tracing systems is essential, combining effective law enforcement with social measures to address inappropriate antimicrobial distribution.
A total of 34.3% (13/38) and 31.6% (12/38) of the evaluated policies lack the domains of prescription regulation and education, respectively. The imperative for a comprehensive and effective management of AMR lies in the foundational elements of professional education and medicine regulation. The absence of these crucial components significantly hampers the efficacy of the overarching antimicrobial stewardship programme. The training and education of involved professionals to implement the policies will significantly impact the capacity of the necessary workforce to adopt standards, facilitate control policies and implement the antimicrobial stewardship guidelines. Strategies to address gaps in education include (1) collaborating with academic institutions and accrediting bodies to integrate AMR into preservice curricula and standardise learning outcomes, (2) expanding in-service training and continuous professional development, (3) incentivising health workers’ completion of AMR-related training and (4) implementing targeted capacity-building initiatives for community and informal providers serving in rural areas, where irrational use is prevalent. On the other hand, strategies to enhance prescription regulation include (1) building and strengthening NRAs/DRAs to allow strict licensing, quality assurance and inspection of antimicrobial producers, importers and sellers; (2) enforcing prescription-only access to antimicrobials; (3) developing integrated supply chain and tracking systems for antimicrobials; and (4) integrating private pharmacies and small-scale drug outlets into AMR training, accreditation schemes and surveillance networks. Albeit promising, these strategies necessitate multisectoral collaboration, long-term planning and targeted resource allocation.

Monitoring and evaluation
The assessment processes integral to monitoring and evaluation encompass the implementation of reporting and feedback mechanisms. These mechanisms facilitate systematic and periodic reviews and evaluations of NAPs addressing AMR, accounting for the multifaceted dimensions of effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of these strategic plans.
Some policies exhibited a proactive stance in evaluating the effectiveness of current and past measures in addressing MDR-TB. For instance, the 2019 resolution from the WHO’s regional office for Southeast Asia underscored the importance of employing Discovering Evidence Supporting the effectiveness of new Treatment for drug Resistant TB to appraise the country-specific feasibility and effectiveness of novel drug regimens for MDR-TB. However, it is noteworthy that 26.3% (10/38) of reviewed papers failed to address this crucial aspect. In contrast, the National Tuberculosis Control Programme of the Philippines for the period 2017–2020 stands out as a notable example of a key policy or framework that did not have references to the monitoring of effectiveness. Policies that lack mechanisms to assess whether interventions are working cannot be meaningfully improved, thus risking inefficient resource use. We recommend standardised monitoring and evaluation frameworks with defined outcomes and impact indicators (eg, AMR prevalence trends, prescription audit outcomes, cost-effectiveness of interventions), timelines and reporting mechanisms tied to NAP implementation. Feedback loops must be structured and strengthened in order to enable stakeholders, including frontline providers, to report on policy implementation challenges and outcomes.
Within the purview of non-therapeutic AMR research, the inquiry extends to the examination of the existence of a comprehensive national multidisciplinary One Health research agenda. This agenda is designed to comprehensively explore the determinants influencing AMR and to formulate potential strategies for its mitigation. Globally, there is a demand for increased research on new vaccines, medicines and alternative treatments for bacterial infections. Additionally, there is a need for enhanced rapid diagnostic tests to ensure the appropriate use of antimicrobials. The advancement of research is contingent on the establishment of judicious policies and the provision of incentives aimed at encouraging the development of innovative antimicrobial agents and alternative therapeutic modalities. Notably, 29.0% (11/38) of reviewed policies failed to discuss strategies for fostering research and development (R&D). However, notably, in Singapore’s NAP on AMR, one of the core strategies is to set up a national coordinating body to coordinate AMR research in line with a national AMR research agenda. Priority research areas for cross-sectoral collaboration include the identification of transmission pathways and the determination of the impact on AMR control efforts, genomic analysis, medication regulation, sociobehavioural and socioeconomic research to comprehend baseline attitudes, practices and knowledge of AMR and the generation of comprehensive interventional behaviours for better AMR control. Without a national AMR research agenda, countries risk falling behind and failing to respond adequately to evolving resistance patterns. Strategies to address this gap include establishing a national AMR research agenda and developing a national coordinating body for AMR research; allocating government funding or tax incentives for R&D; fostering public-private partnerships between government, academe and pharmaceutical companies to bridge research and practice; and promoting international collaboration through regional and global research networks to maximise research capacity and funding opportunities.

WHO health systems building blocks
A significant driving force of DR-TB is poor adherence to proper treatment regimens, and a well-documented factor contributing to this is the lack of access to essential medicines. This inability to access the appropriate antitubercular drugs precludes antimicrobial stewardship as it is likely to result in patients proceeding inaccurately with their treatment schedule, failing to complete their regimen or even foregoing treatment altogether. In other cases, the lack of access to the appropriate medicines may lead patients and healthcare professionals alike to resort to selecting antibiotics solely based on their availability. According to the WHO, essential medicines are ‘intended to be available within the context of functioning health systems at all times in adequate amounts, in the appropriate dosage forms, with assured quality and adequate information, and at a price the individual and the community can afford’. In our study, only 78.9% (30/38) of policies detailed plans for access to essential medicines. An excellent example of a policy that considers this is the National Health Strategies Plan for Tuberculosis Control in the Kingdom of Cambodia 2011–2015, which provided specific steps aimed at achieving equitable access to TB services, focusing on the poor and community participation.
A health information system, managed by trained and capable personnel, allows efficient recording of cases and monitoring of emerging drug resistance patterns. Moreover, health information technology enables a focused review of antimicrobial usage from patient data and prescription records. The lack of a systematic and organised health information system may limit timely and appropriate responses to rapidly changing resistance patterns. In our study, only 73.7% (28/38) of policies detailed plans for information management. Despite this, Myanmar’s National Strategic Plan 2021–2025 stands out as an excellent example of a health information system plan that details surveillance in diagnostic and treatment facilities. Policymakers must recognise health information systems as a crucial element of NAPs against DR-TB and likewise incorporate them, especially considering their role in policy design, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation.
Finally, financing schemes are central to the implementation of health policies, including in DR-TB care. Notably, financing was the WHO building block that was least accounted for by ASEAN DR-TB policies included in this study, only detailed in 68.4% (26/38) of policies. Out-of-pocket spending is still a principal means of financing healthcare in ASEAN member countries, accounting for >30% of total health spending in almost all ASEAN countries, except Brunei and Thailand. Coupled with the unexplored economic consequences of having a DR-TB diagnosis, the lack of readily available financing schemes predisposes patients to financial toxicity. In contrast, an excellent example of a detailed financing scheme would be Cambodia’s National Health Policies and Strategies for Tuberculosis Control 2011–2015, which includes provisions for funding the national programme. Although financing is a critical component of these policies, feasibility concerns remain, including the need for sustained political commitment, strategic reallocation of public resources, alignment with universal health coverage frameworks and potential leveraging of support from international partners.

Comparative analysis with other regions
Our findings reveal critical governance patterns that align with global DR-TB treatment challenges documented in international literature. WHO estimates that while approximately half a million cases of multidrug or RR-TB occur annually, only one-third access effective treatment, with just over half achieving successful outcomes. This global treatment gap reflects the policy deficiencies we identified across ASEAN countries. International evidence demonstrates substantial variation in treatment outcomes based on policy implementation strength: extensively DR-TB shows pooled treatment success rates of only 44.2% globally, while countries with robust regulatory frameworks like Portugal achieve 73.8% success rates for MDR-TB patients. Community-based treatment programmes, which require strong policy frameworks for decentralisation and equity provisions, demonstrate 65% treatment success rates compared with traditional hospital-based approaches. The governance gaps we identified—particularly in antimicrobial research capacity, equity provisions and regulatory frameworks—directly correlate with these outcome disparities. Poor policy implementation contributes to low MDR-TB treatment success rates globally, with care costs far exceeding those for drug-susceptible tuberculosis. This evidence underscores that strengthening the specific policy domains we evaluated could significantly improve ASEAN’s DR-TB outcomes and align them with international best practices demonstrated in high-performing health systems.

Limitations
This study has certain limitations. First, policy documents were sourced from the official websites of the corresponding health departments of the different ASEAN countries, along with the official websites of international organisations. Thus, only publicly available DR-TB-related policies were included in the study coverage. This study has certain limitations. First, policy documents were sourced from the official websites of the corresponding health departments of the different ASEAN countries, along with the official websites of international organisations. Thus, only publicly available DR-TB-related policies were included in the study coverage. Second, restricting the document inclusion to English and Indonesian may have led to the exclusion of relevant policies written in other languages (eg, Thai, Vietnamese or Burmese), which may have biased our findings. Third, the paucity of high-quality databases for ASEAN health policies has precluded a systematic search strategy for DR-TB-related policies. Fourth, the limited data extracted in this study may be insufficient to comprehensively evaluate and assess the implementation and impact of existing DR-TB-related policies. While our analysis includes DR-TB policies in several ASEAN countries, the translation of these policies into effective practice remains a critical challenge that warrants careful consideration. The policy gaps we identified—particularly in antimicrobial research capacity and equity provisions—likely translate to significant implementation barriers, as evidenced by studies in similar LMIC settings where inadequate laboratory infrastructure and limited access to second-line drugs have hindered DR-TB treatment outcomes. Furthermore, even countries with robust policy documents may struggle with implementation due to resource constraints, inadequate healthcare workforce training or weak coordination between national and subnational levels. Despite these limitations, our policy assessment framework serves as a valuable foundation for future mixed-methods studies that examine the policy-implementation gap through facility assessments, stakeholder interviews and patient outcome monitoring across the ASEAN region. Furthermore, it will inform and advance strategies in the development of future policies concerning DR-TB.

Conclusion
After an objective analysis of existing DR-TB policies in ASEAN member countries through governance and WHO frameworks, numerous significant gaps concerning medicine regulation, education, fostering research and development, surveillance, health information systems, access to essential medicines and lack of adequate financing schemes have been identified. Collectively, these factors hamper an effective response to DR-TB and align with global treatment challenges where only one-third of eligible patients access effective care.
ASEAN governments must prioritise the immediate strengthening of national DR-TB policies through three critical actions: establishing regional antimicrobial research consortia to address capacity gaps, implementing standardised equity provisions to ensure vulnerable population access and harmonising medicine regulation frameworks across member countries to improve treatment quality and cross-border coordination. Improving these particular domains and adopting evidence-based best practices will facilitate improved policy formulation and its subsequent translation into effective implementation.
The drivers of antimicrobial resistance are interconnected, and the same can be said for its solutions. Overcoming these challenges necessitates strong leadership and political commitment to make substantial changes in policies, reorganise health systems and put knowledge and recommendations into practice. This study establishes a foundation for critical next steps, including mixed-methods research evaluating policy implementation fidelity, longitudinal studies linking governance improvements to health outcomes and comparative effectiveness research across ASEAN health systems. Additionally, there is a crucial need to align domestic, regional and global policy frameworks to support antimicrobial stewardship, alongside increasing capacity and infrastructure in LMICs, while collaborating with various global organisations. Strengthening policies through evidence-based governance frameworks remains key to addressing DR-TB and other forms of AMR, which continues to be one of the most critical public health threats in the region and globally.

Supplementary material
Funding: This work is a secondary analysis of data collected with the support of funding provided by the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene Early Career Grants Programme 2022. The donor had no involvement in the methodologies employed, data identified, analysis conducted or conclusions drawn.
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer-reviewed.
Handling editor: Soumitra S Bhuyan
Patient consent for publication: Not applicable.
Ethics approval: Not applicable.
Data availability free text: Data are available upon reasonable request with the corresponding author.
Patient and public involvement: Patients and/or the public were not involved in the design, conduct, reporting or dissemination plans of this research.

References
Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis and COVID-19: A Scoping Review on a New Threat to Antimicrobial Resistance
Drug resistant tuberculosis: Implications for transmission, diagnosis, and disease management
Global burden of disease (gbd)
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on TB services at ART programmes in low- and middle-income countries: a multi-cohort survey
A governance framework for development and assessment of national action plans on antimicrobial resistance
Taking Systems Thinking to the Global Level: Using the WHO Building Blocks to Describe and Appraise the Global Health System in Relation to COVID-19
Reforming the health sector in developing countries: the central role of policy analysis
John W. Kingdon, Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies, Boston: Little, Brown, 1984
Is Singapore on track to eliminate tuberculosis by 2030? A policy case study
NATIONAL strategic plan for tuberculosis control (2016-2020)
National action plan for containment of antimicrobial resistance: myanmar 2017-2022
National strategic action plan on antimicrobial resistance
National tb strategic plan update 2017-2020
Implementation of the revised programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis (pmdt) guidelines
National strategic plan to end tuberculosis in cambodia 2021-2030
Thailand’s national strategic plan on antimicrobial resistance 2017-2021
Ending drug-resistant tb in who south-east asia region: eleventh meeting of the regional mdr-tb advisory committee (‎rglc sear)
Updated 2010–2016 philippine plan of action to control tuberculosis
National health policies and strategies for tuberculosis control in the kingdom of cambodia 2011-2015
Concept of essential medicines and rational use in public health
Investigating the ways in which health information technology can promote antimicrobial stewardship: a conceptual overview
National strategic plan 2021–2025 national tb programme
Who pays for health care in Asia?
Progress toward universal health coverage in ASEAN
WHO consolidated guidelines on tuberculosis. module 4: treatment - drug-resistant tuberculosis treatment, 2022 update
Global treatment outcomes of extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis in adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Evaluation of drug-resistant tuberculosis treatment outcome in Portugal, 2000-2016
Treatment outcomes from community-based drug resistant tuberculosis treatment programs: a systematic review and meta-analysis
A Scoping Review of National Policies for Healthy Ageing in Mainland China from 2016 to 2020

Data availability statement
Data are available upon reasonable request.