UK Defence Rehabilitation consensus agreement for the conservative management of Achilles and patellar tendinopathy: a modified Delphi approach
Abstract
Achilles and patellar tendinopathy are common in military personnel due to the repetitive high loads and challenging extrinsic risk factors associated with the demands of their role. Sports medicine is rapidly evolving. Up-to-date evidence-based research is essential, alongside clinical reasoning, to deliver best-practice treatment to service personnel, underpinned by the duty of care to their long-term career.
The aim of this research was to develop recommendations on conservative management of Achilles and patellar tendinopathy in relation to the military population. A systematic review was conducted by a multidisciplinary clinical panel from across Defence Rehabilitation. The panel was split into four subgroups (diagnosis and outcome measures, medical, exercise and adjuncts). Each subgroup proposed recommendations for voting across the wider authorship in a modified Delphi process. 28 recommendations achieved substantial agreement following a chaired meeting attended by all authors. A summary infographic was produced to highlight themes relevant to the military patient population.
Diagnosis of Achilles and patellar tendinopathy remains clinical. The consensus panel strongly advocates exercise rehabilitation as the primary management of Achilles and patellar tendinopathy. Medical interventions should respect the long-term occupational needs of the military population. Education is advised, but further adjunctive interventions should only be considered on a case-by-case basis. This consensus agreement provides a framework for the development of local guidelines for the management of Achilles and patellar tendinopathy in the UK military population.

Introduction
Tendinopathy presents as pain and dysfunction, often related to activity that exceeds the tendon’s mechanical capacity and recovery. Several treatment options exist, aiming to restore the tendon’s mechanical capacity and function, ranging from exercise-based rehabilitation to superficial adjuncts and cellular-level medical interventions such as injections.
Tendinopathy has been researched extensively, often in relation to athletic performance or the general population. Despite some parallels in physical performance, there are notable differences between service personnel and athletes. Both train for specific roles, but periodisation in the military is often interrupted by daily work tasks, courses or deployment. Additionally, monitoring and modifying load is a challenge in military settings, especially when the nature and duration of tasks vary, with further risk factors for tendinopathy, such as sleep, nutrition and terrain, often difficult to control.
Sports and exercise medicine is rapidly evolving. It is supposed that injuries with variable recovery times (such as tendinopathy) have a trend towards novel techniques, with reasonable theoretical constructs but limited clinical evidence. In elite sports, these interventions are often trialled in the hope of an accelerated return to sport. However, in reality, lengthy rehabilitation often follows, which the patient/coach/manager is potentially more amenable to after active intervention. All clinicians are bound by a duty of care. The weighting of short-term competitive edge versus long-term considerations differs between typical military and elite sports settings.
In the UK military, up to 49% of infantry recruits sustain a musculoskeletal injury during basic training. Defence rehabilitation aims include, but are not exclusively focused on, immediate performance or enhanced deployability but also reduced medical discharge, long-term occupational career and personal sustainment. Defence clinicians need to apply ethical principles to justify why some practices may not be immediately practicable.
Therefore, a systematic review of recent literature for conservative management of tendinopathy was conducted (Part 1). Achilles and patellar tendinopathy were the focus, in keeping with their prevalence in military populations. The Part 2 aim was to vote on recommendations and create a consensus agreement for conservative management of Achilles and patellar tendinopathy using the Delphi model. These recommendations can then be used to update the Defence Rehabilitation best-practice guidelines (BPGs) for lower limb tendinopathy.

Methods
All Defence Rehabilitation staff (n=630) received an email inviting participation in the consensus group. Clinicians with an interest in tendinopathy who work in Defence Rehabilitation were included. No one was excluded from the group; however, there was a natural dropout (n=10) after initial contact from 31 clinicians. The final group was a multidisciplinary team comprising military and civilian sport and exercise medicine consultants (n=3), doctors (n=1), physiotherapists (n=15) and exercise rehabilitation instructors (n=2) throughout primary, secondary and tertiary Defence Rehabilitation.
Patient engagement was sought via a questionnaire from patients attending an outpatient tendinopathy class. This was part of a local service evaluation, within guidelines set by National Institute for Health and Care Research, so no formal ethical approval was sought. 21 patients responded over a 3-month period. Patients reported a good understanding of their condition with treatment options explained to them, but fewer patients reported awareness of evidence-based research or guidelines. Full results are in online supplemental file 1. Following feedback, an infographic was produced to accompany the consensus agreement that can be displayed in departments (online supplemental file 2).
A modified Delphi technique was used to achieve consensus on recommendations based on the literature search as per Part 1. An initial meeting on 31 March 2023 outlined the consensus agreement process. Four subgroups were created (diagnosis and outcome measures, medical, exercise and adjuncts) to search the recent evidence for conservative management.
Subgroups met individually and reconvened at whole-group meetings on 4 July 2023, 27 September 2023, 6 December 2023 and 31 January 2024. Meetings were online, except for 31 January 2024, which was hybrid and hosted at the Defence Medical Rehabilitation Centre Stanford Hall. Over 80% of members attended each meeting.
Recommendations were linked to the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine levels of evidence. Recommendations were created by the subgroups and circulated on the dates above to the whole group for anonymous scoring on a 0–10 Likert scale (0=completely disagree and 10=completely agree). Members had 2 weeks to vote. The modified Delphi process is shown in figure 1.
The modified Delphi process.

Results
The rounds of voting for each subgroup’s recommendations are shown in table 1, with full details of recommendations that were reviewed and discussed in online supplemental file 3. Over 85% of consensus group members voted at each round. No recommendations were discarded immediately. Recommendations to be reviewed were discussed at a meeting chaired by the lead author (AJ) before being revised by the relevant subgroup. 12 recommendations achieved consensus agreement after the first round of voting. Several additional statements passed, but the wording was still revised, or some statements combined, based on feedback from the wider group, with subsequent revoting.
Details of each round of voting for the modified Delphi process
Voting round	Diagnosis and outcome measures	Medical	Exercise	Adjuncts	 	Patellar	Achilles	 	1	Number of recommendations	5	10	8	16	6	 	Number rejected (score ≤4)	0	0	0	0	0	 	Number scored >4 ≤7.5	2	1	0	8	0	 	Number passed >7.5	3	9	8	8	6	 	2	Number of revised recommendations	2	1	3	4	7	 	Number rejected (score ≤4)	0	0	0	0	0	 	Number scored >4 ≤7.5	0	0	0	2	0	 	Number passed >7.5	2	1	3	2	7	 	3	Number of revised recommendations	N/A	N/A	N/A	3	N/A	 	Number rejected (score ≤4)	0	 	Number scored >4 ≤7.5	0	 	Number passed >7.5	3	 	Total number of final recommendations	5	10	3	3	7
See Discussion section for full details on voting rounds.
N/A, Not applicable, consensus score >7.5.
The final recommendations are shown in table 2. A full discussion of the literature pertaining to each recommendation can be found in Part 1. An overview of the discussion that led to each recommendation is presented below, with consideration of risk or possible adverse effects. The authors recognise that clinical reasoning underpins their use.
Final recommendations and consensus score
Recommendation	Consensus score	 	Diagnosis and Outcome Measures		 	A multimethod approach is recommended for diagnosing Achilles and patellar tendinopathy, including subjective factors, objective tests and patient-reported outcome measures (PROM). Level 1.	8.67	 	B-mode ultrasound (B-US) is useful in the diagnosis of tendinopathy though clinical improvements in the short to medium term do not correlate with B-US measures. Level 1.	8.0	 	Ultrasound tissue characterisation and shearwave elastography show promise as responsive outcome measures in tendinopathy but further longitudinal research with standardisation of protocols is required. Level 3.	7.56	 	Where increased tendon thickness at the enthesis or presence of erosions are identified using ultrasound in Achilles tendinopathy an underlying inflammatory diagnosis should be considered. Level 1.	8.06	 	A multimethod approach is recommended for monitoring progression in both Achilles and patellar tendinopathy, including subjective factors, objective tests and PROM. Level 3.	8.72	 	Medical		 	Use of platelet-rich plasma offers no additional benefit based on current evidence. Level 1.	8.38	 	Use of autologous blood injection offers no additional benefit based on current limited evidence. Level 1.	8.52	 	Use of high-volume image guided injection offers no additional benefit based on two well controlled randomised controlled trials. Level 2.	8.38	 	Use of peritendinous corticosteroid injection in the long term may result in poorer outcomes. Any benefit is confined to the short-term only. Level 1.	7.9	 	Intratendinous corticosteroid injection has been associated with a risk of tendon rupture. Level 4.	8.05	 	There is insufficient evidence for use of stem cells with the literature noted to be at high risk of bias. Level 4.	8.48	 	There is no conclusive evidence to support nutritional supplementation. Level 3.	8.43	 	There is some evidence supporting adjunctive use of extracorporeal shockwave treatment, which should be offered in conjunction with an appropriate loading programme. Level 1.	8.67	 	Use of tendon dry needling for patellar tendinopathy shows some promising results although heterogeneity of methods precludes meta-analysis to support firm recommendations. Level 1.	8.0	 	Use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs is not associated with long-term improvement in clinical outcomes or tendon structure but may offer some short-term pain relief. Side effect profile must be considered. Level 1	8.75	 	Exercise		 	Patella		 	Isometric and isotonic contractions are equally effective for immediate and short-term pain reduction in patellar tendinopathy. Level 2	8.24	 	HSR and PTLE progressed according to functional capacity produce more favourable outcomes than protocols determined by pain scores. Level 2	8.47	 	HSR and PTLE are recommended over eccentrics due to greater patient satisfaction. Level 2	8.65	 	Achilles		 	Isometrics are recommended if other contraction types are not tolerated. Level 3.	8.71	 	Either HSR or eccentrics are recommended for progressive loading. Level 1.	8.59	 	Lower-volume protocols are equally effective to higher-volume protocols and therefore recommended. Level 1.	8.18	 	Adjuncts		 	Taping may have a short-term pain-relieving effect in patellar tendinopathy. Level 3	7.94	 	There was insufficient recent evidence to support routine use of massage or manual therapy for patella tendinopathy; however, deep friction massage of the tendon may have short-term pain-relieving effect. Level 3.	7.89	 	The systematic review identified no new evidence to support the routine use of ice, taping, stretches, laser or acupuncture in patellar tendinopathy. OCEBM level could not be applied.	8.33	 	There is insufficient evidence that muscle trigger point dry needling is effective as a stand-alone treatment for Achilles tendinopathy but may reduce pain when performed alongside eccentric loading. Level 3	8.35	 	The short-term effects of therapeutic ultrasound are no better than placebo in Achilles tendinopathy. Level 2.	8.83	 	Education in pain science or pathoanatomy has a positive effect in improving function and reducing fear of movement in chronic Achilles tendinopathy. Level 2.	8.78	 	The systematic review identified no new evidence to support the routine use of ice, massage, manual therapy, taping, stretches, laser or acupuncture in Achilles tendinopathy. OCEBM level could not be applied.	8.39
HSR, heavy slow resistance; OCEBM, Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine; PROMs, patient-reported outcome measures; PTLE, progressive tendon loading exercise.

Diagnosis and outcome measures
Three recommendations achieved consensus agreement immediately, with no further amendment required. One statement was revised and subsequently split into two recommendations regarding imaging (numbers 3 and 4), which then passed the second round of voting. There are currently no ‘gold-standard’ tests for diagnosing Achilles and patellar tendinopathy. Tendon disorganisation can be detected on ultrasound; however, the correlation between pain and function is still disputed. Part 1 found level 1 evidence to support the use of conventional B-mode ultrasound for tendinopathy diagnosis and consideration of wider inflammatory processes included in the differential, such as spondyloarthropathy. The role of imaging in monitoring response to treatment and subsequent clinical decision-making is uncertain; this is reflected in the modest agreement scores for the corresponding statement (number 3, score 7.56).
One statement that specifically recommended the Victorian Institute of Sport Assessment (VISA) questionnaires was discarded after voting and further discussion. Several studies have confirmed the reliability, validity and responsiveness of the VISA questionnaires for measuring disability. However, it is acknowledged they were produced prior to publication of standardised guidelines for patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs). One systematic review identified nine core domains for Achilles tendinopathy, and although disability was the most frequently assessed (VISA-Achilles (VISA-A)), the consensus group agreed that no single PROM should be recommended over another for either diagnosis or measuring response to treatment. Instead, clinicians should consider which PROM is most appropriate based on the patient’s presentation.
Symptoms reported often include tendon pain and stiffness provoked by repetitive loading. Participation in running and jumping sports is an extrinsic risk factor for Achilles and patellar tendinopathy. These findings are applicable to military populations, where participation in running and load carriage is, arguably, non-modifiable, especially for certain roles. Subjective questioning should recognise these factors and identify acute or chronic load increases that may outweigh the tendon’s mechanical capacity. The single-leg decline squat (SLDS) is well established in the literature as a provocative test for patellar tendinopathy; however, no equivalent test for the Achilles tendon has been identified.
One study assessed the prognostic value of several functional tests compared with patient-reported symptoms (VISA-Patellar (VISA-P)) over a 24-week loading programme. Multiple physical tests improved, but VAS-SLDS was the only measure that saw improvement (although not significant) corresponding to an increase in VISA-P score. For Achilles tendinopathy, one study identified that a repeated hop test and ankle dorsiflexion range of movement could guide prognosis; however, the findings were not significant, thus further supporting the idea of a multimethod approach to measuring responsiveness to treatment.

Medical
10 recommendations were voted on, and only one needed revision before passing at the second round of voting (number 14). The evidence base to refute the use of PRP continues to grow, forming a strong consensus at level 1. There is less evidence for autologous blood, but conclusions are broadly similar. Despite initially promising results in case series, high-volume image-guided injection cannot be recommended based on two well-controlled randomised controlled trials. There is insufficient recent research to refute the established level 1 evidence that demonstrates corticosteroids to be ineffective in the long term.
While it can be difficult to estimate the incidence of tendon rupture following steroid injection, especially from multiple small prospective studies, repeated administration and intratendinous use should be avoided. Given the common theme among these interventions being that higher levels of evidence demonstrate no effect, caution should be exercised when considering novel techniques. The use of stem cell therapy may be another example of this with the current literature identified as being at high risk of bias. Due to the methodological quality, the level of evidence was downgraded to level 4. Similarly, the evidence base for nutritional supplementation is low and cannot currently be supported (level 3).
The medical subgroup found conflicting data of level 1 evidence for two further adjunctive techniques, extracorporeal shockwave therapy (ESWT) and dry needling (DN). Given the considerable data supporting exercise therapy, rehabilitative exercise should be the first line, with ESWT and DN reserved for recalcitrant cases.

Exercise

Patellar
Eight statements were initially voted on, which all achieved consensus agreement. However, based on feedback from the whole group, the statements were amalgamated into overarching recommendations. Three final recommendations were agreed upon, which reflect the following discussion. Rio’s findings that isometrics produce immediate pain relief are well documented. Nonetheless, following extensive subgroup discussion, it was decided that despite the statistical significance, wider application to clinical practice is potentially overgeneralised. The systematic review states the research has high bias; the small population specifically jumping athletes continuing sport, with lower baseline pain scores; therefore, generalisation to a wider population should be carefully considered. Furthermore, contractions were conducted at 80% maximum voluntary contraction (MVC), so to truly replicate the intervention, the load capacity should be measured. Over a 4-week period, studies have found equal results for pain reduction between isometrics and isotonics. Both interventions should be capacity based (% repetition maximum (RM) or %MVC), which is further supported by one study identifying that volume-matched (short and long duration) isometric contractions at 85% MVC reduced pain with functional testing.
Eccentrics are typically performed in pain ≥5/10, whereas isotonic contractions are capacity based. Eccentrics have shown positive results but with less statistical significance, less patient satisfaction and lower return to sport. This questions why you should push into pain if there is no superior effect on function. Instead, isotonic interventions are advised at <3/10 pain.
One RCT compared moderate-slow resistance at 55% 1RM to heavy slow resistance (HSR) (progression to 90% 1RM). A 5RM was performed every second week to adjust the loads accordingly. There was no significant difference in clinical results between the groups over 12 weeks, thus implying loading based on individual capacity will achieve similar results. Capacity-based progression, at any rehabilitation stage, is preferential to using pain or a predetermined factor (eg, time) that could misestimate capacity.

Achilles
The evidence for Achilles tendinopathy differs from that for patellar tendinopathy. Additional rounds of voting and revision of recommendations were required compared with the other subgroups, reflecting the greater heterogeneity of research methods and lack of recent research into other loading besides eccentric. Only one study identified benefits from isometric loading for pain reduction in Achilles tendinopathy. This was a small crossover trial in which both isometrics performed in knee extension and knee flexion significantly reduced pain on functional loading. Conversely, a larger quasi-RCT found no immediate analgesic effect from isotonics or isometrics. However, their functional test was 10 hops, compared with the first study where the functional test was dependent on the participant’s pain score. This questions whether reduced pain or improved function is the goal and thus implies that clinical reasoning should determine loading implementation based on individual goals.
The current literature equally supports HSR and eccentrics, with no identified research assessing progressive loading, as used in the patellar tendon. The overwhelming majority of Achilles tendon-related exercise research has analysed eccentric exercise, with many papers having high bias. Furthermore, varying effectiveness has been demonstrated between athletic and sedentary populations, suggesting individual patient characteristics must be considered. In group discussions, individual studies showed benefits from HSR and eccentrics on different variables such as strength or power. Nonetheless, the overarching agreement as found by one RCT identified in the meta-analysis is that both HSR and eccentric loading had superior effects to other loading protocols.
The evidence strongly supports loading over a rest/wait-and-see approach, with significant improvements seen from 2 weeks. Additionally, lower-dosage (do as tolerated) protocols have shown equal or better improvements than higher-dosage protocols.

Adjuncts
Six recommendations passed the initial round of voting; however, all were reworded based on feedback. The subgroup found limited evidence to support the routine use of traditionally used adjunctive therapies in lower limb tendinopathy. One recommendation was split into two after feedback to reflect the slightly differing literature for Achilles and patellar tendinopathy (numbers 24 and 28). The consensus score for each statement was stronger in the final round of voting.
Muscle trigger point dry needling, taping and deep friction massage could be used in the acute clinical setting for short-term pain relief, but no intervention was identified that could be self-administered by military personnel for pain control in the field. No evidence was identified in these searches to support the use of therapeutic ultrasound.
Case reports suggest trigger-point filiform/acupuncture dry needling of gastrocnemius/soleus may reduce pain when performed alongside eccentrics in Achilles tendinopathy. However, both RCTs and systematic reviews failed to demonstrate any long-term benefit. Taping has been shown to reduce pain on functional tasks or sporting activities in patellar tendinopathy, no evidence was identified specific to the Achilles tendon. Taping of the patellar tendon reduced jump height, which may be less relevant to the military population. Only one study reviewed deep friction massage in the patellar tendon. They found an immediate pain-relieving effect but no change to quadriceps strength and no short- or long-term follow-up. Therapeutic ultrasound compared with placebo treatment of Achilles tendinopathy showed no difference in outcomes at 6 weeks.
This study recommends education alongside exercise intervention. Pain science education can reduce both pain and disability in chronic pain conditions. However, in Achilles tendinopathy, pain science and pathoanatomical education delivered 1:1 were equally effective.

Discussion
This consensus agreement aimed to provide recommendations on the conservative management of patellar and Achilles tendinopathy in military populations.
Diagnosis remains clinical, supported by risk factors, functional tests and PROMs that detect dysfunction. Further research is required to standardise the use of quantifiable imaging in the target population, establish normative values and investigate the link between structure, function and pain.
Given the multifactorial nature of tendinopathy, it is suggested that no measure is used in isolation to evaluate clinical improvement. Research suggests both subjective and objective factors improve with treatment; however, the association between each factor is not consistent. These findings support that clinical reasoning should measure improvement by evaluating multiple factors. Furthermore, given the varying roles in the military, it was agreed that in line with previous guidance, progression and return-to-play decisions remain clinical.
The medical subgroup found no conclusive evidence to support the use of any injectable therapies. Use of ESWT for Achilles and patellar tendinopathies appears safe and has been an established practice at UK Defence’s Regional Rehabilitation Units for several years, but given the conflicting evidence, it should be considered as an adjunct to exercise. Given the more established evidence base and less invasive nature, ESWT should be considered prior to DN.
The literature supports a progressive tendon loading exercise (PTLE) protocol. When looking at individual studies, clinicians should consider individual differences, such as pain scores, function, military role and occupational goals, to clinically reason the appropriate contraction intervention. Pain is subjective, so in a military setting where soldiers are often conditioned to push themselves, using pain as an outcome measure risks misunderstanding and potential harm. The heterogeneity of studies reflects patient variability and individual factors to be considered when prescribing PTLE. Functional capacity should determine the start point within the progressive loading paradigm. As with the evidence for isometrics, further high-quality research to improve homogeneity and comparison between loading parameters and outcome measures is called for.
No adjunctive treatments can be strongly recommended but could be considered depending on clinical presentation, environment and equipment available. Further research could examine whether the effects of education are similar in group settings.

Limitations
The authors recognise that other tendinopathies are also covered in the lower limb tendinopathy BPGs (gluteal, adductor, hamstring and tibialis posterior). However, due to their reduced prevalence in the military and due to the time constraints, it was decided to only focus on Achilles and patellar tendinopathy for the Delphi consensus agreement.

Conclusion
Diagnosis of Achilles and patellar tendinopathy remains clinical. The consensus panel strongly advocates exercise rehabilitation as the primary management of Achilles and patellar tendinopathy. A PTLE protocol is supported, with a particular focus on individual capacity testing to improve patient adherence and satisfaction. Medical interventions should only be considered alongside exercise-based rehabilitation and should respect the long-term occupational needs of the military population. Education is advised, but further adjunctive interventions should be considered on a case-by-case basis, given their short-term effects and weak evidence.

Supplementary material
Funding: The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Patient consent for publication: Not applicable.
Ethics approval: Not applicable.
Correction notice: This article has been corrected since it was first published online. The acknowledgements statement was missing and has now been added.

References
Clinical management of tendinopathy: A systematic review of systematic reviews evaluating the effectiveness of tendinopathy treatments
Epidemiology of Patellar Tendinopathy in Athletes and the General Population: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis
Management of patellar tendinopathy: a systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomised studies
Effects of Periodized vs. Nonperiodized Resistance Training on Army-Specific Fitness and Skills Performance
Association between external training loads and injury incidence during 44 weeks of military training
Energy Deficiency in Soldiers: The Risk of the Athlete Triad and Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport Syndromes in the Military
Funky treatments in elite sports people: do they just buy rehabilitation time?
Ethics, Evidence Based Sports Medicine, and the Use of Platelet Rich Plasma in the English Premier League
Musculoskeletal injuries in British Army recruits: a prospective study of diagnosis-specific incidence and rehabilitation times
Submitted article: The UK Defence Rehabilitation review of Achilles and patellar tendinopathy management: a systematic review
Delphi methodology in healthcare research: How to decide its appropriateness
NIHR briefing notes for researchers - public involvement in nhs, health and social care research
Evaluating lower limb tendinopathy with Victorian Institute of Sport Assessment (VISA) questionnaires: a systematic review shows very-low-quality evidence for their content and structural validity-part I
ICON 2020-International Scientific Tendinopathy Symposium Consensus: A Systematic Review of Outcome Measures Reported in Clinical Trials of Achilles Tendinopathy
Isometric exercise and pain in patellar tendinopathy: A randomized crossover trial
Association Between Physical Tests and Patients-Reported Outcomes in Athletes Performing Exercise Therapy for Patellar Tendinopathy: A Secondary Analysis of the JUMPER Study
Do physical tests have a prognostic value in chronic midportion Achilles tendinopathy?
Efficacy and safety of corticosteroid injections and other injections for management of tendinopathy: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials
Isometric exercise induces analgesia and reduces inhibition in patellar tendinopathy
Isometric Contractions Are More Analgesic Than Isotonic Contractions for Patellar Tendon Pain: An In-Season Randomized Clinical Trial
Immediate and Short-Term Effects of Short- and Long-Duration Isometric Contractions in Patellar Tendinopathy
Effectiveness of progressive tendon-loading exercise therapy in patients with patellar tendinopathy: a randomised clinical trial
Clinical Outcomes, Structure, and Function Improve With Both Heavy and Moderate Loads in the Treatment of Patellar Tendinopathy: A Randomized Clinical Trial
Immediate Effects of two Isometric Calf Muscle Exercises on Mid-portion Achilles Tendon Pain
Isometric exercises do not provide immediate pain relief in Achilles tendinopathy: A quasi-randomized clinical trial
Heavy Slow Resistance Versus Eccentric Training as Treatment for Achilles Tendinopathy: A Randomized Controlled Trial
The effect of Kinesio-tape® on pain and vertical jump performance in active individuals with patellar tendinopathy
Deep Friction Massage in the Management of Patellar Tendinopathy in Athletes: Short-Term Clinical Outcomes
Analysis of pain intensity and postural control for assessing the efficacy of shock wave therapy and sonotherapy in Achilles tendinopathy – A randomized controlled trial