Evaluation of Noninvasive Diagnostic Techniques in Identifying Coronary Artery Disease: A Systematic Review
Background:
Coronary artery disease (CAD) poses a significant global health burden, necessitating optimal diagnostic strategies for risk assessment and management. This study systematically reviews randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing different noninvasive imaging modalities for CAD evaluation, focusing on their subsequent invasive outcomes and major adverse cardiac events (MACEs).
Methods:
A comprehensive electronic search was conducted across multiple databases, identifying 24 relevant RCTs published between 2010 and 2023. Key outcomes assessed included downstream referral to invasive testing, MACE rates, cost-effectiveness, and hospitalization outcomes.
Results:
The majority of included RCTs focused on comparing coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) with alternative imaging techniques. While CCTA is often associated with increased invasiveness, it demonstrates slightly better MACE rates, cost-effectiveness, and hospitalization outcomes compared to other imaging modalities.
Conclusion:
Continued investigation into alternative noninvasive diagnostic methods for CAD is essential to advance clinical practice and optimize patient care. By exploring new strategies beyond CCTA and leveraging technological innovations, health-care providers can improve diagnostic precision, mitigate procedural risks, and ultimately enhance outcomes for individuals with CAD.

INTRODUCTION
Coronary artery disease (CAD) poses a substantial threat to health worldwide, leading to significant morbidity and mortality. Coronary heart disease occurs when the blood supply to the heart muscle is insufficient due to blockages in the coronary arteries, typically caused by the buildup of plaque (atherosclerosis). Effective and timely diagnosis, along with prompt treatment, is essential to reduce the adverse consequences and improve outcomes associated with this condition.
Various imaging techniques and strategies were developed to overcome the burden of this fatal condition. These cardiac tests can be anatomical, such as coronary computed tomography (CT) angiography (CCTA) and invasive coronary angiography (ICA), or functional including exercise electrocardiogram (ExECG), stress echocardiography (SE), cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR), and myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI). Following the initial assessment for patients presenting with acute chest pain, those with high risk will be referred immediately to ICA according to recent guidelines by the American Heart Association 2021, and CCTA is preferred for those with intermediate risk. Functional imaging, however, for those with low-risk acute coronary syndrome is no longer recommended.
Over the past decade, noninvasive diagnostic cardiac imaging, particularly CCTA, have significantly improved in the image quality, radiation dose reduction and integration of functional assessment. These improvements further enhanced the ability to assess anatomical stenoses.
The aim of this study is to evaluate and summarize the findings of all relevant studies on noninvasive diagnostic techniques in identifying CAD while focusing on the referral to downstream invasive procedures and effect on major adverse cardiac events (MACEs) as primary outcomes.

METHODS

Literature search strategy
This review was registered with the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO (CRD42023477890)). and conducted in adherence to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines. A comprehensive electronic search was conducted of MEDLINE, PubMed, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), and online Trials Registers ClinicalTrials.gov databases for studies published between 2010 and 2023. The search algorithm was created and customized for each database by combining appropriate keywords and was approved by the rest of the study team. An amalgamation of Medical Subject Headings such as (Coronary artery disease OR Coronary heart disease OR Acute coronary syndrome OR Angina OR chest pain) AND (Non-invasive tests OR noninvasive techniques OR Exercise electrocardiograms OR Stress testing OR Coronary computed tomography angiography OR Magnetic resonance imaging OR Single-photon emission computed tomography OR Positron emission tomography OR Real time myocardial contrast echocardiography) AND (randomized controlled trial OR RCT OR Clinical Trials) was used to inclusively identify all studies pertaining to identify diagnostic randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that compare between noninvasive cardiac testing or compared to a usual care for CAD detection.

Inclusion/exclusion criteria
This review included all the English published studies between 2010 and 2023. We included studies comparing between noninvasive anatomical or functional diagnostic techniques or comparing noninvasive modalities to the standard medical care (SC) which have reported clinical outcome. Studies evaluating patients with chronic stable CAD and patients suspected to have low risk acute coronary syndrome were included in the analysis. Studies were required to report downstream testing rates and/or MACEs, as both considerations play a substantial role in the degree of the evaluation of noninvasive diagnostic techniques in identifying CAD. Exclusion criteria of this study were as follows: studies that were not RCTs (e.g. editorials, cohort studies, letters, commentaries, or reviews), studies that did not report outcomes of interest for the clinical questions, RCTs that included an arm of invasive diagnostic intervention (ICA), studies that were not completed at the time of our research, and non-English language studies. Cochrane’s risk of bias tool was used, and studies found at serious risk of bias were excluded.

Selection of articles and data extraction
The result of the primary search was uploaded to an online application, Rayyan, MA, USA, that helps in the initial screening of systematic reviews. In addition, six authors screened all the studies for relevance based on their title and abstract. The full texts of all retained studies were then screened by the same six authors for final inclusion or exclusion. Disagreements at any stage of the screening process were resolved through discussion and consensus of a seventh author. Data extracted from the retained studies included authors, year of publication, sample size, mean age at time of presentation, sex, interventions being compared, follow-up period, primary outcome of interest (ICA, percutaneous coronary intervention, and coronary artery bypass grafting), and secondary (myocardial infarction [MI] and cardiac death). A meta-analysis was not possible due to the heterogeneity across the studies in terms of interventions and outcomes. Consequently, the results were summarized in a narrative manner to offer a qualitative analysis of the data.

RESULTS

Literature findings
After conducting a comprehensive search, we identified a total of 3455 publications, with 1767 from Medline, 1097 from PubMed, 563 from the CENTRAL, and 28 from Online Trials Registers. Following the removal of 770 duplicates, we reviewed the remaining 2685 publications by examining their titles and abstracts. We then excluded 2568 papers based on this initial screening and obtained the full text of 117 papers for further assessment of their eligibility [Figure 1]. In the end, we included 24 articles that met all the inclusion criteria for our study. These studies were published between 2011 and 2023 and were conducted in different countries [Table 1].
An illustration of the process of selecting studies using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines
Outline of the characteristics of the included studies
Trial	Year of publication	Study design	Country	Sample Size	Gender (male/female)	Age	 	The SCOT-HEART	2015	Prospective open-label, parallel-group, multicenter trial	Scotland	4146	2325/1821	57.1±9.7	 	Linde et al.	2015	Randomized, controlled, parallel-group trial	Denmark	576	329/247	CCTA 56±12 SC 55±12	 	Hoffmann et al.	2012	Randomized, controlled, multicenter trial	US	1000	532/468	54±8	 	Dedic et al.	2016	Prospective, open-label, multicenter, randomized trial	Netherlands	490	254/236	54±10	 	Miller et al.	2011	Prospective RCT	USA	60	30/30	51±10	 	Hamilton-Craig et al.	2014	A randomized, prospective, nonblinded single-center study	Australia	563	325/238	52.3±10.4	 	McKavanagh et al.	2015	Prospective RCT	UK	488	269/219	ExECG 58.9 + 10.2 CT 57.8 + 10	 	Stillman et al.	2020	Randomized, controlled, multicenter, comparative	US	1047	570/477	CCTA 57±9 SPECT 58±9	 	Levsky et al.	2015	Randomized, controlled comparative effectiveness trial	US	400	149/251	56.6±11.2	 	Lee et al.	2019	Randomized, controlled, multicenter trial	South Korea	903	376/527	CCTA 63.5±23.6 SPECT 63.2±8.97	 	Karthikeyan et al.	2017	Open-label, parallel-arm, multi-center, randomized trial	International (Brazil, Czech Republic, India, Mexico, Slovenia, and Turkey)	303	145/158	MPI 60.2±11.7 CCTA 58.9±11.1	 	Min et al.	2012	A prospective multicenter randomized pilot trial	US	180	91/89	CCTA 55.9±10 MPI 58.9±9.5	 	Goldstein et al.	2011	Multicenter, randomized clinical trial	US	699	322/377	50±10	 	Douglas et al. (PROMISE)	2015	Randomized, pragmatic trial	North America	10,003	4733/5270	60.8±8.3	 	Levsky et al.	2018	Open-label, randomized, controlled comparative effectiveness trial	US	400	230/170	55±9.7	 	Yu et al.	2020	Prospectively enrolled and randomized	China	240	173/67	69.01±11.2	 	Sørgaard et al.	2018	Prospective randomized controlled multicenter study	Denmark	600	298/302	CCTA + CTP 62.9±8.9 CCTA 63.5±8.8	 	Lubbers et al. (CRESCENT)	2016	Pragmatic RCT	Netherlands	350	339/111	55±10	 	Lubbers et al. (CRESCENT II)	2018	Pragmatic RCT	Netherlands	268	163/105	58±11	 	Gurunathan et al.	2018	Randomized trial	UK	385	262/123	ExECG 54±11 SE 55±11	 	Zacharias et al.	2017	Randomized prospective study	UK	385	261/124	ExECG 54±11 SE 55±11	 	Everett et al.	2023	Three-arm, parallel-group, multicenter, randomized	UK	1202	638/564	56.3±9.03	 	Shaw et al.	2011	Randomized symptomatic	Atlanta, Georgia	772	Female=772 (females study)	Median=62	 	Salame et al.	2018	Prospective, RCT	United States	229	105/124	56.3±9.4
CT: Computed tomography, SPECT: Single-photon emission CT, CTP: Cardiac CT perfusion, CCTA: Coronary CT angiography, ExECG: Exercise electrocardiogram, SE: Stress echocardiography, MPI: Myocardial perfusion imaging, SC: Standard care, RCT: Randomized controlled trial

Studies and patients’ characteristics
Table 1 demonstrates that the sample size of the incorporated studies varied from 60 to 10,003, with a median study population of 489. Women comprised 50.09% of the study population on average, and one study exclusively enrolled females, with a sample size of 772. The mean participant age ranged from 50 ± 10 to 69.01 ± 11.2 across the included studies. The follow-up periods, along with the detailed outcomes of each study, were briefly summarized in Appendix 1.

Low-risk acute coronary artery syndrome patients

Downstream invasive procedures
Coronary computed tomography angiography
Of the 24 included studies, 12 studies compared CCTA to other imaging modalities or strategies to guide the management in patients with low-risk acute CAD [Figure 2]. Compared to SC, CCTA led to higher rates of revascularization procedures (P = 0.006) according to Linde et al. In addition, Hamilton-Craig et al. reported a statistically significant increase in referrals for ICA following CCTA compared to ExECG (P = 0.028). McKavanagh et al. also reported an increase in revascularization in the CCTA group, although no P value was provided for this finding. CCTA had comparable revascularization rates compared to MPI in three studies. Yet, downstream testing (invasive or noninvasive) was higher following CCTA (P = 0.025). In the Prospective multicenter imaging study for evaluation of chest pain (PROMISE) trial, CCTA groups underwent more frequent catheterization procedures compared to functional testing groups (P = 0.02) despite resulting in fewer ones showing nonobstructive CAD. In addition, in a study that compared CCTA to SE, patients undergoing CCTA showed a trend toward a higher rate of subsequent bypass surgeries though not statistically significant (P = 0.81). The integration of CT perfusion (CTP) imaging to CCTA was found to correlate with decreased unnecessary invasive procedures (P = 0.0001) according to Sørgaard et al. [Table 2].
Distribution of comparative studies among included papers on patients with low-risk acute coronary artery syndrome
Overview of included studies’ statistical outcomes and impact
Trial or first author	Settings	Outcomes	OR/HR	95% CI	P	 	The SCOT-HEART	Cardiology chest pain clinics CCTA+SC versus SC	Revascularization MACE	HR 1.198 HR 0.644	0.992–1.448 0.410–1.012	0.0611 0.0561	 	Linde et al.	Hospital admission for chest pain CCTA versus SC	Referral for ICA Revascularization MACE	- - HR 0.36	- - 0.16–0.95	0.13 0.006* 0.04*	 	Hoffmann et al.	ED CCTA versus SC	Referral for ICA MACE Length of stay Discharge Total cost	- - - - -	- - - - -	0.06 0.18 <0.001* <0.001* 0.65	 	Dedic et al.	ED CCTA versus SC	Referral for ICA Revascularization MACE Length of stay Discharge Cost	- - - - - -	- - - - - -	0.20 0.40 0.54 0.80 0.16 <0.01*	 	Miller et al.	ED CCTA+SC versus SC	Referral for ICA Cost Hospital readmissions	- - -	- - -	1.000 0.144 0.007*	 	Hamilton-Craig et al.	ED CCTA versus ExECG	Referral for ICA Length of stay Cost	OR 2.0 - -	- - -	0.028* 0.003* <0.001*	 	McKavanagh et al.	Patients were referred by primary care physicians CCTA versus ExECG	Further investigations Revascularization	- -	- -	>0.0001* -	 	Stillman et al.	Participants from 44 sites CCTA versus MPI	MACE or revascularization	HR 1.03	0.61–1.75	0.19	 	Levsky et al.	Telemetry-monitored wards of an inner-city medical Center CCTA versus MPI	Revascularization Nonfatal MACE Death + MACE	OR 0.77 - -	0.40–1.49 - -	0.44 1 0.29	 	Lee et al.	Out-patient clinic of three large-volume centers CCTA versus MPI	Referral for ICA Unstable angina Cerebrovascular accident Repeat revascularization Death Cost	- - - - - -	- - - - - -	0.041* 0.273 0.721 0.542 0.298 0.043*	 	Karthikeyan et al.	Outpatient clinics of the participating hospitals CCTA versus MPI	Downstream noninvasive or invasive testing Revascularization (CABG/PCI)	OR 0.53 OR 1.22	0.30–0.92 0.46–3.20	0.025* 0.69	 	Min et al.	Outpatient cardiology clinics of 2 diverse cardiology practices CCTA versus MPI	Referral for ICA Revascularization Total costs	- - -	- - -	0.47 0.03* <0.001*	 	Goldstein et al.	16 EDs CCTA versus MPI	Referral for ICA PCI CABG MACE Cost	- - - - -	- - - - -	0.78 0.78 0.13 0.29 <0.0001*	 	Douglas et al.	Outpatients CCTA versus Functional testing	Invasive catheterization MACE	- HR 1.04	- 0.84–1.31	0.02* 0.70	 	Levsky et al.	ED CCTA versus SE	Cardiac catheterization Revascularization MACE Length of stay	- - - -	- - - -	0.51 0.81 0.47 0.002*	 	Yu et al.	Cardiology service CCTA+CTP versus CCTA	Referral for ICA ICA with revascularization MACE	- - -	- - -	0.006* <0.0001* 0.554	 	Sørgaard et al.	Discharged patients after hospitalization CCTA+CTP versus CCTA	Referral for ICA Chest pain Unstable angina pectoris Acute MI	- - - -	- - - -	<0.0001* 0.42 1 1	 	Lubbers et al. (CRESCENT)	Outpatient clinic CT strategy versus functional testing	Invasive angiography Revascularization Nonfatal MI Unstable angina Nonfatal stroke Anginal symptoms Total cost	- - - - - - -	- - - - - - -	0.843 0.384 0.564 0.564 0.137 0.012* <0.0001*	 	Lubbers et al. (CRESCENT II)	Outpatient clinic Cardiac CT protocol versus functional testing	Invasive coronary angiograms without a European Society of Cardiology class I indication for revascularization Invasive angiograms with a revascularization indication Adverse event rate	- - -	- - -	0.035* 0.017* 1	 	Gurunathan et al.	RACPC SE versus ExECG	Coronary angiography Revascularization All-cause death Nonfatal MI Total cost Hospital stays	- - - - - -	- - - - - -	0.02* 0.86 0.18 0.99 0.04* <0.01*	 	Zacharias et al.	RACPC SE versus ExECG	MACE Total cost	- -	- -	- 0.005*	 	Everett et al. (CE-MARC 2)	RACPC CMR versus SPECT versus NICE guidelines	Unnecessary angiography NICE versus CMR SPECT versus CMR MACE rates NICE versus CMR SPECT versus CMR	OR 0.21 OR 1.27 HR 0.61 HR 1.03	0.12–0.34 0.79–2.03 0.24–1.56 0.54–1.98	<0.001* 0.32 0.30 0.93	 	Shaw et al. (WOMEN)	Multi-center trial ExECG versus MPI	MACE Total cost	HR 1.3 -	0.5–3.5 -	0.59 <0.001*	 	Salame et al.	Patients presenting to the ED with atraumatic chest pain or possible angina equivalent SE versus MPI	Ischemia Length of stay Total cost	- - -	- - -	0.20 0.71 0.007*
*P<0.05, CT: Computed tomography, SPECT: Single-photon emission CT, CTP: Cardiac CT perfusion, CCTA: Coronary CT angiography, ExECG: Exercise electrocardiogram, SE: Stress echocardiography, MPI: Myocardial perfusion imaging, SC: Standard care, RACPC: Rapid Access Chest Pain Clinic, CI: Confidence interval, MACE: Major adverse cardiac events, CMR: Cardiovascular magnetic resonance, ED: Emergency department, ICA: Invasive coronary angiography, MI: Myocardial infarction, CABG: Coronary artery bypass grafting, PCI: Percutaneous coronary intervention, OR: odd ratio, HR: Hazzard ratio, NICE: National institute for health and care excellence
Other imaging modalities/strategies
A study by Gurunathan et al. found that individuals undergoing ExECG were more likely to be referred for invasive angiography compared to those undergoing SE (P = 0.02) [Table 2].

Major adverse cardiovascular events

Coronary computed tomography angiography
The findings of Linde et al. states that CCTA would decrease cardiovascular events compared to SC (P = 0.04). However, in the Hoffmann et al. and Dedic et al. studies, there was no difference in MACE between the two strategies (P = 0.18 and P = 0.54, respectively). Consistent findings were reported when CCTA was compared to other functional tests (P = 0.70) according to Douglas et al. Moreover, there was no significant difference in MACE between CCTA and MPI according to Levsky et al. and Goldstein et al. (P = 0.29), and similarly, no difference was observed between CCTA and SE in Levsky et al. (P = 0.47) [Table 2].

Other imaging modalities/strategies
The What is the optimal method for ischemia evaluation in women (WOMEN) trial, which was exclusive to female participants comparing between ExECG and stress MPI, showed similar MACE rates between the two groups (P = 0.59). These results were similar when ExECG was compared with SE in the studies by Gurunathan et al. and Zacharias et al., though the latter did not report a specific P value [Table 2].

Cost, hospitalization, symptoms, and emergency department discharge

Coronary computed tomography angiography
Compared to SC, CCTA decreased cost, hospital stays, and facilitated emergency discharge. In addition, it was more cost-effective compared to different functional testing modalities including ExECG and MPS. CCTA also enhanced angina symptoms and reduced rehospitalization when compared to ExECG in one study, yet another study suggested that functional testing with SE led to higher discharge rates and shorter hospital stays compared to CCTA [Table 2].

Other imaging modalities/strategies
Two studies showed that SE was more cost-effective than ExECG and resulted in decreased hospital stay. However, ExECG had lower hospital cost when compared to MPI [Table 2].

Suspected stable coronary artery disease/stable angina patients

Downstream invasive procedures

Coronary computed tomography angiography
Five of the 24 included studies compared CCTA with different imaging techniques in patients with stable angina [Figure 3]. In patients with stable coronary disease, the CT coronary angiography in patients with suspected angina due to coronary heart disease (SCOT-HEART) study observed that revascularization rates tended to be higher in the CCTA group compared to SC, although this finding was not statistically significant (P = 0.0611). Min et al., however, reported a statistically significant higher revascularization rate following CCTA compared to MPI (P = 0.03). In two studies, CCTA had either similar rates of subsequent invasive procedures compared to MPI (P = 0.19) or even lower rates (P = 0.041). Similar to low-risk acute CAD patients, the addition of CTP to CCTA lowered invasive subsequent procedure in stable angina patients (P < 0.0001) [Table 2].
Distribution of comparative studies among included papers on patients with suspected stable coronary artery disease

Other imaging modalities/strategies
In Computed tomography vs. Exercise testing in suspected coronary artery disease (CRESCENT) trial, when a CT strategy incorporating calcium scan and CCTA was compared to functional imaging, no disparity in invasive angiography (P = 0.843) or revascularization rates (P = 0.384) was observed. Nevertheless, CRESCENT II demonstrated reduced unnecessary invasive angiograms while increasing those with a revascularization indication (P = 0.017) in the CT algorithm groups. The Clinical evaluation of magnetic resonance imaging in coronary heart disease 2 (CE-MARC 2) trial studied three strategies including National institute for health and care excellence (NICE) guidelines and two functional testing with CMR and single-photon emission CT (SPECT). Despite minimal CAD detection increase, the NICE guideline resulted in more unnecessary ICA findings compared to CMR and SPECT (P < 0.001) [Table 2].

Major adverse cardiovascular events

Coronary computed tomography angiography
The SCOT-HEART study that compared CCTA to SC stated less fatal and nonfatal MI when CCTA was utilized for patients with suspected angina (P < 0.0561). Both Stillman et al. and Lee et al. reported comparable clinical outcomes when CCTA was compared to SPECT. Furthermore, no difference in MACE was observed following the addition of CTP to CCTA compared to CCTA alone (P < 0.554) [Table 2].

Other imaging modalities/strategies
The CE-MARC 2 study which compared NICE guideline, CMR, and SPECT demonstrated no significant difference in MACE among the three strategies in patients presenting with suspected stable disease. In addition, comparable results were observed in regard to MACE following a CT strategy or functional testing of the CRESCENT trial [Table 2].

Cost, hospitalization, symptoms, and emergency department discharge

Coronary computed tomography angiography
CCTA utilization in patients with stable angina decreased the cost compared to MPI in two studies [Table 2].

Other imaging modalities/strategies
SE had lower hospital cost compared to MPS. In the CRESCENT trial, a CT strategy led to better symptomatic relief and was more cost-effective when compared to functional imaging [Table 2].

Risk of bias assessment
Two reviewers simultaneously and independently assessed the risk of bias for eligible RCTs using the Cochrane collaboration tool. The revised Cochrane tool was utilized for this purpose, and all 24 included RCTs were considered to have a low risk of bias [Table 3].
Outline of the evaluations conducted by the review authors concerning the risk of bias for each item in every study included
Trial or first author	Sequence generation	Allocation concealment	Blinding of participants, personnel and outcome assessors	Incomplete outcome data	Selective outcome reporting	Other sources of bias	Overall RoB	 	The SCOT-HEART	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low	 	Linde et al.	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low	 	Hoffmann et al.	Unclear risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	High risk	Low	 	Dedic et al.	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low	 	Miller et al.	Low risk	Low risk	High risk	Low risk	Low risk	High risk	Low	 	Hamilton-Craig et al.	Low risk	Unclear risk	High risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low	 	McKavanagh et al.	Low risk	Unclear risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low	 	Stillman et al.	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	High risk	Low	 	Levsky et al.	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	High risk	Low	 	Lee et al.	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low	 	Karthikeyan et al.	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low	 	Min et al.	High risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	High risk	Low	 	Goldstein et al.	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low	 	Douglas et al. (PROMISE)	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low	 	Levsky et al.	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low	 	Yu et al.	Unclear risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low	 	Sørgaard et al.	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low	 	Lubbers et al. (CRESCENT)	Low risk	Unclear risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low	 	Lubbers et al. (CRESCENT II)	Unclear risk	Low risk	High risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low	 	Gurunathan et al.	Low risk	Unclear risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low	 	Zacharias et al.	Low risk	Unclear risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low	 	Everett et al.	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	High risk	Low	 	Shaw et al.	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low	 	Salame et al.	High risk	High risk	Low risk	Unclear risk	Low risk	Low risk	Low
RoB: Risk of bias

DISCUSSION
In this systematic review, coronary noninvasive imaging studies were examined with the main aim of identifying the rate of subsequent invasive procedures and MACE. The findings from selected studies reported mostly increased invasive downstream testing with the use of CCTA compared to other imaging modalities despite slightly lower MACE rates, cost-effectiveness, and shorter hospitalization.
CCTA was the most frequently compared imaging technique in the included studies and was often associated with higher invasiveness. Two studies suggested decreased unwarranted invasive procedures when perfusion imaging was added to CCTA. However, the findings from the Danish study of non-invasive testing in coronary artery disease (Dan-NICAD) trial revealed that the use of perfusion techniques (CMR or MPI) following CCTA had low sensitivities when compared to ICA. It should be noted that downstream invasive procedure does not signify a negative outcome, especially regarding MACE rate, in which an initial CCTA compared to direct referral to ICA had a similar MACE rate in the Coronary computed tomographic angiography for selective cardiac catheterization (CONSERVE) trial. As presented previously, CCTA utilization decreased MACE rates when compared to SC, yet the rate was similar in comparison to functional imaging. In a recent retrospective study which was conducted on Thai patients with a follow-up period of 9.9 ± 2.4 years, CCTA was effective in guiding the treatment and decreasing the frequency of MACE. Furthermore, CCTA has been an excellent alternative to ICA for patients with stable disease, and while it has a similar MACE risk, it lowers the serious complications following invasive procedures. A recent meta-analysis done by Corballis et al. comparing between the two revealed an improvement in the revascularization rates when CCTA was employed. In addition, CCTA showed a similar prognostic value to ICA in patients with unstable angina and non-ST-elevation MI as highlighted by the Very early versus deferred invasive evaluation using computerized tomography in patients with acute coronary syndromes (VERDICT) trial.
In four included studies, no difference in MACE was reported when different functional imaging techniques such as ExECG, SE, and MPI were compared despite SE being more cost-effective. However, other factors could contribute to the improvement in MACE frequencies, specifically risk prediction. One study by Kraen et al. reported an improvement in risk prediction of cardiac events when MPI was included alongside ExECG in patients with known or suspected ischemic heart disease. This aligns with the findings of a study done by Marcos-Garces et al. which suggested that combining ExECG and vasodilator CMR provided a more comprehensive assessment of prognosis. It is also important to recognize that MPI includes SPECT, positron emission tomography (PET), and in some cases, CMR. In a meta-analysis done by Xu et al., both CMR and PET offered superior diagnostic efficacy when compared to SPECT. As opposed to ICA with fractional flow reserve, stress MPI using CMR, CT, or PET reliably excluded CAD, although it is less precise when employing SPECT or echocardiography. Furthermore, CMR, in contrast to CT and PET scans, was capable of assessing myocardial blood flow without the need for ionizing radiation exposure.

Limitations
The results of included studies may be biased as data of these studies were collected from highly experienced imaging centers, ignoring the real-world practices of those imaging modalities. Furthermore, most included studies were focused on CCTA which could impact the assessment of other techniques such as MPI, ExECG, and SE. It is also essential to recognize that in the included studies, patients were enrolled with angina symptoms and pretest likelihood of CAD which may affect the diagnostic performance of all discussed noninvasive techniques. Most importantly, due to notable heterogeneity including variations in comorbidities, intervention protocols, outcome measures, diagnostic criteria, and the diverse numbers of studies across different imaging modalities, a network meta-analysis was not feasible. Consequently, a narrative synthesis was utilized.

CONCLUSION
This systematic review examined noninvasive diagnostic methods for CAD, focusing on their subsequent invasive outcomes and MACE. The findings show that while CCTA is frequently associated with increased downstream invasive procedures, it also demonstrates lower MACE rates, cost-effectiveness, and shorter hospital stays. Continued investigation into alternative noninvasive diagnostic methods for CAD is essential to advance clinical practice and optimize patient care. By exploring new strategies beyond CCTA and leveraging technological innovations, health-care providers can improve diagnostic precision, mitigate procedural risks, and ultimately enhance outcomes for individuals with CAD.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
Global epidemiology of ischemic heart disease: Results from the global burden of disease study
A review on coronary artery disease, its risk factors, and therapeutics
Coronary artery disease In: StatPearls
2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Coronary computed tomography versus Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of coronary artery disease
York: Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York
The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
RoB 2: A revised tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials
Rayyan systematic review platform
CT coronary angiography in patients with suspected angina due to coronary heart disease (SCOT-HEART): An open-label, parallel-group, multicentre trial
Long-term clinical impact of coronary CT angiography in patients with recent acute-onset chest pain: The randomized controlled CATCH trial
Coronary CT angiography versus standard evaluation in acute chest pain
Coronary CT angiography for suspected ACS in the Era of high-sensitivity troponins: Randomized multicenter study
Is coronary computed tomography angiography a resource sparing strategy in the risk stratification and evaluation of acute chest pain? Results of a randomized controlled trial
Diagnostic performance and cost of CT angiography versus stress ECG – A randomized prospective study of suspected acute coronary syndrome chest pain in the emergency department (CT-COMPARE)
A comparison of cardiac computerized tomography and exercise stress electrocardiogram test for the investigation of stable chest pain: The clinical results of the CAPP randomized prospective trial
Coronary computed tomography angiography compared with single photon emission computed tomography myocardial perfusion imaging as a guide to optimal medical therapy in patients presenting with stable angina: The RESCUE trial
Coronary computed tomography angiography versus radionuclide myocardial perfusion imaging in patients with chest pain admitted to telemetry: A randomized trial
Coronary computed tomography angiography versus myocardial single photon emission computed tomography in patients with intermediate risk chest pain: A randomized clinical trial for cost-effectiveness comparison based on real-world cost
Functional compared to anatomical imaging in the initial evaluation of patients with suspected coronary artery disease: An international, multi-center, randomized controlled trial (IAEA-SPECT/CTA study)
Coronary CT angiography versus myocardial perfusion imaging for near-term quality of life, cost and radiation exposure: A prospective multicenter randomized pilot trial
The CT-STAT (Coronary computed tomographic angiography for systematic triage of acute chest pain patients to treatment) trial
Outcomes of anatomical versus functional testing for coronary artery disease
Coronary computed tomography angiography versus stress echocardiography in acute chest pain: A randomized controlled trial
Clinical outcomes of dynamic computed tomography myocardial perfusion imaging combined with coronary computed tomography angiography versus coronary computed tomography angiography-guided strategy
Value of myocardial perfusion assessment with coronary computed tomography angiography in patients with recent acute-onset chest pain
Calcium imaging and selective computed tomography angiography in comparison to functional testing for suspected coronary artery disease: The multicentre, randomized CRESCENT trial
Comprehensive cardiac CT with myocardial perfusion imaging versus functional testing in suspected coronary artery disease: The multicenter, randomized CRESCENT-II trial
Cost-effectiveness of a management strategy based on exercise echocardiography versus exercise electrocardiography in patients presenting with suspected angina during long term follow up: A randomized study
Relative clinical and economic impact of exercise echocardiography versus exercise electrocardiography, as first line investigation in patients without known coronary artery disease and new stable angina: A randomized prospective study
Randomised trial of stable chest pain investigation: 3-year clinical and quality of life results from CE-MARC 2
Comparative effectiveness of exercise electrocardiography with or without myocardial perfusion single photon emission computed tomography in women with suspected coronary artery disease: Results from the what is the optimal method for ischemia evaluation in women (WOMEN) trial
Contrast-enhanced stress echocardiography and myocardial perfusion imaging in patients hospitalized with chest pain: A randomized study
Diagnosing coronary artery disease after a positive coronary computed tomography angiography: The Dan-NICAD open label, parallel, head to head, randomized controlled diagnostic accuracy trial of cardiovascular magnetic resonance and myocardial perfusion scintigraphy
Selective referral using CCTA versus direct referral for individuals referred to invasive coronary angiography for suspected CAD: A randomized, controlled, open-label trial
Impact of coronary CT angiography in selection of treatment modalities and subsequent cardiovascular events in Thai patients with stable CAD
CT or invasive coronary angiography in stable chest pain
CT angiography compared to invasive angiography for stable coronary disease as predictors of major adverse cardiovascular events – A systematic review and meta-analysis
Prognostic value of coronary CT angiography in patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes
Incremental value of exercise ECG to myocardial perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography for prediction of cardiac events
Exercise ECG testing and stress cardiac magnetic resonance for risk prediction in patients with chronic coronary syndrome
Diagnostic performance of CMR, SPECT, and PET imaging for the identification of coronary artery disease: A meta-analysis
Diagnostic accuracy of stress myocardial perfusion imaging compared to invasive coronary angiography with fractional flow reserve meta-analysis

Appendix 1: Summary of follow-up durations and outcomes
Summary of follow-up durations and outcomes
Trial or first author	Comparison	Follow-up period	Outcomes of the study	 	The SCOT-HEART	SC plus CCTA versus SC alone	1.7 years	The inclusion of CTCA in standard clinical care clarified the diagnosis of angina from coronary heart disease, reducing the need for further stress testing, increasing invasive coronary angiography usage, and potentially lowering fatal and nonfatal MI	 	Linde et al.	CCTA versus SC (ExECG or MPI)	Median: 18.7 months	A CCTA-guided treatment approach decreased the risk of cardiovascular events (Cardiac death, MI, hospitalization for unstable angina, and revascularization) compared to standard evaluation with a functional test. It also identified more patients with significant CAD and resulted in a higher frequency of index revascularizations than standard care	 	Hoffmann et al.	CCTA versus SC	28 days	Following early CCTA, hospital stays decreased, more direct emergency department discharges occurred, and there were no missed acute coronary syndromes or differences in MACE at 28 days. Yet, downstream testing and radiation exposure increased without significant differences in cumulative costs of care	 	Dedic et al.	CCTA versus SC	30 days	CCTA reduces outpatient testing and costs but there was no difference in downstream testing or discharge from the ER between the two groups	 	Miller et al.	SC versus SC + CCTA	90 days	Integrating CCTA into the current ED risk assessment for ACPSs did not alter resource usage but increased CAD diagnoses and notably decreased rehospitalization within 90 days	 	Hamilton-Craig et al.	CCTA versus ExECG	30 days +12 months	CCTA angiography is quicker, cheaper, and more diagnostically effective than exercise treadmill ECG-based care. However, more downstream testing, specifically invasive coronary angiography, was associated with CCTA	 	McKavanagh et al.	ExECG versus CCTA	12 months	Utilizing CCTA as the initial evaluation for stable chest pain enhanced angina symptoms and led to reduced investigations and re-hospitalizations in comparison to EST, yet more revascularization was identified in the CCTA groups	 	Stillman et al.	CCTA versus SPECT	16.2 months	The occurrence of MACE or the need for revascularization was comparable between participants in the CCTA group and those undergoing SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging. However, CCTA was a better predictor of MACE and revascularization	 	Levsky et al.	MPI versus CCTA	Median; 40 months	There were no significant differences in revascularization rate or resource use between the CCTA and MPI groups over 40 months. However, CCTA resulted in less radiation exposure and a more positive patient experience than MPI	 	Lee et al.	CCTA versus SPECT	12 months	CCTA led to fewer subsequent ICAs with no variance in clinical outcomes and was more cost-effective	 	Karthikeyan et al.	MPI versus CCTA	6 and 12 months	Choosing stress-rest MPI over CCTA for suspected CAD may reduce downstream testing (invasive and noninvasive), despite slightly higher patient radiation exposure	 	Min et al.	CCTA versus MPI	55±34 days	Patients with stable CAD undergoing CCTA or MPS see similar quality of life improvements, but CCTA involves more aggressive therapy, higher revascularization rates, lower costs, and reduced effective radiation dose	 	Goldstein et al.	CCTA versus MPI	6 months	Using CCTA as the primary noninvasive imaging method in suitable patients is safe, speeds up assessment compared to rest-stress MPI, and lowers total ED costs	 	Douglas et al.	CCTA versus functional testing	Median: 25 months	There was no difference in regard to death, MI, hospitalization, and complications between the two groups. However, more CTA patients underwent catheterization within 90 days, though CTA resulted in fewer ones showing nonobstructive CAD	 	Levsky et al.	CCTA versus SE	24 months	SE proved safe and effective in chest pain triage compared to CCTA, leading to higher discharge rates and shorter stays. CCTA patients received more pharmacotherapy for coronary artery disease, with a trend toward increased bypass surgeries in this group	 	Yu et al.	CT-MPI + CCTA-guided versus CCTA-guided strategy	3, 6, and 12 months	Opting for CT-MPI+CCTA-guided patient management might be preferable to a strategy solely based on CCTA in order to decrease the need for unnecessary invasive procedures	 	Sørgaard et al.	CCTA plus CTP versus CCTA alone	Median: 17 months	Postdischarge coronary CTA with CTP reduces invasive procedures and treatments in patients suspected of ischemic heart disease, with significantly fewer revascularizations compared to coronary CTA alone	 	Lubbers et al. (CRESCENT)	CT strategy versus functional testing	12 months	After cardiac CT, more patients reported anginal symptom relief at 1 year, with fewer adverse events. Although radiation exposure was slightly higher, CT more reliably ruled out CAD, leading to faster diagnoses, fewer tests, and lower costs. Invasive angiography was similarly frequent after CT and functional testing	 	Lubbers et al. (CRESCENT II)	Cardiac CT protocol versus functional testing (95% ExECG)	6 months	In patients with suspected stable CAD, cardiac CT with dynamic perfusion imaging provides a rapid and efficient alternative to functional testing. It reduces unnecessary invasive angiograms while increasing those with a revascularization indication	 	Gurunathan et al.	SE versus ExECG	6, 12, 24, and 36 months	ESE had a higher CAD detection rate than Ex-ECG and resulted in reduced costs compared to Ex-ECG, with fewer clinic visits, emergency visits, and hospital stays. Additionally, Ex-ECG patients were more likely to undergo invasive angiography without differences in clinical outcomes	 	Zacharias et al.	SE versus ExECG	21±5 months	ESE was more effective and cost-saving than ExECG as the initial evaluation for CAD in new-onset suspected SA without known CAD. However, no difference in MACE reported	 	Everett et al. (CE-MARC 2)	CMR versus SPECT versus NICE	12 months and 3 years	The NICE guidelines-based approach led to more “unnecessary” ICA findings compared to functional imaging strategies, with minimal CAD detection increase. Also, the NICE strategy did not reduce 3-year MACE or improve QoL compared to CMR or SPECT imaging	 	Shaw et al. (WOMEN)	ExECG versus MPI	6, 12, and 24 months	Using ETT alone had similar 2-year outcomes (MACE) to exercise MPI in low-risk women, but resulted in more selective follow-up testing and significant cost savings	 	Salame et al.	SE versus MPI	30 days	Both stress imaging methods had comparable diagnostic test rates. Secondary outcomes showed lower hospital costs and greater clinician satisfaction with the promptness and safety of stress echocardiography compared to stress MPI
ACPSs: Acute chest pain syndromes, CT: Computed tomography, SPECT: Single-photon emission CT, CTP: Cardiac CT perfusion, CCTA: Coronary CT angiography, ExECG: Exercise electrocardiogram, SE: Stress echocardiography, MPI: Myocardial perfusion imaging, SC: Standard care, MACE: Major adverse cardiac events, CMR: Cardiovascular magnetic resonance, ED: Emergency department, ICA: Invasive coronary angiography, MI: Myocardial infarction, CAD: Coronary artery disease, QoL: Quality of life, EST: Exercise stress test, ETT: Exercise tolerance test, ER: Emergency room, NICE: National institute for health and care excellence