Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes–a promising therapeutic approach to improve neurocognitive disorders in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide and is often accompanied by neurocognitive disorders. It seriously affects the quality of life and treatment outcome of patients. COPD-induced neurocognitive disorders (COPD-NCDs) are driven by systemic inflammation, blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption, and chronic hypoxia, but there is currently no effective treatment to prevent or reverse cognitive decline. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes (MSC-Exos) are nanoscale extracellular vesicles with unique bioactivity, which have shown great potential in the fields of nervous system diseases, respiratory diseases, bone and joint diseases. Different from traditional cell therapies, MSC-Exos have the advantages of non-immunogenicity, non-tumorigenicity, high stability and biocompatibility. In addition, MSC-Exos can also cross the BBB, regulate neuroinflammation, promote neurogenesis, enhance myelination and improve synaptic plasticity, thereby addressing the multifaceted pathogenesis of central nervous system (CNS) diseases. In this review, we first summarize the pathogenic mechanism of COPD-NCDs, and then summarize the multiple mechanisms of MSC-Exos improving NCDs based on the efficacy of MSC-Exos on other CNS diseases, emphasizing the theoretical basis and unique potential of MSC-Exos as a treatment for COPD-NCDs. Finally, we prospected the future research directions and potential problems of applying MSC-Exos to treat COPD-NCDs, future research should focus on optimizing the large-scale preparation of MSC-Exos, exploring their long-term safety, and advancing clinical translation to address the unmet needs of COPD-NCDs patients.

Introduction
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic inflammatory disease that is heterogeneous and often characterized by persistent respiratory symptoms and progressive incompletely reversible airflow limitation. COPD is the third leading cause of death globally, with about 3.23 million deaths per year, causing a huge economic and social burden worldwide. In recent years, numerous studies have demonstrated the occurrence of extrapulmonary comorbidities in COPD, including cardiovascular disease (pulmonary hypertension, coronary artery disease, heart failure, etc.), neurocognitive disorders, anxiety, depression, osteoporosis, nutritional deficiencies, obesity, metabolic complications (metabolic syndrome and diabetes mellitus), and sleep disorders. Neurocognitive disorders are found in up to 61% of patients with COPD, manifesting as memory loss, impaired executive function, and decreased attention. The high prevalence of neurocognitive disorders in COPD patients (61%) suggests a bidirectional relationship between systemic inflammation and neuronal damage. COPD-induced neurocognitive disorders (COPD-NCDs) reduce treatment compliance, impair pulmonary rehabilitation outcomes, and worsen critical metrics such as quality of life, hospitalization rates and survival, ultimately increasing mortality and disability. Poor adherence may stem from impaired memory and executive function, which compromise medication management and rehabilitation participation.
The widely accepted etiological theory of COPD-NCDs involves two synergistic pathways. Firstly, systemic inflammation and oxidative stress, hallmarks of COPD, drive extrapulmonary damage through circulating C-reactive protein (CRP), pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., interleukin (IL)-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)) and reactive oxygen species (ROS). Spillage of these mediators into the somatic circulation compromises the integrity of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), enabling peripheral neurotoxins to penetrate into the brain parenchyma, triggering activation of microglia and astrocytes, and ultimately leading to neuronal damage. Secondly, chronic hypoxia due to airflow limitation directly impairs hippocampal neurogenesis and prefrontal cortex function, as evidenced by MRI studies showing regional hippocampal atrophy and cortical thinning in hypoxemic COPD patients. Despite these established mechanisms, COPD-NCDs remain clinically overlooked or undiagnosed, partly because cognitive decline is erroneously attributed to aging or depression rather than COPD progression. Current managements prioritize symptomatic inflammation relief and oxygen supplementation, but fail to address neuroprotection. As previously noted, COPD-NCDs result from prolonged disease progression. There is evidence of a dose-response relationship between duration of COPD and risk of mild cognitive impairment when COPD duration exceeds 5 years. Given the irreversible nature of advanced neuronal damage, developing therapies with minimal side effects that concurrently mitigate inflammation, enhance hypoxia tolerance, and promote synaptic plasticity is critical to halting disease progression and improving functional outcomes.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent stem cells derived from the mesoderm with the ability to self-renew and differentiate into a variety of tissue cell types, including bone, cartilage, and adipose tissue. MSCs, owing to their triple advantages: accessibility from diverse tissues (including bone, umbilical cord, adipose tissue, etc.), easily isolate and amplify, and low immunogenicity. Particularly, they have the ability to differentiate into neural cell lineages, which make them an ideal source for autologous or allogeneic cell transplantation to treat neurodegenerative diseases. Critically, their efficacy extends beyond direct differentiation into neural cells. There is also dynamic crosstalk with immune cells via cytokines (e.g., IL-10, transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β)). Despite the important therapeutic role of MSCs, a large number of studies have shown that their mediated therapeutic effects are achieved mainly through paracrine mechanisms. Exosomes (Exos) are one of its major paracrine mediators.
Exos are extracellular vesicles (EVs) ranging from 30 to 150 nm in diameter that transfer functional components such as microRNAs (miRNAs), circular RNAs, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) and mRNAs molecules, and proteins from MSCs to recipient cells, playing a critical role in intercellular communication.
The pathogenesis of COPD-NCDs involves systemic inflammation, which disrupts BBB integrity, subsequently activating microglia and astrocytes. This cascade results in neuroinflammation and eventual neuronal damage. Additionally, chronic hypoxia in COPD-NCDs impairs oxygen-dependent enzymes critical for neurotransmitter synthesis (e.g., acetylcholine), further exacerbating neuronal dysfunction. Studies have shown that MSC-derived exosomes (MSC-Exos) are enriched in neuroprotective and immunomodulatory miRNAs, immunomodulatory factors (e.g., TGF-β, IL-10, and hepatic growth factor (HGF)), and neurotrophic factors, which can attenuate neuroinflammation, promote angiogenesis, and facilitate neurogenesis. Importantly, the multimodal mechanisms of MSC-Exos align with the two key pathological features of COPD-NCDs: (1) Counteracting systemic inflammation-induced BBB disruption, neuroinflammation, and neuronal damage; (2) Mitigating chronic hypoxia-mediated neuronal injury. Thus, we propose that MSC-Exos may offer a targeted therapeutic strategy for COPD-NCDs, given their biological properties and the disease’s pathophysiology. However, we acknowledge that direct experimental and clinical evidence specific to COPD-NCDs remains limited, and further research is needed to elucidate the precise mechanisms of action in this context. This review first summarizes the possible pathogenesis of COPD-NCDs. Then, building on evidence of the neuroprotective effects of MSC-Exos in other central nervous system (CNS) diseases, we highlight the rationale and unique potential of MSC-Exos as therapeutic agents for COPD-NCDs. Specifically, neuroinflammation and neuronal dysfunction, key features of COPD-NCDs, are known targets of MSC-Exos in CNS disorders. MSC-Exos may improve neurocognitive deficits through multiple mechanisms, including (1) enhancing the integrity of BBB; (2) ameliorating neuroinflammation by modulating microglial polarization and astrocyte activation; (3) inhibiting neuronal apoptosis while promoting neurogenesis and functional recovery; (4) facilitating oligodendrocyte progenitor cell differentiation and myelin sheath regeneration; and (5) supporting synapse formation and synaptic plasticity. These mechanisms, validated in CNS disorders, suggest promising translational potential for COPD-NCDs.

Possible mechanisms of COPD-NCDs
COPD-NCDs refer to cognitive impairments associated with COPD. COPD is characterized with irreversible airflow obstruction and airway inflammation. Hypoxemia in patients with COPD is thought to worsen neurocognitive impairments due to of poor oxygenation. For example, hippocampal atrophy in COPD patients with chronic hypoxemia, can result in cognitive dysfunction, which may be attenuated by oxygen therapy. Conversely, the lack of long-term adjunctive oxygen therapy has been shown to increase the risk of cognitive impairments. However, another study revealed that non-hypoxemic COPD patients also showed significant cognitive decline. Additionally, acute oxygen therapy can not reverse the neurocognitive disorders that develop in COPD patients with hypoxemic. These findings suggest that hypoxemia plays a partial role in COPD-NCDs, with other mechanisms likely contributing.
While hypoxemia contributes to neurocognitive impairments, emerging evidence suggests that systemic inflammation plays a more central role in the pathogenesis of COPD-NCDs. The pathogenesis of systemic inflammation in COPD involves the following steps: (1) Long-term exposure to harmful particles and gases (e.g., cigarette smoke, biofuel combustion) activates immune cells, leading to oxidative stress through the production of ROS and reactive nitrogen species (RNS). (2) Oxidative stress increases the release of pro-inflammatory mediators (e.g., nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB)) leading to local inflammation. (3) Inflammatory cells, such as alveolar macrophages, neutrophils, and T lymphocytes, accumulate in the lungs and release more inflammatory mediators, leading to lung inflammation. (4) Inflammatory markers and oxidative stress “spill over” into the systemic circulation, causing systemic inflammation including significant elevation of CRP, IL-6, IL-8, fibrinogen and TNF-α.
Studies have shown that systemic inflammatory mediators, including IL-6, TNF-α and IL-1β, can damage the BBB, activate glial cells, induce neuroinflammation, and ultimately lead to neuronal damage and cognitive decline. Despite these insights, no effective treatment currently exists to slow or reverse COPD-NCDs.
Taken together, COPD-NCDs arise from a combination of systemic inflammation and chronic hypoxia. Systemic inflammation, driven by oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-6, TNF-α), compromises BBB integrity, allowing neurotoxic mediators to infiltrate the brain and trigger neuroinflammation. Chronic hypoxia further exacerbates neuronal damage by impairing hippocampal neurogenesis and prefrontal cortex function. These mechanisms collectively contribute to cognitive decline in COPD patients, underscoring the need for therapies targeting inflammation, hypoxia, and neuronal repair.
Therefore, targeting the underlying mechanisms of COPD-NCDs and exploring novel therapeutic approaches, such as MSC-derived exosomes, may offer a promising strategy to address this unmet clinical need.

MSC-Exos: a novel therapeutic approach
Exos, a major subclass of EVs, were first isolated from sheep reticulocytes in 1983. These cup-shaped nanoscale double-membrane structures are released into the extracellular environment, where they play critical biological roles. Exos are secreted by nearly all cell types, including stem cells, immune cells, tumor cells, endothelial cells (ECs) and cardiomyocytes, etc. They are widely distributed in physiological fluids (e.g., urine, plasma, and cerebrospinal fluid) and organs (e.g., thymus). EVs also include two other subpopulations, microvesicles (100–1000 nm) and apoptotic bodies (500–2000 nm).
Exos carry a diverse cargo of proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, metabolites, reflecting the composition of their donor cells. Specific proteins, such as CD9, CD63, CD81, TSG101 and Alix are highly enriched in Exos and serve as reliable markers for their identification. Through intercellular communication, Exos can regulate the physiological activities of target cells, demonstrating significant potential in the treatment of various diseases.
Although MSCs show therapeutic potential in preclinical studies, their clinical application is limited by low post-transplantation survival rates, immune rejection and tumorigenic risks. Recent evidence suggests that the therapeutic effects of MSCs are largely mediated by paracrine factors, particularly Exos. MSC-Exos offer several advantages over traditional MSC therapy: (1) High stability and biocompatibility, enabling efficient crossing the BBB. (2) Avoidance of risks associated with cell transplantation, such as immune rejection, vascular obstruction, and tumor formation. (3) Sterilization by filtration and production as ready-made products. Additionally, Exos deliver functional cargo (e.g., miRNAs, proteins) to target cells, acting as a drug delivery platform that enhances therapeutic precision and efficacy.
Preclinical studies have demonstrated that MSC-Exos can effectively reduce lung inflammation and damage, thereby improving COPD. In cigarette smoke-induced COPD, the administration of adipose MSC-derived Exos (ADSC-Exos) significantly reduced the elevation of TNF-α, IL-6 and chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 (CXCL1) in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), as well as a significant decrease in the number of inflammatory cells (e.g., alveolar macrophages, lymphocytes, and neutrophils), and was able to attenuate lung inflammation and mucus hypersecretion, thereby reducing cigarette smoke-induced lung injury. Furthermore, MSC-Exos have shown remarkable therapeutic efficacy in CNS disorders, including neuroinflammation and neuronal damage (Fig. 1).
Multiple mechanisms of MSC-Exos for the treatment of CNS disorders. MSCs can be obtained from the umbilical cord, bone marrow, dental pulp, and adipose tissue. MSC-Exos can inhibit microglial M1 polarization and A1 astrocyte activation, improve BBB integrity, promote neuronal and myelin regeneration, and enhance synaptic plasticity. The figure was created with BioRender.com
Given the shared pathological features between COPD-NCDs and other CNS disorders, MSC-Exos may exert similar therapeutic effects in COPD-NCDs. Although the direct application of MSC-Exos in COPD-NCDs has not been extensively studied, their mechanisms of action on other CNS disease provide a strong rationale for exploring their potential in this context. Thus, MSC-Exos represent a promising cell-free therapeutic strategy for COPD-NCDs, offering a novel approach to address the unmet clinical needs in this field.

MSC-Exos and BBB integrity
The BBB is composed of continuous capillary ECs, basement membrane, pericytes, astrocytic, microglia, and neurons. Tight junctions (TJs) between ECs effectively seal the paracellular space, representing the most prominent feature of the BBB. Key proteins involved in TJ formation and maintenance include claudins and occludins, while adherens junctions (AJs) link ECs through vascular endothelial cadherin (VE-cadherin). The BBB prevents harmful substances from entering the brain and while selectively regulating the passage of molecules to maintain neuronal and brain function. However, BBB integrity is compromised in many CNS disorders, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), multiple sclerosis (MS), and ischemic stroke (IS), and its disruption is recognized as an early biomarker of cognitive impairment.
BBB disruption can occur through several mechanisms: (1) TJs disruption, associated with the expression/activity of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-9), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), ROS, aspartic proteases (SAPS), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and vascular β-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1); (2) ECs damage: increased expression of high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) and decreased expression of endothelial adenosine receptor 2a (Adora2a), TGF-β1 type I receptor, activin receptor-like kinase (ALK)-1 and ALK-5, and glucose transporter isozyme 1 (GLUT1); (3) Pericyte loss: stress induces pericyte contraction and apoptosis, and hypoxia and inflammation trigger pericyte detachment from the basal lamina, leading to pericyte loss; (4) Astrocyte activation: leads to secretion of MMP-9, pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α), VEGF-A and endothelial cell growth factor 1 (ECGF1) disrupting BBB integrity; (5) Microglia activation: releases pro-inflammatory cytokines, increases paracellular permeability, and promotes phagocytosis of astrocytic end-feet, reducing occludin and claudin-5 expression. BBB disruption is a key factor in the development of cognitive impairment and dementia, highlighting the need for therapies that target these mechanisms.
COPD-NCDs are associated with BBB disruption. In a murine model, sodium fluorescein (Na-F) and Evans blue (EB) were injected into the jugular vein demonstrated increased BBB permeability. The COPD model exhibited moderate lung damage, alveolar enlargement, pulmonary neutrophil infiltration, and decreased blood oxygen saturation. Increased BBB permeability to Na-F and EB paralleled lung pathology, suggesting that COPD contributes to cognitive dysfunction by facilitating the transfer of blood-derived proteins (e.g., albumin) into the brain parenchyma.
In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that cigarette smoke (including e-cigarettes) reduces the expression of TJ proteins (e.g., ZO-1, claudin-5, and occludin) in ECs, leading to BBB dysfunction. Clinical studies further corroborate these findings, showing vasogenic brain edema in COPD patients secondary to BBB disruption. Therefore, restoring BBB integrity may be a key therapeutic strategy for COPD-NCDs.
MSC-Exos have been shown to improve BBB integrity through multiple mechanisms (Fig. 2): (1) Upregulation of TJ proteins: improving BBB integrity by increasing the expression of ZO-1 and claudin-5. For instance, early administration of MSC-Exos in swine model of traumatic brain injury (TBI) and hemorrhagic shock (HS) increased the expression of ZO-1 and claudin-5, which improved the integrity of the BBB and reduced brain swelling and lesion size; (2) Reduction of oxidative stress and endothelial apoptosis: decreasing endothelial ROS production thereby inhibiting EC apoptosis. In IS, bone marrow MSC-derived Exos (BM-MSC-Exos) increases the expression of TJ proteins ZO-1 and claudin-5 by decreasing endothelial ROS production and apoptosis. These processes may involve in activating the Ras/PI3K/Akt/ eNOS pathway and inhibiting RASA1 expression via exosomal miR-132-3p. (3) Inhibition of inflammation and reduction of EC apoptosis: reduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and pro-apoptotic factors. In subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), BM-MSC-Exos attenuated BBB destruction and brain oedema, which was achieved by increasing the level of miRNA129-5p, thereby inhibiting the HMGB1/TLR4 pathway, which ultimately led to a reduction in the expression levels of the pro-inflammatory factor TNF-α and the pro-apoptotic factor phosphorylated-p53 (p-p53).
Mechanisms of MSC-Exos in improving BBB integrity. (1) Up-regulation of TJ proteins: MSC-Exos enhance BBB integrity by increasing ZO-1 and claudin-5 expression. (2) Reduction of oxidative stress: MSC-Exos decrease ROS production and endothelial cell apoptosis. (3) Anti-inflammatory effects: MSC-Exos reduce pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α levels and inhibit endothelial cell apoptosis. The figure was created with BioRender.com
To sum up, preclinical studies have demonstrated the efficacy of MSC-Exos in improving BBB integrity and neurological outcomes in TBI, HS, SAH, and IS. Given the shared mechanisms of BBB disruption in COPD-NCDs and other CNS disorders, MSC-Exos may offer a promising therapeutic strategy to mitigate cognitive dysfunction in COPD patients.

MSC-Exos and neuroinflammation
Neuroinflammation is a key contributing factor to COPD-NCDs. Studies have demonstrated that exposure to cigarette smoke in mice leads to increased microglia activation in the hippocampus, elevated neuroinflammation, and impaired cognitive function. Microglia, the resident macrophages of the CNS, play a critical role in regulating neuroinflammation, maintaining neuronal networks, and facilitating injury repair. Under normal physiological conditions, microglia exhibit a ramified morphology with multiple branches, maintaining a state of homeostasis. However, in response to pathological stimuli such as injury or inflammation, they transition to an amoeboid reactive state secreting inflammatory factors to mediate immune responses. Activated microglia can adopt either M1 (pro-inflammatory) or M2 (anti-inflammatory) phenotypes. Prolonged M1 activation in the excessive release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, superoxide, nitric oxide (NO), ROS, and proteases, which exacerbate neuroinflammation and contribute, to the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders such as AD, Parkinson’s disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
MSC-Exos mitigate neuroinflammation in neurological disorders such as IS, TBI, MS, spinal cord injury (SCI), and AD (Table 1). A growing body of evidence suggests that MSC-Exos mitigate neuroinflammation by inhibiting M1 polarization and promoting M2 polarization of microglia, potentially through diverse signaling pathways. For example, BM-MSC-Exos have been shown to alleviate neuroinflammation in acute cerebral ischemic injury by reversing M1 polarization via the CysLT2R-ERK1/2 pathway. Similarly, human umbilical cord MSC-derived Exos (hUC-MSC-Exos) deliver miR-146a-5p to microglia, suppressing the IRAK1/TRAF6 signaling pathway and reducing neuroinflammation, thereby improving outcomes in IS.
Summary of the mechanism of action of MSC-Exos in suppressing neuroinflammation in CNS diseases
MSC-Exos sources	Related Exosomal Cargo	Molecular mechanisms	Effect	Disease types	Reference	 	BM-MSCs	/	NLRP3/ASC/Cl.caspase-1↓; CD32↓; CD68↓; iNOS↓; CD206↑; Arg-1↑; Ym1↑	Inhibit microglia M1 polarization; Promote microglia M2 polarization; Inhibit neuroinflammation.	IS		 	/	CysLT2R-ERK1/2↓; CD86↓; CD206↑; NO↓; IL-1β↓; IL-12↓; TNF-α↓; TGF-β↑; IL-10↑		 	miR-145	FOXO1↓; TNF-α↓; IL-6↓; IL-1β↓; CD86↓; CD206↑		 	miR-223-3p	CysLT2R↓; CD16/32↓; CD206↑; IL-6↓; IL-1β↓; IL-10↑		 	UC-MSCs	miR-146a-5p	IRAK1/TRAF6/NF-κB↓; TNF-α↓; IL-6↓; IL-1β↓; CD16↓; CD206↑		 	UCBMSCs	miR-23a-3p	iNOS↓; Arg-1↑; IBA1↓; TNF-α↓; IL-6↓; IL-10↑		 	ADSCs	miR-21-5p	PIK3R1↓; PI3K/AKT↑; CD86↓; iNOS↓; CD206↑; IL-10↑; TNF-α↓; IL-6↓; IL-1β↓		 	hypoxic pre-treated ADSCs	circ-Rps5	miR-124-3p↓; SIRT7↑; IL-1β↓; TNF-α↓; IL-6↓; CD206↑; iNOS↓		 	UC-MSCs	/	GFAP↓; IBA1↓	Inhibition of astrocyte and microglia hyperactivation; Inhibit neuroinflammation.	TBI		 	/	NF-κB↓; TNF-α↓; IL-1β↓; IL-6↓; IBA1↓; CD68↓; GFAP↓		 	BM-MSCs	/	CD68↓; GFAP↓		 	miR-17-92 clusters	CD68↓; GFAP↓		 	UC-MSCs	/	lncRNA TUBB6/Nrf2↑; IL-1β↓; IL-6↓; TNF-α↓; IL-10↑; CD86↓; CD206↑	Inhibit microglia M1 polarization; Promote microglia M2 polarization; Inhibit neuroinflammation.		 	BM-MSCs	/	IL-1β↓; TNF-α↓; iNOS↓; Arg-1↑; CD206↑		 	ADSCs	/	NF-κB↓; MAPK↓; MCP-1↓; TNF-α↓; IL-1β↓; IL-6↓; IL-1α、IL-1β↓; iNOS↓; CCL2↓; CCL3↓; CCL5↓; Arg1↑; CD206↑; IGF1↑; IL-10↑		 	UC-MSCs	miR-21	IBA1↓; IL-6↓; IL-1β↓; TNF-α↓	Inhibition of microglia hyperactivation; Inhibit neuroinflammation.		 	BM-MSCs	miR-146a-5p	IRAK1↓; NFAT5↓; IL-6↓; IL-1β↓; TNF-α↓; OX42↓; MHC-II↓; iNOS↓; COX2↓; MCP-1↓	Inhibit microglia M1 polarization; Inhibit neuroinflammation.	ICH		 	DPSCs	miR-197-3p	FOXO3↓; CD68↓; IBA1↓; IL-6↓; IL-1β↓; TNF-α↓; NLRP3↓	Inhibition of microglia activation; Inhibit neuroinflammation.	SAH		 	BM-MSCs	miR-181c	PTEN↓; IL-1β↓; TNF-α↓; NF-κB↓; p-IKKα/β↓; p65↓	Inhibition of microglia activation; Anti-inflammatory.	SCI		 	miR-125a	IRF5↓; IL-5↓; IL-13↓; CCL12↓; TNF-α↓; Arg1↑; Ym1 ↑; Fizz↑; CD86↓; CD206↑; IL-1β↓; IL-4↑	Inhibit microglia M1 polarization; Promote microglia M2 polarization; Inhibit neuroinflammation.		 	hypoxic preconditioned BM-MSCs	miR-216a-5p	TLR4/NF-κB↓; PI3K/AKT↑; iNOS↓; Arg1↑; CD206↑; YM1/2↑; TNF-α↓; IL-1β↓; IL-6↓; TGF-β↑; IL-4↑; IL-10↑		 	ADMSCs	miR-22	GSDMD↓; TNF-α↓; IL-1β↓; IL-6↓; IBA-1↓; NLRP3↓; Caspase-1↓	Inhibition of microglia hyperactivation; Inhibit neuroinflammation.	AD		 	BM-MSCs	/	IBA1↓; GFAP↓; TNF-α↓; IL-1β↓; IL-6↓	Inhibition of astrocyte and microglia hyperactivation; Inhibit neuroinflammation.		 	UC-MSCs	/	YM-1↑; Arg-1↑; MRC1↑; FIZZ1 ↑; CD163↑; IL-1β↓; TNF-α↓; IL-10↑; TGF-β↑;	Promote microglia M2 polarization; Inhibit neuroinflammation.		 	iPSCs	lncRNA-0949	TLR4↓; p38/p-ERK1/2↓; NF-κB↓; p65↓; MIP2↓; TNF-α↓; IL-1β↓; IL-6↓	Inhibit neuroinflammation.	Neuroinflammatory diseases		 	BM-MSCs	/	TLR2/IRAK1/NF-kB↓; YM1↑; iNOS↓; IL-1β↓; TNF-α↓; IL-10↑; TGF-β↑	Inhibit microglia M1 polarization; Promote microglia M2 polarization; Inhibit neuroinflammation.	MS		 	ADSCs	/	TNF-α↓; IL-1β↓; IL-6↓; IBA1↓	Inhibition of microglia activation; Inhibit neuroinflammation.	HIBI		 	BM-MSCs	/	p38MAPK/p65NF-κB↓; TNF-α↓; IL-1β↓; IL-6↓; IL-10↑; TGF-β↑; CD86↓	Inhibit microglia M1 polarization; Inhibit neuroinflammation.		 	WJ-MSC	/	TLR4/CD14↓; TNF-α↓; IL-1β↓; IL-6↓; Cxcl10↓; CD68↓; IBA1↓	Inhibition of microglia activation; Inhibit neuroinflammation.	PBI		 	ADSCs	/	SIRT1↑; IBA1↓; CD68↓; IL-4↑; IL-10↑; TNF-α↓; IL-1β↓	Inhibition of microglia activation; Inhibit neuroinflammation.	Radiation-induced brain injury		 	OM-MSCs	/	Ret↓; DDC↓; Fcrl2↓; IL-1β↓; IL-10↑; IBA1↓	Inhibition of microglia activation; Inhibit neuroinflammation.	SCZ
Notes: ↑, level increase; ↓, level decrease
In addition to microglia, the abnormal activation of astrocytes plays significant role in neuroinflammation and neuronal injury. Activated M1 microglia release pro-inflammatory factors such as IL-1α, TNF-α, and complement component 1q (C1q), which induce the formation of A1-responsive astrocytes. These A1-responsive astrocytes, commonly observed in various CNS disorders, lose their normal supportive function and become neurotoxic. They contribute to neuronal and oligodendrocyte death, inhibit synapse formation, and impair neuronal excitatory function. Preclinical studies have demonstrated that hUC-MSC-Exos can suppress the overactivation of both microglia and astrocyte by inhibiting the NF-kB signaling pathway and down regulating pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6, thereby promoting neurological recovery after TBI. In addition, BM-MSC-Exos have been shown to reduce A1 astrocyte activation, decrease pro-inflammatory cytokines levels, and improve motor function in SCI, likely through the inhibition of the NF-κB pathway.
More interestingly, pretreatment of MSCs under specific conditions can enhance the therapeutic potential of their Exos. For example, hypoxia-pretreated BM-MSC-Exos carrying miR-216a-5p have been shown to shift microglia from the M1 to the M2 by modulating the TLR4/NF-κB and PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, promoting functional recovery after SCI. Similarly, Exos derived from hypoxia-preconditioned ADSCs deliver circ-Rps5, promoting M2 polarization of microglia/macrophages and attenuating brain injury in acute IS. Additionally, BM-MSC-Exos overexpressing steroid receptor coactivator-3 (SRC-3) have been found to inhibit microglia and astrocyte activation following cerebral ischemia, reducing levels of IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, and improving neurological function. Furthermore, docosapentaenoic acid (DPA)-treated hUC-MSC-Exos exhibit enhanced anti-inflammatory and antidepressant effects, potentially through the down-regulation of the MyD88/TRAF6/NF-κB signaling pathway mediated by miR125b-5p. These findings underscore the potential of preconditioned MSC-Exos as a therapeutic tool for CNS disorders, though further research is needed.
In conclusion, given well-documented role of MSC-Exos in modulating neuroinflammation across various CNS diseases, it is plausible that they may also exert therapeutic effects in COPD-NCDs, which are similarly characterized by neuroinflammation. However, further research is needed to explore this potential and elucidate the underlying mechanisms.

MSC-Exos and neurogenesis
Neurocognitive dysfunction in COPD-NCDs may be attributed to neuronal damage and impaired neurogenesis. In patients with COPD, elevated markers of pulmonary inflammation and oxidative stress can ‘spill over’ into the systemic circulation, leading to increased systemic inflammation, disruption of the BBB, activation of brain immune cells, and subsequent neuronal damage or loss. Additionally, chronic hypoxia associated with COPD contributes to neuronal injury, which is anatomically reflected in hippocampal atrophy, leading to cognitive dysfunction. On the other hand, neurogenesis, a complex process in which hippocampal neural stem cells (NSCs) proliferate and differentiate into newborn neurons and other resident brain cells, plays a key role in maintaining cognitive function. Studies have shown that exposure to cigarette smoke reduces neurogenesis and decreases the number of immature neurons in the dentate gyrus of rodents the risk of neurocognitive deficits. Therefore, promoting neurogenesis and inhibiting neuronal apoptosis may represent effective strategies for alleviating COPD-NCDs.
Currently, there are no treatments capable of preventing or reversing irreversible neuronal damage. Stem cell-based therapies have emerged as a promising approach for neural regeneration. However, the presence of the BBB poses a significant challenge, as delivering stem cells to the brain often requires invasive physical or chemical methods to bypass the barrier. These methods not only carry risks but may also exacerbate inflammation by increasing BBB permeability. In contrast, Exos derived from MSC-Exos can naturally cross the BBB, offering a non-invasive and potentially safer alternative. The ability of MSC-Exos to traverse the BBB involves multiple mechanisms, including endocytosis by ECs due to their lipid bilayer structure. More importantly, MSC-Exos carry bioactive molecules such as miRNAs, lncRNAs, and proteins, which have shown great potential in the treating CNS disorders. In preclinical studies, MSC-Exos have been shown to improve neurocognitive function primarily by promoting neurogenesis and inhibiting neuronal apoptosis (Table 2).
Summary of the mechanism of action of MSC-Exos in promoting neurogenesis in CNS disorders
MSC-Exos sources	Related Exosomal Cargo	Molecular mechanisms	Effect	Disease types	Reference	 	UC-MSCs	/	Bax↓; cytoplasmic cytochrome c↓; cleaved caspase-3↓; Bcl-2↑; mitochondrial cytochrome c↑; PINK1/Parkin↑	Inhibition of neuronal death; Suppresse apoptosis, pyroptosis, and ferroptosis	TBI		 	/	Bcl-2/Bax↑	Inhibition of neuronal apoptosis		 	/	DCX↑; NeuN↑	Inhibition of neuronal apoptosis; Promote neuronal regeneration		 	BM-MSCs	/	BrdU/DCX↑; BrdU/NeuN↑	Promote neurogenesis		 	BM-MSCs	miR-124-3p	p38 MAPK↓; GLT-1↑; cleaved caspase-3↓; cleaved caspase-9↓	Reduction of glutamate excitotoxicity; Inhibition of neuronal apoptosis		 	BM-MSCs	miR-17–92 cluster	NeuN↑	Reduce neuronal loss; Promote neurogenesis		 	BDNF-induced BM-MSCs	miR-216a-5p	NEUROG2↑; DCX↑	Inhibition of neuronal apoptosis; Promote neuronal regeneration		 	MSCs	/	BrdU/NeuN↑	Inhibit hippocampal neuronal loss; Promote DG neurogenesis		 	ADSCs	/	BrdU/NeuN↑	Inhibition of neuronal apoptosis; Promote hippocampal neurogenesis		 	BM-MSCs	Zeb2/Axin2	BrdU/NeuN↑; BDNF↑; VEGF↑; SOX10↑; Wnt/β-catenin↑; endothelin-3/EDNRB↓	Promote neurogenesis	IS		 	/	IL-33/ST2↑	Reduce neuronal death		 	/	Bcl-2↑; Bax↓; cleaved caspase3↓; JNK1/c-Jun↑	Inhibit neuronal apoptosis		 	miR-345-3p	TRAF6↓		 	ADSCs	miR-22-3p	KDM6B↓; cleaved caspase 3↓; caspase 3↓; Bax↓; Bcl-2↑; BMF/BMP2↓		 	BM-MSCs	miR-133b	RhoA↓; ERK1/2↑; CREB↑	Inhibit neuronal apoptosis	ICH		 	miR-146a-5p	NeuN↑		 	BM-MSCs	miR-17–92 cluster	cleaved-Caspase3↓; Caspase3↓; cleaved-Caspase3/Caspase3↓	Inhibit neuronal apoptosis	SCI		 	hpMSCs	/	MEK/ERK/CREB↑; Tuj1↑; NeuN↑; DCX↑; SOX2↑; PAX6↑; Nestin↑; KI67↑; Sox1↑; GFAP↑	Promote the proliferation of NSCs; Promote neurogenesis		 	UC-MSCs	miR-223	PTEN/PI3K/Akt↑	Inhibit neuronal apoptosis	AD		 	BM-MSCs	/	DCX↑; BDNF↑	Promotes neuronal regeneration		 	/	NeuroD1↑	Promote neurogenesis		 	MSCs	/	PSA-NCAM↑; DCX↑	Promote neurogenesis		 	ADSCs	/	p53↓; Bax↓; caspase-3↓; cleaved caspase-3↓; Bcl-2↑	Inhibit neuronal apoptosis		 	BM-MSCs	miR-132-3p	NeuN↑; Ras/Akt/GSK-3β↑	Inhibit neuronal apoptosis	VD		 	BM-MSCs	Gli1	Sp1↓; LRRK2↓; α-synuclein↓; Bcl-2↑	Inhibit neuronal damage and apoptosis	PD		 	EP4 antagonist-induced BM-MSCs	2′,3′-Cyclic nucleotide 3′‐phosphodiesterase (CNP)	DCX↑; β3-tubulin↑; MAP2↑	Promote neurogenesis	cognition/learning deficiencies		 	AMSCs	/	caspase-3↓; caspase-9↓; Bcl-2/Bax↑	Inhibit neuronal apoptosis	CP		 	OM-MSCs	/	DCX↑; BDNF↑	Promote neurogenesis	SCZ		 	UC-MSCs	/	BrdU/DCX↑; BrdU/NeuN↑	Promote neurogenesis	Acute brain disease		 	BM-MSCs	/	DCX ↑; NeuN↑	Promote neurogenesis	Methamphetamine addiction		 	ADSCs	lncRNA IFNGAS1	PI3K(p110α)/AKT↑; Tuj1↑; GAD67 ↑; vGLU1 ↑	Inhibit neuronal apoptosis; Promote neurogenesis	ASD		 	BM-MSCs	/	NeuN↑	Inhibit neuronal loss; Promote hippocampal neurogenesis	SE
Notes: ↑, level increase; ↓, level decrease
For example, treatment with UC-MSC-Exos reversed the suppression of hippocampal NSC proliferation and neuronal differentiation induced by intrahippocampal streptozotocin (STZ) injections (a model simulating AD-like conditions), and promoted adult hippocampal neurogenesis, exerting neuroprotective effects. Similarly, BM-MSC-Exos were found to enhance hippocampal neurogenesis in methamphetamine (METH)-induced neurocognitive impairment. In TBI models, MSC-Exos from various sources not only promoted neurogenesis, but also inhibited neuronal apoptosis, leading to improved neurological recovery.
The therapeutic effects of MSC-Exos are largely mediated by their cargo, including miRNAs, IncRNAs, proteins. For instance, BM-MSC-Exos were shown to attenuated glutamate excitotoxicity and inhibit neuronal apoptosis by delivering miR-124-3p, which negatively regulates the p38 MAPK pathway in astrocytes and upregulates GLT-1 expression, thereby improving neurological damage and cognitive function. In another study, miR-132-3p from BM-MSC-Exos ameliorated neuronal damage and cognitive deficits in vascular dementia (VD) by activating the Ras/Akt/GSK-3β pathway through downregulation of RASA1. Additionally, lncRNA IFNG-AS1 derived from ADSC-Exos down-regulated miR-21a-3p and activated the PI3K (p110α)/AKT signaling pathway, promoting neurogenesis and improving autism spectrum disorder (ASD)-like behavior in BTBR mice.
In a word, neuronal damage and impaired neurogenesis are key features of COPD-NCDs. MSC-Exos promote hippocampal neurogenesis by delivering neurotrophic factors (e.g., brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)) and miRNAs that enhance NSC proliferation and differentiation, reverse neuronal apoptosis and improve cognitive function in models of traumatic brain injury and vascular dementia, suggesting similar benefits in COPD-NCDs.

MSC-Exos and myelin regeneration
Oligodendrocytes (Ols) and the myelin sheath they produce play an important role in learning and memory. During aging, the inhibition of myelin formation contributes to decline in spatial memory. Additionally, enhanced myelination has been shown to improve AD-related cognitive impairment. As previously mentioned, COPD-induced CNS neuroinflammation activates microglia, which further releases neuroinflammatory cytokines such as Il-1α, TNF-α and C1q. These cytokines induce the activation of A1 astrocytes, thereby inhibiting the proliferation and differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs). This process leads to the death of nascent Ols and failure of myelin regeneration. Therefore, promoting OPCs differentiation and myelin regeneration may be an effective strategy for treating cognitive dysfunctions in COPD patients.
MSC-Exos can enhance myelin formation by directly promoting the proliferation and differentiation of OPCs and increasing the expression of myelin-associated proteins. They can also indirectly inhibit demyelination by promoting microglial cell M2 polarization, as demonstrated in various models of neurological disease (Table 3).
Summary of the mechanism of action of MSC-Exos in promoting Myelin regeneration in CNS diseases
MSC-Exos sources	Related Exosomal Cargo	Molecular mechanisms	Effect	Disease types	Reference	 	BM-MSCs	/	BrdU-NG2↑; BrdU-APC↑; MBP↑; IL-1β↓; TNF-α↓; iNOS↓; YM1↑; TGF-β↑; IL-10↑; TLR2/IRAK1/NF-kB↓	Promote differentiation of OPCs into OLs; Promote myelin regeneration; Promote microglia M2 polarization; Inhibition of neuroinflammation	MS		 	/	TNF-α↓; IL-12↓; IL-10↑; TGF-β↑; iNOS↓; Arg-1↑; CD68↓; CD206 ↑	Inhibition of demyelination; Promote microglia M2 polarization; Inhibition of neuroinflammation		 	miR-23b-3p	NEK7↓; NLRP3↓; Caspase-1↓; ASC↓; IL-1β↓; IL-6↓; IL-18↓; TNF-α↓; IL-10↑	Inhibition of demyelination; Inhibition of neuroinflammation; Inhibition of microglial pyroptosis		 	UC-MSCs	miR-23a-3p	PI3k/Akt↑; Tbr1/Wnt↓;Mag↑; Mog↑; MBP↑	Promote differentiation of OPCs into OLs; Promote myelin regeneration		 	BM-MSCs	miR-17-92 clusters	MBP↑; PTEN↓; PI3K/Akt/mTOR ↑; SMI-31↑; BrdU-NG2↑; BrdU-MBP↑	Increase myelin density; Promote myelin sheath formation; Promote oligodendrogliogenesis	IS		 	miR-134	caspase-8↓	Inhibition of apoptosis in OLs		 	Zeb2/Axin2	SMI-31↑	Promote myelin regeneration		 	T2DM-BM-MSCs	/	miR-9↓; ABCA1↑; APC↑; NG2↑	Increase myelin density; Promote oligodendrogliogenesis	T2DM IS		 	WJ-MSC	/	MBP↑; CNPase↑; Olig2↑	Promote myelin sheath formation; Promote oligodendrocyte maturation	PBI		 	BM-MSCs	/	Olig2↑; Opalin↑	Promote oligodendrocyte differentiation; Promote myelin sheath formation	DOX-induced chemobrain
Notes: ↑, level increase; ↓, level decrease
In demyelinating CNS diseases such as MS, BM-MSC-Exos directly promotes the differentiation of OPCs into mature Ols and increases the levels of myelin basic protein (MBP), facilitating myelin regeneration. This mechanism may involve the inhibition of the TLR2/IRAK1/NF-kB signalling pathway. Olig2, an Ol transcription factor, and Opalin, an Ol-specific membrane protein, both play critical roles in promoting Ol differentiation and myelin sheath formation. Studies have shown that BM-MSC-Exos can enhance myelin sheath formation by upregulating Olig2 and Opalin expression, thereby reversing doxorubicin (DOX) -induced neural demyelination and improving cognitive recovery. Furthermore, miR-23a-3p-enriched UC-MSC-Exos directly enhanced the expression of myelin proteins in OPCs and promoted the maturation and development of myelin Ols, likely through the modulation of PI3k/Akt and Tbr1/Wnt pathways. In another study, miR-17-92 cluster-enriched BM-MSC-Exos were found to downregulate PTEN levels, activating the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signalling pathway and promoting oligodendrocyte generation and myelin sheath formation in the ischemic border zone (IBZ), thereby improving neurological recovery after IS.
Additionally, reducing neuroinflammation can inhibit demyelination and thus indirectly improve demyelinating CNS diseases. It has been demonstrated that BM-MSC-Exos can reduce neuroinflammation and inhibit demyelination by suppressing microglia M1 polarization and promoting microglia M2 polarization. Thes findings indicate that MSC-Exos could restore myelin integrity and improve cognitive function in COPD patients.

MSC-Exos and synaptic plasticity
Synapse formation occurs throughout life, and synaptic connections in many regions are continuously remodeled in response to experience, leading to synaptic plasticity, which is closely associated with learning and memory. Although there is no direct evidence linking COPD to synaptic dysfunction, cigarette smoke has been shown to significantly impact synaptic function. Synaptic proteins, such as synaptophysin, are essential for maintaining normal synaptic function and plasticity. Chronic exposure to cigarette smoke reduces the expression of presynaptic proteins, leading to synaptic degeneration and early pathological changes in the pre-symptomatic stages of AD, which may contribute to later cognitive impairment. In newborn mice exposed to environmental tobacco smoke, reduced levels of hippocampal synaptic proteins and BDNF were associated with cognitive dysfunction, most of which were irreversible. BDNF, a key neurotrophic factor secreted by neurons and glial cells, plays a vital role in synapse formation and synaptic plasticity. Moreover, it is shown that microglia and astrocytes are closely associated with synapse formation and synaptic plasticity.
Furthermore, nicotine exposure during adolescents has been shown to reduces metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) 2 protein and function on glutamatergic presynaptic terminals in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), leading to cognitive dysfunction. mGluR2, a member of the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily, regulates synaptic transmission and neuronal excitability throughout the CNS. mGluR2 is normally localized to presynaptic terminals or preterminal axons and is involved in the regulation of neurotransmitter release and synaptic plasticity. Therefore, we hypothesize that reduced synapse formation and synaptic plasticity are strongly associated with COPD-NCDs.
The role of MSC-Exos and their contents in promoting synapse formation and enhancing synaptic plasticity has been widely reported (Table 4), suggesting their potential as therapeutic target for COPD-NCDs. For example, Nakano et al. demonstrated that BM-MSC-Exos increase synaptophysin expression, promote synaptogenesis, and enhance synaptic density in mice with diabetic cognitive impairment. Similarly, in IS models, BM-MSC-Exos treatment significantly increased synaptophysin expression in the IBZ, improving synaptogenesis and synaptic plasticity. In AD mouse models, lateral ventricle administration of BM-MSC-Exos upregulated the expression of synapse-associated proteins such as synaptic binding protein-1 (Syt-1), synaptophysin-1, and BDNF, enhancing synaptic plasticity and improving AD-like behaviors.
Summary of the mechanism of action of MSC-Exos in enhancing synaptic plasticity in CNS disorders
MSC-Exos sources	Related Exosomal Cargo	Molecular mechanisms	Effect	Disease types	Reference	 	BM-MSCs	/	PSD95↑; synaptophysin↑; JNK1/c-Jun↑	Promote synaptogenesis	IS		 	/	synaptophysin↑	Promote synaptogenesis; Enhance synaptic plasticity		 	miR-133b	synaptophysin↑	Promote synapse formation; Enhance synaptic plasticity		 	Zeb2/Axin2	synaptophysin↑; BDNF↑	Enhance synaptic plasticity		 	MYCBPAP	synaptophysin↑; PSD95↑	Enhance synaptic plasticity		 	BM-MSCs	/	BDNF↑	Enhance synaptic plasticity	AD		 	/	Synaptophysin↑	Enhance synaptic plasticity		 	miR-146a	Synaptophysin↑	Increase synaptic density; Promote synaptogenesis		 	hypoxia-preconditioned BM-MSCs	miR-21	synapsin 1↑; PSD-95↑	Promote synaptogenesis		 	WJ-MSCs	/	BdnfIV↑; synaptophysin ↑; GluR1↑; HDAC4↓	Enhance synaptic plasticity		 	OM-MSCs	/	PSD95↑; TH↑; BDNF↑	Enhance synaptic plasticity	SCZ		 	BM-MSCs	/	synaptophysin↑	Increase the number of synapses; Enhance synaptic plasticity	Cognitive impairment in diabetes		 	BM-MSCs	miR-132-3p	synapsin 1↑; PSD95↑; Ras/Akt/GSK-3β↑	Increase synaptic density; Enhance synaptic plasticity	VD		 	BM-MSCs	/	BDNF↑; synaptophysin↑	Promote synapse formation	DOX-induced chemobrain
Notes: ↑, level increase; ↓, level decrease
MSC-Exos contents also play an important role in promoting synaptogenesis and enhancing synaptic plasticity. In AD mice, MSC-Exos transfer miR-146a to inhibit astrocyte inflammation and promote synaptogenesis, thereby improving cognitive dysfunction. Furthermore, MSC-Exos shuttle MYCBP-associated protein (MYCBPAP), which promotes synaptic remodeling and improves neurological recovery after IS in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs). These effects, observed in models of Alzheimer’s disease and IS, suggest that MSC-Exos could improve synaptic function and cognitive outcomes in COPD-NCDs.

Biomarkers for monitoring therapeutic efficacy in COPD-NCDs
Biomarker assessment is critical in clinical trials to evaluate whether MSC-Exos confer therapeutic benefits in COPD-NCDs. Systemic inflammation and oxidative stress play key roles in the pathogenesis of COPD-NCDs, and several biomarkers have been linked to disease progression: (1) Inflammatory markers: Elevated levels of CRP and fibrinogen correlate with lower Montreal Cognitive Assessment test (MoCA) scores, indicating a negative association with cognitive function in COPD patients. Similarly, increased systemic cytokines (e.g., TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β) are observed in COPD patients with depressive symptoms. (2) Neurodegeneration markers: Serum Aβ levels are elevated in COPD patients, potentially increasing the risk of dementia and AD. Additionally, high levels of DNA damage and malondialdehyde (MDA) are associated with cognitive impairment in COPD. (3) Astrocyte-derived markers: Severe COPD patients exhibit higher serum S100B concentrations—a calcium-binding peptide with neurotoxic effects at high levels—compared to mild/moderate COPD cases, correlating with worse cognitive dysfunction. (4) Transcriptional regulation: Increased CREB mRNA expression in blood samples may serve as a biomarker for cognitive decline in COPD.
These findings suggest that future clinical trials could evaluate the therapeutic effects of MSC-Exos by monitoring serum biomarkers, including systemic inflammatory markers (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, CRP, fibrinogen), Aβ, MDA, S100B, and CREB. Such assessments would provide insights into MSC-Exos’ ability to modulate disease progression in COPD-NCDs.

Summary and perspective
COPD-NCDs represent a significant unmet clinical need, with systemic inflammation, BBB disruption, neuroinflammation, and neuronal damage contributing to cognitive decline. While direct experimental evidence is currently lacking, we propose three potential mechanisms by which MSC-Exos may ameliorate COPD-NCDs: (1) Indirect neuroprotection through pulmonary improvement. MSC-Exos may reduce pulmonary inflammation, thereby decreasing systemic inflammatory circulation and subsequent neuroinflammation, ultimately improving neurocognitive dysfunction; (2) Direct CNS effects: MSC-Exos can cross the BBB to exert neuroprotective effects by: restoring BBB integrity, modulating neuroinflammation, promoting neurogenesis, enhancing myelination, and improving synaptic plasticity; (3) Lung-brain axis regulation: Emerging evidence suggests MSC-Exos may act through specific pulmonary-neural pathways. For instance, intravenous MSC administration was shown to modulate the CNS serotonergic system via the pulmonary vagal-brain axis, producing antidepressant effects in mice. As MSC-Exos represent a major paracrine mechanism of MSCs, their potential role in such axis-mediated improvement of COPD-NCDs warrants further investigation.
While this review primarily focuses on the direct CNS effects of MSC-Exos, we acknowledge that their multimodal mechanisms offer promising therapeutic potential for COPD-NCDs.
However, there are still some challenges in the current application of MSC-Exos: (1) Lack of standardized isolation methods: Conventional ultracentrifugation yields exosomes with low purity, often contaminated by other EVs of similar size, which may diminish therapeutic efficacy; (2) Storage and transport limitations: While MSC-Exos are more stable than MSCs, long-term storage at -80 °C can impair their bioactivity. Lyophilization may improve stability, but further optimization is needed; (3) Heterogeneity in exosome content: The composition and function of Exos vary depending on the cell source and culture conditions (e.g., hypoxia), leading to inconsistencies in therapeutic effects; (4) Presence of harmful cytokines: MSC paracrine signaling includes detrimental cytokines, necessitating purification steps to isolate exosomes with minimal side effects; (5) Limited clinical trial data: Variations in administration routes, dosages, and disease models highlight the need for further investigation. (6) Biosafety and risks of long-term administration: Although MSC-Exos have been described as non-immunogenic, long-term safety data remain limited, particularly for chronic diseases such as COPD-NCDs. Prolonged or high-dose administration may increase the risk of adverse reactions, including potential immune responses over time. To address these concerns, further preclinical studies should incorporate in vivo models to evaluate the effects of long-term, high-dose MSC-Exos administration, along with extended monitoring to assess potential toxicity. Additionally, real-time imaging techniques (e.g., MRI and fluorescence imaging) could be employed to track the in vivo distribution and metabolic pathways of MSC-Exos, providing critical insights into their long-term safety profile.
Despite these challenges, MSC-Exos-based therapies hold great promise. Future research should focus on: (1) preclinical validation: Establishing robust COPD-NCDs models to assess therapeutic efficacy; (2) bioengineering for targeted delivery: Modifying MSC-Exos surfaces to enhance specificity. For example, intranasal administration of RGD-modified UCMSC-Exos overexpressing CD146 and CD271 (RGD-CD146+CD271+ UCMSC-Exos) improved spinal cord injury recovery by targeting miR-501-5p, enhancing vascular integrity, and promoting neurological function; (3) therapeutic cargo loading: Enhancing MSC-Exos with bioactive molecules (e.g., selenium nanoparticles) to improve efficacy, as demonstrated in diabetic models where NSe-loaded exosomes exhibited superior anti-inflammatory and regenerative effects; (4) preconditioning strategies: Optimizing MSC culture conditions (e.g., with recombinant human growth differentiation factor 7 (rhGDF7)) to boost exosome potency. For instance, pretreatment increased miR-369-3p levels in MSC-Exos, mitigating cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury via PDE4D inhibition and AMPK activation; (5) clinical translation: Advancing MSC-Exos therapies toward human trials for COPD-NCDs.
While MSC-Exos from various sources share many common biological properties, emerging evidence suggests important functional differences that may impact their therapeutic efficacy, such as Aβ clearance potential, neuroregenerative capacity and neurite growth promotion. For example, ADSC-Exos demonstrate superior expression of neprilysin (NEP), a key Aβ-degrading enzyme, compared to BM-MSC-Exos, suggesting potentially greater therapeutic value for Alzheimer’s pathology in COPD-NCDs. And dental MSC-derived Exos (DMSC-Exos) exhibit enhanced neuroprotective effects compared to BM-MSC-Exos and ADSC-Exos, likely due to their neural crest origin. Furthermore, Menstrual stem cell-derived Exos and BM-MSC-Exos show significant capacity to promote neurite outgrowth in cortical and sensory neurons, while chorion-derived and UC-MSC-Exos lack this effect.
These source-dependent variations in Exo composition and function highlight the importance of carefully considering MSC origin when designing therapeutic strategies for COPD-NCDs. Future research should systematically compare the efficacy of different MSC-Exos sources in COPD-NCDs models to identify optimal candidates for clinical translation.
With continued innovation, MSC-Exos may revolutionize the treatment of COPD-NCDs, offering hope for improved cognitive function and quality of life in patients.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Authors’ contributions
HX, XTM and ZYD contributed the conception and design of the project; HX wrote the manuscript draft; XY, YSL and WHJ contributed the design and drawing of the figures; XTM, ZYD and FW completed final editing and revision of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding
This study was supported by the Medical Basic Research Innovation Center of Airway Disease in North China, Key Laboratory of Pathobiology; the Ministry of Education and Department of Education of Jilin Province (JJKN20211159KJ).

Data availability
Not applicable.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

AI declaration
The authors declare that they have not use AI-generated work in this manuscript.

Competing interests
All authors have declared no conflict of interest for this manuscript.

Abbreviations
COPD
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
COPD-NCDs
COPD-induced neurocognitive disorders
BBB
blood-brain barrier
MSC-Exos
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes
CNS
central nervous system
CRP
C-reactive protein
IL
interleukin
TNF-α
tumor necrosis factor-α
ROS
reactive oxygen specie
MSCs
Mesenchymal stem cells
TGF-β
transforming growth factor-β
Exos
Exosomes
EVs
extracellular vesicles
miRNAs
microRNAs
lncRNAs
long noncoding RNAs
HGF
hepatic growth factor
RNS
reactive nitrogen species
NF-κB
nuclear factor kappa-B
ECs
endothelial cells
ADSC-Exos
adipose MSC-derived Exos
CXCL1
chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1
BALF
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
TJs
Tight junctions
AJs
adherens junctions
VE-cadherin
vascular endothelial cadherin
AD
Alzheimer’s disease
MS
multiple sclerosis
IS
ischemic stroke
MMP
matrix metalloproteinase
SAPS
aspartic proteases
VEGF
vascular endothelial growth factor
BACE1
β-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1
HMGB1
high mobility group box 1
Adora2a
adenosine receptor 2a
ALK
activin receptor-like kinase
GLUT1
glucose transporter isozyme 1
ECGF1
endothelial cell growth factor 1
Na-F
sodium fluorescein
EB
Evans blue
TBI
traumatic brain injury
HS
hemorrhagic shock
BM-MSC-Exos
bone marrow MSC-derived Exos
SAH
subarachnoid hemorrhage
p-p53
phosphorylated-p53
NO
nitric oxide
PD
Parkinson’s disease
ALS
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
SCI
spinal cord injury
hUC-MSC-Exos
human umbilical cord MSC-derived Exos
C1q
component 1q
SRC-3
steroid receptor coactivator-3
DPA
docosapentaenoic acid
NSCs
neural stem cells
STZ
streptozotocin
METH
methamphetamine
VD
vascular dementia
ASD
autism spectrum disorder
BDNF
brain-derived neurotrophic factor
Ols
Oligodendrocytes
OPCs
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells
MBP
myelin basic protein
DOX
Doxorubicin
IBZ
ischemic border zone
mGluR
metabotropic glutamate receptor
PFC
prefrontal cortex
GPCR
G protein-coupled receptor
Syt-1
synaptic binding protein-1
MYCBPAP
MYCBP-associated protein
SHRs
spontaneously hypertensive rats
MoCA
Montreal Cognitive Assessment test
MDA
malondialdehyde
RGD-CD146+CD271+ UCMSC-Exos
RGD-modified UCMSC-Exos overexpressing CD146 and CD271
rhGDF7
recombinant human growth differentiation factor 7
NEP
neprilysin
DMSC-Exos
dental MSC-derived Exos

References
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Novel Pharmacological strategies to treat cognitive dysfunction in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Comorbidities of COPD
Systemic manifestations and comorbidities of COPD
Cognitive function in COPD
Comorbidities of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Lung disease as a determinant of cognitive decline and dementia
Effect of coexisting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and cognitive impairment on health outcomes in older adults
The impact of cognitive impairment on efficacy of pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with COPD
The impact of cognitive impairment on self-management in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A systematic review
Inflammatory mechanisms in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Alateeq R, Akhtar A, De Luca SN, Chan SMH, Vlahos R. Apocynin prevents cigarette smoke-induced anxiety-Like behavior and preserves microglial profiles in male mice. Antioxid (Basel). 2024;13. 10.3390/antiox13070855.
Increased exploration and hyperlocomotion in a cigarette smoke and LPS-induced murine model of COPD: linking pulmonary and systemic inflammation with the brain
The unique alterations of hippocampus and cognitive impairment in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Reduced cortical thickness, surface area in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a surface-based morphometry and neuropsychological study
Siraj RA, Comorbid cognitive impairment in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): Current understanding, risk factors, implications for clinical practice, and suggested interventions. Med (Kaunas). 2023;59. 10.3390/medicina59040732.
A prospective study of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and the risk for mild cognitive impairment
Fu X, Liu G, Halim A, Ju Y, Luo Q, Song AG. Mesenchymal stem cell migration and tissue repair. Cells. 2019;8. 10.3390/cells8080784.
Clinical application of mesenchymal stem cells in rheumatic diseases
Biological functions of mesenchymal stem cells and clinical implications
Mesenchymal stem cells: a new trend for cell therapy
Potential for neural differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells
Specific induction of neuronal cells from bone marrow stromal cells and application for autologous transplantation
Adult rat and human bone marrow stromal stem cells differentiate into neurons
Clinical trials with mesenchymal stem cells: an update
Huang Y, Wu Q, Tam PKH. Immunomodulatory mechanisms of mesenchymal stem cells and their potential clinical applications. Int J Mol Sci. 2022;23. 10.3390/ijms231710023.
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived factors: Immuno-modulatory effects and therapeutic potential
Paracrine mechanisms of mesenchymal stem cell-based therapy: current status and perspectives
Mesenchymal stem cell derived-exosomes: a modern approach in translational medicine
Mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived Exosomal miR-150-3p affects intracerebral hemorrhage by regulating TRAF6/NF-κB axis, gut microbiota and metabolism
Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and MicroRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells
Exosomal KLF3-AS1 from hMSCs promoted cartilage repair and chondrocyte proliferation in osteoarthritis
Zailani H, Satyanarayanan SK, Liao WC, Hsu YT, Huang SY, Gałecki P, Su KP, Chang JP. Roles of Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in managing cognitive impairment in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A review. Nutrients. 2023;15. 10.3390/nu15204363.
Harrell CR, Volarevic A, Djonov V, Volarevic V. Mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosomes as new remedy for the treatment of neurocognitive disorders. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22. 10.3390/ijms22031433.
Harrell CR, Fellabaum C, Jovicic N, Djonov V, Arsenijevic N, Volarevic V. Molecular mechanisms responsible for therapeutic potential of mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived secretome. Cells. 2019;8. 10.3390/cells8050467.
Guy R, Offen D. Promising opportunities for treating neurodegenerative diseases with mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosomes. Biomolecules. 2020;10. 10.3390/biom10091320.
COPD and cognitive impairment: the role of hypoxemia and oxygen therapy
The evaluation of cognitive impairment and relevant factors in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Assessment of cognitive impairment in long-term oxygen therapy-dependent COPD patients
Cognitive performance in patients with COPD
Acute effects of oxygen treatment upon information processing in hypoxemic COPD patients
Cigarette smoke exposure induces neurocognitive impairments and neuropathological changes in the Hippocampus
Inflammatory markers and the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A systematic review and Meta-Analysis
Zailani H, Satyanarayanan SK, Liao WC, Liao HF, Huang SY, Gałecki P, Su KP, Chang JP. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in managing comorbid mood disorders in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): A review. J Clin Med. 2023;12. 10.3390/jcm12072653.
Cigarette smoke-induced pulmonary impairment is associated with social recognition memory impairments and alterations in microglial profiles within the Suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus
Fate of the transferrin receptor during maturation of sheep reticulocytes in vitro: selective externalization of the receptor
Kalluri R, LeBleu VS. The biology, function, and biomedical applications of exosomes. Science. 2020;367. 10.1126/science.aau6977.
Extracellular vesicles in physiology, pathology, and therapy of the immune and central nervous system, with focus on extracellular vesicles derived from mesenchymal stem cells as therapeutic tools
Han C, Sun X, Liu L, Jiang H, Shen Y, Xu X, Li J, Zhang G, Huang J, Lin Z et al. Exosomes and Their Therapeutic Potentials of Stem Cells. Stem Cells Int. 2016; 2016:7653489. 10.1155/2016/7653489
Ha DH, Kim HK, Lee J, Kwon HH, Park GH, Yang SH, Jung JY, Choi H, Lee JH, Sung S, et al. Mesenchymal stem/stromal Cell-Derived exosomes for Immunomodulatory therapeutics and skin regeneration. Cells. 2020;9. 10.3390/cells9051157.
Hade MD, Suire CN, Suo Z. Mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosomes: applications in regenerative medicine. Cells. 2021;10. 10.3390/cells10081959.
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes in cancer therapy resistance: recent advances and therapeutic potential
Exosomes: extracellular organelles important in intercellular communication
Exosomes and microvesicles: extracellular vesicles for genetic information transfer and gene therapy
Exosomes: composition, biogenesis and function
Li L, Chen X, Wang WE, Zeng C. How to Improve the Survival of Transplanted Mesenchymal Stem Cell in Ischemic Heart? Stem Cells Int. 2016; 2016:9682757. 10.1155/2016/9682757
Donor-derived mesenchymal stem cells are Immunogenic in an allogeneic host and stimulate donor graft rejection in a nonmyeloablative setting
Long-term cultures of bone marrow-derived human mesenchymal stem cells frequently undergo spontaneous malignant transformation
Immunosuppressive effect of mesenchymal stem cells favors tumor growth in allogeneic animals
Adipose–derived mesenchymal stem cells exhibit tumor tropism and promote tumorsphere formation of breast cancer cells
BMSC-Exosomes attenuate ALP dysfunction by restoring lysosomal function via the mTOR/TFEB Axis to reduce cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury
The neuroprotection effects of exosome in central nervous system injuries: a new target for therapeutic intervention
Is the intravascular administration of mesenchymal stem cells safe? Mesenchymal stem cells and intravital microscopy
Malignant tumor formation after transplantation of short-term cultured bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells in experimental myocardial infarction and diabetic neuropathy
Targeted delivery of RGD-CD146(+)CD271(+) human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosomes promotes Blood-Spinal cord barrier repair after spinal cord injury
Mesenchymal stem cells-derived exosomes for drug delivery
Exosomes derived from adipose-derived stem cells alleviate cigarette smoke-induced lung inflammation and injury by inhibiting alveolar macrophages pyroptosis
Protective role of mesenchymal stem cells and mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes in cigarette smoke-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in mice
Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles ameliorate airway inflammation in a rat model of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
A blood-brain barrier overview on structure, function, impairment, and biomarkers of integrity
Molecular physiology and pathophysiology of tight junctions in the blood-brain barrier
Neuronal regulation of the blood-brain barrier and neurovascular coupling
Functional morphology of the blood-brain barrier in health and disease
Endothelial adherens junctions at a glance
The molecular constituents of the blood-brain barrier
The blood-brain barrier
Selective loss of cortical endothelial tight junction proteins during alzheimer’s disease progression
Blood-Brain barrier leakage in patients with early alzheimer disease
Neurological diseases in relation to the blood-brain barrier
Blood-brain barrier breakdown is an early biomarker of human cognitive dysfunction
Che J, Sun Y, Deng Y, Zhang J. Blood-brain barrier disruption: a culprit of cognitive decline? Fluids barriers CNS. 2024; 21:63. 10.1186/s12987-024-00563-3
Development, maintenance and disruption of the blood-brain barrier
Blood-brain barrier breakdown in alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative disorders
Blood-brain barrier impairment in dementia: current and future in vivo assessments
Elevated permeability of the blood-brain barrier in mice intratracheally administered Porcine pancreatic elastase
Electronic cigarette exposure disrupts blood-brain barrier integrity and promotes neuroinflammation
Impact of cigarette smoke extract and hyperglycemic conditions on blood-brain barrier endothelial cells
Cigarette smoke extract exacerbates hyperpermeability of cerebral endothelial cells after oxygen glucose deprivation and reoxygenation
Comparative assessment of in vitro BBB tight junction integrity following exposure to cigarette smoke and e-cigarette vapor: a quantitative evaluation of the protective effects of Metformin using small-molecular-weight paracellular markers
Vasogenic cerebral edema associated with the disability in activities of daily living in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Early single-dose treatment with exosomes provides neuroprotection and improves blood-brain barrier integrity in swine model of traumatic brain injury and hemorrhagic shock
miR-132-3p priming enhances the effects of mesenchymal stromal cell-derived exosomes on ameliorating brain ischemic injury
Exosomes from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells can alleviate early brain injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage through miRNA129-5p-HMGB1 pathway
Exosomes derived from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells harvested from type two diabetes rats promotes neurorestorative effects after stroke in type two diabetes rats
Ebselen prevents cigarette smoke-induced cognitive dysfunction in mice by preserving hippocampal synaptophysin expression
Bipolar/rod-shaped microglia are proliferating microglia with distinct M1/M2 phenotypes
Microglia function in the central nervous system during health and neurodegeneration
Isik S, Yeman Kiyak B, Akbayir R, Seyhali R, Arpaci T. Microglia Mediated Neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s Disease. Cells. 2023;12. 10.3390/cells12071012.
Differential roles of M1 and M2 microglia in neurodegenerative diseases
Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes attenuate cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury-induced neuroinflammation and pyroptosis by modulating microglia M1/M2 phenotypes
MSCs-Derived exosomes attenuate acute brain injury and inhibit microglial inflammation by reversing CysLT2R-ERK1/2 mediated microglia M1 polarization
Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell-derived Exosomal miR-146a-5p reduces microglial-mediated neuroinflammation via suppression of the IRAK1/TRAF6 signaling pathway after ischemic stroke
MiR-145 enriched exosomes derived from bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells protects against cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury through downregulation of FOXO1
Exosomes from MSCs overexpressing microRNA-223-3p attenuate cerebral ischemia through inhibiting microglial M1 polarization mediated inflammation
Exosomes from hypoxic pre-treated ADSCs attenuate acute ischemic stroke-induced brain injury via delivery of circ-Rps5 and promote M2 microglia/macrophage polarization
Mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosomes improved cerebral infarction via transferring miR-23a-3p to activate microglia
Function of miR-21-5p derived from ADSCs-exos on the neuroinflammation after cerebral ischemia
Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microglia
Astrocyte-targeting therapy rescues cognitive impairment caused by neuroinflammation via the Nrf2 pathway
Normal aging induces A1-like astrocyte reactivity
Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes promote neurological function recovery in rat after traumatic brain injury by inhibiting the activation of microglia and astrocyte
Intravenous infusion of the exosomes derived from human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells enhance neurological recovery after traumatic brain injury via suppressing the NF-κB pathway
Mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosomes reduce A1 astrocytes via downregulation of phosphorylated NFκB P65 subunit in spinal cord injury
Exosomes derived from bone mesenchymal stem cells repair traumatic spinal cord injury by suppressing the activation of A1 neurotoxic reactive astrocytes
Exosome-shuttled miR-216a-5p from hypoxic preconditioned mesenchymal stem cells repair traumatic spinal cord injury by shifting microglial M1/M2 polarization
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes overexpressing SRC-3 protect mice from cerebral ischemia by inhibiting ferroptosis
Exosomes derived from DPA-treated UCMSCs attenuated depression-like behaviors and neuroinflammation in a model of depression induced by chronic stress
Nutritional factors affecting adult neurogenesis and cognitive function
Tobacco smoke diminishes neurogenesis and promotes gliogenesis in the dentate gyrus of adolescent rats
Low intensity, long term exposure to tobacco smoke inhibits hippocampal neurogenesis in adult mice
Clinical gene therapy for neurodegenerative diseases: past, present, and future
Stem Cell-Derived exosomes: a new strategy of neurodegenerative disease treatment
Harrell CR, Jovicic N, Djonov V, Arsenijevic N, Volarevic V. Mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosomes and other extracellular vesicles as new remedies in the therapy of inflammatory diseases. Cells. 2019;8. 10.3390/cells8121605.
Exosomes from human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells attenuates stress-induced hippocampal dysfunctions
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes improve neurogenesis and cognitive function of mice with methamphetamine addiction: A novel treatment approach
Effect of exosomes derived from multipluripotent mesenchymal stromal cells on functional recovery and neurovascular plasticity in rats after traumatic brain injury
Mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosomes improve functional recovery in rats after traumatic brain injury: A Dose-Response and therapeutic window study
MSC-derived exosomes promote recovery from traumatic brain injury via microglia/macrophages in rat
Bone marrow stromal cells-derived exosomes reduce neurological damage in traumatic brain injury through the miR-124-3p/p38 MAPK/GLT-1 axis
Exosomes derived from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells attenuate neurological damage in traumatic brain injury by alleviating glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity
Exosomal miR-132-3p from mesenchymal stromal cells improves synaptic dysfunction and cognitive decline in vascular dementia
Exosome LncRNA IFNG-AS1 derived from mesenchymal stem cells of human adipose ameliorates neurogenesis and ASD-like behavior in BTBR mice
Steadman PE, Xia F, Ahmed M, Mocle AJ, Penning ARA, Geraghty AC, Steenland HW, Monje M, Josselyn SA, Frankland PW. Disruption of oligodendrogenesis impairs memory consolidation in adult mice. Neuron. 2020;105. 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.10.013.:150– 64.e6.
Myelin plasticity: sculpting circuits in learning and memory
Motor skill learning requires active central myelination
Myelin degeneration and diminished Myelin renewal contribute to age-related deficits in memory
Enhancing Myelin renewal reverses cognitive dysfunction in a murine model of alzheimer’s disease
Exosomes derived from bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells promote remyelination and reduce neuroinflammation in the demyelinating central nervous system
Nucleoporin Seh1 interacts with Olig2/Brd7 to promote oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination
The oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2 OLIG2 regulates transcriptional repression during myelinogenesis in rodents
OPALIN is an LGI1 receptor promoting oligodendrocyte differentiation
Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells and their derived exosomes resolve doxorubicin-induced chemobrain: critical role of their MiRNA cargo
Exosomal miR-23a-3p derived from human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells promotes remyelination in central nervous system demyelinating diseases by targeting Tbr1/Wnt pathway
MiR-17-92 enriched exosomes derived from multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells enhance axon-myelin remodeling and motor electrophysiological recovery after stroke
MicroRNA cluster miR-17-92 cluster in exosomes enhance neuroplasticity and functional recovery after stroke in rats
Exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells attenuate inflammation and demyelination of the central nervous system in EAE rats by regulating the polarization of microglia
Dynamic mediators of synapse development and plasticity
Impaired learning and memory ability induced by a bilaterally hippocampal injection of streptozotocin in mice: involved with the adaptive changes of synaptic plasticity
Synapse formation: from cellular and molecular mechanisms to neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders
Cigarette smoking accelerated brain aging and induced pre-Alzheimer-like neuropathology in rats
Exposure of neonatal mice to tobacco smoke disturbs synaptic proteins and Spatial learning and memory from late infancy to early adulthood
Parkhurst CN, Yang G, Ninan I, Savas JN, Yates JR 3rd, Lafaille JJ, Hempstead BL, Littman DR, Gan WB. Microglia promote learning-dependent synapse formation through brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Cell. 2013;155:1596–609. 10.1016/j.cell.2013.11.030.
BDNF and hippocampal synaptic plasticity
Microglia roles in synaptic plasticity and myelination in homeostatic conditions and neurodevelopmental disorders
Emerging roles of astrocytes in neural circuit development
Astrocytes: biology and pathology
Glia as sculptors of synaptic plasticity
Lasting synaptic changes underlie attention deficits caused by nicotine exposure during adolescence
Short- and long-term consequences of nicotine exposure during adolescence for prefrontal cortex neuronal network function
Metabotropic glutamate receptors: physiology, pharmacology, and disease
Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells improve diabetes-induced cognitive impairment by exosome transfer into damaged neurons and astrocytes
Systemic administration of exosomes released from mesenchymal stromal cells promote functional recovery and neurovascular plasticity after stroke in rats
Exosomes derived from bone-marrow mesenchymal stem cells alleviate cognitive decline in AD-like mice by improving BDNF-related neuropathology
Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells improve cognitive impairment in an alzheimer’s disease model by increasing the expression of microRNA-146a in hippocampus
Exosome-shuttled MYCBPAP from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells regulates synaptic remodeling and ameliorates ischemic stroke in rats
Cognitive impairment in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Association of systemic inflammation with depressive symptoms in individuals with COPD
Long J, Xu P, Chen J, Liao J, Sun D, Xiang Z, Ma H, Duan H, Ju M, Ouyang Y. Inflammation and comorbidities of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the cytokines put on a mask! Cytokine. 2023; 172:156404. 10.1016/j.cyto.2023.156404
Biomarkers of systemic inflammation and depression and fatigue in moderate clinically stable COPD
Serum Amyloid-Beta levels are increased in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
DNA damage in dementia: evidence from patients affected by severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and meta-analysis of most recent literature
S100B in brain damage and neurodegeneration
Targeting S100B protein as a surrogate biomarker and its role in various neurological disorders
S100B in neuropathologic states: the CRP of the brain?
Potential association between obstructive lung diseases and cognitive decline
Mesenchymal stromal cells alleviate depressive and anxiety-like behaviors via a lung vagal-to-brain axis in male mice
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes as a new therapeutic strategy in the brain tumors
Preservation of exosomes at room temperature using lyophilization
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes: therapeutic opportunities and challenges for spinal cord injury
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes: a potential cell-free therapy for orthodontic tooth stability management
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosome: a promising alternative in the therapy of alzheimer’s disease
Wu L, Zhang L, Huang M, Wu Y, Jin S, Zhang Y, Gan X, Yu T, Yu G, Zhang J, Wang X. Mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosomes: emerging as a promising Cell-Free therapeutic strategy for autoimmune hepatitis. Biomolecules. 2024;14. 10.3390/biom14111353.
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes: an emerging therapeutic strategy for hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury
Khalil DY, Hussein RH, El-Kholy WM. Mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosomes loaded with selenium or nano selenium as a novel therapeutic paradigm for Streptozotocin-Induced type 1 diabetes in rats. Biology (Basel). 2024;13. 10.3390/biology13040253.
Growth differentiation factor 7 pretreatment enhances the therapeutic capacity of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells against cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury
Human adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells secrete functional neprilysin-bound exosomes
Gugliandolo A, Mazzon E. Dental mesenchymal stem cell secretome: an intriguing approach for neuroprotection and neuroregeneration. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;23. 10.3390/ijms23010456.
Dental mesenchymal stem/stromal cells and their exosomes
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes from different sources selectively promote neuritic outgrowth
MiR-17-92 Cluster-Enriched exosomes derived from human bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells improve tissue and functional recovery in rats after traumatic brain injury
Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes provide neuroprotection in traumatic brain injury through the LncRNA TUBB6/Nrf2 pathway
Exosomes derived from bone mesenchymal stem cells ameliorate early inflammatory responses following traumatic brain injury
Exosomal miRNA-21 derived from umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells inhibits microglial overactivation to counteract nerve damage
Exosomes derived from MicroRNA-146a-5p-Enriched bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells alleviate intracerebral hemorrhage by inhibiting neuronal apoptosis and microglial M1 polarization
Dental pulp mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes inhibit neuroinflammation and microglial pyroptosis in subarachnoid hemorrhage via the miRNA-197-3p/FOXO3 axis
Exosomes with high level of miR-181c from bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells inhibit inflammation and apoptosis to alleviate spinal cord injury
Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell-derived Exosomal microRNA-125a promotes M2 macrophage polarization in spinal cord injury by downregulating IRF5
ADMSC Exo-MicroRNA-22 improve neurological function and neuroinflammation in mice with alzheimer’s disease
Exosomes isolated from human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells alleviate neuroinflammation and reduce Amyloid-Beta deposition by modulating microglial activation in alzheimer’s disease
Exosomes secreted from induced pluripotent stem cell ameliorate the lipopolysaccharide induced neuroinflammatory response via lncRNA-0949
Ikeda T, Kawabori M, Zheng Y, Yamaguchi S, Gotoh S, Nakahara Y, Yoshie E, Fujimura M. Intranasal administration of mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosome alleviates Hypoxic-Ischemic brain injury. Pharmaceutics. 2024;16. 10.3390/pharmaceutics16040446.
Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells-derived exosomes protect against nerve injury via regulating immune microenvironment in neonatal hypoxic-ischemic brain damage model
Exosomes derived from umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells reduce microglia-mediated neuroinflammation in perinatal brain injury
Exosomes derived from Adipose-Derived mesenchymal stem cells ameliorate Radiation-Induced brain injury by activating the SIRT1 pathway
Unlocking the therapeutic potential of exosomes derived from nasal olfactory mucosal mesenchymal stem cells: restoring synaptic plasticity, neurogenesis, and neuroinflammation in schizophrenia
Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosome suppresses programmed cell death in traumatic brain injury via PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy
Protective effect of BMSCs-derived exosomes mediated by BDNF on TBI via miR-216a-5p
Zeb2/Axin2-Enriched BMSC-Derived exosomes promote Post-Stroke functional recovery by enhancing neurogenesis and neural plasticity
Exosomes from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells are a potential treatment for ischemic stroke
Treadmill exercise exerts a synergistic effect with bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes on neuronal apoptosis and synaptic-axonal remodeling
Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell Exosomal miR-345-3p ameliorates cerebral Ischemia-reperfusion injury by targeting TRAF6
Exosomal microRNA-22-3p alleviates cerebral ischemic injury by modulating KDM6B/BMP2/BMF axis
Role of exosomes derived from miR-133b modified MSCs in an experimental rat model of intracerebral hemorrhage
Exosomal miR-17-92 cluster from BMSCs alleviates apoptosis and inflammation in spinal cord injury
Exosomes derived from human placental mesenchymal stem cells enhanced the recovery of spinal cord injury by activating endogenous neurogenesis
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived Exosomal miR-223 regulates neuronal cell apoptosis
Exploring the molecular mechanisms of MSC-derived exosomes in alzheimer’s disease: autophagy, insulin and the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes promote neurogenesis and cognitive function recovery in a mouse model of alzheimer’s disease
The exosome of adipose-derived stem cells reduces β-amyloid pathology and apoptosis of neuronal cells derived from the Transgenic mouse model of alzheimer’s disease
Bone Marrow-Derived mesenchymal stem Cell-Derived exosomes containing Gli1 alleviate microglial activation and neuronal apoptosis in vitro and in a mouse Parkinson disease model by direct inhibition of Sp1 signaling
Exosomal 2’,3’-CNP from mesenchymal stem cells promotes hippocampus CA1 neurogenesis/neuritogenesis and contributes to rescue of cognition/learning deficiencies of damaged brain
Human amniotic mesenchymal stromal cell-derived exosomes promote neuronal function by inhibiting excessive apoptosis in a hypoxia/ischemia-induced cerebral palsy model: A preclinical study
Intranasal MSC-derived A1-exosomes ease inflammation, and prevent abnormal neurogenesis and memory dysfunction after status epilepticus
Exosomal miR-23b-3p from bone mesenchymal stem cells alleviates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by inhibiting microglial pyroptosis
Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells-derived exosomes prevent oligodendrocyte apoptosis through Exosomal miR-134 by targeting caspase-8
Thomi G, Joerger-Messerli M, Haesler V, Muri L, Surbek D, Schoeberlein A. Intranasally administered exosomes from umbilical cord stem cells have preventive neuroprotective effects and contribute to functional recovery after perinatal brain injury. Cells. 2019;8. 10.3390/cells8080855.
Secondary release of exosomes from astrocytes contributes to the increase in neural plasticity and improvement of functional recovery after stroke in rats treated with exosomes harvested from MicroRNA 133b-Overexpressing multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells
Exosomes derived from hypoxia-preconditioned mesenchymal stromal cells ameliorate cognitive decline by rescuing synaptic dysfunction and regulating inflammatory responses in APP/PS1 mice
Chen YA, Lu CH, Ke CC, Chiu SJ, Jeng FS, Chang CW, Yang BH, Liu RS. Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Derived Exosomes Ameliorate Alzheimer’s Disease Pathology and Improve Cognitive Deficits. Biomedicines. 2021;9. 10.3390/biomedicines9060594.