How to Approach Patients with Acute Chest Pain
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is associated with high mortality rates. Although  the goal was to achieve a missed diagnosis rate of 1%, the actual data showed  a rate of 2%. Chest pain diagnosis has remained unchanged over the years and  is based on medical interviews and electrocardiograms (ECG), with biomarkers  playing complementary roles. We aimed to summarize the key points of medical  interviews, ECG clinics, use of biomarkers, and clinical scores, identify  problems, and provide directions for future research. Medical interviews should  focus on the character and location of chest pain (is it accompanied by radiating  pain?) and the duration, induction, and ameliorating factors. An ECG should be  recorded within 10 minutes of the presentation. The serial performance of an ECG  is recommended for emergency department (ED) evaluation of suspected ACS.  Characteristic ECG traces, such as Wellens syndrome and De Winter T-waves, should  be understood. Therefore, troponin levels in all patients with suspected ischemic  heart disease should be examined using a highly sensitive assay system. Depending  on the ED facility, the patient should be risk stratified by serial measurements  of cardiac troponin levels (re-testing at one hour would be preferred) to  determine the appropriate time to perform an invasive strategy for a definitive  diagnosis. The diagnostics should be based on Bayes’ theorem; however, care  should be taken to avoid the influence of heuristic bias.

1. Introduction
Chest pain is one of the most frequent causes of visits to emergency departments  (ED) and general outpatient clinics. Differential diagnosis requires prompt and  accurate evaluation of (1) ischemic heart disease, (2) other cardiovascular  diseases (aortic dissection and pulmonary embolism), and (3) non-cardiovascular  and pulmonary diseases. Among these, acute coronary syndrome (ACS) with  unclear electrocardiogram (ECG) changes accounts for approximately 10% of cases.  The physician in charge decides whether a patient needs to be admitted to the  hospital for diagnosis. However, differences in the accurate diagnosis rate  depend not only on the physician’s skill but also on their personality,  experience with medical errors, local customs, and patient background. Waxman  et al. investigated all Medicare claims in California and showed the  number of patients discharged directly from the ED without a diagnosis of acute  myocardial infarction (AMI); their analysis from 2006 to 2014 consistently found  a missed diagnosis rate of 2%. However, excessive hospitalization and  non-invasive examinations result in higher healthcare costs. Hospital beds  are a precious resource, as evidenced by the severe acute respiratory syndrome  coronavirus 19 pandemic. Natsui et al. analyzed a database of nearly  40,000 patients obtained over two years from 15 EDs in the United States. The  admission rate for follow-up was 14%; however, there was a wide variation  between physicians who tended to admit patients and those who did not  (8.8%–93.7%). However, it did not affect the frequency of death or AMI within  30 days. Recently, the 2021 American Heart Association/American College of  Cardiology/American Society of Echocardiography/American College of Chest  Physicians/Society for Academic Emergency Medicine/Society of Cardiovascular  Computed Tomography/Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance guidelines for  the evaluation and diagnosis of acute chest pain were revised for the first time  in nine years, to reduce the ACS miss rate to 1%, which was achieved by a  combination of (1) medical interviews, (2) ECGs, and (3) biomarkers.

2. An Analogy is Drawn from the Medical Interviews
Harrison’s internal medicine study found that (1) gastrointestinal problems  (e.g., reflux esophagitis) (42%), (2) ischemic heart disease (31%), and (3)  musculoskeletal system disorders (28%) were the most common causes of chest  pain. The characteristics of chest pain are essential in formulating an initial  assessment. However, not all patients may describe chest pain; instead, they may  claim chest discomfort or dyspnea. Surprisingly, the only highly specific finding  with a high likelihood ratio suggestive of ACS was radiating pain to the (1)  right shoulder or upper extremity and (2) bilateral shoulders or upper  extremities being the most common causes. Other symptoms were not specific to ACS  . In contrast, pain triggered by palpitations, sharp pain, pain that changes  with posture, and pain aggravated by inhalation are complaints that can rule out  ACS (negative likelihood ratio 0.2). However, patients commonly describe chest  pain as dyspnea or chest discomfort, rather than chest pain. A patient background  approach that includes coronary risk factors may be effective in such cases.  Particular attention should be paid to the presence or absence of hypertension,  history of smoking, and statin use.

3. Using Analogies from Electrocardiographic Changes
It is important to record an ECG within 10 minutes of arrival at the hospital  and to repeat the recording (within 30 to 60 minutes).
The strict definition of ST-segment elevation is the classical rule: ‘ST-segment  elevation of more than 1 mm in two or more inductions’. In this case, ‘two or  more inductions’ means anatomically adjacent inductions. The left precordial  leads or II/III/aVF in limb leads are objective, and these two patterns cover  almost 80% of ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). The definition of height is ‘more than 1 mm’, however, in  the US, an ironclad rule of ‘more than 2 mm’ is imposed only on V2 lead and V3  lead, where false positives are more common; on V2 lead and V3 lead, the  difference between men and women is more maniacal, with 1.5 mm (female) and 2.0  mm (male), or sometimes 2.5 mm for patients under 40 years old. The definition is  very detailed, but it is not all about sensitivity. These detailed definitions  are all rules to increase specificity without reducing sensitivity to prevent  false positives.
Typical ST-segment elevation with reciprocal change (mirror phenomenon) is  observed in only approximately 5% of cases. In reality, assessing  ischemic heart disease based on ST–T changes is challenging. In this  context, this review introduces some characteristic ECG findings identified by  cardiologists. The first is Wellens’ syndrome, in which characteristic ECG  changes are easily observed in leads V2–3. A slight upward shift and a  negative wave at the end of the T wave characterized the T wave. The diagnosis  was highly significant as the culprit’s vessel was the left anterior descending  artery. Prescribing aspirin and immediately transferring the patient to a  facility with catheterization capabilities should be considered (Fig. 1A). The  second is De Winter T-waves, in which the ST portion falls by 1 mm, and sharp  T-waves are observed under thoracic guidance. The culprit vessel was in the left  anterior descending artery (Fig. 1B).
The typical electrocardiogram (ECG) that should be considers for urgent coronary 
angiography. (A) Wellens syndrome. (B) De Winter T waves.

4. The Analogy is Drawn from the Biomarkers
Diagnostic criteria for AMI have shifted from an epidemiological/pathological  perspective to a biochemical (biomarker) perspective since the 20th century. The  most important reason for this was the emergence of high-sensitivity troponin  assays. In 2009, data comparing the diagnostic efficiency of various  high-sensitivity troponin assay systems for AMI were reported, and the Roche and  Abbott assay systems showed an outstanding area under the curve (AUC) of around  0.95 for both I and T (AUC 0.8 is considered a high diagnostic performance)  . However, this AUC is low in clinical practice. Troponin is known to be  elevated when the oxygen demand is unbalanced, such as in tachyarrhythmia and  anemia, cardiac diseases such as heart failure and cardiomyopathy, renal failure,  and pulmonary embolism. ACS cannot be determined from a single troponin  measurement.

5. High-sensitive Troponin Measurement System
Subsequently, various manufacturers developed troponin assays. They have been  developing high-sensitivity assay systems according to their own unique  standards. Therefore, the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry defines  the following criteria as standards for high-sensitivity assay systems:
(1) The 99th percentile should be determined in a healthy population.
(2) The 99th percentile for high-sensitivity cardiac troponin (hs-cTn) assays should  be measured with an analytical imprecision of 10% (%CV; coefficient of  variation).
(3) High-sensitivity assays should measure cardiac troponin above the detection  limit in 50% of healthy participants.

6. Definition of AMI
The Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction consensus document  classifies AMI into types 1 to 5 and differentiates AMI from myocardial injury by  providing the diagnostic term.

6.1 Myocardial Injury
An abnormal troponin level (99th percentile or higher) was detected at least  once among multiple measurements. A rise and/or fall in the cardiac troponin  level was considered acute injury.

6.2 Myocardial Infarction
AMI is a myocardial injury characterized by one of the following features: (1)  ischemic symptoms, (2) new electrocardiographic changes, (3) abnormal Q waves,  (4) new regional wall motion abnormalities observed on echocardiography, or (5)  thrombus identification on angiography.
The most frequent subtypes are type 1 myocardial infarction (MI), caused by acute plaque disruption or  erosion; type 2 MI, caused by a myocardial imbalance in oxygen supply or demand;  and myocardial injury, defined by an elevated concentration of the cardiac  biomarker troponin in the absence of acute myocardial ischemia. In the ED,  accurately discriminating between patients with type 1 MI, type 2 MI, and  myocardial injury is challenging. This is probably due to the ischemic symptoms  described above and the fact that identifying new ECG changes takes work in  actual clinical practice. In other words, when a patient with anemia or  tachyarrhythmia expresses chest tightness, the physician decides whether to  consider ischemic symptoms. Similarly, in the case of renal impairment, no clear  threshold has been established at which the level of numerical deterioration of  troponin becomes a false-positive. Therefore, it is difficult to  determine whether abnormal troponin levels indicate ACS.

7. Risk Scores
Among those without significant ECG changes and abnormal troponin values, only  1% to 4% of these patients have ACS. Risk scores are helpful given the  relatively low yield of the classical approach for possible ACS. Of these, the  History, Electrocardiogram, Age, Risk factors and Troponin (HEART) score and the  Emergency Department Assessment of Chest Pain Score (EDACS) are recommended in  the guidelines and are widely used. The HEART score is characterized by  incorporating the impression of the patient’s condition and ECG, which physicians  rely on, and guidelines emphasize the importance of the score.
However, the HEART score incorporates the judgment of the attending physician into the evaluation, which may introduce bias. On the other hand, the EDACS is somewhat age-weighted. For example, a 50-year-old man with a history of smoking who presents with chest pain, sweating, and hypertension as coronary risk factors would generally be considered likely to have ACS but would be classified as low risk with a score of 13.

8. The 0-hour/1-hour Algorithm
Mueller et al. at the University of Basel, Switzerland, proposed  an algorithm to improve the efficiency of ACS diagnosis based on serial troponin  measurements. Patients who present with chest pain as the primary  complaint without evident electrocardiographic changes are assessed for  high-sensitivity troponin at the time of arrival and one hour later, and the  decision to send them home is based on their troponin levels. The advantages of  this method are as follows (Fig. 2).
The 0-hour/1-hour algorithm with high sensitivity cardiac 
troponin T. The assay system to measure troponin must meet the conditions the 
International Federation of Clinical Chemistry recommends. NSTEMI, 
non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction.

8.1 Serial Measurement
Based on Bayes’ theorem, if the first test is negative, the pre-diagnostic  probability is lowered, and the second test is used to confirm (i.e., exclude)  the first test, thus reducing the post-diagnostic probability. Initially, the  second measurement depended on medical resources such as ED capacity, number of  hospital beds, and staff. In extreme cases, the later it is, the more sufficient  the increase in troponin levels and the fewer diagnostic errors. However,  patients continued to be observed in the ED, leading to congestion. In 2012, a  second measurement was recommended after three hours; however, a meta-analysis  showed that it could be performed as early as one hour if a highly sensitive  assay system was used.

8.2 Quantitative Representation
Diagnosis of ACS is often difficult because it involves qualitative expressions.  This algorithm, which proposes a risk stratification based entirely on  quantitative values, is a significant achievement which young residents can use.

9. Frequently Asked Questions about 0–1 h Algorithm

9.1 How do You Manage Observation Groups?
Approximately 20% of the patients in the observation group (25–30%) had  Non-ST elevation (NSTE)-ACS. Current guidelines state that patients  should be sent home after making appointments for coronary computed tomography  angiography, exercise myocardial scintigraphy, or magnetic resonance imaging if  there is no change in troponin levels after three hours. Lopez-Ayala examined the  optimal cutoff values using a sensitivity analysis of two cohort studies.  The results showed that “high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hs-cTnT) 15 ng/L at three h and delta 4 ng/L” was  the safest value for stratification, with a sensitivity of 93.3%, a negative  predictive value of 94.7%, and an MI rate of 5%. However, even with this  cutoff, approximately half of the patients were still stratified into the  observation group (approximately 14.6% of the patients with ACS). With the  recent development of machine learning, Doudesis et al. created an  interesting clinical decision support tool called the Collaboration for the  Diagnosis and Evaluation of Acute Coronary Syndrome (CoDE-ACS). It was  machine-trained with an XG Boost model using the High-STE-ACS cohort (10,038  patients (median age, 70 years; 48% female)) who were seen at one of 10  secondary or tertiary care hospitals in Scotland. The external validation  cohort included data from approximately 10,000 patients. CoDE-ACS was scored from  0–100, with an excellent diagnostic efficiency of 0.953 (0.947–0.958) for its  AUC and a score of 3 to rule out AMI and 61 to suspect AMI. Only 3–60  points corresponded to the observation group of the 0–1 algorithm (12.8%  included AMI); as a result, CoDE-ACS could be reduced to 13%.

9.2 Interpretation of Troponin Values in Patients with Heart Failure  at Presentation
If a patient with heart failure show a troponin level above the 99th percentile, ischemic heart disease may be the underlying cause. However, in clinical practice, the first priority should be managing the heart failure itself. Coronary artery evaluation should only be considered if heart failure is not well controlled, rather than based on troponin values. The timing of coronary artery evaluation should be based on vital signs, including the patient’s respiratory status, rather than by troponin levels.

9.3 Can We Really Exclude Rule-out Groups?
Being classified in the exclusion group does not mean that coronary atherosclerosis is absent. In our cohort,  47% of patients were stratified into the rule-out group, and 6.7% underwent  percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). These patients had a HEART score of 4. Since around 90% of these patients underwent PCI within 30 days after index visit, they should be closely monitored in the outpatient setting for 30 days. After that, no patient experienced a cardiovascular event during one year.

9.4 On Admission Rule Out
Guidelines recommend excluding patients with baseline hs-cTnT levels below the  detection limit (LoD) of 5 ng/L. This evidence is supported by meta-analyses  and two randomized trials using hs-cTnT. This may be a helpful tool to  show patients that there is nothing to worry about, as hs-cTnT is also harmful in  patients with a low pre diagnostic probability.
Clinicians should be aware of some of the analytical aspects of hs-cTn assays  regarding the LoD and limit of quantitation. Since the guidelines define myocardial infarction as showing a rise and fall in troponin levels, it may be inappropriate to make judgments based solely on troponin values at the time of presentation.

9.5 No Information about the Characteristics of Patients
The 0–1 algorithm does not consider the patient’s background, age, or number of  risk factors. Nilsson et al. incorporated elements of the 0–1  algorithm into the HEART and EDAC scores, and both achieved an negative  predictive value (NPV) 99.5% diagnostic performance for AMI at presentation.  The HEART score combined with the 0–1 algorithm met the 1% miss rate  guideline recommendation. However, neither method was superior to the other. Furthermore, the combined 0–1 algorithm with such a clinical score could  exclude unstable angina.
Artificial intelligence technology, which has shown remarkable progress in  recent years, is also beginning to benefit patients with chest pain. Neumann  et al. used machine learning to create a model for AMI diagnosis  that incorporated 18 variables of patient information based on the BACC study (n  = 2575, mixed groups of single and serial measurements), and StenoCario (n =  1688, mixed groups of single and serial measurements) was used for validation.  Data from different countries were used to generalize the model. Diagnostic  efficiency was excellent (AUC ranged from 0.92 to 0.98) when the prognostic  predictors were AMI occurring within 30 days and all-cause mortality. In the  future, a machine learning model incorporating ECG elements (multiple comparable  ECGs recorded consecutively would be desirable) would allow safer and quicker  risk stratification in patients with chest pain.

10. Conclusions
We reviewed the current status of how to approach patients with acute chest  pain. This issue is long-standing, but has not been resolved. The reason why  innovative methods for chest pain management have yet to be firmly established  lies in the complexity and variability of chest pain etiology. Chest pain can  originate from a wide range of causes, including cardiac, gastrointestinal,  musculoskeletal, and psychological sources, making a one-size-fits-all approach  challenging. Moreover, individual patient factors, such as comorbidities and  varying presentations of symptoms, add layers of complexity to developing  universally applicable and effective treatment protocols. The decision-making  method that uses the technique with the highest empirical probability of  resolution is called a heuristic. It is almost synonymous with the rules of  thumb, quick thinking, and intuition. Decision-making is usually based on this  process because it solves problems with less effort. The difference in the  accuracy rates between experienced and young ED physicians can be attributed to  the breadth of the heuristic repertoire. Heuristic bias, a negative aspect of  heuristics, begins to appear when clinicians become slightly more familiar with  them. Therefore, clinicians need to estimate the prior probability of diagnosis  qualitatively from the medical interview and ECG within the limited time  available in the ED and pay attention to increasing the post-test probability by  quantitative evaluation using troponin to reduce the number of severe missed  cases.
Publisher’s Note: IMR Press stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Abbreviations
ACS, acute coronary syndrome; ECG, electrocardiogram; ED, emergency department;  AMI, acute myocardial infarction; AUC, area under the curve; hs-cTn,  high-sensitivity cardiac troponin; NSTE-ACS, non-ST-segment elevation acute  coronary syndrome; CoDE-ACS, Collaboration for the Diagnosis and Evaluation of  Acute Coronary Syndrome; LoD, limit of detection.

Author Contributions
KI selected the topic and wrote the initial manuscript. KI and TM edited the manuscript and assisted in drawing the figures. KI contributed to the initial conception of the manuscript, took charge of organizing the article’s structure and provided critical reviews. Both authors have read and approved the final manuscript. Both authors have participated sufficiently in the work and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work.

Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

Funding
This research received no external funding.

Conflict of Interest
Dr. Inoue received a research grant from Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research C  (No. 18K09954), Roche Diagnostics, SB Bioscience Co., Ltd., Fujirebio Inc., Bayel  Sysmex, and Kanto Chemical Co. Inc. Dr. Minamino received a research grant from  Roche Diagnostics. Kenji Inoue is serving as Guest Editor of this journal. We declare that Kenji Inoue had no involvement in the peer review of this article and has no access to information regarding its peer review. Full responsibility for the editorial process for this article was delegated to Stefano De Servi. Otherwise, there are no conflicts of interest to declare.

References
Evaluation of the patient with acute chest pain
Systematic review of emergency department crowding: causes, effects, and solutions
The association between emergency department crowding and adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients with chest pain
Unrecognized Cardiovascular Emergencies Among Medicare Patients
Chest pain centers: diagnosis of acute coronary syndromes
One-Year Outcome of Patients with Chest Pain in the Rule-Out Group According to the 0-Hour/1-Hour Algorithm
The challenge of chest pain in the emergency room: now and the future
Higher Emergency Physician Chest Pain Hospitalization Rates Do Not Lead to Improved Patient Outcomes
2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR Guideline for the Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Value and limitations of chest pain history in the evaluation of patients with suspected acute coronary syndromes
Appropriate cardiac cath lab activation: optimizing electrocardiogram interpretation and clinical decision-making for acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction
2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused Update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Failure Society of America
2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines
The 12-lead electrocardiogram as a predictive tool of mortality after acute myocardial infarction: current status in an era of revascularization and reperfusion
2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines
Electrocardiographic manifestations of Wellens’ syndrome
Impending anterior myocardial infarction: de Winter syndrome
Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction (2018)
High-sensitivity cardiac troponin T for early prediction of evolving non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction in patients with suspected acute coronary syndrome and negative troponin results on admission
Analytical validation of a high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T assay
Early diagnosis of myocardial infarction with sensitive cardiac troponin assays
Heart fatty acid-binding protein offers similar diagnostic performance to high-sensitivity troponin T in emergency room patients presenting with chest pain
IFCC educational materials on selected analytical and clinical applications of high sensitivity cardiac troponin assays
Role of troponin in patients with chronic kidney disease and suspected acute coronary syndrome: a systematic review
High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin T in Patients with Severe Chronic Kidney Disease and Suspected Acute Coronary Syndrome
0/1-Hour Triage Algorithm for Myocardial Infarction in Patients With Renal Dysfunction
Multicenter Evaluation of a 0-Hour/1-Hour Algorithm in the Diagnosis of Myocardial Infarction With High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin T
Utility of absolute and relative changes in cardiac troponin concentrations in the early diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction
Outcome of Applying the ESC 0/1-hour Algorithm in Patients With Suspected Myocardial Infarction
Performance of the European Society of Cardiology 0/1-Hour, 0/2-Hour, and 0/3-Hour Algorithms for Rapid Triage of Acute Myocardial Infarction: An International Collaborative Meta-analysis
Utility of the 0-hour/1-hour high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T algorithm in Asian patients with suspected non-ST elevation myocardial infarction
A 0/1-Hour Algorithm Using High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin
One-hour rule-out and rule-in of acute myocardial infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T
Prospective Validation of the 0/1-h Algorithm for Early Diagnosis of Myocardial Infarction
Novel Criteria for the Observe-Zone of the ESC 0/1h-hs-cTnT Algorithm
Machine learning for diagnosis of myocardial infarction using cardiac troponin concentrations
Rapid Rule-out of Acute Myocardial Infarction With a Single High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin T Measurement Below the Limit of Detection: A Collaborative Meta-analysis
Limit of detection of troponin discharge strategy versus usual care: randomised controlled trial
A Randomized Trial of a 1-Hour Troponin T Protocol in Suspected Acute Coronary Syndromes: The Rapid Assessment of Possible Acute Coronary Syndrome in the Emergency Department With High-Sensitivity Troponin T Study (RAPID-TnT)
Diagnostic accuracy of the HEART Pathway and EDACS-ADP when combined with a 0-hour/1-hour hs-cTnT protocol for assessment of acute chest pain patients
A 1-h Combination Algorithm Allows Fast Rule-Out and Rule-In of Major Adverse Cardiac Events
A 0-Hour/1-Hour Protocol for Safe, Early Discharge of Chest Pain Patients
Personalized diagnosis in suspected myocardial infarction