Castleman disease as the great mimicker: the role of complex morpho-pathological evaluation
Castleman disease (CD) is a group of lymphoproliferative disorders characterized by abnormal enlargement of lymph nodes (LNs) and a wide range of symptoms. Only a few cases are found in the head and neck. Based on clinical presentation and evolution, the disease can be classified into two main subtypes: unicentric CD (UCD), characterized by the enlargement of a single LN or a single LN chain, and multicentric CD (MCD), characterized by the involvement of multiple LNs and regions, with more important systemic symptoms and a poor prognosis. CD is also known as “the great mimicker” and can be easily misdiagnosed, sharing similar clinical and imaging characteristics with other pathologies, mainly when it is found in the neck. A histopathological (HP) and immunohistochemical (IHC) correlation is essential in these cases to accurately diagnose and establish the proper treatment plan. In light of this, we present a rare case of a 15-year-old young female with a slowly expanding, isolated supraclavicular mass. An excisional biopsy was performed, and the results confirmed the presence of CD, hyaline-vascular type. As of this writing, there was no evidence of recurrence or new enlarged LNs. We also review CD’s clinical and HP features and the diagnostic and treatment challenges it poses.

Introduction
Castleman disease (CD), also referred to as benign giant lymphoma, or lymphoid hamartoma, is a rare lymphoproliferative disorder characterized by lymph node (LN) enlargement, with a wide variety of associated diseases and manifestations and a mostly benign behavior. Benjamin Castleman first described it in 1956 on 13 patients with solitary hyperplastic mediastinal LNs, closely mimicking thymoma.
Studies indicate a slight gender difference in the incidence of CD, with females more affected in the earlier decades of life, while males show a higher incidence in the latter half. Among pediatric patients, the male-to-female ratio is approximately equal. The epidemiology of CD is difficult to assess, mostly because of the need for knowledge regarding the etiology and pathophysiology of the disease.
Although the pathogenesis of CD remains unclear, it is thought to be associated with excessive signaling from interleukin-6 (IL-6), which promotes the multiplication and survival of B-cells. Other CD-related factors include follicular dendritic cell abnormalities and the presence of vascular permeability factor (VPF). Human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) has also been suggested as a potential etiology.

Aim
This paper describes an unusual case of supraclavicular unicentric CD (UCD) in a young girl patient. It reviews CD’s clinical and paraclinical characteristics, therapeutic modalities, and prognostic factors related to this pathology. Written consent to photo documentation and use of images was obtained for research and publication purposes.

About a particular clinical case
A 15-year-old young female with no other known comorbidities presented to our Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) Department for a large, painless, slowly expanding, left-sided supraclavicular mass for over seven months. She otherwise had no other symptoms.
Physical examination showed a single, mobile, soft supraclavicular LN measuring approximately 5×4 cm in size, without overlying skin changes. Fiberoptic nasopharyngoscopy showed no abnormalities. The patient’s respiratory status was stable with no respiratory distress or abnormal pulmonary sounds. The abdomen was soft, with no abdominal masses or hepatosplenomegaly. Her medical history showed no recent travel abroad, medication use, animal exposure, or tuberculosis contact, and she was up to date with immunizations. Initial lab results showed a normal white blood cell (WBC) count and inflammatory markers levels. Group tests A streptococcal infection, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus, Toxoplasma gondii, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were all negative. The patient proceeded with a chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound, which showed no abnormalities.
An empiric course with Amoxicillin–Clavulanate (1 g twice a day, seven days) and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) was prescribed, but the LN previously noted remained.
On the head and neck’s magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), there was an oval, well-defined, homogeneously enhancing soft tissue mass measuring 5×3.6×3 cm. The mass caused a slight displacement of the adjacent structures without apparent infiltration (Figure 1A, 1B).
After the discussion with the patient, an excisional biopsy was performed to obtain a definitive diagnosis (Figure 2A, 2B, 2C). There were no postoperative complications. On histopathological (HP) examination, Hematoxylin–Eosin (HE)-stained evaluation of the surgical specimen showed an enlarged LN with overall preserved architecture, with a broad mantle zone consisting of small lymphocytes arranged in layers, resulting in an “onion skin” appearance (Figure 3A, 3B, 3C).
Subsequent immunohistochemistry showed positive staining for cluster of differentiation (CD)23 and CD20 and negative staining for CD30 (ruling out lymphoma) (Figure 4A, 4B, 4C). Anti-HHV-8 and anti-B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) antibodies were negative. Based on morphological and immunohistochemical (IHC) findings, a diagnosis of UCD, hyaline-vascular (HV) type, was made.
Coronal post-contrast T1-weighted MRI image (A) and axial DWI image (B) demonstrating a hyperintense mass in the left supraclavicular region, with intense restricted diffusion and homogenous enhancement. DWI: Diffusion-weighted imaging; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging
(A–C) Intraoperative view (lateral cervicotomy): excised surgical specimen
(A) Lymph node showing effaced architecture with proliferated blood vessels and fibrosis; (B and C) Follicles with regressed germinal center with central hyalinization and concentric mantle cell around the germinal center (“onion skin”). Hematoxylin–Eosin (HE) staining: (A) ×50; (B and C) ×200
(A) CD20 shows regressed follicles with expanded mantle zones; (B) Bcl-6 shows a regressed, hyalinized germinal center. (C) CD23 shows intact follicular dendritic cell meshworks, with two germinal centers surrounded by a single mantle zone (twinning). Immunohistochemistry staining technique: (A–C) ×200
Since the patient had no systemic signs suggesting a multicentric form of CD and postoperative thoracoabdominal imaging had excluded other LN involvement, a diagnosis of a unicentric form of CD was established. The patient recovered well postoperatively, and, at this stage, no further investigations or treatment were required. The first postoperative visit was scheduled seven days after the surgery to remove the stitches.
During an 18-month postoperative follow-up, the patient remained stable, with no signs of recurrence. She remained under periodical follow-up, with instructions to contact her surgeon in case she develops new LNs or systemic symptoms.

Clinical features of Castleman disease
Based on the extent of LN involvement and the severity of symptoms, CD can be classified as unicentric (UCD) or multicentric (MCD). The unicentric type is usually asymptomatic with the proliferation of one LN or a single LN chain and represents the most common variety among all types of CD. Sometimes, the diagnosis is incidental during a regular examination or chest X-ray or due to compression symptoms because of its local invasion. UCD generally follows an indolent and non-progressive course in most cases. However, it has been associated with a higher risk of particular neoplasms such as diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, which is the most common form of non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, and follicular dendritic cell tumors. UCD is most frequently located in the mediastinum, though it can also occur in less frequent extrathoracic locations such as the neck, axilla, abdomen, and pelvis.
The multicentric form, however, presents as persistent generalized lymphadenopathy and systemic symptoms such as weight loss, lethargy, fever, night sweats, hepatosplenomegaly, skin findings like violaceous papules, multiple biochemical abnormalities [e.g., hypoalbuminemia, platelet disorders, kidney failure (end-stage renal disease; ESRD), transaminitis, or polyclonal gammopathy] or symptoms caused by compression or invasion of adjacent anatomical structures as the airways or blood vessels. MCD is rare and shows a tendency to be much more aggressive, being often linked to HIV, HHV-8, Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS), and lymphoma. The systemic symptoms are believed to be a consequence, largely due to increased IL-6 secretion. Also, a particular form of MCD is related to KS, which occurs in the clinical course of most HIV-positive multicentric cases. The HIV-positive MCD has a higher increased frequency of pulmonary symptoms and can be distinguished from other forms of HIV-related systemic proliferative disorders. Over the past few years, MCD can be further classified into HHV-8 positive or HHV-8 negative, while UCD remains a single entity.

Imaging
Imaging, including computed tomography (CT) and MRI, is fundamental in diagnosing cervical masses. Thus, the disease cannot be conclusively diagnosed based only on clinical manifestations or imaging studies, and an excisional biopsy is needed for a definitive diagnosis. Both CT and MRI are useful to evaluate the extension of CD. On contrast-enhanced CT/MRI, it typically appears as a solitary or multiple well-defined, moderate hypodense, or homogeneous intense masses. On double-phase CT scans, CD generally shows mild enhancement during the arterial phase and progressive homogeneous enhancement on venous-phase CT scans.

Histopathological assessment
The classification and understanding of CD have evolved significantly over the years, particularly with the advancements in HP evaluation. The diagnosis of CD depends on histological and IHC findings from an excised LN biopsy. Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy typically shows nonspecific lymphoid hyperplasia, and although it can help rule out other conditions, it is usually insufficient for a definitive diagnosis of CD. Traditionally, two major HP categories have been described: HV type (80–90%) and plasma cell (PC) type (10–20%), with a rare intermediate “mixed” type. The majority of cases are unicentric and HV type.
HV type is the most frequent histological subtype, occurring in 80% of all cases, of which 79% are unicentric. It is characterized by follicular and interfollicular capillary proliferation with regressed germinal centers and a mantle zone consisting of small lymphocytes arranged in layers, resulting in an “onion skin” appearance.
PC type histopathology is characterized by polymorphic hyperplastic germinal centers and mantle zone expansion with relatively preserved LN architecture and sheets of mature PCs within the interfollicular regions of the LN. This type is most commonly found in idiopathic multicentric CD (iMCD), HHV-8-associated MCD, and polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein, skin changes (POEMS)-associated MCD, but it is rare in UCD.
Mixed histopathology shows both HV type and PC features. This condition is seen in both UCD and iMCD, showing both regressed germinal centers and extensive plasmacytosis. This mixed presentation suggests a combination of the pathological features found in HV and PC histopathology.
Immunohistochemistry shows a significant depletion of lymphoid follicles, giving them an atretic appearance. Despite this depletion, B-cells persist within the expanded mantle zones, as demonstrated by the expression of specific B-cell antigens like CD20 and the presence of immunoglobulin (Ig)D. Sensitive IHC techniques may also show CD5 expression, a marker typically expressed on mantle zone cells during early ontogeny. Additionally, atypical dendritic cells within the atretic follicles are identified by the expression of follicular dendritic cell markers such as CD21 or CD23.

Differential diagnosis
CD has a wide differential diagnosis, including a variety of reactive and neoplastic conditions. Therefore, a thorough clinical and paraclinical correlation is essential to accurately diagnosing CD. Of note, the neoplastic diseases that should be considered are angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, and follicular dendritic cell sarcoma, some authors suggest that CD is a benign version of the latter. The non-neoplastic diseases that can mimic CD are HIV infection, lupus, lymphadenitis, rheumatoid arthritis, IgG4 sclerosing disease, and adult-onset Still’s disease. In these cases, clinical and serological information is very valuable for the correct diagnosis.
In cases where differentiation between lymphoma and CD is necessary, the Castleman-like features are typically localized rather than diffuse, as observed in true CD. Furthermore, these patients lack the common clinical and laboratory characteristics of CD. However, an accurate assessment of HP features and the use of immunohistochemistry are required to distinguish LN infiltration by lymphoma from CD. Recent consensus guidelines state that all possible reactive and malignant processes mimicking CD should be excluded before diagnosing idiopathic MCD. Moreover, a diagnosis of CD needs to be made based on an entire excisional LN biopsy since needle-core biopsies may not be adequate. Due to its broad differential diagnosis, an experienced hematopathologist should review the cases of CD and make use of all the clinical data available and ancillary studies such as immunohistochemistry and clonality testing.

Treatment and outcome
Treating CD depends on the disease subtype. In 2020, the American Society of Hematology published recent international guidelines on diagnosing and managing UCD. Management strategies are influenced by factors such as the disease’s location, whether the LN is resectable or not, and the symptoms induced by mass effect on surrounding structures.
In patients diagnosed with UCD, excisional LN biopsy is the “gold standard” procedure, offering both diagnostic clarity and therapeutic benefits. Complete surgical resection is identified as the only significant predictor of survival. However, the location of the LN can sometimes complicate surgery, especially if the mass is near critical structures like a main bronchus or major blood vessels. According to guidelines, asymptomatic unresectable lesions require careful monitoring. For symptomatic patients with unresectable LNs, debulking surgery may alleviate symptoms caused by mass effect. In such cases, since the surgery might be life-threatening, alternatives such as embolization or treatment with Rituximab could decrease the tumor size to a safely resectable mass. Also, radiotherapy should be considered for persistent symptomatic cases that cannot be surgically removed.
As for MCD, various treatment modalities are available, reflecting the complex and heterogeneous nature of the disease. Surgical resections, chemotherapy (alone or in combination with steroids), and stem cell transplantation have all been proposed as treatment strategies, but none has proven consistently successful. Moreover, therapies targeting specific pathways and agents involved in MCD pathogenesis, such as CD20, IL-6, or HHV-8 replication, have shown more promising results. The monoclonal antibodies blocking the IL-6 signaling cascade, such as Tocilizumab and Siltuximab, are highly effective and often considered first-line treatments for patients who are highly symptomatic without HIV and HHV-8 infection. Antiviral therapies, including Ganciclovir, Foscarnet, and Cidofovir, are directly effective against HHV-8 by targeting the viral replication pathways.
Additionally, novel immunomodulatory agents such as Rituximab (a CD20 monoclonal antibody), Thalidomide, Bortezomib, the interleukin-1 (IL-1) antagonist, and interferon-alpha (IFN-α) have shown promising results. Relapse cases are usually treated with chemotherapy and immunomodulatory drugs. Despite the availability of these treatments, not all cases of CD respond favorably. Although MCD is a benign proliferative disorder, the prognosis is unfavorable without treatment. Common causes of death in patients with MCD include renal dysfunction, infections, and the development of some malignancies such as KS or sarcoma.

Discussions
Adenopathy is a common presentation in children seeking medical attention. In children, lymphadenopathies are predominantly benign and self-limiting, often resulting from viral or bacterial infections that cause localized swelling of LNs due to lymphocyte and macrophage activation. However, persistent or specific-site lymphadenopathy, such as in the supraclavicular fossa, can be concerning and warrant further investigation, as it may indicate a more serious condition, including malignancies. In adults, right supraclavicular lymphadenopathy is typically associated with mediastinal cancers, whereas left supraclavicular lymphadenopathy may suggest gastric cancer.
CD includes a spectrum of lymphoproliferative disorders characterized by adenopathy in various regions of the body. The exact etiology of CD’s remains unclear. However, it has been associated with an overproduction of IL-6, immune dysfunction, or secondary to other disorders, including HHV-8 infection, HIV, amyloidosis, and renal insufficiency. About 70% of cases occur in the mediastinum. It may also be found in other locations, such as the axilla, retroperitoneum, mesentery, and pelvis. Cases in the head and neck regions are rare. Although CD does not occur as a malignant process, it has been linked with some malignancies such as B-cell lymphomas and POEMS (a syndrome that comprises monoclonal gammopathies, peripheral neuropathy, visceromegaly, endocrinopathies, and some skin disorders such as pemphigus).
CD diagnosis is challenging due to the often asymptomatic nature of the condition, which can be easily underdiagnosed or misdiagnosed. When found in the neck, CD can mimic other pathologies, particularly lymphoma, sharing similar clinical presentations and imaging characteristics. Moreover, because of the low incidence of CD, it can be easily misdiagnosed by radiologists, who might not consider CD as a potential diagnosis.
Generally, surgical resection holds a high curative rate and a 91% overall survival (OS) rate over five years. However, despite the low recurrence rate associated with complete removal, regular monitoring is required to detect disease progression or recurrence.
In a study conducted by Talat et al. on 278 patients diagnosed with UCD, surgical resection led to a 95% disease-free survival (DFS) rate at three years. In cases where surgery is not an option or where the LN is difficult to access, radiation doses of 35–45 Gy seem to be effective, even though tumor responses have been recorded at lower doses. Another retrospective study also reviewed the effectiveness of radiotherapy on recurrent or unresectable CD. Patients with recurrences during follow-up after completing surgical excision received 30 Gy doses, and those with unresectable UCD received a higher dose of 45 Gy external beam radiotherapy (EBRT), achieving three-year OS and DFS rates of 83% and 91%, respectively.
What made this case special was the localization in the supraclavicular region. Although the imaging was mostly nonspecific from a diagnostic perspective, it was helpful in surgical planning. As in previously reported cases, laboratory testing had no bearing on the diagnosis or treatment our patient received. Supraclavicular masses have a wide range of differentials, and a definitive diagnosis is rarely made without sampling or removal. In addition, and especially when a difficult dissection may be anticipated, meticulous imaging should always be performed before surgery. Further investigation showed no additional affected LNs after the complete surgical removal of the LN. HP examination and immunohistochemistry were consistent with a HV-type CD.
It is essential to differentiate the unicentric form from the progression of a multicentric one. Blood tests play an essential role in this distinction. UCD typically shows normal lab results, while MCD often presents with abnormalities in various tests such as complete blood count (CBC), biochemistry, iron, ferritin, polyclonal immunoglobulins, albumin, total proteins, electrophoresis, IL-6, and urinalysis. These anomalies might indicate the progression of MCD or may suggest an association with other blood disorders such as systemic amyloidosis, POEMS syndrome, PC myeloma, or lymphoma. Moreover, it is important to rule out the potential evolution of CD into follicular dendritic cell tumor.
The primary differential diagnosis considered was lymphoma. Despite the similarities in presentation and imaging, the treatment strategies for lymphoma and CD are quite different. In patients with non-multicentric type CD, surgical resection is the optimal management strategy, whereas chemotherapy and radiotherapy are the first-line treatment options in lymphoma. UCD has an excellent prognosis, and our patient has remained disease-free to date. However, regular follow-up is required.
In summary, although only a few cases have been published, the case highlights surgery as a first-line treatment in patients with UCD. While CD is still considered a complex pathology, recent advances in understanding its pathophysiology have opened many patients to personalized and effective treatment options.

Conclusions
CD is a rare lymphoproliferative disease that can mimic many malignant conditions, which makes its diagnosis particularly difficult. Clinical correlation, imaging correlation, and HP confirmation are necessary and should come into the differential diagnosis line, mainly when the disease presented as a solitary node or a multistation lymphadenopathy with marked enhancement on imaging. Excisional biopsy is essential in order to differentiate between other lympho-proliferative disorders or hypervascular masses. Physicians should be aware of CD and bear it in mind as a possible diagnosis of any solid mass with nonspecific presenting features.

Conflict of interests
The authors declared no potential conflict of interests concerning the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Source of funding
All authors certify that they have no affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any financial interest or non-financial in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.

References
Localized mediastinal lymphnode hyperplasia resembling thymoma
Castleman disease presenting as a parapharyngeal mass: a case report and review of the literature
Castleman disease
Castleman disease presenting as a supraclavicular neck mass in a child
Insights into the etiology of Castleman disease
The clinical picture of Castleman disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Unicentric Castleman’s disease: unusual disorder of the neck - a case review
Diagnostic challenges in patients with Castleman disease, a single center experience from Hungary
Castleman disease
Idiopathic multicentric Castleman’s disease: a systematic literature review
Multicentric Castleman disease: where are we now
Castleman’s disease of the neck: a case report and literature review
Diagnosis and management of Castleman disease
Imaging and clinical features of Castleman disease
Imaging of Castleman disease
The spectrum of Castleman’s disease: mimics, radiologic pathologic correlation and role of imaging in patient management
Historical and pathological overview of Castleman disease
Clinicopathological comparison and therapeutic approach to Castleman disease - a case-based review
Pathology of Castleman disease
Castleman disease: a multicenter case series from Turkey
Analysis of immunophenotypic features in hyaline vascular type Castleman disease
Enfermedad de Castleman. Análisis histopatológico e inmunohistoquímico de treinta y nueve casos [Castleman disease. Histopathological and immunohistochemical analysis of 39 cases]
Follicular lymphoma with hyaline-vascular Castleman disease-like follicles and CD20 positive follicular dendritic cells
International, evidence-based consensus treatment guidelines for idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease
Update and new approaches in the treatment of Castleman disease
Overview of Castleman disease
Castleman’s disease: from basic mechanisms to molecular therapeutics
Castleman’s disease of the head and neck
The etiology of peripheral lymphadenopathy in children
Prevalence of Castleman’s disease in patients suffering from cervical lymphadenopathy
Castleman’s disease
Efficacy and safety of regimens used for the treatment of multicentric Castleman disease: a systematic review
Castleman’s disease: systematic analysis of 416 patients from the literature
Treatment of unicentric and multicentric Castleman disease and the role of radiotherapy
Castleman’s disease and radiotherapy: a single center experience
The clinical spectrum of Castleman’s disease
Unicentric Castleman disease illustration of its morphologic spectrum and review of the differential diagnosis