The Developmental Approach to Autism Science: Considering Cognitive Ability in the Age of Neuroimaging Research
ABSTRACT
Over the last 75 years, the developmental approach to developmental disability has touted—as one of its central tenets—the need to consider development in our understanding of developmental difference. This idea can be examined in many ways, but operationally and pragmatically, it has meant considering the impact of cognitive ability on our dependent variables and being mindful of the comparisons we make, and in the conclusions that we draw from those comparisons. The argument for considering the role of cognitive ability in our understanding of group differences originates in the study of intellectual disability, where there was a desire to understand profiles of strengths and weaknesses. This profile, or group difference approach, is also common to the field of autism and is particularly relevant to neuroscience‐focused work. While many autistic people do not have co‐occurring intellectual disability, IQ differences between groups can still obscure findings. Here, we aim to highlight reasons why the consideration of cognitive ability in neuroscience research on autism is relevant and critical to the field.
Our field has long pathologized autistic individuals, and in conflating autism and IQ, has often attributed deficits to autism that may instead be related to the level of cognitive abilities (Russo et al.). This is inconsistent with the developmental approach to intellectual disability research (Zigler), which emphasizes the flawed logic of deriving meaningful group differences without accounting for cognitive ability (Burack et al.; Campbell et al.). Although nuances have been debated (Burack; Burack et al.), the necessity of matching in case control designs is widely accepted by developmentalists focused on intellectual disability. In this commentary, we express concerns about the common failure to implement developmental matching procedures in neuroscience work focused on autism, given the close connections between cognition and neural function. This work is often published in high‐impact journals, expensive to carry out, and taxing of time and effort on participants (e.g., stillness needed for MRI, repeated trials needed for EEGs), and thus high stakes. We aim to counter many of the medical, psychological, genetic, and statistical claims refuting the need to control for IQ (e.g., Dennis et al.) and see this commentary as a call to be deliberate in our methodological approaches, open with our data, and mindful in acknowledging the consequences and effects of our methodological decisions on our understanding of, and beliefs about, disability. In so doing, we acknowledge that this work is difficult, and that considering development holistically by controlling for age and IQ simultaneously in research designs is challenging. We also note that while IQ is the focus here, cognitive differences are but one example of the potential confounds that make studies of populations as heterogeneous as autism challenging. Work leveraging individual difference designs can help counter some of these challenges, though case control studies are still needed in (autism) science.
While autism, IQ, and the relation between them have been conceptualized in many ways, we highlight two perspectives. We contend that autism and IQ are separate and that differences in IQ, if ignored, obscure autism relevant research findings. Thus, controlling for cognitive level through participant‐focused approaches that include matching on a relevant aspect of IQ or mental age, or on statistical approaches such as covarying, are essential (Burack et al.). In contrast, when rebutting the need to match or consider or covary for IQ, others propose that group differences between autistic and non‐autistic participants are relevant to autism even if the two groups differ in clinically and statistically significant ways in their underlying cognitive abilities. This pathognomonic argument, common to medical models, supposes that autism and intellectual disability are inextricably linked and cannot be separated, and that this provides statistical grounds for not matching or covarying, because their measurements are considered interdependent. We disagree.
First, from the perspective of psychiatry and psychology, autism and intellectual disability are distinct diagnoses that lead to different areas and levels of impairment that are clinically distinguishable, though at times co‐occurring (APA). Not all autistic people have intellectual disability (Zeidan et al.), and not all people with intellectual disability have social difficulties or repetitive behaviors that align with an autism diagnosis. The criteria (APA) and the measures used to assess for autism (Lord et al.) specify that difficulties in social communication and repetitive behaviors need to be greater than would be expected based on IQ. That is, each condition makes an independent and dissociable contribution to a person's social, cognitive, and adaptive abilities that are to be accounted for in clinical work and should be accounted for in research (Munson et al.).
Second, IQ tests used in both research and practice tend to underestimate the cognitive abilities of autistic people (Courchesne et al.; Dawson et al.). Thus, our ability to measure cognitive ability in autistic people is already embedded in the tests we use, in part, because IQ tests were normed for age and not for neurodevelopmental differences (Clements et al.). At face value, this may provide evidence against matching and statistical control, but when examining IQ using measures that are more sensitive or that reduce conflating/confounding language demands, we can begin to disentangle what is autism versus what is not. That is, matching on full‐scale IQ may not be the best choice of matching measure (Jarrold and Brock; Mervis and Robinson), but this does not mean the answer is not to match at all. Rather, we would do better to consider what IQ measures, indices, or subtests are most relevant to our research questions (Burack; Mottron; Russo et al.) and focus on cognitive measures that predict performance regardless of diagnosis.
Third, we do not yet know the source(s) of neural variability in autism. Therefore, we cannot know that the neural variability of autism comes from the same source as the neural variability of IQ (which is also mostly unknown). Different genetic pathways to autism have differential relations to cognitive abilities. For example, de novo mutations, which are more common in autism than in non‐autistic populations, are associated with decreased cognitive ability (Chen, Liu, et al.; Rauch et al.). In contrast, common polygenic risk for autism has been associated with increased cognitive ability and educational attainment (Weiner et al.; Schmilovich et al.). Thus, the current “truth” about the mechanisms underlying autism and IQ is unknown, but it likely includes independent, additive, interdependent, and interacting aspects (Moreno‐De‐Luca et al.).
Fourth, the invocation of statistical arguments against matching generally states that by controlling for IQ, there is a risk of removing variance inherent part of autism. While this claim has statistical merit, it is not a claim about the nature of IQ and autism, but rather a claim about one's ability to infer causality. In the Supporting Information, we provide a set of statistical simulations to demonstrate that the failure to control for IQ can lead to conclusions about a causal association between autism and a dependent variable when there are none, and further, that while controlling for IQ reduces statistical power, it does not categorically prevent accurate inferences about a causal association between autism and a dependent variable. Failure to control for IQ on the argument that IQ and autism are ‘inter‐dependent’ is not statistically defensible, unless one is arguing that IQ and autism are either perfectly correlated or perfectly correlated plus noise in measurement. If this is not the case, which it is not, we can make valid inferences so long as the number of participants is large enough, and/or the effect size is large enough. Further, if IQ and autism are highly correlated, controlling for IQ reduces our statistical power to detect an effect of autism, possibly to the point that it necessitates collecting a prohibitively large dataset. But this is not a theoretical or statistical issue. And even if this is the case, failing to control for cognitive level is not the solution, as it could lead to faulty and harmful inferences that can have implications for autism science and the treatment of autistic people.
In different situations, researchers seem to have less difficulty with the disembedding of confounding factors. For example, researchers focused on anxiety would statistically control for, measure, or at the very least consider the impact of depression symptoms because these diagnoses often co‐occur, their symptoms overlap, and our understanding of one would be obscured by the impact of the other (Beuke et al.). In another example related to cognitive ability and etiology more directly, researchers of dementia control for both age and education (Zemla). Why this should not also apply to autism is an empirical question with implications for autistic people, as well as for research and clinical work.
The impact of IQ on within‐ and between‐group differences in autism is well documented. For example, within autism, intellectual disability has been found meta‐analytically to moderate the female phenotype (Saure et al.); impact pitch perception (Chen, Tang, et al.); the nature and prevalence of motor stereotypies (Melo et al.); and to be the only predictor of peak alpha frequency (Dickinson et al.). Within a group of participants with intellectual disability, autistic traits were associated with increased white matter density (Stanfield et al.), and findings suggest IQ is associated with functional and structural differences in autism (Cody et al.). These findings provide evidence of the independence of IQ and autistic traits in their contributions to the autism phenotype. In addition, IQ (along with age) but not diagnostic category (autism, ADHD, and OCD) was found to be a critical clustering variable across brain morphology metrics even in a sample of participants with average IQs (Sadat‐Nejad et al.). Yet, only 64% of the studies that were included in a recent meta‐analysis on resting state EEG (Neo et al.) involved matching participant groups on IQ. However, as debate continues and refinements occur, the implications for science and clinical care must be considered. Indeed, interventions may best be tailored to the profiles of strengths and weaknesses of autistic individuals in a manner that considers intellectual disability in their development and in their prescription.
If authors want to understand autism they need to (a) control for IQ statistically or use appropriate matching techniques, (b) collect data from a comparison group similar cognitive levels, (c) examine within group differences in IQ, (d) make their data available for re‐analysis (assuming IQ was collected), and (e) think deeply, discuss, and acknowledge the impact of IQ on their research question, the people it is about, and the conclusions that they draw, or (f) select individual difference designs that account for variability. The cost of not doing so is high, not only to autistic people, their families, and those who work with and for them, but also to science. Neuroscience research is advancing at an exponential rate. Human studies increasingly focus on neuroimaging techniques, which require specialized equipment and carry important constraints. These constraints already impact who completes studies, which generally include participants with lower support needs (Russell et al.) and often require funding. When researchers confound autism and IQ or do not consider IQ, they impact the veracity of our science, the populations these scientific questions are about, and public trust in the research enterprise.
For more than half a century, advocates of a developmental approach to neurodivergent persons have worked to ensure that scientific findings are developmentally contextualized (Burack et al.; Flanagan et al.; Goldman et al.; Mervis and Robinson; Russo et al.; Zigler). And yet, studies continue to be published in high‐impact journals (Kaiser; Aydin et al.; Norman et al.), in which the role of potential differences in cognitive abilities is minimized in explaining or testing group differences. We hope the adoption of a developmental perspective will lead to increased transparency, methodological consideration, with the goal of producing strong science that is reproducible and meaningful.

Ethics Statement
The authors have nothing to report.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
There are no data associated with this paper. However, simulations were run for the supplementary materials, and the output of those simulations can be found at https://osf.io/exzbq/.

References
Genetic Overlap Between Midfrontal Theta Signals and Attention‐Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and Autism Spectrum Disorder in a Longitudinal Twin Cohort
Anxiety and Depression: Why and How to Measure Their Separate Effects
Editorial Preface
“The Mysterious Myth of Attention Deficit…” Revisited: A Discussion of How the Developmental Approach Is Transforming the Understanding of Intellectual Disability
Edward Zigler's Legacy in the Study of Persons With Intellectual Disability: The Developmental Approach and the Advent of a More Rigorous and Compassionate Science
Benefits and Pitfalls in the Merging of Disciplines: The Example of Developmental Psychopathology and the Study of Persons With Autism
On Mosaics and Melting Pots: Conceptual Considerations of Comparison and Matching Strategies
Cicchetti's Organizational‐Developmental Perspective of Down Syndrome: Contributions to the Emergence of Developmental Psychopathology and the Study of Persons With Neurodevelopmental Conditions
Nonverbal, Rather Than Verbal, Functioning May Predict Cognitive Flexibility Among Persons With Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Preliminary Study
De Novo Mutations Within Metabolism Networks of Amino Acid/Protein/Energy in Chinese Autistic Children With Intellectual Disability
Auditory Pitch Perception in Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Does the Factor Structure of IQ Differ Between the Differential Ability Scales (DAS‐II) Normative Sample and Autistic Children?
Structural and Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Autism
Autistic Children at Risk of Being Underestimated: School‐Based Pilot Study of a Strength‐Informed Assessment
The Level and Nature of Autistic Intelligence
Why IQ Is Not a Covariate in Cognitive Studies of Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Peak Alpha Frequency Is a Neural Marker of Cognitive Function Across the Autism Spectrum
The Developmental Approach to the Study of Down Syndrome: Contemporary Issues in Historical Perspective
Voluntary Orienting Among Children and Adolescents With Down Syndrome and MA‐Matched Typically Developing Children
Polygenic Transmission Disequilibrium Confirms That Common and Rare Variation Act Additively to Create Risk for Autism Spectrum Disorders
To Match or Not to Match? Methodological Issues in Autism‐Related Research
Neural Signatures of Autism
Prevalence and Determinants of Motor Stereotypies in Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Methodological Issues in Cross‐Syndrome Comparisons: Matching Procedures, Sensitivity (Se), and Specificity (Sp)
Developmental Brain Dysfunction: Revival and Expansion of Old Concepts Based on New Genetic Evidence
Matching Strategies in Cognitive Research With Individuals With High‐Functioning Autism: Current Practices, Instrument Biases, and Recommendations
Evidence for Latent Classes of IQ in Young Children With Autism Spectrum Disorder
Resting‐State EEG Power Differences in Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Cross‐Sectional Mega‐Analysis of Resting‐State Alterations Associated With Autism and Attention‐Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children and Adolescents
Range of Genetic Mutations Associated With Severe Non‐Syndromic Sporadic Intellectual Disability: An Exome Sequencing Study
Selection Bias on Intellectual Ability in Autism Research: A Cross‐Sectional Review and Meta‐Analysis
Deconstructing Executive Deficits Among Persons With Autism: Implications for Cognitive Neuroscience
Choices, Challenges, and Constraints: A Pragmatic Examination of the Limits of Mental Age Matching in Empirical Research
Characterizing Replicability in the Clustering Structure of Brain Morphology in Autism, Attention‐Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, and Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
Intellectual Disabilities Moderate Sex/Gender Differences in Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Copy‐Number Variants and Polygenic Risk for Intelligence Confer Risk for Autism Spectrum Disorder Irrespective of Their Effects on Cognitive Ability
Towards a Neuroanatomy of Autism: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis of Structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging Studies
Global Prevalence of Autism: A Systematic Review Update
Increased Reliance on Heuristic Thinking in Mild Cognitive Impairment
Familial Mental Retardation: A Continuing Dilemma
Developmental Versus Difference Theories of Mental Retardation and the Problem of Motivation