Rational approach to feline medical emergencies: part 2
Clinical challenges:
Emergencies cause disruption to the normal flow of the working day in a busy veterinary practice, requiring diversion of resources from routine cases to assist with the medical priority. Assessments and decisions have to be made rapidly, which can be challenging if the particular condition is not dealt with on a regular basis.
Aims:
This two-part article series aims to help practitioners feel more confident with the most common types of cases that can present as emergencies and to highlight some of the areas where feline patients require a different approach from their canine counterparts. This second article focuses on the medical emergencies of seizures, urethral obstruction, acute kidney injury and diabetic ketoacidosis. This follows on from Part 1, which discussed priorities for triage and stabilisation of emergency patients, before addressing the management of shock, dyspnoea, feline aortic thromboembolism and anaemia.
Audience
The intended audience is general practitioners who may be confronted with emergency cases on an irregular basis, although clinicians working in out-of-hours services may also find useful details to update their knowledge.
Evidence base:
Although much of the information covered is well established, the article series introduces knowledge and clinical techniques that have emerged in the literature in the past 5 years.
Plain Language Summary
Common feline emergencies not requiring surgery: part 2
This two-part review article covers some of the more common feline conditions that require emergency treatment. It focuses on medical conditions rather than those requiring surgery. This second instalment starts with the management of seizures, before turning attention to ‘blocked’ cats and concluding with emergencies related to kidney disease and diabetes.

Introduction
The principles of triage and stabilisation described in Part 1   are equally relevant to the conditions discussed in Part 2, in order to maximise outcomes for emergency patients.

Seizures
Status epilepticus can be defined as a seizure lasting longer than 5 mins or recurrent seizures without full recovery.   Seizures may be generalised tonic–clonic in nature, but focal seizures, associated with temporal lobe epilepsy, can manifest as salivation, facial twitching, lipsmacking, chewing, licking and swallowing, usually accompanied by altered consciousness.   Status epilepticus requires urgent treatment to prevent progression of cerebral and systemic damage, which can lead to multiorgan failure and cardiopulmonary arrest. Initially, there may be hypertension, tachycardia, hyperglycaemia, hyperthermia and ptyalism due to increased autonomic activity.   If the seizure is sustained for more than 30 mins, there can be development of raised intracranial pressure and systemic hypotension that leads to reduced cerebral blood flow, hypoglycaemia, hypoxia, acidosis, hyperkalaemia and hyponatraemia.   Table 1 lists the potential causes of seizures.
Causes of seizures
Category	Examples	 	Degenerative	Enzyme deficiencies, lysosomal storage disorders, severe hyperthermia	 	Anomalous	Idiopathic epilepsy, hydrocephalus	 	Metabolic	Hypoglycaemia, hypocalcaemia, hypernatraemia, hyponatraemia, uraemia, hepatic encephalopathy, hyperlipidaemia, hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic syndrome	 	Nutritional	Thiamine deficiency	 	Neoplastic	Meningioma, lymphoma, glioma, metastatic neoplasia	 	Inflammatory	Meningoencephalitis	 	Infectious	Viral: feline infectious peritonitisBacterial: extension from middle ear disease, penetrating injury, etc	 	Protozoal: Toxoplasma gondii	 	Fungal: Cryptococcus species	 	Traumatic	Road traffic accident, fall from height, dog bite	 	Toxic	Organophosphates, carbamates, isoxazoline insecticides, lead, ethylene glycol, pyrethrins, lidocaine, metaldehyde, metronidazole, ronidazole	 	Vascular	Ischaemia, haemorrhage, hypertension, hyperviscosity
The most common conditions are highlighted in bold
Following assessment of airway, breathing and circulation, initial management should comprise oxygen support to prevent hypercapnia, which along with jugular occlusion (eg, for blood sampling) and a head-down position can raise intracranial pressure.   Cats should, therefore, be placed with their head elevated in relation to the body, ensuring there is no pressure around the neck. This can be achieved by lying the cat on a board tilted at 20–30° to the horizontal to limit the risk of kinking in the neck region.
Ideally, intravenous access should be obtained, in order that fluid therapy can be given to maintain cerebral perfusion and drugs can be administered via this route. While placing the catheter, blood can be withdrawn for a minimum database. Blood glucose and ionised calcium should be measured to rule out hypoglycaemia and hypocalcaemia, which, if identified, should be treated accordingly (Table 2).
Drugs used in the management of seizures
Drug	Dose	Route(s) of administration	Comments	 	Glucose (dextrose) 50%*	0.5–1.0 ml/kg	IV	Dilute 1:4 with 0.9% NaCl	 	Can be followed with 2.5–5.0% CRI	 	Calcium gluconate 10%*	0.5–1.5 ml/kg	IV	Give over 15–20 mins Monitor ECG	 	Diazepam	0.5–1.0 mg/kg	 	1.0 mg/kg	 	0.5 mg/kg/h	IV	 	Per rectum	 	CRI	IV diazepam can be repeated every 10 mins, up to three times	 	CRI can be given for 12–24 h after two initial IV boluses	 	Midazolam*	0.3 mg/kg	 	0.3 mg/kg	 	0.3–0.4 mg/kg/h	IV	 	Intranasal	 	CRI	IV midazolam can be repeated every 10 mins, up to three times Intranasal route has not been evaluated in cats	 	CRI can be given for 12–24 h after two initial IV boluses	 	Phenobarbitone*	4 mg/kg	 	2–3 mg/kg	IV	 	PO	IV phenobarbitone can be given every 20–30 mins to a total loading dose of 16–20 mg/kg	 	Oral phenobarbitone can be given q12h once seizures are controlled and patient can swallow	 	Levetiracetam*	30–60 mg/kg	 	20–30 mg/kg	IV	 	PO	IV levetiracetam can be repeated up to four times to a total of 120 mg/kg in 24 h	 	Oral levetiracetam can be given q8h once seizures are controlled and patient can swallow	 	Ketamine	1–5 mg/kg 1 mg/kg/h	IV	 	CRI	Initial bolus before starting CRI	 	Ketamine can be used concurrently with dexmedetomidine	 	Dexmedetomidine	3 µg/kg	 	3–7 µg/kg/h	IV	 	CRI	Initial bolus before starting CRI	 	Dexmedetomidine can be used concurrently with ketamine	 	Propofol	2–8 mg/kg	 	0.1–0.4 mg/kg/min	IV	 	CRI	Give IV propofol over 2 mins until effect seen	 	Requires intubation and constant monitoring; preservative-free solutions preferred for CRI; potential to cause Heinz body anaemia	 	Sodium chloride 7.5%	4 ml/kg	IV	Used for treatment of raised intracranial pressure. Only give once	 	Mannitol*	0.5–1.0 g/kg	IV	Used for treatment of raised intracranial pressure. Give over 20 mins; can be repeated after 4–8 h	 	Lipid solution 20%*	1.5–5 ml/kg	 	0.25–0.5 ml/kg/min	IV	 	CRI	Used for treatment of toxicities. Give via IV route prior to CRI Give for 30–60 mins
Not licensed for veterinary use
CRI = constant rate infusion; ECG = electrocardiogram; IV = intravenous; NaCl = sodium chloride; PO = oral
Benzodiazepines are the first-line anti-seizure medication, due to their rapid onset of action. Midazolam may be considered preferable to diazepam on the basis of better control of seizures and reduced side effects in people, but these aspects have not been evaluated in cats.   If intravenous access is not available, these drugs can potentially be given per rectum or intranasally, respectively, although there is minimal evidence on their use via these routes.
As benzodiazepines are short-acting, a maintenance drug such as phenobarbitone or levetiracetam should be introduced to further control seizures. Phenobarbitone is likely to be the first choice, as the intravenous preparation may be more readily available and is generally less expensive. It can then be followed with an oral licensed veterinary product (where available). If phenobarbitone is not available, or is not controlling the seizure, levetiracetam can be introduced. If control is not achieved with these drugs, third-tier options include ketamine, dexmedetomidine and propofol (Table 2).
Where raised intracranial pressure is suspected (eg, head trauma, space-occupying mass, prolonged seizure activity), hypertonic saline or mannitol can be considered to control this (Table 2). Signs of raised intracranial pressure include altered mentation, reduced pupillary light reflex, loss of physiological nystagmus or a decerebrate posture.   Cushing’s reflex (systemic hypertension and bradycardia) is less commonly identified in cats with raised intracranial pressure than dogs.
If toxin ingestion is suspected as the cause of seizures, induction of emesis is contraindicated, due to the altered mentation that can be associated with seizures and antiepileptic drugs. Most toxins will have been absorbed from the stomach by the time clinical signs are seen and, therefore, gastric decontamination may not be warranted. An exception to this would be heavy metals (eg, lead), where removal of the material will prevent further absorption; affected cats require general anaesthesia and gastric lavage, with the airway secured by placement of a cuffed endotracheal tube. Activated charcoal is rarely of benefit as most toxins causing seizures do not undergo enterohepatic recirculation. Intravenous lipid emulsions have been used effectively for the treatment of toxicity associated with lipophilic drugs, such as permethrin, moxidectin, ivermectins, carprofen and bupiva-caine, and have shown variable efficacy for metaldehyde toxicity. They appear to be of no benefit in alpha-chloralose poisoning.
Further information regarding causes and investigations of seizures can be found in Sivolapenko and Lowrie’s review.

Urethral obstruction
Urethral obstruction is a common presentation in cats, accounting for 0.5% of feline cases in general practice   and between 5.7% and 9% of the caseload in emergency practice. Causes of urethral obstruction include spasm and urethral plugs associated with idiopathic cystitis, urolithiasis, neoplasia and stricture formation. Preceding signs of dysuria, polla-kiuria and haematuria may not have been noticed by the owner, especially in cats who toilet outdoors, or urinary tenesmus may have been mistaken for constipation. Urethral obstruction can lead to non-specific signs of anorexia, vomiting, lethargy and collapse when present for >24 h.
Clinical examination is likely to reveal a large, distended and painful bladder unless rupture has occurred, in which case focused ultrasound may be required to identify uroabdomen. Abdominocentesis and measurement of creatinine levels in both the abdominal fluid and plasma provides confirmation; with uroabdomen, abdominal fluid creatinine values are typically >2 x plasma levels.
Identification of bradycardia (<120 beats per minute) and hypothermia (<35–35.9°C; <95–96.6°F) should alert the clinician that immediate intervention is required, as it is 98% specific for the presence of hyper-kalaemia exceeding 8.0 mmol/l.
A minimum database should include electrolytes, acid–base status, packed cell volume, and urea, creatinine, ionised calcium and lactate levels. This should be sufficient to confirm hyperkalaemia, azotaemia, metabolic acidosis and ionised hypocalcaemia,   and also provides a baseline for assessment of any change in response to therapy. Blood pressure and ECG monitoring should commence as soon as feasible. Once urine is obtained, urinalysis should include specific gravity, pH, chemistry, sediment examination and culture.
Patients are likely to be dehydrated, especially if anorexia, adipsia and vomiting are present. Therefore, despite an inability to void urine, fluid therapy should be started to correct dehydration and acidosis. A balanced electrolyte solution is preferable to sodium chloride; even though the latter is a potassium-free solution, it will worsen acidosis.
Analgesia should be provided as urinary obstruction is a painful condition – opioids such as methadone or fentanyl are preferable to buprenorphine in severe cases.
ECG abnormalities seen in relation to serum potassium values
Potassium (mmol/l)	ECG changes	 	5.5–6.5	Tall T wave	 	6.6–7.0	Decreased R wave; prolonged QRS and P–R intervals; S–T segment depression	 	7.1–8.5	Decreased P wave amplitude; increased P wave duration; prolonged QT interval	 	8.6–10.0	Absent P waves (atrial standstill); sinoventricular rhythm	 	>10.0	Widened biphasic QRS; ventricular flutter/fibrillation; asystole
Hyperkalaemia is the most significant metabolic disturbance, as it can lead to electrical conduction abnormalities in the heart and, ultimately, cardiac arrest. While guidance can be given on ECG changes associated with progressive hyperkalaemia (see ‘ECG abnormalities seen in relation to serum potassium levels’ box), concurrent abnormalities such as the degree of acidosis and ionised hypocalcaemia can also contribute to conduction abnormalities. If bradycardia or ECG changes are present, or if serum potassium is >7.0 mmol/l, treatment for hyperkalaemia should be instigated. Along with starting intravenous fluids, calcium gluconate should be administered to stabilise cardiac conduction (Table 3). A recent study has suggested that additional medications – beyond intravenous fluids and calcium gluconate, followed by rapid unblocking of the cat – offer no benefit in the treatment of hyperkalaemia associated with urethral obstruction.
Drugs used in the management of hyperkalaemia
Drug*	Dose	Route(s) of administration	Comments	 	Calcium gluconate 10%	0.5–1.5 ml/kg	IV	Give slowly over 15–20 mins and monitor ECG	 	Glucose (dextrose) 50%	0.5–1.0 ml/kg	IV	Dilute 1:4 with 0.9% NaCl	 	Soluble (neutral/regular) insulin	0.5 IU/kg insulin plus	 	2.0 g/unit insulin of glucose (= 2 ml/kg)	IV	Monitor blood glucose q1–2h to avoid hypo/hyperglycaemia Can use 2.5% glucose CRI to maintain blood glucose, if required	 	Terbutaline	0.01 mg/kg	IV	 	IM	Give slowly – can cause tachycardia and hypotension	 	Salbutamol (albuterol)	100 µg/actuation	 	1–4 puffs	Inhaled	Can be administered via an endotracheal tube	 	Sodium bicarbonate	1–2 mmol/kg	IV	Give slowly over 15 mins	 	Dilute in 0.9% NaCl	 	May lower ionised calcium	 	8.4% solution = 1 mmol/ml (1 mmol = 1 mEq)
None of the drugs listed are licensed for veterinary use
CRI = constant rate infusion; ECG = electrocardiogram; IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous; NaCl = sodium chloride
While calcium gluconate protects the heart from arrhythmia, it does not lower potassium. Therefore, if rapid urinary outflow cannot be re-established, glucose and insulin can be administered to lower potassium by intracellular translocation (Table 3). If potassium remains elevated after these medications, beta (β)2-adrenergic drugs can be considered, as they promote intracellular uptake of potassium through stimulation of the sodium–potassium ATPase pump. There are no studies indicating the degree of change in potassium levels in blocked cats treated with either terbutaline or salbutamol (albuterol), but inhaled salbutamol (100 µg and 200 µg) was shown to lower potassium in healthy cats by 0.1–1.7 mmol/l.
Only if the cat is stable, radiography may be performed prior to attempting catheterisation, as this can increase the chance of obtaining a diagnosis from 45% to 61%.   However, in the majority of patients, radiography is likely to be deferred until catheterisation has been achieved and urinary outflow is re-established.
While catheterisation can be performed in sedated patients, the author’s preference is for general anaesthesia, as this will provide greater levels of analgesia and muscle relaxation, which in turn may reduce the risk of urethral trauma. Regional analgesia with a sacrococcygeal epidural can also be beneficial in providing pain relief and reducing spasm (Figures 1–4). Further details on performing this procedure are provided elsewhere.
The patient is placed in sternal recumbency. A 2–3 cm area centred on the sacrococcygeal space is clipped and aseptically prepared
The location of the sacrococcygeal space is determined – this can be facilitated by an assistant lifting the tail up and down to identify the articulation
A 25 G hypodermic or spinal needle is inserted on the midline, angled cranially at 30–45°. A slight ‘pop’ may be felt as this passes through the arcuate ligament. A syringe is attached and aspirated to check there is no blood
A syringe containing local anaesthetic is attached. Either 0.1–0.2 ml/kg of lidocaine, or 0.22 mg/kg bupivacaine plus 0.1 mg/kg morphine can be used.23,24 The anaesthetic agent is injected slowly
Initial catheterisation can be performed using a polypropylene catheter (Jackson cat catheter, available in various brands), but these need to be replaced as they are not suitable for use as an indwelling catheter due to their rigidity; they are also often too short for larger cats. The requirement for removal and replacement can be avoided with the use of a polytetrafluoroethylene or polyurethane catheter (eg, Slippery Sam, ICU Medical; KatKath, VygonVet). If not obtained prior to catheterisation, plain radiographs should be taken to rule out urolithiasis as a cause of the urethral obstruction. If this is not the first episode of obstruction, a double-contrast study, including a retrograde urethrogram, should be performed to establish the cause of the recurring signs.
The author’s preference is to use a rigid catheter for the initial unblocking and contrast study, withdrawing it at the end of the retrograde urethrogram phase of the contrast study and replacing it with an indwelling catheter (such as a KatKath Adjustable Urinary Catheter [VygonVet] or Tomcat/Small Animal Urinary Catheter [Mila]) that can be adjusted in length, as appropriate for the cat.
Prior to catheterisation, the perineal area should be clipped and aseptically prepared. The penis should be extruded and extended caudally and dorsally to straighten out the sigmoid flexure present at the proximal end of the penile urethra (Figure 5). Sterile lubricant should be applied to the outside of the catheter before its introduction into the penis. The catheter is then gently advanced. Pulsatile flushing with saline may facilitate passage where this is hindered by urethral spasm or crystalline matrix plugs. It is vital that catheterisation is performed as atraumatically and aseptically as possible to prevent urethral rupture or the introduction of infection (Figure 6). Indwelling catheters should always be connected to a closed collection system and gloves worn when handling catheters and lines (Figure 7).
(a) In preparation for urinary catheterisation, the area should be clipped and aseptically prepared. Sterile gloves should be worn. The penis is extruded and extended caudally and dorsally to straighten out the sigmoid flexure. Sterile lubricant is then applied to the outside of the catheter before advancing it gently into the urethra
Iatrogenic trauma from catheterisation.
(a) Retrograde urethrogram showing a ureteric tear from traumatic catheterisation. These injuries can result in stricture formation when they heal.
(b) Skin necrosis as a result of urine leaking into the subcutaneous tissues from a urethral tear
An indwelling catheter should always be attached to a closed urine collection system to prevent the introduction of infection. The collection bag should be placed inside a clean plastic bag and positioned below the cat (but kept off the floor)
If it is not possible to pass a catheter, consideration should be given to converting to general anaesthesia if catheterisation is being attempted under sedation. If the cat is already anaesthetised, decompressive cystocentesis can sometimes facilitate catheterisation by reducing spasm associated with pain. This procedure is performed using a butterfly catheter (or hypodermic needle attached to a short length of extension tubing) connected to a three-way tap and 20 ml syringe. One operator should localise the bladder and steady the needle tip in the bladder while a second operator aspirates the urine to minimise iatrogenic trauma. Bladder rupture is a potential consequence of decompressive cystocentesis, especially in chronically thickened bladders, but the procedure may be beneficial in cats with marked azotaemia, for example. Pros and cons should, therefore, be considered on an individual basis.
More extensive information on the management of urethral obstruction and further investigations to establish the underlying cause is available in recent publications. Despite the expanding literature on the subject, however, good evidence on which to base decision-making is still lacking in some areas – including the optimal time to remove indwelling catheters, whether decompressive cystocentesis is beneficial to catheterisation, and the optimal management of urethral spasm.

Acute kidney injury
Acute kidney injury (AKI) refers to a sudden decrease in kidney function of <7 days’ duration. Although cats presenting as emergencies due to AKI will generally be azo-taemic, this is not necessarily the case. AKI can also be detected in hospitalised patients who are showing an increase in creatinine (⩾26.4 µmol/l, ⩾0.3 mg/dl) over a 48 h period.   The International Renal Interest Society grading system for AKI is described in Table 4.   Renal transplantation is suggested for grades IV and V AKI, but this is a contentious treatment with limited availability. Renal dialysis, peritoneal dialysis or euthanasia can be considered as alternative options.
Grading of acute kidney injury
IRIS grade	Creatinine	Other criteria	Substages	 	I	<140 µmol/l	 	<1.6 mg/dl	Increased creatinine (⩾26.4 µmol/l, ⩾0.3 mg/dl) within 48 h	NO, O	 	II	141–220 µmol/l	 	1.7–2.5 mg/dl	Increased creatinine (⩾26.4 µmol/l, ⩾0.3 mg/dl) within 48 h	NO, O	 	III	221–439 µmol/l	 	2.6–5.0 mg/dl		NO, O	 	IV	440–880 µmol/l	 	5.1–10.0 mg/dl		NO, O, RRT*	 	V	>880 µmol/l	 	>10.0 mg/dl		NO, O, RRT*
IRIS = International Renal Interest Society; NO = non-oliguric; O = oligo-anuric;
RRT = renal replacement therapy – see comment in the text
Oliguric = urine output <1.0 ml/kg/h
Anuric = urine output <0.5 ml/kg/h
Potential causes of AKI are given in Table 5. Cats with chronic kidney disease (CKD) can also suffer an acute deterioration, so-called acute-on-chronic kidney disease, if, for example, they become systemically unwell or are exposed to nephrotoxic drugs. Unlike CKD, the azotaemia that develops with AKI theoretically has the potential to be reversible if recognised early and treated appropriately, although the underlying cause and degree of damage present are also factors influencing the outcome.
Causes of acute kidney injury
Category	Causes	 	Pre-renal		 	Ischaemia	✜ Dehydration	 	✜ Hypotension	 	✜ Hypertension	 	✜ Thromboembolism	 	✜ Hyperviscosity	 	✜ Cardiac disease	 	Renal		 	Toxins	✜ Ethylene glycol	 	✜ Lilies	 	✜ Vitamin D (eg, cholecalciferol rodenticides, psoriasis creams)	 	Infection	✜ Pyelonephritis	 	✜ Feline infectious peritonitis	 	✜ Pyometra	 	✜ Sepsis	 	Neoplasia	✜ Renal lymphoma	 	✜ Renal carcinoma	 	Drugs	✜ Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs	 	✜ Diuretics	 	✜ Aminoglycosides	 	✜ Amphotericin B	 	✜ Synthetic colloids	 	✜ Iodine contrast agents	 	Metabolic	✜ Hypercalcaemia	 	Trauma	✜ Crushing injuries	 	✜ Rhabdomyolysis	 	Post-renal		 	Obstruction	Ureteric	 	Urethral
More common conditions are highlighted in bold

Diagnostic approach
History and physical examination findings can help indicate whether the renal disease is acute or chronic in nature; haematology, serum biochemistry and electrolytes can give further insight into the underlying cause (Table 6). If significant hyperkalaemia is identified, this will require appropriate management (discussed in the earlier section on ‘Urethral obstruction’). Biomarkers have been evaluated to assist in the diagnosis of AKI. However, the most appropriate test to use for the diagnosis of early AKI in cats has not been established.   In addition, limited availability of these diagnostic tests often means their use is restricted to academic settings.
Differentiating acute kidney injury from chronic kidney disease
Acute	Chronic	 	Weight loss	Not evident	Developed over several months	 	Body condition score	No change	Decreased	 	Muscle mass	Normal	Decreased	 	Polydipsia	Short duration (if present)	Present for several weeks/months	 	Polyuria	Short duration (if present)	Present for several weeks/months	 	Oliguria/anuria	May be present	Not likely to be present, except in end-stage disease	 	Appetite	Normal until last 48–72 h	Reducing over several months	 	Vomiting	Recent onset, if present	Insidious onset	 	Renal palpation	Potentially large and painful kidneys	Small and irregular kidneys	 	Anaemia	Unlikely to be present	May be present	 	Potassium	Normal or increased	Normal or decreased	 	Urinalysis	Blood, glucosuria, pyuria, cylinduria, calcium oxalate crystals	Specific gravity <1.025	 	Otherwise may be unremarkable
Urinalysis should include sediment examination, biochemistry and assessment of specific gravity by refractometer. Casts and blood cells can be prone to lysis when transported to a laboratory and so in-house evaluation is preferable for assessing these. Glucosuria suggests tubular damage; proteinuria can arise from glomerular or tubular damage and should be quantified with a urine protein: creatinine ratio. Blood may suggest infection, inflammation or urolithiasis, or could be due to the sampling method (eg, cystocentesis). Haematuria is not specific to renal disease, as it also arises with lower urinary tract disorders.
The presence of bacteria or pyuria on a urine sediment examination merits submission of a cystocentesis sample for culture; however, a negative culture does not always exclude the presence of pyelonephritis. Ethylene glycol toxicity, another of the more common causes of AKI (Table 5), can be investigated in a variety of ways (see ‘Identifying ethylene glycol toxicity’ box). Further information on the diagnosis and treatment of this condition is available elsewhere.
Blood pressure should be measured; hypotension can cause AKI and can be specifically addressed if not responding to fluid therapy (see discussion on vasopressor therapy in the section on ‘Shock’ in Part 1  ). However, AKI was also the most common cause for cats presenting as a hypertensive emergency (manifesting as seizures, altered mentation or sudden-onset blindness) in a recent study,   in which case antihypertensive medication such as amlodipine may be required.
Abdominal ultrasound can be helpful in narrowing down the differential diagnoses. Evaluation should include the following parameters:
✜ Renal size, shape and symmetry.
✜ Renal corticomedullary definition Hyper-echoic cortices and increased medullary echogenicity may be observed ultrasonographically, or there may be reduced corticomedullary definition.
✜ Dilation of the renal pelvis Mild renal pelvic dilation may be seen with polyuria or following fluid administration, as well as being an indicator of pyelonephritis. Dilation of the renal pelvis >13 mm is suggestive of obstruction; minimal renal pelvic dilation has also been noted in obstructed ureters.
✜ Retroperitoneal or peritoneal fluid This is often associated with anuria/oliguria.
Further information about ultrasound findings in AKI is available elsewhere.
Calcium oxalate dihydrate
Calcium oxalate monohydrate (picket fence)
Calcium oxalate monohydrate (dumbbell)
Calcium oxalate monohydrate (hemp seed)

Treatment approaches
Treatment of AKI initially involves fluid therapy and correction of metabolic abnormalities. Care needs to be taken to ensure oligo-anuric patients do not become volume overloaded. Placement of an indwelling urinary catheter to measure ‘ins and outs’ can be beneficial. If this is not feasible, litter trays can be weighed to estimate urine output, and regular weighing of the patient (at least twice daily) can help to detect weight gain associated with volume overload. Assessment of the collaps-ibility of the caudal vena cava   or measurement of the caudal vena cava:aorta ratio   can also give an indication of volume status.
Identification of the underlying cause of AKI may enable specific treatment to be given. Additionally, supportive care will include nutritional management and use of antiemetics. Gastric decontamination may be indicated if lily, ethylene glycol or another toxicity is suspected. Unfortunately, often by the time patients are presented unwell with azotaemia, the ingested toxin has been absorbed and gastric decontamination is of limited benefit. Although a specific antidote (fomepizole) exists for ethylene glycol toxicity, this needs to be given early in the course of the disease; typically, by the time patients present with AKI, the opportunity to use this treatment has passed. If a response to supportive care is not seen, toxin ingestion, particularly of lilies and ethylene glycol, often results in euthanasia.
Antibacterial therapy, guided by culture and sensitivity testing, is indicated for pyelonephritis. Post-renal azotaemia may require unblocking of an obstructed urethra or surgical intervention for a ruptured bladder.
In addition to intravenous fluids, medical management of ureteric obstruction due to ureteroliths can comprise:
✜ Analgesics A reduction in pain may help to reduce some of the ureteric spasm that can impair stone passage.
✜ Loop diuretics Frusemide can be used to increase the volume of urine produced in an attempt to ‘flush’ the stone more distally.
✜ Osmotic diuretics Mannitol can also be used to increase the volume of urine produced but should not be used in patients who are anuric or have cardiac disease.
✜ Alpha-receptor antagonists Prazocin and tamsulosin may reduce ureteral spasm.
✜ Smooth muscle relaxants Glucagon, amitriptyline and amlodipine can be considered.
Availability may determine which of these treatments is chosen in practice. Up to 30% of patients can respond to medical management, particularly where the obstructing stone is located more distally. However, if no improvement is seen after 48–72 h, consideration should be given to placement of a ureteric stent or subcutaneous ureteric bypass system to alleviate the obstruction and preserve nephron function. Discussion of these techniques is beyond the scope of this article, but readers are referred to a number of resources.

Diabetic ketoacidosis
Cats with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) often present with non-specific signs of anorexia, vomiting and lethargy, which can progress to dehydration, altered mentation and collapse. There is usually a history of polyuria and polydipsia, although owners may not have noticed this, particularly in cats with outdoor access. The suspicion for DKA may be increased if the cat is a known diabetic, but only 38–50% of cats with DKA had previously been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus in two retrospective studies.
DKA arises when there is increased conversion of fatty acids to ketones as a result of insufficient insulin to inhibit hormonesensitive lipase (Figure 12). The condition is associated with the presence of concurrent illness, most commonly pancreatitis and urinary tract infections, but also CKD, inflammatory bowel disease, cholangiohepatitis, neoplasia and other infectious/inflammatory processes. Hepatic lipidosis has been identified concurrently with DKA,   but this is more likely a consequence of the DKA rather than a cause. Investigation for concurrent disease, such as assessment of pancreatic lipase, urine culture, abdominal and thoracic imaging or testing for infectious disease, may be warranted.
Ketone production in diabetes mellitus. Hormone-sensitive lipase in adipocytes converts triglycerides to free fatty acids and glycerol. This pivotal enzyme is inhibited by insulin and stimulated by counter-regulatory hormones (growth hormone, cortisol, glucagon, adrenaline, noradrenaline). In the absence of insulin, and particularly where illness may increase the levels of the counter-regulatory hormones, there is increased production of free fatty acids, which are subsequently converted to ketones in the liver. BHB = betahydroxybutyrate
Treatment of DKA is intensive and expensive, with cats being hospitalised for a median of 4–6.5 days. Survival-to-discharge outcomes are reported as 56–74%, although subsequent relapse or lack of control of clinical signs of diabetes mellitus led to euthanasia of 6/31 cats in one study within 3 weeks of dis-charge.   Accordingly, there is an important role for the veterinarian in terms of owner awareness (see ‘Owner education’ box).
Diagnosis of DKA requires confirmation of the presence of hyperglycaemia, ketonaemia and acidosis. Ketones can be assessed using urine dipsticks, but a ketone meter allows quantitative measurement of beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) rather than semiquantitative measurement of acetoacetate as provided by dipsticks. Measurement of ketones by dipstick is considered more sensitive when plasma is used, rather than urine, however.   If measurement of acid–base status is not possible, acidosis can be assumed to be present if urine ketones exceed 1.5 mmol/l (1+ on dipstick),   plasma ketones exceed 4 mmol/l (2+ on dipstick)   or BHB values exceed 2.55 mmol/l. A handheld ketone monitor (Precision Xceed; Abbott) has been validated for use in cats.
Treatment of DKA involves fluid therapy to restore euvolaemia, insulin to prevent ketone formation, glucose supplementation to prevent hypoglycaemia, monitoring of electrolytes and potassium, and phosphate supplementation, as required (see ‘Algorithm for management of diabetic ketoacidosis’). Recently, glargine and lispro insulins have emerged as possible alternatives to soluble insulin for the treatment of feline DKA (Table 7).
Insulin protocols for the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis
Dose			Comments	 	Soluble (neutral/regular) insulin – CRI protocol	 	Blood glucose	Insulin CRI (ml/h)*	Dextrose or glucose solution†		 	>14 mmol/l	 	>300 mg/dl	10	Not required	*0.8 IU/kg added to 100 ml of 0.9% NaCl	 	Run first 50 ml through line, as insulin adheres to plastic.	 	Change solution every 6 h	 	†50% glucose solution can be added to the patient’s intravenous fluids to make a solution of the required strength. For example, for a 2.5% solution, 12.5 ml of 50% glucose can be added to a 500 ml bag of crystalloid fluids such as lactated Ringer’s, Plasma-Lyte (Baxter) or 0.45% NaCl after removal of 12.5 ml fluid from the bag. For a 5% solution, 25 ml should be added. This can then be administered at a rate appropriate to the hydration status of the patient	 	11–13.9 mmol/l	 	200–300 mg/dl	7	2.5%	 	8–10.9 mmol/l	 	150–199 mg/dl	5	2.5%	 	5.5–7.9 mmol/l	 	100–149 mg/dl	5	5%	 	<5.49 mmol/l	 	<100 mg/dl	0	5%	 	Soluble (neutral/regular) insulin – intermittent intramuscular protocol	 	0.2 IU/kg initial dose. Then 0.1 IU/kg hourly	Can be difficult to dose accurately in small cats	 	Glargine	 	2 IU SC at start of IV fluids; repeated q12h1 IU IM after 2 h of fluids; repeated q4h if glucose>13.9 mmol/l (>250 mg/dl)	Can be cost-effective as cats can be discharged on same insulin used to treat DKA	 	Lispro	 	Adjust rate of CRI based on blood glucose, as for soluble insulin protocol (see above)	0.8 IU/kg added to 100 ml of 0.9% NaCl Run through first 50 ml and change solution every 6 h, as for soluble insulinAn alternative protocol using slower administration rates but a more concentrated solution is also available57
CRI = constant rate infusion; DKA = diabetic ketoacidosis; IM = intramuscularly; NaCl = sodium chloride; SC = subcutaneously
While continuous glucose monitors may appear to be advantageous in the management of DKA by reducing the number of blood samples that have to be taken from cats, a recent study using the Freestyle Libre system (FreeStyle Libre 2.0; Abbott) indicated that interstitial blood glucose readings from the device were lower than whole blood glucose levels, measured using a portable blood glucose meter, and thus concluded that the system could not currently be recommended as it may have an effect on clinical decision-making.
Supportive treatments for concurrent conditions such as antiemetics, analgesics, antibiotics and placement of a feeding tube may be needed, dependent on the individual case.

Euglycaemic diabetic ketoacidosis
Euglycaemic diabetic ketoacidosis (eDKA) is a condition that may arise in cats receiving sodium–glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT2is) such as velagliflozin, bexagliflozin or dapagliflozin. DKA may develop in these patients due to lack of insulin, but blood glucose values are often less than expected because of the increased renal excretion that results from SGLT2i administration. This population is similar to regular DKA patients in terms of clinical signs, ketonaemia and acidaemia, but blood glucose is typically <14 mmol/l (<250 mg/dl), which could cause DKA to be excluded from the list of differentials, unless the treating veterinarian was aware the patient had received SGLT2i medication. eDKA is most likely to occur within the first 2 weeks of starting SGLT2i therapy.
Management of eDKA is similar to that for DKA, with the notable exception that glucose supplementation should be started concurrently with insulin therapy, and that often high levels of glucose supplementation may be required. A bolus of glucose (0.5 ml/kg of 50% glucose diluted 1:4 with normal saline)   can be given intravenously; however, if a glucose CRI is needed at a higher concentration than 5% to maintain blood glucose >8 mmol/l, a central line should be placed, as high concentrations of glucose can cause phlebitis due to hyperosmolarity.   The SGLT2i should be stopped, but it can take several days (and potentially up to 16 days  ) for its effect on urinary glucose excretion to resolve. Once cats are eating, they should be transitioned to a subcutaneous insulin regimen, rather than reintroducing the SGLT2i, as these cats have shown a requirement for insulin.
Further practical information on DKA and eDKA is provided in the ‘2025 iCatCare consensus guidelines on the diagnosis and management of diabetes mellitus in cats’.

Key Points
✜ Medical emergencies often present without warning and demand immediate veterinary attention. This, together with the fact that cats who are critically ill can be very fragile, makes these cases challenging to manage in a busy veterinary practice.
✜ This article discusses current thinking specific to the management of seizures, urethral obstruction, acute kidney injury and diabetic ketoacidosis.
✜ Some ways in which feline patients differ from their canine counterparts are highlighted. For example, eDKA is a condition that may arise in cats receiving SGLT2is, and Cushing’s reflex (systemic hypertension and bradycardia) is less commonly identified in cats with raised intracranial pressure than dogs.
✜ The best patient outcomes are achieved when all members of the veterinary team understand their respective roles and work efficiently together. This also helps to ensure that the client’s experience – from the point of making the initial telephone call to the practice through to being appraised of the treatment plan for their cat – is as least stressful as possible.
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The author of this commissioned Clinical Spotlight review received an honorarium; as for all JFMS articles, this Clinical Spotlight article went through peer review.
Ethical approval: This work did not involve the use of animals and therefore ethical approval was not specifically required for publication in JFMS.
Informed consent: This work did not involve the use of animals (including cadavers) and therefore informed consent was not required. For any animals or people identifiable within this publication, additional informed consent for publication was obtained.
ORCID iD: Nicola Reed  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2131-053X

References
Rational approach to feline medical emergencies: part 1
Status epilepticus in dogs and cats, part 1: etio-pathogenesis, epidemiology and diagnosis
Feline temporal lobe epilepsy: review of the experimental literature
Intracranial pressure monitoring in normal dogs using subdural and intraparenchymal miniature strain-gauge transducers
ACVIM consensus statement on the management of status epilepticus and cluster seizures in dogs and cats
Head trauma
Use of intravenous lipid therapy in three cases of feline permethrin toxicosis
Intravenous lipid emulsion and dexmedetomidine for treatment of feline permethrin intoxication: a report from 4 cases
Treatment of permethrin toxicosis in cats by intravenous lipid emulsion
Conventional treatment of a metaldehyde-intoxicated cat with additional use of a low-dose intravenous lipid emulsion
Intravenous lipid emulsion for the treatment of poisonings in 313 dogs and 100 cats (2016–2020)
Successful treatment of local anaesthetic toxicity using intralipid 20% emulsion following intrathoracic bupivacaine overdose in a cat
Alpha-chloralose poisoning in 25 cats: clinical picture and evaluation of treatment with intravenous lipid
Epileptic seizures in cats: practical approaches to diagnosis
Occurrence and clinical management of urethral obstruction in male cats under primary veterinary care in the United Kingdom in 2016
Retrospective evaluation of the incidence of presumed feline urethral obstruction during a prepandemic year compared to a pandemic year
Characterisation of the clinical characteristics, electrolytes, acid–base and renal parameters in male cats with urethral obstruction
Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases (1986–1995)
Historical and physical parameters as predictors of severe hyperkalemia in male cats with urethral obstruction
Pharmacological therapy for hyperkalemia in feline urethral obstruction has no additional benefit over intravenous fluid and calcium gluconate therapy and prompt unobstruction
Effect of inhaled salbutamol on whole-blood potassium concentrations in healthy cats
Radiographic diagnoses in 80 cats before and 73 cats after unobstructing the urethra
Coccygeal epidural with local anaesthetic for catheterization and pain management in the treatment of feline urethral obstruction
A prospective randomised double-blinded clinical study evaluating the efficacy and safety of bupivicaine versus morphine-bupivi-caine in caudal epidurals in cats with urethral obstruction
2025 iCatCare consensus guidelines on the diagnosis and management of lower urinary tract disease in cats
Approach to urethral obstruction in cats. Part 1: presentation and stabilisation
Approach to urethral obstruction in cats. Part 2: catheterising and postobstruction management
Approach to urethral obstruction in cats. Part 3 : addressing underlying concerns and preventing recurrence
International Renal Interest Society best practice consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of acute kidney injury in cats and dogs
IRIS grading of acute kidney injury (AKI)
Renal biomarkers in companion animals – a review
Preliminary evaluation of a quantitative ethylene glycol test in cats and dogs
Evaluation of two point-of-care ethylene glycol tests for dogs
Ethylene glycol poisoning
Evaluation of presentation, treatment, and outcome in hypertensive emergency in dogs and cats: 15 cases (2003–2019)
Clinical significance of renal pelvic dilatation on ultrasound in dogs and cats
Renal pelvic and ureteral ultrasonographic characteristics of cats with chronic kidney disease in comparison with normal cats, and cats with pyelonephritis or ureteral obstruction
Minimal renal pelvis dilation in cats diagnosed with benign ureteral obstruction by antegrade pyelography: a retrospective study of 82 cases (2012–2018)
Feline abdominal ultrasonography: What’s normal? What’s abnormal? Renal pelvis, ureters and bladder
Ultrasonographic findings in cats with acute kidney injury: a retrospective study
The utility of clinicopathological findings and point-of-care ultrasound in increasing the index of suspicion of ureteral obstruction in azotemic cats presenting to the emergency room
Feline friendly POCUS: how to implement it into your daily practice
Feline caudal vena cava to aorta ratio reference interval
Safety and efficacy of high-dose fomepizole compared with ethanol as therapy for ethylene glycol intoxication in cats
Treatment of ethylene glycol toxicosis in cats
4-Methylpyrazole as a treatment in naturally occurring ethylene glycol intoxication in cats
Feline ureteral obstructions. Part 1: medical management
Benign ureteral obstruction in cats: outcome with medical management
Factors affecting the outcome of medical treatment in cats with obstructive ureteral stones treated with tamsulosin: 70 cases (2018–2022)
Feline ureteral obstructions Part 2: surgical management
Interventional management of canine and feline benign ureteral obstructions
Medical and interventional management of upper urinary tract uroliths
Diabetic ketosis and ketoacidosis in cats: 42 cases (1980–1985)
Retrospective evaluation of risk factors and outcome predictors in cats with diabetic ketoacidosis (1997–2007): 93 cases
Feline acute patient physiologic and laboratory evaluation scores and other prognostic factors in cats with first-time diabetic ketoacidosis
Ketone measurements using dipstick methodology in cats with diabetes mellitus
Measurement of β-hydroxybutyrate in cats with nonketotic diabetes mellitus, diabetic ketosis and diabetic ketoacidosis
Point-of-care β-hydroxybutyrate measurement for the diagnosis of feline diabetic ketoacidemia
Validation of a portable hand-held whole blood ketone meter for use in cats
Glargine versus regular insulin protocol in feline diabetic ketoacidosis
Lispro insulin and electrolyte supplementation for treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis in cats
Use of lispro insulin for treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis in cats
Comparison between a flash glucose monitoring system and a portable blood glucose meter for monitoring of cats with diabetic ketosis or ketoacidosis
2025 iCatCare consensus guidelines on the diagnosis and management of diabetes mellitus in cats
Clinical management of euglycaemic ketoacidosis in a cat with congenital diabetes mellitus treated with insulin and dapagliflozin
SGLT2 inhibitor use in the management of feline diabetes mellitus
Smaller-gauge catheter and greater body weights are associated with increased risk of peripheral intravenous catheter complications in cats hospitalised in the critical care unit
Clinical management of euglycaemia ketoacidosis in a cat with congenital diabetes mellitus treated with insulin and dapagliflozin