Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase as a predictive biomarker in clinical oncology: implications for a precision treatment approach
Highlights
ATM kinase is a central regulator of DNA damage response, particularly in repairing double-strand breaks. Its loss leads to genomic instability, increased mutation rates, and heightened immunogenicity, making ATM-deficient tumors vulnerable to DNA-damage therapies.
ATM-deficient tumors showed enhanced sensitivity to radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and synthetic lethality approaches with ATR, CHEK1 and PARP inhibitors.
ATM loss activates STING/cGAS pathway, boosting antigen presentation and immune cell infiltration. This enhances responsiveness to immune checkpoint inhibitors, especially in tumors with high mutational burden.
The therapeutic responses vary significantly based on mutation types and co-mutation status. ATM and TP53 mutations are mutually exclusive. Biallelic loss leads to complete ATM deficiency, while certain monoallelic missense mutations (i.e. R3008H) exert dominant-negative effect. The functional distinction is crucial for treatment outcomes.
ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) kinase is a central mediator of the DNA damage response (DDR), with established roles in maintaining genomic integrity in response to genotoxic insults. Both germline and somatic alterations in ATM occur frequently in tumors, with pathogenic variants affecting an estimated 1 in 100 individuals worldwide. Emerging evidence has shown its utility as a biomarker for therapeutic sensitivity. ATM-deficient tumors exhibit increased sensitivity to radiotherapy, chemotherapy and present opportunities for synthetic lethality approaches. Notably, ATM loss sensitizes tumors to ATR and PARP inhibitors. This review summarizes the structure and function of ATM kinase and its interacting partners, while addressing critical knowledge gaps in recently described rationale for drug combinations that induce selective synthetic lethality in tumors cells. We examine how these approaches can be leveraged to improve standard chemotherapeutic and immunotherapeutic treatments in cancer. Additionally, we highlight the key preclinical and clinical studies evaluating ATM as a predictive biomarker and discuss its evolving role in precision oncology.

Introduction
ATM is a serine/threonine kinase encoded by the ATM gene located on chromosome 11q22-23. ATM kinase plays a key role in recognizing and repairing DNA damage through activation of downstream DNA replication checkpoint and repair pathways. Thus, the loss or mutation of ATM is inherently associated with genomic instability, inducing a unique phenotype characterized by hypermutation and enhanced immunogenicity. Recent studies have highlighted ATM loss as a key vulnerability in several tumor types, yet much is still unknown about the heterogenous landscape of ATM alterations in dictating tumor biology and treatment response. In this review, we summarize the molecular role of ATM in DNA damage repair, summarize its utility as a predictive biomarker of response to chemotherapy, targeted inhibitors, and immunotherapy, and explore opportunities, challenges, and critical knowledge gaps in the clinical management of ATM-deficient tumors.

The structure of ATM kinase
Human ATM domain map. ATM is a large protein with multiple domains, allowing its interaction with numerous proteins and downstream targets. The N-terminus contains a substrate binding site, including p53, ATMIN, NBS1, NKX3.1, H2AX, among others. The leucine zipper motif is essential for ATM dimerization and interaction with other substrates. Adjacent is a proline rich domain critical for c-Able kinase binding. The FAT domain on the C-terminus facilitates ATM dimerization and acts as an auto-phosphorylation site. The ATM kinase domain allows for its serine/threonine kinase activity, highly homologous to that of the PI3K, which is followed by the kinase regulatory domain PKD. At the end of the C-terminus lies the FATC domain, which mediates TIP60 interaction and kinase activation. Key phosphorylation sites include Ser139 and Ser1981.
Fig 1 dummy alt text
The ATM gene comprises 66 exons, encoding a large 350 kDa serine/threonine kinase protein of 3056 amino acids. ATM belongs to the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-related kinase (PIKK) family, sharing structural homology with members like mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), suppressor of mutagenesis in genitalia 1 (SMG1), and the closely related DNA damage-associated kinases DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) and ATM and RAD3-related kinase (ATR). ATM’s protein structure can be divided into distinct functional regions (Fig. 1). The N-terminus contains multiple α-helical HEAT repeats that forms a crucial scaffolding platform, allowing ATM to interact with and recruit various proteins to DNA damage sites for repair. Key binding partners for the HEAT motifs binding parters include p53, H2AX, ATM interating protein (ATMIN), Nibrin (NBS1, a component of MRN complex), and NKX3.1 (a prostate tumor suppressor). The HEAT motifs also houses an incomplete leucine zipper facilitating ATM dimerization and interaction with substrates, and a proline-rich region essential for c-Abl kinase binding. The C-terminus contains the signature domains characteristic all PIKK family members. The FRAP-ATM-TRRAP (FAT) domain, part of the HEAT motifs, facilitates ATM dimerization and contains a critical autophosphorylation site. Adjacent to this lies a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-like catalytic domain responsible for ATM's serine/threonine kinase activity, followed by a small PIKK regulatory domain (PRD). At the extreme C-terminus, the FATC domain is indispensable for ATM's interaction with the histone acetyltransferase Tip60, which mediates downstream kinase activation and function in the DNA damage response, and for controlling ATM's kinase activity itself. Structural study, informed by ATM’s yeast homolog Tel1, suggest the HEAT repeats form a "cradle," while the FAT, kinase, and FATC regions constitute a "head". Although ATM primarily localizes to the nucleus, it is also found in cytoplasmic peroxisomes and mitochondria. However, unlike most peroxisomal proteins that possess a peroxisomal targeting signal sequence (PTSI) at the end of the C-terminus, ATM’s PTSI domain remains incompletely characterized, leaving its peroxisomal function unclear.

ATM biology and function
ATM is a central regulator of the DNA damage response (DDR), particularly in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), a catastrophic form of genomic damage that can result in lethality or oncogenesis if left unrepaired. DSBs are sensed by the MRN complex (comprising MRE11, RAD50, and NBS1), which recognizes DNA breaks and recruits ATM to the site of damage, resulting in its rapid activation in response to genetic insult via autophosphorylation at Ser1981. ATM exists as an inactive dimer and this autophosphorylation event triggers dissociation into active monomeric subunits. Autophosphorylation of Ser1981 is dispensable for ATM recruitment to sites of DNA damage, but essential for its retention at DSB sites and initiation of downstream effector cascades. ATM monomers subsequently phosphorylate numerous downstream substrates, including histone variant H2AX at Ser139 (forming γH2AX), which further recruits and anchors important DNA repair factors such as 53BP1 and BRCA1 to the chromatin. These facilitate chromatin remodeling, initiate DNA repair, and trigger cell cycle arrest, ensuring sufficient time for error-free DNA repair and preventing propagation of damaged DNA. Further, activated ATM phosphorylates MDC1 that is recruited to DSBs by γH2AX, further stabilizing ATM-chromatin interactions at both DSB and DSB-flanking sites, resulting in propagation of γH2AX foci along the chromatin.
ATM function in maintaining genomic stability and the fidelity of DNA damage repair is closely intertwined with ATR kinase function. ATM shares overlapping functions with ATR, particularly in mediating cell cycle checkpoint activation. Both kinases converge on the phosphorylation of key effectors such as TP53 and histone variant H2AX. ATM functions primarily in G1 cell cycle checkpoint and ATR on the intra-S-phase and G2/M checkpoints, however activation of either kinase can induce arrest at G1/S, intra-S, or G2/M checkpoints depending on signaling context and extent of DNA damage. The redundancy of ATM and ATR is particularly evident in the intra-S checkpoint, where activation of both kinases in response to DNA damage can target Cdc25A for degradation in a ubiquitin-dependent mechanism. The classical activation mechanisms of each kinase are described as functionally distinct, with ATM is triggered following DSB recognition, while ATR is preferentially activated by replication stress and the accumulation RPA-coated ssDNA. However, studies have shown that ATR is essential in mediating the complete cellular response to DSBs. ATM promotes DNA and resection of DSBs, facilitating ATR activation by generating ssDNA-RPA complexes. This ATM-to-ATR switch highlights the coordinated response of these factors to diverse forms of genotoxic stress and highlights their partially redundant roles in maintaining genome integrity. Conversely, ATM and ATR have independent roles in the cellular response to DNA damage. ATM is critical in modulating chromatin remodeling at DNA damage sites through KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP1) phosphorylation at Ser824, which facilitates heterochromatin relaxation, γH2AX foci formation, and enables repair in transcriptionally silent regions of the genome. ATR and downstream CHEK1 play an essential role in the stabilization of stalled replication forks in response to replicative stress, functions in which ATM plays a limited direct role. However, in the setting of ATR dysfunction, replicative stress can lead to fork replication fork collapse and resultant DSBs. Thus, ATM is important in repairing downstream genetic insults resulting from genotoxic stress in cells where ATR function is impaired, thus further linking the function of the ATM/ATR kinases and highlighting the complexity of response to these diverse insults.
ATM has potent effects on p53 function, the canonical guardian of DNA integrity in response to genotoxic stress. Mouse Double Minute 2 homolog (MDM2), an E3 ubiquitin ligase, is the predominant negative regulator of p53 function. Activation of MDM2 promotes polyubiquitination of p53, stimulating its degradation. Additionally, MDM2 can block p53 transcriptional activity and/or sequester it in the cytosol, leading to impairment of p53-mediated responses in cancer cells. In response to DNA damage, ATM phosphorylates MDM2 at several residues near its RING domain, triggering conformational changes that block MDM2-mediated polyubiquitination of p53 and stabilizing its function within the cell. Principally, this leads to cell cycle arrest via upregulation of p21, allowing time for the cell to repair DNA damage or triggering the induction of apoptosis in cases of catastrophic, unrepairable insults. However, inactivating p53 mutations, a common oncologic alteration in human cancers, render cells dependent on ATM-ATR signaling through various mechanisms such as the activation of the p38 MAPK/MK2 pathway. In ATM-deficient cells, p53 can sustain its tumor suppressive function through ATR or DNA-PKc, both of which can also activate p53 in a compensatory fashion. This functional epistasis is supported by large-scale cancer genomics datasets, where ATM and TP53 mutations tend to occur in a mutually exclusive pattern across multiple tumor types, suggesting cellular redundancy in promoting tumorigenesis. In a genomic analysis of non-small cell lung cancer patients by Vokes et al, ATM loss was significantly associated with activating KRAS mutations and showed a significant inverse relationship in the frequency of co-occurring TP53 alterations, further supporting their overlapping roles in maintaining genome integrity. Further research into this important relationship is urgently needed, as the non-random mutational distribution of ATM and TP53 is likely driven by important cellular cues that remain incompletely understood.
Homologous recombination (HR) repair has recently garnered interest in precision oncology, as deleterious mutations in this pathway have shown synthetic lethality with certain DNA damaging agents such as poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. HR is a coordinated process for high-fidelity genomic repair of DSBs (among other DNA damage adducts), involving several steps and sub-pathways, the description of which are beyond the scope of this review (see Li and Heyer et. al for complete description of these mechanisms). Broadly, HR initiation for DSB break repair, in a process known as presynapsis, involves resection of the breakpoint to generate a 3’ overhang via induction of CtIP and MRE11 by ATM to generate ssDNA overhangs required for RAD51-mediated strand invasion and pairing to homologous template DNA. Although ATM is well-known to play a key role in presynapsis, recent evidence suggests that it is essential in later stages of HR as well. Further, although ATM loss can be partially restored by ATR in the early phases of HR, it is unable to compensate in the later stages of HR in ATM-null cells, leading to cell death with combined PARPi and radiation treatment. Additionally, ATM counteracts NHEJ through activation of CtIP and facilitating removal of NHEJ-promoting complexes, allowing HR machinery to bind. In ATM-deficient cells, the failure of activating HR causes broken replication forks to be repaired by NHEJ, resulting in cytotoxic chromosome fusions and genomic instability. Numerous additional studies have implicated ATM as a key mediator of HR repair mechanisms, although it is not considered a core HR protein. Yet, despite this known role in HR, pathogenic ATM alterations have not been consistently shown to sensitize cells to PARP inhibition in clinical trials for poorly understood reasons, highlighting the need for further research into this phenomenon.
Beyond its canonical role in maintaining DNA integrity, ATM functions as key mediator in the response to redox stress. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) activate ATM through oxidation of specific Cys residues including Cys2991, leading to dimer formation via disulfide linkage, as opposed to the monomerization that occurs in response to DSBs. ATM modulates the Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 - Antioxidant Response Element (Nrf2-ARE) pathway, a key antioxidant mechanism within cells. ATM has been shown to prevent Nrf2 ubiquitination and degradation through interactions with KEAP1/BRCA1. The importance of this redox-regulatory role is highlighted by the localization of ATM to the mitochondria, where it acts as a key regulator of mitochondrial homeostasis and function. ATM loss resulted in mitochondrial dysfunction through impairement of mitophagy, contributing to elevated ROS and dysregulated autophagy observed in preclinical models of neuronal injury. The metabolic disruption are central to the pathogenesis of cerebellar degeneration and ataxia that are hallmarks of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) syndrome, which occurs with germline mutations in ATM and for which the protein is aptly named. While the implications of the redox role of ATM in cancer remains incompletely understood, however given the importance of oxidative stress and altered metabolism in malignant cells, the metabolic consequences of ATM loss undoubtedly contribute to oncogenesis, representing a significant but understudied area that warrants further investigation.
Other non-canonical roles of ATM further contribute to oncogeneisis and tumor growth. For example, ATM has been identified as a key driver of cell senescence through autophagy. Loss of ATM allows cancer cells to proliferate and survive even when subjected to replication stress, while ATM inhibition has been shown to stimulate cell division in previously senescent cells. Additionally, a recent study demonstrated that ATM regulates intracellular localization of chaperone protein GRP94, thereby modulating the expression and signaling of oncogenic receptors. In this context, ATM loss increases cell surface expression of EGFR and IGF1R, which triggers enhanced microglial phagocytosis and production of proinflammatory cytokines. These findings underscore the vital role of ATM in regulating inflammation, a critical hallmark of cancer development and progression.
Overall, these are just several roles that ATM has as a diverse cellular kinase with overlapping functions in genomic and metabolic homeostasis. ATM and ATR has been reported to have over 700 protein substrates and their functionality and governed cellular processes are constantly evolving. Despite its complexities, ATM clearly has a vital place among the family of DDR proteins, as loss leads to a spectrum of diseases including immunodeficiency, neurodegeneration, and cancer, as evidenced in patients with A-T and sporadic cancers harboring somatic ATM alterations.

ATM as a biomarker of therapeutic response

ATM and sensitivity to chemoradiation
ATM expression and mutational status within the cancer cell is a key determinant of treatment response, as there are several anticancer agents that function through the induction of DSB formation, thus making cells reliant on high-fidelity DNA repair for survival. Radiation therapy promotes cellular toxicity in part via the induction of both simple and complex DSBs, with the latter differentiated as “clustered DNA damage” and characterized by the presence of DNA damage such as oxidative base damage or single-stranded breaks surrounding DSBs. Susceptibility to radiation-induced injury has long been known to be a hallmark of ATM-deficiency within cancer cells. In a large cohort analysis of over 20,000 pan-cancer patients, genetic inactivation of ATM was significantly associated with an improved efficacy of radiation treatment. In a murine soft tissue sarcoma model, ATM deletion within tumor cells led to sensitization to radiation therapy. These findings were also mirrored in preclinical models of diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma, where concurrent ATM and TP53 loss led to improved response to radiation. Several chemotherapeutic agents also rely on DSB break formation to exert their cytotoxic effects and have been shown to induce ATM activation in response to treatment. ATM mutations lead to enhanced sensitivity to both radiation therapy and cisplatin in bladder cancer, as well as invigorating the immune response. Similarly, germline or somatic defects in HR repair, including ATM mutations, were found to correlate with platinum sensitivity in ovarian cancer.

ATR inhibition in ATM-mutant cancers
As outlined above, ATM and ATR have several overlapping functions in response to DNA damage. This redundancy allows for compensatory repair and survival in tumor cells harboring pathogenic mutations in either ATR or ATM. Specifically, ATM-deficient cells depend heavily on ATR to manage replication stress and stalled replication forks, frequent occurrences in cancer cells which generate excessive genotoxic stress from overactive oncogenic signaling pathways. Similarly, ATR inhibition leads to robust activation of the ATM-p53 G1 checkpoint response and combined inhibition of ATM and ATR bypassing this checkpoint, inducing cell cycle progression in the setting of catastrophic DNA damage and eventual cell death. Therefore, utilizing ATR inhibitors (ATRi) to induce synthetic lethality in ATM mutant tumors has been explored as a promising therapeutic strategy. A study by Rafiei and colleagues showed that ATM loss does not produce demonstrable defects in HR as measured by DR‐GFP reporter assay or sensitivity to PARPi but leads to profound sensitivity to ATRi in prostate cancer. Similarly, Reaper et al demonstrated that ATRi induced synthetic lethality in ATM-p53 deficient cells. This relationship has been validated across multiple preclinical cancer models, including chronic lymphocytic leukemia, where ATRi in TP53 or ATM mutant cells led to accumulation of DNA damage and the induction of mitotic catastrophe within cancer cells, and bladder cancer, where ATM loss sensitized tumor cells to ATR inhibitor berzosertib. Furthermore, two independent studies demonstrated synergistic lethality and sensitization to chemotherapy with simultaenous inhibition of ATM, ATR, and DNA-PK in mammalian cells and a preclinical model of prostate cancer. However, translation of these findings to clinical benefit has proven challenging. A pivotal phase 1 study by Yap and colleagues explored the clinical benefit of ATRi camonsertib (RP-3500) in 120 patients with advanced solid cancers, including 44 patients harboring ATM loss-of-function mutation. While camonsertib treatment produced a significant reduction in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) levels, an indicator of biochemical response to treatment, in 50% of patients with pathogenic ATM alterations, clinical response as determined by imaging was significantly less encouraging. A follow up study using the ATRi elimusertib as a monotherapy showed no preferential clinical benefit in patients with ATM alterations, as an objective response observed in only 3/33 (9.1%) of ATM-mutant patients. These results highlight the need for further insight into ATM and ATR dependencies that underlie the discrepancy between preclinical and clinical results.

CHEK1 inhibitors in ATM-mutant cancers
As previously discussed, CHEK1 is the primary effector downstream of ATR and plays essential role in maintaining DNA integrity and cell cycle regulation. Its activation is particularly important in the response to DNA single strand breaks (SSBs), while the activation of ATM’s downstream effector CHEK2 mediates the response to DSBs, and these pathways are partially complementary. DNA damage promotes phosphorylation and inactivation of the cell cycle progression master regulator CDK1, resulting in cell cycle arrest at S and G2/M checkpoints until DNA repair is completed. CDK1 is activated by CDC25, which is targeted by both CHEK1 and CHEK2. Consequently, inhibition of CHEK1 is thought to have therapeutic value in various cancers, and several CHEK1-targeted drugs have been developed, with some currently in clinical trials as monotherapy or in combination with chemotherapies. While comprehensive review of CHEK1 inhibition in cancer can be found elsewhere, here we focus on the therapeutic potential of CHEK1 inhibitor in the context of ATM deficiency.
In cancer cells, the ATM/CHEK2 pathway is often attenuated, making cancer cell survival heavily dependent on the ATR/CHEK1 pathway. Targeting CHEK1 in the context of ATM deficiency can therefore induce potent synthetic lethality in cancer cells by inhibiting both SSB and DSB repair, representing a promising therapeutic avenue similar to ATR inhibition. A recent study by Tozaki and colleagues demonstrated that combining ATM and CHEK1 inhibitors exerts synergistic antitumor effects and induces synthetic lethality at low doses in colorectal cancer cells. This study showed that dual inhibition synergistically promotes CDK1 activation, resulting in apoptosis induction with enhanced cell cycle progression in colorectal cancer cells. Similarly, a previous study in neuroblastoma cells demonstrated enhanced apoptosis of cancer cells with simultaneous inhibition of CHEK1 and ATM, while CHEK1 inhibition alone was generally nonresponsive in the same disease setting.
Among DNA damage repair inhibitors, CHEK1 inhibitors have been extensively studied, showing potent therapeutic effects in preclinical models. The CHEK1 inhibitor LY2606368 (prexasertib) has shown clinical benefit across multiple cancer types, including efficacy in platinum-resistant triple negative breast cancer patients in phase II trials, platinum-resistant ovarian carcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma. While tumor ATM status was not systematically evaluated in breast cancer and squamous cell carcinoma trials, the ovarian carcinoma study enrolled 13 patients harboring ATM mutations. Among these patients, 10/13 (77%) patients exhibited stable disease with CHEK1 inhibition, although it is worth nothing that most of the ATM mutations were of unknown significance. Additionally, prexasertib was identified as a potent anti-cancer agent in colorectal cancer stem cells through drug-library screening, with computational predicting particular efficacy in ATM-mutated cancer cells. Clinical trials of SRA737, an oral CHEK1 inhibitor, have provided further evidence of therapeutic potential in advanced solid tumors, with 5/6 (83.3%) patients demonstrating partial response or stable disease. When combined with chemotherapy, SRA737 demonstrated stable disease in 2 rectal cancer patients with ATM mutations. Notably, a case study of a patient with refractory small cell lung cancer harboring ATM-deficiency exhibited a complete response lasting 3 years when treated with CHEK1 inhibitor in combination with chemotherapy. These clinical observations suggest that CHEK1 inhibition may be particularly effective in ATM-deficient cancers and support further investigation. Results from the recently completed phase 2 clinical trial of prexasertib in patients with solid tumors with replicative stress or homologous repair deficiency (NCT02873975) will provide valuable insights into this therapeutic approach.

PARP inhibitors in ATM-mutant cancers
PARP enzymes (PARP1/2) are critical for base excision repair (BER) and SSB repair. PARP inhibition leads to replication fork collapse, converting SSBs into DSBs that require HR for high-fidelity repair. When HR is defective, particularly in the presence of BRCA1/2 or ATM mutations, PARP inhibitors can induce synthetic lethality, resulting in cell death. Three generations of PARP inhibitors have transformed the oncologic landscape, especially in maintenance therapy for ovarian and breast cancer with germline BRCA1/2 mutations. Comprehensive review of PARP inhibitors in cancer is beyond the scope for this review, here we focus on the use of PARP inhibition in tumors with altered ATM.
Multiple preclinical studies have demonstrated that ATM-deficient cancer cells exhibit sensitivity to PARP inhibitors, including colorectal cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, bladder cancer and mantle cell lymphoma demonstrated PARP inhibition sensitivity in ATM-deficient cells. Studies of mantle cell lymphoma and gastric cancer with ATM loss and p53 mutations also showed enhanced anti-tumor effect with PARP inhibitions. However, in a recent study of melanoma, loss of functional ATM did not confer sensitivity to PARP inhibitors, even with the addition of ATR inhibition.
Emerging clinical evidence supports the potential efficacy of PARP inhibitor monotherapy in ATM-deficient tumors, although results have been mixed. In the TRITON2 trial evaluating PARP inhibitors for metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, no patients with ATM mutations achieved objective responses by independent radiological assessment, with only 2 of 59 patients showing biochemical responses. Similar results were observed in patients with confirmed biallelic ATM loss or germline ATM mutations, where no radiographic or prostate-specific antigen (PSA) responses were seen among 11 patients in each category. Findings were more promising in the TOPARP-B phase II trial, reporting a 36.8% overall response to PARP inhibition in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer patients with ATM mutations, though PSA and radiographic responses remained limited. Notably, this response rate was lower than the response rate in BRCA1/2-mutated patients. Similarly, a phase II trial in refractory solid tumor patients with non-BRCA DDR mutations showed stable disease lasting over 1 year in 6 of 13 patients (46%), including those harboring ATM somatic mutations. Additional clinical evidence then demonstrated modest but durable responses in these ATM-deficient tumors. The ARIEL2 trial evaluated PARP inhibition in relapsed ovarian cancer also showed that ATM-mutant tumors exhibited stable disease and durable response.
In a phase II trial evaluating PARP inhibition in combination with chemotherapy for gastric cancer, patients with low ATM expression demonstrated greater overall survival compared to those with normal ATM expression . In a phase I study combining PARP inhibitor with chemotherapy for metastatic solid tumors harboring HR deficiency mutations beyond BRCA1/2, Tsang and colleagues observed responses in 2/17 patients with ATM mutations. While the response rate was low, the duration of clinical benefit exceeded 1 year (17-23 months), with a non-statistically significant trend towards longer progression-free survival among patients with ATM mutations versus wild type disease. The BRCAAway phase 2 trial of PARP inhibitor olaparib with abiraterone/prednisone in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer with BRCA1/2 and/or ATM alteration demonstrated a well-tolerated profile and longer progression-free survival.
With PARP inhibitor resistance on the rise, new clinical approaches have focused on dual inhibition of PARP and other DDR proteins, including ATR, ATM, and WEE1. Since PARP inhibition also results in accumulation of stalled replication forks, and ATR is key in their repair and restart, combined PARP and ATR inhibition have been extensively investigated. Study by Lloyd and colleagues support this approach as this inhibition enhances cell death and genome instability in different ATM-deficient cell lines, with similar findings reported in ATM-deficient lung cancer and neuroblastoma tumors. In addition, the combination of PARP and immune checkpoint inhibitors in DDR-altered solid tumors has shown promising clinical activity and manageable toxicity in a phase 1b study. While ATM mutation status was not a predefined inclusion criterion in this study, the observed efficacy across the BRCA-wildtype tumors suggest potential utility in DDR-altered patients, including those with ATM alterations.
Current literature reveals heterogeneous efficacy of PARP inhibition in ATM-deficient tumors, with responses generally less robust than those observed in BRCA1/2-deficient cancers. While the underlying mechanisms for this differential response remain unclear, combination strategies incorporating other DDR targets such as ATR, checkpoint inhibitors, or immunotherapy may enhance the efficacy of PARP inhibition in ATM-deficient settings and warrant further investigation. Ongoing clinical trials are evaluating PARP inhibitors in combination with agents that target compensatory DDR pathways, such as ATR (NCT04065269), WEE1 (NCT04855656), and immune checkpoint inhibitors (NCT03579316), with a focus on ATM- or TP53-deficient tumors. These studies will help identify synergistic synthetic lethal combinations and refine precision treatment strategies for ATM-altered cancers.

WEE1 inhibitors in ATM-mutant cancers
WEE1 controls G2/M transition through inhibitory phosphorylation of cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) at Tyr15, preventing premature entry into mitosis until DNA damage can be repaired. As one of the primary gatekeepers of the G2 cell-cycle checkpoint, WEE1 inhibition has been extensively studied both as a single agent and in combination with other DDR drugs or chemotherapy across various cancer types. WEE1 inhibition has demonstrated synthetic lethality with multiple DDR pathways. Combined WEE1 and PARP1 inhibition produces synthetic lethality in both HR-deficient (BRCA1/2 altered) and HR-proficient tumors. Similarly, dual inhibition of WEE1 and CHEK1 induces severe DNA damage, leading to potent anti-tumor effects in ovarian cancer, melanoma, and leukemia models. Additionally, combined WEE1 and ATR inhibition produces tumor-selective synthetic lethality and suppress metastasis in vitro. Despite these promising combinations, studies of WEE1 inhibition in ATM-deficient tumors remain scarce, although the rationale for WEE1 treatment in ATM-deficient cancers is compelling. WEE1 inhibition can override the G2/M checkpoint, leading to premature cell cycle progression and subsequent cell death due to accumulated DNA damage. Supporting this concept, Jin et al. demonstrated that combined WEE1 and ATM inhibition leads to synergistic reduction in proliferation and tumorigenic properties in vitro and in immunodeficient mice. However, the development of WEE1 inhibitors has been limited by safety concerns related to low selectivity and off-target effects, resulting in a paucity of preclinical and clinical studies. Given the theoretical basis for synthetic lethality between WEE1 and ATM, further research examining WEE1 inhibition in tumors harboring pathogenic ATM alterations is urgently needed.

ATM and immunotherapy
The use of immunotherapy has revolutionized the field of oncology by re-invigorating the immune response to solid organ tumors. DNA damage defects, specifically mismatch repair-deficient (dMMR) cancers that induce a high tumor mutational burden (TMB), have shown remarkable sensitivity to immunotherapy. Various studies have explored the role of ATM dysfunction and the immune response. A study by Li et al demonstrated that genetic or pharmacologic loss of ATM led to activation of the STING/cGAS pathway, thereby inducing the expression of MHC-I in colorectal cancer. This led to enhanced infiltration of cytotoxic T cells and improved overall survival in vivo when combined with radiation therapy. These findings were mirrored by a study from Hu and colleagues, who demonstrated that ATM inhibition induces the release of mitochondrial DNA into the cytoplasm, thereby activating STING/cGAS, augmenting the antitumor immune response, and reducing tumor growth in a T-cell dependent manner. In a clinicogenomic analysis of lung cancer patients, ATM mutations were associated with elevated TMB and improved survival with combined immune checkpoint inhibition and chemotherapy treatment. In vitro validation studies showed that chemotherapy induced the activation of the STING/cGAS pathway in ATM mutant cells, thus further implicating MHC-I activation and enhanced antigen presentation in underlying this response. Similarly, Yi et al found that ATM mutations were associated with an enhanced response to immunotherapy in bladder cancer, with improved overall survival, higher mutational burden, and enrichment of IFN signaling in patient samples harboring ATM alterations. A transcriptomic study by Huang et. al also demonstrated that low expression of ATM activated interferon signaling and induced interferon-stimulated genes in patients with cisplatin-resistant oral cancer, which correlated with increased tumor-infiltrated immune cells and complete remission. ATM expression has been shown to be inversely correlated with PD-L1 expression through modulation of the JNK/c-Jun/TNF-α pathway in triple-negative breast cancer, suggesting that ATM loss may augment PD-L1 levels and provide an additional mechanism for the benefit of PD-1 seen in these studies. In a pancreatic cancer model, ATM inhibition induces type 1 interferon-mediated immune response that is further enhanced by radiation, resulted in increased sensitivity to check point inhibitor therapy. However, conflicting evidence also exists for the immunogenic role of ATM in cancer. Sinha and colleagues reported that ATM-null tumors failed to induce effector immune cell infiltration or enhance the response to immunotherapy in murine CT26 colorectal and 4T1 triple-negative breast cancer models, suggesting a context-dependent role for ATM in driving the immune response in cancer.

Functional consequences of biallelic and dominant-negative ATM mutations and impact on therapeutic response
The functional impact of ATM mutations varies dramatically depending on the zygosity and specific nature of the genetic alteration. Complete ATM protein deficiency typically occurs with biallelic inactivation through truncating mutations, homozygous deletions, or copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity. For instance, germline biallelic mutations in the ATM gene result in the rare genetic disease ataxia-telangiectasia, with varied morbidity and mortality associated with different ATM genotype. In a whole-exome sequence study across a panel of ATM mutated patient-derived xenograft models from a range of tumor types, biallelic truncation/frameshift ATM mutations were linked to ATM protein loss, while monoallelic or missense mutations did not confer ATM protein loss by immunohistochemistry. Complete ATM loss results in profound disruption of the DDR response and are routinely used in preclinical models (i.e. via CRISPR-mediated biallelic inactivation) to demonstrate sensitivity to inhibitors targeting replication stress pathways, including ATR, WEE1, and CHEK1. While tumors with monoallelic mutations retain partial ATM functionality, emerging evidence reveals that select missense mutations can act in a dominant-negative manner, effectively interfering with wild-type protein function produced by the functional allele. There is evidence that these missense ATM mutations carry higher cancer risk than truncating variants, particularly if they are in the FAT, kinase, or FATC domains. This is especially relevant when considering the role of ATM as a biomarker of clinical response, as clinicogenomic data show that an increasing number of tumor alterations are monoallelic missense mutations.
Although recurrent hotspot mutations are scarce in ATM relative to other tumor suppressor genes, specific high-frequency missense mutations provide critical insights into the functional consequences and therapeutic vulnerabilities, including DDR inhibitor sensitivity. The R3008H residue, located within the C-terminal PI3-kinase domain crucial for ATM catalytic activity, represents the most well-characterized dominant-negative alteration. R3008H codon mutations result in a kinase-dead ATM variant, failing to support autophosphorylation in response to DDR, thus impairing ATM recruitment to DNA damage foci and disrupting downstream signaling activation even in the presence of a functional allele. The clinical significance of ATM R3008H mutation extends across multiple malignancies, including pancreatic cancer, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, mantle cell lymphoma, and diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Preclinical studies have shown that expression of kinase-dead ATM mutants comparatively increases the oncogenic potential of cells and renders them more sensitive to topoisomerase I inhibition relative to ATMnull cells, suggesting a dominant-negative mechanism where intact but non-functional ATM actively interferes with the DDR. Animal studies further validate this concept, showing mice bearing a kinase-dead ATM mutation exhibited lower viability and higher rates of chromosomal instability than ATMnull mice. Another mouse model of heterozygous ATM mutations demonstrated heightened susceptibility to cancer. These findings suggest that dominant-negative alterations may be more detrimental than complete gene loss. Clinical evidence supports these mechanistic findings, with a reported case of ATM-R3008H alteration producing sensitivity to PARP inhibition in small cell esophageal carcinoma after disease recurrence. Scott et al showed that missesse mutations in regions of ATM, away from the kinase domain, lead to a dominant interfering effect on ATM function, resulting in chromosomal instability and decreased cell viability when exposed to radiation. Similarly, mutations affecting the FAT domain, which is critical for maintaining the tertiary structure of the protein, can destabilize ATM or prevent its transition into its active monomeric form upon DNA damage, thereby suppressing kinase activation. These mutations have been implicated in patients with peripheral T cell lymphoma and may contribute to favorable response to checkpoint inhibitors. Notably, new human ATM variants were recently identified in ataxia telangiectasia disease that restores ATM functions and can be targeted in future gene therapy development.
Multiple clinical and preclinical evidence have validated the functional significance of biallelic versus monoallelic ATM loss in therapeutic strategies. In lung adenocarcinoma, Schmitt et al. showed that ATM missense mutations predicted loss of function and correlated with increased sensitivity to PARP and ATR inhibitors only when biallelic inactivation or functional loss was confirmed. Likewise, in a monotherapy trial of PARP inhibitor, biallelic loss-of-function mutations in DDR-related genes, including ATM, was associated with a trend towards longer progression-free survival and improved clinical benefit rate, indicating that allelic zygosity could be a discriminating factor. Karmokar et. al also demonstrated DDRi agents exhibiting a mixed response across ATM genotypes, with a general trend toward greater activity, particularly in combination in models with biallelic ATM mutation and protein loss.
These findings underscore the importance of distinguishing monoallelic from biallelic mutations and functionally characterizing specific point mutations when using ATM as a biomarker in guiding patient selection. As such, interpretation of ATM mutational status for patient selection in precision medicine trials should incorporate not only genomic data but ideally consider protein-level expression (IHC), kinase function assays, and evidence of dominant-negative interference where possible. In addition, the frequency of missense mutations varies significantly across cancer types, with high rate of missense mutations in breast and gastric cancer, but low in pancreatic and prostate cancer, necessitating context-dependent evaluation.

ATM and TP53 mutational exclusivity and impact on therapeutic response
As stated above, ATM and p53 are central regulators of the DDR that function at distinct but interconnected nodes to maintain genomic integrity. The complex relationship between these two tumor suppressors has important implications in both cancer biology and therapeutic targeting. Multiple studies have demonstrated a pattern of mutual exclusivity between ATM and TP53 mutations. For instance, large-cohort genomic studies demonstrated that no ATM-related breast tumor contained somatic pathogenic variants in TP53. Similar results were found in pancreatic cancer. A study done by Borja and colleagues reported ATM and TP53 mutual exclusivity across various solid tumors. Additionally, a comprehensive pan-cancer analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) datasets by Knijnenburg et al. revealed that ATM and TP53 mutations rarely co-occur in primary tumors, with this pattern being particularly pronounced in prostate, bladder, and pancreatic cancers. This relationship holds true for hematologic malignancies, including chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and mantle cell lymphoma.
Recent findings have revealed important nuances to the mutual exclusivity paradigm. Vokes and colleagues demonstrated that while co-alteration of ATM and TP53 occurs at lower-than-expected frequencies in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), observed concurrent ATM mutations that do co-occur with TP53 are more likely to be missense variants associated with high mutational burden. The findings support that these variants may represent non-functional passenger mutations rather than true driver alterations. Supporting this concept, another study in NSCLC showed that TP53 and ATM co-alterations are rare and associated with an increased tumor mutation burden with increased response to checkpoint inhibitors. Alternatively, it is possible that less deleterious mutations are necessary for both gene alterations to co-exist. For instance, the ATM missense mutation 7271T→G is associated with higher cancer frequency but typically presents as a milder disease form. Assessing the status of p53 in patients harboring this specific ATM variant would provide valuable insight to such theory.
The observed mutual exclusivity likely reflects convergent evolutionary pressure in DDR-deficient tumors, where loss of either ATM or TP53 alone is sufficient to disable checkpoint fidelity and confer a selective advantage during tumorigenesis. Dual inactivation may either be unnecessarily redundant for cancer cell survival or potentially detrimental to tumor fitness, except in specific contexts where additional mutations compensate for the combined loss. However, this “redundancy theory” does not fully align with the recent phase 3 CodeBreaK study. In this specific cohort of NSCLC patients, 16% with KRAS G12C mutation harbored concurrent ATM mutations with roughly 1/3 of whom also carried TP53 alterations. The majority of ATM mutations were short variant. Notably, these patients exhibited shorter progression-free survival (PFS) when treated with KRAS inhibitor. Further analyssif of PFS outcomes, stratified by TP53 wild-type versus mutant status within this cohort, will be essential to refining our understanding of the mutal exclusivity paradigm.
Therapeutically, determining the functional status of TP53 and ATM kinase within tumors is critical. ATM- deficient tumors that retain wildtype TP53 maintain intact apoptotic machinery, rendering them susceptible to DNA-damaging agents or checkpoint inhibitors (e.g., ATR, WEE1). Therapies for tumors with TP53 deficiency have focused on targeted and cellular therapies. Synthetic lethality has been discussed for TP53-deficient tumors, as they are also highly dependent on ATR for survival, making ATR inhibition a favorable therapeutic approach. Conversely, in the rare case of tumors with dual ATM/TP53 mutations, both checkpoint signaling and apoptotic capacity are impaired, may require aggressive combination strategies due to monotherapy resistance. Distinct genotype combination of ATM and TP53 in tumors, therefore, may require a different approach. ATR inhibition has exhibited efficacy in both ATM- and TP53-deficient tumor models. For instance, Ng et al. demonstrated synergistic effect of ATR inhibition with radiotherapy in ATMnull murine models both in vitro and in vivo, with validation in a phase I/II trial showing clinical responses in advanced cancer patients harboring ATM alterations. Reaper et. al first identified the synthetic lethal interaction between ATR and TP53. Similar findings were shown in hematologic malignancy, as ATR inhibition induces synthetic selective cytotoxicity and chemosensitization in TP53- or ATM-defective CLL in vitro and in vivo. Turchick and colleagues reinforced these findings in preclinical cellular models. Conversely, WEE1 inhibition showed greater efficacy in TP53-deficient but not ATM-wildtype tumors in colorectal cancer patients, likely due to preserved downstream apoptotic machinery. Similarly, CHEK1 inhibitors demonstrated enhanced anti-tumor activity specifically in TP53-mutant cancer cells through replication stress induction. These findings highlight the important relationship of both ATM and p53 function in determining the response to targeted inhibitors that induce catastrophic DNA damage. Elucidation of the biochemical underpinnings driving this phenomenon is an ongoing focus of our laboratory efforts.
Lastly, recent data from large trials as discussed above has provided important insights into DDR-targeted therapy efficacy in solid tumors harboring ATM mutations. However, TP53 mutation status was limited or not reported in these clinical trials, representing a critical knowledge gap that limits our ability to fully assess whether TP53 status modifies therapeutic response in ATM-altered tumors. The existence of these large clinical datasets presents an opportunity to retrospectively evaluate the therapeutic impact of ATM and TP53 mutual exclusivity, however. Future studies stratifying patients by both ATM and TP53 status may substantially improve patient selection for ATR inhibitors, WEE1 inhibitors, or combination regimens involving DNA-damaging agents. As precision medicine approaches continue to evolve, co-consideration of ATM and TP53 status represents a promising strategy for optimizing therapeutic outcomes in DDR-deficient cancers.

Limitations and challenges
While current literature highlights the promising role of ATM in precision oncology, several critical limitations must be addressed before it can be effectively utilized as a predictive biomarker. A fundamental challenge lies in accurately identifying clinically relevant ATM alterations. ATM mutations are not uniformly deleterious, as many are missense mutations of unknown significance with unclear impact on protein function. The large size of ATM protein makes it more challenging to predict whether specific mutations truly impact DDR response. This heterogeneity requires moving beyond simple genomic sequencing toward comprehensive functional characterization. Functional assays such as phospho-CHEK2 detection, γH2AX foci formation, or kinase activity profiling are essential to stratify true ATM-deficient tumors. However, significant variability exists across platforms and thresholds used to define ATM loss, making cross-study comparison difficult. This inconsistency creates a major obstacle for implementing ATM biomarker research into clinical practice.
Moreover, the zygosity of ATM mutations (monoallelic vs. biallelic) significantly affects protein function and therapeutic response. Emerging evidence suggests biallelic loss is more predictive of drug sensitivity, however this crucial information is not reported by routine commercial next-generation sequencing assays. Furthermore, certain missense mutations, such as R3008H, can exert dominant-negative effects that impair wild-type ATM function even in heterozygous settings, adding another layer of complexity to mutational interpretation. These findings underscore the urgent need for improved genomic assessment tools that can differentiate functionally distinct ATM mutations to guide therapeutic decision-making.
While synthetic lethality is an established concept, targeting the DNA damage response through this mechanism has seen limited success in the clinical theater. This is partly due to an incomplete understanding of the complex interplay between ATM mutations and secondary genetic alterations, which may create compensatory survival pathways that undermine the efficacy of single-target DDR inhibitors. In addition, noncanonical roles of ATM in cellular function may influence therapeutic responses to through yet unknown mechanism. Furthermore, the presence of missense mutations and varying levels of ATM zygosity further add layers of complexity. Clinical trials utilizing detailed genetic mapping are essential to deepen our understanding of these interactions and to develop more effective targeted therapies.
Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) analysis from patient blood samples has emerged as a critical tool for genetic biomarker identification and therapeutic efficacy monitoring. However, clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP) presents a significant confounding factor that may compromise the accuracy of these assessments. CHIP represents the clonal expansion of hematopoietic stem cells harboring leukemogenic mutations in the absence of overt hematologic malignancy. Importantly, CHIP-associated mutations, including those in ATM, may be detected in circulating DNA despite being absent from the primary tumor. The inability to distinguish CHIP-derived variants from tumor-derived alterations can lead to misclassification of patients' mutational status, potentially confounding research findings and, more critically, preventing patients from receiving optimal therapeutic interventions. To address this challenge, matched peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) sequencing represents a viable solution for confirming the tissue origin of detected ATM mutations. This approach enables investigators to differentiate between hematopoietic cell-derived variants and genuine tumor alterations, as demonstrated in the phase I trial of the ATR inhibitor camonsertib, where matched PBMC analysis was employed to validate the tumor-specific nature of identified mutations.
Limitations and future opportunities of ATM as a clinical biomarker in precision oncology. Limitations include inconsistency in functional testing, unmeasured impact of mutation zygosity and dominant-negative variants, impact of TP53-ATM mutational exclusivity, and cofounding effect of clonal hematopoiesis. These limitations can be addressed with functional assays identifying clinically relevant muations, standardization of tests and clinical threshold, and improvement of clinical trial design.
Fig 2 dummy alt text
Select clinical trials in ATM-mutant cancers.
Table 1 dummy alt text
Trial	Identifier	Eligibility Criteria	Treatment	Patients	Key Outcomes in ATM-mutant Cohort	 	TRESR(Phase I/IIa)	NCT04497116	Advanced solid tumors with ATR inhibitor-sensitizing mutations, including ATM loss-of-function	Camonsertib (RP-3500, ATR inhibitor) alone or in combination with talazoparib (PARP inhibitor) or gemcitabine	▪ 120 total▪ 44 ATM LOF	▪ 12% response among ATM LOF patients▪ Average partial response in ATM LOF tumors was 54 weeks	 	Elimusertib (BAY1895344)(Phase I)	NCT03188965	Advanced solid tumors and lymphomas; specific expansion cohorts required ATM loss or mutation	Elimusertib (ATR inhibitor)	▪ 229 total▪ 36 ATM mutation	▪ 9.1% response rate with no preferential clinical benefit observed in patients with ATM mutations	 	Prexasertib (LY2606368)(Phase II)	NCT02873975	Advanced solid tumors with HR deficiency (including ATM, ATR, BRCA1/2 mutations)	Prexasertib (CHK1 inhibitor)	▪ 27 total▪ 13 ATM mutation in ovarian carcinoma cohort	▪ 10/13 (77%) ovarian carcinoma patients with ATM mutation exhibit stable disease at 4 months	 	SRA737(Phase I/II)	NCT02797964	Advanced cancers for tumors with CHK1-sensitizing aberrations, including ATM mutations	SRA737 (CHK1 inhibitor) alone or in combination with gemcitabine	▪ 32 colorectal cancer▪ 2 ATM mutation	▪ 2/2 (100%) rectal cancer patients with ATM mutations had stable disease	 	TRITON2(Phase II)	NCT02952534	Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer with deleterious mutations in BRCA1/2 or ATM, or molecular evidence of other homologous recombination deficiency	Rucaparib (PARP inhibitor)	▪ 277 total▪ 59 ATM mutation	▪ No objective responses by independent radiology review▪ 2 out of 59 patients showed biochemical responses (PSA level)▪ No radiologic or biochemical response in patients with biallelic ATM loss or germline ATM mutations	 	TOPARP-B(Phase II)	NCT01682772	Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer with DNA repair gene aberrations, including ATM	Olaparib (PARP inhibitor)	▪ 78 total▪ 49 ATM mutation	▪ 36.8% overall response rate in patients with ATM mutants▪ 10.5% and 4.1% showed radiographic and PSA responses respectively▪ No radiographic or PSA response in biallelic ATM loss	 	Olaparib(Phase II)	NCT01063517	Recurrent and metastatic gastric cancer	Paclitaxel or Paclitaxel + Olaparib (PARP inhibitor)	▪ 61 receiving Paclitaxel + Olaparib▪ 31 with low ATM expression in Paclitaxel + Olaparib cohort	▪ Greater overall survival benefit with olaparib/paclitaxel in ATMlow population (median OS 8.2 months vs. not reached in Paclitaxel alone)	 	BRCAAway (Phase II)	NCT03012321	Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer with DNA repair defects, including mutations in BRCA1/2 or ATM	Olaparib (PARP inhibitor), or Abiraterone + Olaparib	▪ 165 total▪ 11 ATM mutation	▪ 2/17 (11.8%) response in ATM mutant cohort, trending towards longer progression-free survival▪ Duration of clinical benefit 17-23 months
Despite compelling preclinical evidence supporting DDR-targeted therapies in ATM-deficient cancer models, clinical trial results have been inconsistent. This gap in clinical translation likely stems from multiple factors, including the challenges outlined above and the influence of co-occurring mutations. DDR alterations such as TP53 or BRCA mutations can either enhance or mitigate therapeutic vulnerabilities associated with ATM loss, yet such co-mutation data is frequently unreported in clinical trials, limiting result interpretation. Additionally, many early-phase trials evaluating ATM as a biomarker involve small patient cohorts, restricting the ability to draw definitive conclusions about its predictive value. Addressing these factors in future trials will help establish consensus regarding the clinical utility of ATM as a biomarker of response and opportunity for a precision medicine approach. A summary of limitations and future opportunities is shown in Fig. 2, and a summary of selected clinical trials targeting ATM mutations is shown in Table 1.

Conclusion and future directions
ATM represents a crucial biomarker and therapeutic target in precision oncology. Its role spans multiple treatment modalities including chemotherapy, targeted inhibition (ATR, WEE1, CHEK), and immunotherapy. Comprehensive molecular profiling that incorporates ATM functional status, co-mutations, and immune landscape will be essential to optimize treatment strategies. As functional assays improve and clinical trial data mature, ATM may become a cornerstone biomarker in the molecular stratification of solid tumors.

Availability of data and materials
Not applicable

Ethics Approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
All authors consent for publication.

Funding
This work was supported by the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons (ASCRS) Career Development Award GR027432 to A.R. Dosch.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ann T. Pham: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. Fenghua Yuan: Writing – review & editing. Nagaraj S. Nagathihalli: Writing – review & editing. Austin R. Dosch: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest
All authors report no competing interests.

References
ATM function and its relationship with ATM gene mutations in chronic lymphocytic leukemia with the recurrent deletion (11q22.3-23.2)
ATM in immunobiology: From lymphocyte development to cancer immunotherapy
Prognostic impact of ATM mutations in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
ATM-deficiency increases genomic instability and metastatic potential in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer
The association between ATM variants and risk of breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Common mechanisms of PIKK regulation
An unprecedented nucleic acid capture mechanism for excision of DNA damage
Association of condensin with chromosomes depends on DNA binding by its HEAT-repeat subunits
Comparison of ARM and HEAT protein repeats
DNA damage-induced association of ATM with its target proteins requires a protein interaction domain in the N terminus of ATM
Activation of p53 transcriptional activity requires ATM's kinase domain and multiple N-terminal serine residues of p53
gammaH2AX and MDC1: anchoring the DNA-damage-response machinery to broken chromosomes
ATMIN defines an NBS1-independent pathway of ATM signalling
Two-step activation of ATM by DNA and the Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1 complex
Functional activation of ATM by the prostate cancer suppressor NKX3.1
ATM's leucine-rich domain and adjacent sequences are essential for ATM to regulate the DNA damage response
Interaction between ATM protein and c-Abl in response to DNA damage
FAT: a novel domain in PIK-related kinases
Mechanisms of ATM Activation
A single ataxia telangiectasia gene with a product similar to PI-3 kinase
The FATC domains of PIKK proteins are functionally equivalent and participate in the Tip60-dependent activation of DNA-PKcs and ATM
The dimeric architecture of checkpoint kinases Mec1ATR and Tel1ATM reveal a common structural organization
Localization of a portion of extranuclear ATM to peroxisomes
ATM functions at the peroxisome to induce pexophagy in response to ROS
Mitochondrial dysfunction in ataxia-telangiectasia
Requirement of the MRN complex for ATM activation by DNA damage
Autophosphorylation at serine 1981 stabilizes ATM at DNA damage sites
Enhanced phosphorylation of p53 by ATM in response to DNA damage
Activation of the ATM kinase by ionizing radiation and phosphorylation of p53
A role for ATR in the DNA damage-induced phosphorylation of p53
ATM phosphorylates histone H2AX in response to DNA double-strand breaks
Histone H2AX is phosphorylated in an ATR-dependent manner in response to replicational stress
Ionizing radiation–dependent γ-H2AX focus formation requires ataxia telangiectasia mutated and ataxia telangiectasia mutated and Rad3-related
Cell cycle checkpoint signaling through the ATM and ATR kinases
ATM and related protein kinases: safeguarding genome integrity
The ATM-Chk2-Cdc25A checkpoint pathway guards against radioresistant DNA synthesis
Chk1 mediates S and G2 arrests through Cdc25A degradation in response to DNA-damaging agents
Checking on DNA damage in S phase
Sensing DNA damage through ATRIP recognition of RPA-ssDNA complexes
Essential and dispensable roles of ATR in cell cycle arrest and genome maintenance
ATR and ATRIP: partners in checkpoint signaling
Single-stranded DNA orchestrates an ATM-to-ATR switch at DNA breaks
Chromatin relaxation in response to DNA double-strand breaks is modulated by a novel ATM- and KAP-1 dependent pathway
The ATM Substrate KAP1 controls DNA repair in heterochromatin: regulation by HP1 proteins and serine 473/824 phosphorylation
The essential kinase ATR: ensuring faithful duplication of a challenging genome
Hallmarks of DNA replication stress
The MDM2-p53 interaction
Mechanism of p53 stabilization by ATM after DNA damage
Surfing the p53 network
The cell-cycle arrest and apoptotic functions of p53 in tumor initiation and progression
p53-deficient cells rely on ATM- and ATR-mediated checkpoint signaling through the p38MAPK/MK2 pathway for survival after DNA damage
The combined status of ATM and p53 link tumor development with therapeutic response
DNA-PK, ATM, and ATR: PIKKing on p53
ATM and TP53 mutations show mutual exclusivity but distinct clinical impact in mantle cell lymphoma patients
Clinicopathologic features, molecular landscape, and prognostic implications of ovarian low-grade serous tumors with histologic transformation
ATMMutations associate with distinct co-mutational patterns and therapeutic vulnerabilities in NSCLC
Cumulative defects in DNA repair pathways drive the PARP inhibitor response in high-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines
Homologous recombination deficiency: exploiting the fundamental vulnerability of ovarian cancer
Cracking the homologous recombination deficiency code: how to identify responders to PARP inhibitors
PARP inhibitors: clinical relevance, mechanisms of action and tumor resistance
Homologous recombination in DNA repair and DNA damage tolerance
Involvement of ATM in homologous recombination after end resection and RAD51 nucleofilament formation
The interaction of CtIP and Nbs1 connects CDK and ATM to regulate HR–mediated double-strand break repair
ATM antagonizes NHEJ proteins assembly and DNA-ends synapsis at single-ended DNA double strand breaks
ATM orchestrates the DNA-damage response to counter toxic non-homologous end-joining at broken replication forks
The controlling role of ATM in homologous recombinational repair of DNA damage
ATM and Artemis promote homologous recombination of radiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks in G2
ATM, ATR, and DNA-PK: The Trinity at the heart of the DNA damage response
ATMLoss Confers Greater sensitivity to ATR inhibition than PARP inhibition in prostate cancer
ATM Activation by oxidative stress
ATM directs DNA damage responses and proteostasis via genetically separable pathways
Nrf2-ARE pathway: An emerging target against oxidative stress and neuroinflammation in neurodegenerative diseases
Oxidative stress as a therapeutic perspective for ATM-deficient chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients
Mitochondria at the crossroads of ATM-mediated stress signaling and regulation of reactive oxygen species
Oxidative stress and the multifaceted roles of ATM in maintaining cellular redox homeostasis
The ATM protein kinase and cellular redox signaling: beyond the DNA damage response
ATM Kinase-Dependent Regulation of Autophagy: A Key Player in Senescence?
ATM in senescence
Attenuation of ATM signaling by ROS delays replicative senescence at physiological oxygen
ATM interaction with GRP94 modulates oncogenic receptor expression and signaling and microglial activation
ATM and ATR substrate analysis reveals extensive protein networks responsive to DNA damage
ATM and ataxia telangiectasia
DNA damage response signaling pathways and targets for radiotherapy sensitization in cancer
Targeting DNA double-strand break repair pathways to improve radiotherapy response
A minimally invasive assay for individual assessment of the ATM/CHEK2/p53 pathway activity
Pathogenic ATMMutations in cancer and a genetic basis for radiotherapeutic efficacy
Tumor cells, but not endothelial cells, mediate eradication of primary sarcomas by stereotactic body radiation therapy
Tumor genotype dictates radiosensitization after Atm deletion in primary brainstem glioma models
Chemotherapy induced DNA damage response
ATM deficiency confers specific therapeutic vulnerabilities in bladder cancer
Germline and somatic mutations in homologous recombination genes predict platinum response and survival in ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal carcinomas
Selective killing of ATM- or p53-deficient cancer cells through inhibition of ATR
Oncogenes induce genotoxic stress by mitotic processing of unusual replication intermediates
Oncogene-induced senescence is part of the tumorigenesis barrier imposed by DNA damage checkpoints
Oncogene-induced senescence is a DNA damage response triggered by DNA hyper-replication
Selective Inhibition of ATM-dependent double-strand break repair and checkpoint control synergistically enhances the efficacy of ATR INHIBITORS
ATR inhibition induces synthetic lethality and overcomes chemoresistance in TP53- or ATM-defective chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells
Simultaneous inhibition of ATM, ATR, and DNA-PK causes synergistic lethality
Dual inhibition of ATR and DNA-PKcs radiosensitizes ATM-mutant prostate cancer
Camonsertib in DNA damage response-deficient advanced solid tumors: phase 1 trial results
Phase Ib basket expansion trial and alternative-schedule dose-escalation study of ATR inhibitor elimusertib in advanced solid tumors with DNA damage response defects
The ATM-Chk2 and ATR-Chk1 pathways in DNA damage signaling and cancer
Causes and consequences of replication stress
Genomic DNA damage and ATR-Chk1 signaling determine oncolytic adenoviral efficacy in human ovarian cancer cells
Characterization of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae homologue of Schizosaccharomyces pombe Chk1 involved in DNA-damage-induced M-phase arrest
Differential roles of ATM- and Chk2-mediated phosphorylations of hdmx in response to DNA damage
ATM and the Mre11 complex combine to recognize and signal DNA double-strand breaks
Triggering the all-or-nothing switch into mitosis
cell cycle synchronization at the G2/M phase border by reversible inhibition of CDK1
An essential role for Cdk1 in S phase control is revealed via chemical genetics in vertebrate cells
Cdc25: mechanisms of checkpoint inhibition and recovery
Cdc25A phosphatase: combinatorial phosphorylation, ubiquitylation and proteolysis
Piwnica-Worms H. Mitotic and G2 checkpoint control: regulation of 14-3-3 protein binding by phosphorylation of Cdc25C on serine-216
Chk1 regulates the S phase checkpoint by coupling the physiological turnover and ionizing radiation-induced accelerated proteolysis of Cdc25A
Roles of Chk1 in cell biology and cancer therapy
FOXM1 promotes non-small cell lung cancer progression by increasing CHEK1 expression
Co-inhibition of Notch1 and ChK1 triggers genomic instability and melanoma cell death increasing the lifespan of mice bearing melanoma brain metastasis
CHK1 inhibition increases the therapeutic response to radiotherapy via antitumor immunity in ARID1A-deficient colorectal cancer
The prevalence of CHEK1 and CHEK2 mutations in prostate cancer: a retrospective cohort study
Cancer vulnerabilities through targeting the ATR/Chk1 and ATM/Chk2 Axes in the context of DNA damage
The combination of ATM and Chk1 inhibitors induces synthetic lethality in colorectal cancer cells
Co-Inhibition of the DNA Damage Response and CHK1 Enhances Apoptosis of Neuroblastoma Cells
ATM, ATR, CHK1, CHK2 and WEE1 inhibitors in cancer and cancer stem cells
Prexasertib, a cell cycle checkpoint kinase 1 and 2 inhibitor, in BRCA wild-type recurrent high-grade serous ovarian cancer: a first-in-class proof-of-concept phase 2 study
A phase ii single arm pilot study of the CHK1 inhibitor prexasertib (LY2606368) in BRCAwild-type, advanced triple-negative breast cancer
The CHK1 inhibitor prexasertib in BRCA wild-type platinum-resistant recurrent high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma: a phase 2 trial
Evaluation of prexasertib, a checkpoint kinase 1 inhibitor, in a phase ib study of patients with squamous cell carcinoma
CHK1-targeted therapy to deplete DNA replication-stressed, p53-deficient, hyperdiploid colorectal cancer stem cells
A Phase 1/2 trial of SRA737 (a Chk1 inhibitor) administered orally in patients with advanced cancer
A Phase I/II Trial of Oral SRA737 (a Chk1 Inhibitor) given in combination with low-dose gemcitabine in patients with advanced cancer
Synthetic lethality in ATM-deficient RAD50-mutant tumors underlies outlier response to cancer therapy
The multifaceted roles of PARP1 in DNA repair and chromatin remodelling
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 activation during DNA damage and repair
Inhibition of poly(ADP-Ribose) polymerase in tumors fromBRCAmutation carriers
Maintenance olaparib in patients with newly diagnosed advanced ovarian cancer
DNA damage response inhibitors in cancer therapy: lessons from the past, current status and future implications
ATM-deficient colorectal cancer cells are sensitive to the PARP inhibitor olaparib
ATM deficiency sensitizes mantle cell lymphoma cells to poly(ADP-Ribose) polymerase-1 inhibitors
Enhanced cytotoxicity of PARP inhibition in mantle cell lymphoma harbouring mutations in both ATM and p53
Low ATM protein expression and depletion of p53 correlates with olaparib sensitivity in gastric cancer cell lines
Assessing determinants of response to PARP inhibition in germline ATM mutant melanoma
Rucaparib for the treatment of metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer associated with a DNA damage repair gene alteration: final results from the phase 2 TRITON2 study
Non-BRCA DNA damage repair gene alterations and response to the PARP Inhibitor rucaparib in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer: analysis from the phase II TRITON2 study
Olaparib in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer with DNA repair gene aberrations (TOPARP-B): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 2 trial
Phase II Trial of the PARP inhibitor, niraparib, in BAP1 and other DNA damage response pathway-deficient neoplasms
Rucaparib in relapsed, platinum-sensitive high-grade ovarian carcinoma (ARIEL2 Part 1): an international, multicentre, open-label, phase 2 trial
Randomized, double-blind phase II trial with prospective classification by ATM protein level to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of olaparib plus paclitaxel in patients with recurrent or metastatic gastric cancer
Synthetic lethality beyond BRCA: A Phase I study of rucaparib and irinotecan in metastatic solid tumors with homologous recombination-deficiency mutations beyond BRCA1/2
Abiraterone, olaparib, or abiraterone + olaparib in first-line metastatic Castration-resistant prostate cancer with DNA repair defects (BRCAAway)
Clinical approaches to overcome PARP inhibitor resistance
Combined PARP and ATR inhibition potentiates genome instability and cell death in ATM-deficient cancer cells
Combined poly-ADP ribose polymerase and ataxia-telangiectasia mutated/Rad3-related inhibition targets ataxia-telangiectasia mutated-deficient lung cancer cells
DNA damage response deficiency enhances neuroblastoma progression and sensitivity to combination PARP and ATR inhibition
Pamiparib in combination with tislelizumab in patients with advanced solid tumours: results from the dose-escalation stage of a multicentre, open-label, phase 1a/b trial
Avelumab Plus talazoparib in patients With BRCA1/2- or ATM-altered advanced solid tumors
Cdk1-dependent regulation of the mitotic inhibitor wee1
WEE1 inhibition in cancer therapy: Mechanisms, synergies, preclinical insights, and clinical trials
Sequential therapy with PARP and WEE1 inhibitors minimizes toxicity while maintaining efficacy
Inhibition of WEE1 potentiates sensitivity to PARP inhibitor in biliary tract cancer
Combined inhibition of Wee1 and Chk1 gives synergistic DNA damage in S-phase due to distinct regulation of CDK activity and CDC45 loading
Combined inhibition of the cell cycle related proteins Wee1 and Chk1/2 induces synergistic anti-cancer effect in melanoma
Inhibiting Wee1 and ATR kinases produces tumor-selective synthetic lethality and suppresses metastasis
Therapeutic Co-targeting of WEE1 and ATM downregulates PD-L1 expression in pancreatic cancer
Combined inhibition of Wee1 and Chk1 as a therapeutic strategy in multiple myeloma
WEE1 inhibitor adavosertib in combination with carboplatin in advanced TP53 mutated ovarian cancer: A biomarker-enriched phase II study
A novel BCMA PBD-ADC with ATM/ATR/WEE1 inhibitors or bortezomib induce synergistic lethality in multiple myeloma
Neoadjuvant immunotherapy for dMMR and pMMR colorectal cancers: therapeutic strategies and putative biomarkers of response
DNA mismatch repair in cancer immunotherapy
ATM inhibition enhance immunotherapy by activating STING signaling and augmenting MHC Class I
ATM inhibition enhances cancer immunotherapy by promoting mtDNA leakage and cGAS/STING activation
ATM mutations benefit bladder cancer patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors by acting on the tumor immune microenvironment
ATM inhibition-induced ISG15/IFI27/OASL is correlated with immunotherapy response and inflamed immunophenotype
Inhibition of ATM promotes PD-L1 expression by activating JNK/c-Jun/TNF-α signaling axis in triple-negative breast cancer
Inhibition of ATM increases interferon signaling and sensitizes pancreatic cancer to immune checkpoint blockade therapy
The cold immunological landscape of ATM-deficient cancers
Morbidity and mortality from ataxia-telangiectasia are associated with ATM genotype
Ataxia telangiectasia: more variation at clinical and cellular levels
Relevance of ATM status in driving sensitivity to DNA damage response inhibitors in patient-derived xenograft models
Rare variants in the ATMgene and risk of breast cancer
ATM Mutations and Phenotypes in Ataxia-Telangiectasia Families in the British Isles: Expression of Mutant ATM and the Risk of Leukemia, Lymphoma, and Breast Cancer
Evaluation of the role of Finnish ataxia-telangiectasia mutations in hereditary predisposition to breast cancer
Characterization of ATM mutations in 41 Nordic families with ataxia telangiectasia
Missense mutation and defective function of ATM in a childhood acute leukemia patient with MLL gene rearrangement
Rare, evolutionarily unlikely missense substitutions in ATM confer increased risk of breast cancer
Germline pathogenic variants in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) Gene are associated with high and moderate risks for multiple cancers
Kinase-dead ATM protein is highly oncogenic and can be preferentially targeted by Topo-isomerase I inhibitors
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated loss-of-function displays variant and tissue-specific differences across tumor types
The cancer-associated ATM R3008H mutation reveals the link between ATM activation and its exchange
Pancreatic cancer genomes reveal aberrations in axon guidance pathway genes
ATM mutations uniformly lead to ATM dysfunction in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: application of functional test using doxorubicin
ATM gene inactivation in mantle cell lymphoma mainly occurs by truncating mutations and missense mutations involving the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase domain and is associated with increasing numbers of chromosomal imbalances
Oligonucleotide microarrays demonstrate the highest frequency of ATM mutations in the mantle cell subtype of lymphoma
ATM mutations are associated with inactivation of theARF-TP53 tumor suppressor pathway in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Kinase-dead ATM protein causes genomic instability and early embryonic lethality in mice
Mice heterozygous for mutation in Atm, the gene involved in ataxia-telangiectasia, have heightened susceptibility to cancer
Case report: olaparib shows satisfactory clinical outcomes against small cell esophageal carcinoma with ATM mutation
Missense mutations but not allelic variants alter the function of ATM by dominant interference in patients with breast cancer
Structural insights into the activation of ATM kinase
Concurrent mutations in ATM and genes associated with common γ chain signaling in peripheral T cell lymphoma
Immune checkpoint inhibitors in peripheral T-cell lymphoma
New human ATM variants are able to regain ATM functions in ataxia telangiectasia disease
ATM deficiency is associated with sensitivity to PARP1- and ATR inhibitors in lung adenocarcinoma
Breast cancer risk genes — association analysis in more than 113,000 women
Pathogenic germline variants in 10,389 adult cancers
Clinico-genomic characterization of ATM and HRD in pancreas cancer: application for practice
Prospective evaluation of germline alterations in patients with exocrine pancreatic neoplasms
Germline mutations in penetrant cancer predisposition genes are rare in men with prostate cancer selecting active surveillance
Germline pathogenic variants in 7636 japanese patients with prostate cancer and 12 366 controls
A mutational signature reveals alterations underlying deficient homologous recombination repair in breast cancer
Whole-genome sequencing reveals clinically relevant insights into the aetiology of familial breast cancers
Clinicopathologic profile of breast cancer in germline ATM and CHEK2 mutation carriers
Atypical ATMs: broadening the phenotypic spectrum of ATM-associated hereditary cancer
Genomic and molecular landscape of DNA damage repair deficiency across the cancer genome atlas
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated–deficient B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia occurs in pregerminal center cells and results in defective damage response and unrepaired chromosome damage
p53 dysfunction in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia: inactivation of ATM as an alternative toTP53 mutation
Association of tumor protein p53 and ataxia-telangiectasia mutated comutation with response to immune checkpoint inhibitors and mortality in patients with non–small cell lung cancer
Clinicopathologic, genomic, and immunophenotypic landscape of ATM mutations in non-small cell lung cancer
Molecular determinants of sotorasib clinical efficacy in KRASG12C-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer
Targeting mutant p53 for cancer therapy: direct and indirect strategies
Genotype-directed synthetic cytotoxicity of ATR inhibition with radiotherapy
Small-molecule inhibition of Wee1 kinase by MK-1775 selectively sensitizes p53-deficient tumor cells to DNA-damaging agents
WEE1 inhibitor adavosertib exerts antitumor effects on colorectal cancer, especially in cases with p53 mutations
Replication and ribosomal stress induced by targeting pyrimidine synthesis and cellular checkpoints suppress p53-deficient tumors
The Landscape of Somatic Genetic Alterations in Breast Cancers From ATM Germline Mutation Carriers