Peripheral nerve blocks for primary and secondary headache disorders: review of current evidence and a practical approach
Headache is prevalent, disabling, and a frequent neurological referral in the  healthcare system. Clinic-based procedures have evolved in recent years to play  an important role in headache medicine, with growing evidence on the safety,  tolerability and efficacy of peripheral nerve blocks (PNBs). Despite novel  headache therapies, PNBs are still widely used in headache services to treat  primary and secondary headache disorders, including cluster headache and other  trigemino-autonomic cephalalgias, migraine, occipital neuralgia, and other less  frequent headache disorders. We aim to provide an update of the current evidence  and a practical approach for delivering the most common PNBs used in clinical  practice. We aim to describe PNBs indications, contraindications, injection  locations and techniques, drug constituents, and potential pitfalls.

1. Introduction
Headache is common and one of the most disabling and undertreated neurological  conditions. Peripheral nerve blocks (PNBs) are delivered in acute medical  units and outpatient clinics to treat primary and secondary headache disorders.  The greater occipital nerve (GON) is commonly targeted, but headache  practitioners may target other cervical and distal trigeminal nerve branches.  PNBs can reduce the nociceptive input into the trigeminocervical complex  modulating central descending inhibitory pain pathways, which can abort acute  headache attacks or shorten duration of bouts. PNBs containing local anaesthetics  (LA) modulate pain via blocking C- and Aδ nerve fibres. Corticosteroids  can be added to LA, although evidence for their efficacy, other than in cluster  headache (CH), is scarce.
There have been multiple meta-analyses looking at the use of GON blocks in  migraine, both for acute and preventive management. A review of the research  over the last 5 years has shown increasing evidence that PNBs can be used for a  wide variety of headache disorders. The GON block is the most frequently targeted  and researched, with good evidence for its use as a transitional preventive  therapy in cluster headache and migraine and as a diagnostic and therapeutic tool  in occipital neuralgia. In this review, we highlight the evidence for  PNBs in primary and secondary headache disorders commonly treated in headache  services. Guidance is also provided on the technical and practical aspects of  delivering PNBs. The most relevant studies of PNBs in primary and secondary  headache disorders, described in this manuscript are summarised in  Supplementary Table 1.

2. Methods

2.1 Search strategy
This scoping review outlines the evidence base for PNBs in primary and secondary  headache disorders. The authors searched Offshore Vessel Inspection Database  (OVID) Medline and PubMed for original research articles published until February  2025. Search terms used were “Greater Occipital Nerve Blocks”, combined with  each of the following search terms, “Migraine”, “Cluster headache”, “Primary  headache disorders” and “Secondary Headache disorders”. Manuscript titles and  abstracts were screened by LF to include manuscripts which were randomised  controlled trials (RCTs). For some of the primary and secondary headache  disorders with limited or no RCT manuscripts, the largest cohort studies were  included. Manuscripts were included if they did not use ultrasound guided nerve  blocks, and focused on distal greater occipital nerve blocks. The authors  excluded manuscripts which researched sub-occipital or cervical nerve blocks.  This distinction was made because sub-occipital nerve blocks, cervical nerve  blocks, and ultrasound guided nerve blocks are delivered primarily by pain  specialists in the UK and neurologists deliver distal greater occipital nerve  blocks based on anatomical landmarks. The studies referenced in this review are  outlined in Supplementary Table 1.

2.2 PNBs in migraine
Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) have shown the efficacy of GON blocks in  episodic and chronic migraine. RCTs using GON block injections are problematic to  design due to possible inadequate blinding of patients with a procedure where the  use of local anaesthetic is part of the treatment protocol. Despite these  limitations, an evidence base has been established over the last few years.
In a RCT of episodic migraine patients, a single GON block with triamcinolone  and lidocaine reduced the frequency of migraine attacks in the four weeks  following the injection, but had no difference to placebo on the duration and  severity of the migraine headache. Bilateral GON blocks given weekly for  three weeks, were shown to reduce the frequency of episodic migraine at two  months. As an acute treatment for migraine, bupivacaine GON blocks provided  freedom from pain in up to 31% of patients compared with placebo and was as  effective as intravenous metoclopramide and Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  (NSAIDs). However, a RCT of GON block with bupivacaine compared to  intravenous metoclopramide for acute headache treatment in the emergency  department was shown to be equivalent. PNBs targeting the supraorbital nerve  (SON) and GON have also shown to be superior to the use of SON blocks alone in  acute migraine management. Interestingly, in patients with acute migraine  aura, bupivacaine GON blocks completely resolved the aura in 50% of patients  with no recurrence of aura in the following week, and in chronic migraine, the  same GON blocks showed significant improvement in pain scores at four weeks.
In chronic migraine, GON blocks with bupivacaine were efficacious in short-term  preventative treatment, with the addition of triamcinolone to the GON block not  showing any additional significant benefit to the use of bupivacaine alone  . When given weekly for four weeks, bupivacaine GON blocks significantly  reduced headache frequency and pain at up to three months of follow-up. In  another RCT, the use of triamcinolone and lidocaine GON blocks resulted in  reduction of pain severity and frequency as well as use of analgesics up to two  months after the intervention. GON blocks with methylprednisolone and  lidocaine/bupivacaine when combined with lesser occipital nerve (LON),  supratrochlear nerve (STN), SON, and auriculotemporal nerve (ATN) blocks helped  reduce headache attack frequency in up to two thirds of chronic migraine patients  in an open label and a prospective non-randomised cohort in the UK. In  chronic migraine patients who respond to GON blocks, the addition of prophylactic  medication has not shown any further improvement beyond that provided by the GON  block alone. However, in a RCT of patients receiving topiramate monotherapy,  monthly GON blocks were more effective in reducing monthly migraine days than  topiramate, providing evidence for the use of these blocks in patients refractory  to medication treatment.
In chronic migraine patients with medication overuse headache, GON blocks  provided better outcomes compared with standard detoxification regimens which  involve medication withdrawal, and perhaps it could be a more efficient  transitional strategy to help patients withdraw acute medications including  triptans and NSAIDs. A RCT of GON blocks with triamcinolone given to  patients with medication overuse headaches in addition to medication withdrawal  showed that detoxification with GON blocks resulted in better outcomes. In  patients with migraine, either as an acute, transitional, or preventive  treatment, the evidence of adding corticosteroids to the injection preparation to  improve patient’s outcome is scarce. However, considering the  methodological difficulties in RCTs, Dilli et al. showed that both  the active and placebo arm were equally effective and well tolerated. Moreover, a  few open label studies, including our own experience, suggest that adding  corticosteroids is safe, well tolerated, and theoretically could prolong the  anaesthetic effect as seen in other PNB studies.

2.3 PNBs in cluster headache
The use of GON blocks in episodic and chronic cluster headache as a preventive  treatment is well established in headache clinics. More recently, the  2023 European Academy of Neurology Guidelines on the treatment of cluster  headache recommended the use of GON block with the use of steroids in treatment  of cluster headaches. A RCT of episodic cluster headache found that  methylprednisolone and lidocaine GON blocks significantly reduced weekly attack  frequency at four weeks post injection compared with placebo. RCTs of  episodic and chronic cluster headaches have additionally demonstrated that  addition of GON blocks to oral verapamil resulted in a reduction in the number of  daily attacks in the week following the injection and up to four weeks in some  patients.
Observational cohort studies provide evidence that a single GON block can reduce  attack frequency in the week following the injection, which allows GON blocks a  role in the acute treatment of a cluster of attacks in these patients whilst oral  medication is being optimised.

2.4 PNBs in other trigemino autonomic cephalalgias (TACs)
Although the evidence is limited, headache practitioners commonly use GON blocks  with and without the addition of trigeminal nerve blocks (multiple cranial nerve  approach) as a transitional preventive or co-adjuvant treatment of other TACs,  such as hemicrania continua (HC), Paroxysmal hemicrania (PH) and SUNCT-SUNA  (Short-lasting Unilateral Neuralgiform attacks with Conjunctival injection and  Tearing, and Short-lasting Unilateral Neuralgiform attacks with Cranial Autonomic  symptoms). Lambru et al. reported that in his cohort of  78 patients with SUNCT-SUNA, 66 received a unilateral GON blocks, whereas 12  patients received bilateral injections in view of their unilateral  side-alternating attacks. Headache improvement after the injection was reported  by 37% (n = 29/78) of patients lasting for a mean of 38.4 ± 34.7 days.  Some headache practitioners advocate the use of ipsilateral greater and lesser  occipital nerve (LON) blocks as first-line treatment in patients with TACs if  medications are not well tolerated, i.e., lamotrigine in SUNCT-SUNA and  if indomethacin is not tolerated or contraindicated in patients with suspected  Indomethacin responsive headaches—hemicrania continua and paroxysmal hemicrania  .

2.5 PNBs for secondary headache disorders
There is robust evidence to support the use of GON blocks in cervicogenic  headache with and without associated occipital neuralgia. In a RCT of  patients with cervicogenic headaches, occipital nerve blockade significantly  relieved cervicogenic headache and associated symptoms at two weeks following the  injection. Another RCT of patients with occipital neuralgia and cervicogenic  headaches showed significant reduction in headache days and analgesia use when  compared with baseline after receiving ultrasound guided GON blocks at the level  of C2. In a cohort study, GON blocks given via sub compartmental technique  showed longer headache relief, whilst another RCT of patient with cervicogenic  headache showed improvement with both GON and Cervical level 2/3 nerve blocks  . Furthermore, the use of repetitive GON blocks resulted in prolonged  pain relief lasting up to six months in patients with cervicogenic headache.  There is less evidence for PNBs for secondary headaches but it’s use in post  dural puncture headaches has been studied over the last few years. RCTs of post  dural puncture headaches have consistently shown that GON blocks significantly  improve pain scores and at up to 24 hours post block compared with standard  treatment alone.
In patients with post dural puncture headaches following caesarean section under  spinal anaesthesia, a RCT has shown that the use of dexamethasone and lidocaine  delivered to suboccipital muscles significantly improved pain scores at 24 hours  compared with placebo. A further cohort study in patients after spinal  anaesthesia support these findings with improvement in pain scores at 24 hours  after a GON block.
There are also case reports and smaller case series suggesting a role for GON  blocks in the management of other headache disorders, including spontaneous  intracranial hypotension, subarachnoid haemorrhage, and post-traumatic headaches  . However, whilst these studies and reports demonstrate improvement in  pain scores and clinical outcomes in these patients, further studies with more  patients and RCTs are needed for these headache disorders. Unlike migraine and  cluster headache, these secondary headaches disorders are relatively less  prevalent, making it more difficult to study systematically.

2.6 Safety profile of PNBs
PNBs are generally safe and well-tolerated. The most common side effects include  pain at injection site, dizziness, and nausea. A systematic review of GON  blocks found the only irreversible adverse effects to be avascular necrosis of  the hip, although causality in this case was not established, and persistent  alopecia very rarely. Further meta-analysis comparing local anaesthetic only  blocks to placebo found no significant difference in adverse events.
Local anaesthetic myotoxicity and systemic toxicity are rare complications of  the use of local anaesthetics and can be mitigated through the rationing of the  total anaesthetic dose used at a single timepoint and minimising injecting into  local blood vessels. Injector training and anatomical localisation are  important factors in minimising these risks. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity  (LAST) is a very rare but potentially life-threatening complication of local  anesthetic administration, most notably after the use of Bupivacaine compared  with Lidocaine and affecting the central nervous and cardiovascular systems.  Neurological symptoms usually include perioral paresthesias, a metallic taste,  tinnitus, and agitation, followed by seizures, and ultimately neurologic  depression with respiratory arrest and eventually coma if unsupported. The  incidence of LAST is variable and recent reviews of case reports and registries  have estimated its incidence as low as 0.27 per 1000 and as high as 1.8 per 1000  peripheral nerve blocks.
A RCT which compared occipital nerve block to acetaminophen and caffeine for  headache in pregnancy found no difference in birth weight or mode of delivery,  and also found that the nerve block led to a lower pain rating within one hour  . Lidocaine-only nerve blocks are considered safe in pregnancy.
There are minimal absolute contraindications to performing a cranial nerve  block; however they do include allergic reaction to local anaesthetic, and open  skull defect. If there is an anaesthetic allergy then the patient can receive a  corticosteroids-only block, however this would be limited to only GON blocks.  Localised bleeding from the injection site can occur, so care needs to be taken  if patients are on anti-platelet or anti-thrombotic medication, and the local  site should be pressed for a few minutes following injection.
When using a nerve block with steroids, there should also be an awareness of the  steroid side effects. Local effects of corticosteroid injection can include  alopecia, atrophy, and hypopigmentation. The more systemic effects also  need to be considered, and they can include hyperglycemia in patients with  diabetes, candidiasis, and Cushing’s disease. It is possible that  methylprednisolone has an enhanced safety profile over other corticosteroids as  no irreversible adverse effects were reported in its use in a systematic review  .

2.7 Peripheral nerve blocks: technical aspects
Peripheral nerve blocks (PNBs) are increasingly utilized as a therapeutic tool  for various headache disorders, including cluster headache (CH), migraine, and  other primary and secondary headache disorders. Recommendations and  practitioner’s surveys from both the American Headache Society, the Spanish  Headache Study Group, and British Association for the Study of headache (BASH)  have shaped clinical guidelines for the indications, contraindications, and  technical aspects for the administration of PNBs based on an evidence base  approach. The constituents of these blocks are contingent upon factors  such as availability, clinician preference, and institutional protocols. Local  anesthetics (LAs) exert their analgesic effects by inhibiting the conduction of  nociceptive signals through nerve fibres, primarily through the reversible  blockade of sodium channels targeting C- and Aδ fibres, which are  integral to the transmission of pain. While corticosteroids are occasionally  added to LAs in this context, the evidence supporting their efficacy—beyond  their use in cluster headache—remains limited. Interestingly, despite  their widespread use, there is currently no international consensus regarding a  standardized technical approach for the delivery of PNBs for headache disorders  . The nerve block constituents we use in our centre are outlined in Table 1 (Ref.).
Nerve block constituents. Adapted with permission from 
Fernandes et al. Practical Neurology, 2021.
Nerve	Constituents per injection (volume injected, mL)	Constituents (anaesthetic only-volume ratio)	 	Greater Occipital	Methylprednisolone 40 mg/mL* (2 mL)Lidocaine 2%** (1 mL)Bupivacaine 0.5%*** (1 mL)Total injection volume = 4 mL	Methylprednisolone can be omitted and volume made up with lidocaine and/or bupivacaineIf a combination of the both lidocaine and bupivacaine is used, the recommended volume ratio (lidocaine/bupivacaine) is 1:1–1:3	 	Lesser Occipital	Lidocaine 2% (1 mL)Bupivacaine 0.5% (1 mL)Total injection volume = 2 mL	 	Auriculotemporal	 	Supraorbital	Lidocaine 2% (0.5 mL)Bupivacaine 0.5% (0.5 mL)Total injection volume = 1 mL	 	Supratrochlear
*Methylprednisolone acetate maximum dose 160 mg per sitting, **Lidocaine maximum 
dose: 4.5 mg/kg, not to exceed 300 mg per dose (without vasoconstrictor), 
***Bupivacaine maximum dose: 2.5 mg/kg, not to exceed 175 mg per dose (without 
vasoconstrictor).
A comprehensive understanding of the anatomy and reference points of the  occipital and superficial trigeminal nerve branches is key for the effective and  safe performance of PNBs. Knowledge of these anatomical structures is essential  not only for maximizing the therapeutic efficacy, but also for mitigating  potential complications, such as nerve injury, haemorrhage, or inadvertent  arterial injection of the anesthetic agent. Headache patients frequently report  their pain localized to the forehead, retro-orbital region, temples, occipital  area, and upper cervical regions. The forehead and upper periocular areas  are predominantly innervated by peripheral branches of the ophthalmic division  (V1) of the trigeminal nerve, including the supraorbital and supratrochlear  nerves. The auriculotemporal nerve, a branch of the mandibular division (V3),  innervates the temples, while the occipital and upper cervical regions receive  innervation from the C2/C3 posterior cervical branches, including the greater,  lesser, and third occipital nerves.
Once a patient has been deemed suitable for a PNB, it could be beneficial to  provide a graphic representation of the relevant peripheral cranial nerve to be  targeted, thereby facilitating patient understanding. We have previously produced  and published illustrated videos of PNB administration as an aid for healthcare  practitioners. The informed consent process should comprehensively explain  the risks associated with the procedure, including potential complications, such  as infection, bleeding at the injection site, and procedural discomfort. PNBs are  contraindicated at sites with prior surgical interventions, such as previous burr  holes or craniotomy, due to the risk of inadvertent anesthetic infiltration into  the central nervous system. Additionally, blocks should generally be avoided in  patients with implanted devices, such as nerve stimulators or shunts, though in  rare circumstances, they may be considered with appropriate expertise and  informed consent regarding the potential risks.
Following consent, patients should be positioned either supine on an examination  table or seated, depending on the specific nerve to be blocked and patients’  preferences. Pre-procedural recommendations often include ensuring the patient is  adequately hydrated and has eaten to reduce the risk of vasovagal episodes. For  patients with prior presyncope or syncopal episodes during administration of  injectable treatments, we suggest the patient to assume a lateral decubitus  position for GON blocks to avoid sudden drop of blood pressure and dizzy spells.  Clinicians must rigorously confirm patient identity and the targeted injection  site prior to initiating the procedure, ensuring compliance with local safety  protocols.
Patients will typically experience localized numbness in the dermatome of the  injected nerve within minutes of the procedure, which serves as an indicator of  successful nerve infiltration; however there is no correlation between having an  immediate anaesthetic effect and short- or long-term treatment efficacy.
It is important to note that corticosteroids are commonly incorporated into GON  blocks, though some centres may use them for LON blocks as well. However, their  use in trigeminal nerve blocks is generally discouraged due to the risk of  unwanted cosmetic side effects, and lipoatrophy. Additionally, the systemic  effects of corticosteroids, including iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome, have been  documented in both the literature and anecdotal reports.

2.7.1 Greater occipital nerve (GON) blocks
The GON, arising from the medial branch of the dorsal primary ramus of the  second cervical nerve, innervates the posterior scalp extending to the vertex.  Anatomically, it is located approximately one-third of the distance between the  occipital protuberance (inion) and the mastoid process, typically 2 cm lateral  and 1.5–2.0 cm inferior to the inion. Careful attention must be paid to the  occipital artery, which typically runs lateral to the GON. The injection  technique involves positioning the patient with the head slightly flexed, with  the clinician standing behind. A 25-gauge needle is inserted perpendicularly to  the skin until firm resistance is encountered, indicating the needle has reached  the periosteum. Aspiration is performed to rule out arterial injection, followed  by a fan-like distribution of the anesthetic solution.

2.7.2 Lesser occipital nerve (LON) blocks
The LON arises from the ventral rami of the second and third cervical nerves and  innervates the lateral posterior scalp. It is located approximately two-thirds of  the distance between the inion and mastoid process. The injection procedure  mirrors that of the GON, with the patient in a seated position and the clinician  standing behind. After locating the LON, the needle is inserted perpendicularly,  and the anesthetic solution is injected following aspiration to confirm no  arterial flashback.

2.7.3 Supratrochlear and supraorbital nerve blocks
Both the supratrochlear and supraorbital nerves, branches of the ophthalmic  division (V1) of the trigeminal nerve, innervate the forehead and anterior scalp.  These nerves are superficially located near the supraorbital ridge. The  supratrochlear nerve can be blocked by inserting the needle lateral to the  procerus muscle, just above the eyebrow, while the supraorbital nerve is blocked  just above the supraorbital notch. A 30-gauge needle is used for both, with  aspirations to confirm correct needle placement prior to injection.

2.7.4 Auriculotemporal nerve blocks
The auriculotemporal nerve, arising from the mandibular division (V3) of the  trigeminal nerve, innervates the temporal region and the temporomandibular joint.  Its superficial branches are located anterior to the tragus, making this area the  target for injection. The injection technique involves inserting a 30-gauge  needle into the subcutaneous tissue, ensuring proper aspiration before injecting  the anesthetic solution.

2.7.5 Infraorbital nerve blocks
The infraorbital nerve is a terminal branch of the maxillary nerve (V2). It  emerges from the infraorbital foramen and provides sensory innervation to the  skin of the lower eyelid, cheek, wing of the nose, and upper lip. This nerve is  blocked at its exit point from the infraorbital foramen. This foramen may be  identified 6 mm below the infraorbital rim and 25 mm from the midline. With the  patient supine, the doctor remains on the same side as the nerve targeted for the  injection. We recommend using a 2 to 5 mL syringe and a 30-gauge needle. The  needle is angled medially 45 degrees and slightly upward next, 0.5 to 1 mL of  anaesthetic solution is injected. Injecting excessive volumes of solution or  angling the needle too sharply may result in orbital diffusion of the  anaesthetic, a situation best avoided.

3. Limitations
The remit of this review was on the use of GON blocks for headache when  administered using anatomical landmarks. There is evidence base on the use of  ultrasound guidance for the delivery of proximal GON blocks and sub-occipital  nerve blocks for headaches. We did not review the studies investigating GON  blocks administered through ultrasound guidance. Future studies should compare  the use of ultrasound guided proximal GON block delivery with GON blocks  delivered distally on headache outcomes.

4. Conclusions
Peripheral nerve blocks are effective in the acute, transitional, and  preventative management of headache disorders. It is still difficult to identify  those who will respond best, but these procedures allow an interventional  approach for those with troublesome, acute, and refractory primary and secondary  headaches. Neurologists can administer these blocks as a day case procedure, in  clinic or the emergency department, where quick pain relief can provide a  satisfactory outcome and avoid hospital admissions. Despite its widespread use,  an international expert consensus is still lacking and may well guide headache  practitioners in selecting the correct candidate patient, the standardized  interventional technique, the type, dosage, and volume of the pharmacological  agents to be used, defining the optimum intervals for repeat procedures, and to  determine standardized treatment and patient outcomes.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at https://files.jofph.com/ files/article/2010553951928107008/attachment/ Supplementary%20material.docx.

References
Ahmed F. Headache disorders: differentiating and managing the common subtypes. British Journal of Pain. 2012; 6: 124–132.
GBD 2016 Headache Collaborators. Global, regional, and national burden of migraine and tension-type headache, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. The Lancet Neurology. 2018; 17: 954–976.
Fernandes L, Khan N, Dobson J, Randall M, Idrovo L. Multiple cranial nerve blocks as an alternative preventative therapy for chronic migraine. Headache. 2020; 60: 981–987.
Levin M. Nerve blocks in the treatment of headache. Neurotherapeutics. 2010; 7: 197–203.
Blumenfeld A, Ashkenazi A, Napchan U, Bender SD, Klein BC, Berliner R, et al. Expert consensus recommendations for the performance of peripheral nerve blocks for headaches—a narrative review. Headache. 2013; 53: 437–446.
Blumenfeld A, Ashkenazi A, Grosberg B, Napchan U, Narouze S, Nett B, et al. Patterns of use of peripheral nerve blocks and trigger point injections among headache practitioners in the USA: results of the American Headache Society Interventional Procedure Survey (AHS-IPS). Headache. 2010; 50: 937–942.
Santos Lasaosa S, Cuadrado Pérez ML, Guerrero Peral AL, Huerta Villanueva M, Porta-Etessam J, Pozo-Rosich P, et al. Consensus recommendations for anaesthetic peripheral nerve block. Neurología. 2017; 32: 316–330.
Miller S, Lagrata S, Matharu M. Multiple cranial nerve blocks for the transitional treatment of chronic headaches. Cephalalgia. 2019; 39: 1488–1499.
Naja ZM, El-Rajab M, Al-Tannir MA, Ziade FM, Tawfik OM. Repetitive occipital nerve blockade for cervicogenic headache: expanded case report of 47 adults. Pain Practice. 2006; 6: 278–284.
Solomon S. Greater occipital nerve blocks as migraine therapy: a discussion of two recent randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trials. Cephalalgia. 2016; 36: 1094.
Malekian N, Bastani PB, Oveisgharan S, Nabaei G, Abdi S. Preventive effect of greater occipital nerve block on patients with episodic migraine: a randomized double‐blind placebo‐controlled clinical trial. Cephalalgia. 2022; 42: 481–489.
Özer D, Bölük C, Türk Börü Ü, Altun DU, Taşdemir M, Köseoğlu Toksoy C. Greater occipital and supraorbital nerve blockade for the preventive treatment of migraine: a single-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study. Current Medical Research and Opinion. 2019; 35: 909–915.
Friedman BW, Mohamed S, Robbins MS, Irizarry E, Tarsia V, Pearlman S, et al. A randomized, sham-controlled trial of bilateral greater occipital nerve blocks with bupivacaine for acute migraine patients refractory to standard emergency department treatment with metoclopramide. Headache. 2018; 58: 1427–1434.
Korucu O, Dagar S, Çorbacioglu ŞK, Emektar E, Cevik Y. The effectiveness of greater occipital nerve blockade in treating acute migraine-related headaches in emergency departments. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica. 2018; 138: 212–218.
Friedman BW, Irizarry E, Williams A, Solorzano C, Zias E, Robbins MS, et al. A randomized, double-dummy, emergency department-based study of greater occipital nerve block with bupivacaine vs intravenous metoclopramide for treatment of migraine. Headache. 2020; 60: 2380–2388.
Hokenek NM, Ozer D, Yılmaz E, Baskaya N, Hokenek UD, Ak R, et al. Comparison of greater occipital nerve and supra orbital nerve blocks methods in the treatment of acute migraine attack: a randomized double-blind controlled trial. Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery. 2021; 207: 106821.
Cuadrado ML, Aledo-Serrano Á, López-Ruiz P, Gutiérrez-Viedma Á, Fernández C, Orviz A, et al. Greater occipital nerve block for the acute treatment of prolonged or persistent migraine aura. Cephalalgia. 2017; 37: 812–828.
Palamar D, Uluduz D, Saip S, Erden G, Unalan H, Akarirmak U. Ultrasound-guided greater occipital nerve block: an efficient technique in chronic refractory migraine without aura? Pain Physician. 2015; 18: 153–162.
Ashkenazi A, Matro R, Shaw JW, Abbas MA, Silberstein SD. Greater occipital nerve block using local anaesthetics alone or with triamcinolone for transformed migraine: a randomised comparative study. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry. 2008; 79: 415–417.
Cuadrado ML, Aledo-Serrano Á, Navarro P, López-Ruiz P, Fernández-de-las-Peñas C, González-Suárez I, et al. Short-term effects of greater occipital nerve blocks in chronic migraine: a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Cephalalgia. 2017; 37: 864–872.
Dilli E, Halker R, Vargas B, Hentz J, Radam T, Rogers R, et al. Occipital nerve block for the short-term preventive treatment of migraine: a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled study. Cephalalgia. 2015; 35: 959–968.
Gul HL, Ozon AO, Karadas O, Koc G, Inan LE. The efficacy of greater occipital nerve blockade in chronic migraine: a placebo-controlled study. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica. 2017; 136: 138–144.
Kashipazha D, Nakhostin-Mortazavi A, Mohammadianinejad SE, Bahadoram M, Zandifar S, Tarahomi S. Preventive effect of greater occipital nerve block on severity and frequency of migraine headache. Global Journal of Health Sciences. 2014; 6: 209–213.
İnan N, İnan LE, Coşkun Ö, Tunç T, İlhan M. Effectiveness of greater occipital nerve blocks in migraine prophylaxis. Archives of Neuropsychiatry. 2016; 53: 42–45.
Chowdhury D, Mundra A, Datta D, Duggal A, Krishnan A, Koul A. Efficacy and tolerability of combination treatment of topiramate and greater occipital nerve block versus topiramate monotherapy for the preventive treatment of chronic migraine: a randomized controlled trial. Cephalalgia. 2022; 42: 859–871.
Karadaş Ö, Özön AÖ, Özçelik F, Özge A. Greater occipital nerve block in the treatment of triptan-overuse headache: a randomized comparative study. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica. 2017; 135: 426–433.
Tepe N, Tertemiz OF. Comparison of greater occipital nerve and greater occipital nerve + supraorbital nerveblock effect in chronic medication overuse headache. Turkish Journal of Medical Sciences. 2021; 51: 1065–1071.
Arab A, Khoshbin M, Karimi E, Saberian G, Saadatnia M, Khorvash F. Effects of greater occipital nerve block with local anesthetic and triamcinolone for treatment of medication overuse headache: an open-label, parallel, randomized, controlled clinical trial. Neurological Sciences. 2022; 43: 549–557.
Robbins MS. Peripheral nerve blocks, steroid injections and their niche in headache medicine. Cephalalgia. 2015; 35: 850–852.
Robbins MS. Clinic-based procedures for headache. Continuum. 2021; 27: 732–745.
Afridi SK, Shields KG, Bhola R, Goadsby PJ. Greater occipital nerve injection in primary headache syndromes—prolonged effects from a single injection. Pain. 2006; 122: 126–129.
Kirksey MA, Haskins SC, Cheng J, Liu SS. Local anesthetic peripheral nerve block adjuvants for prolongation of analgesia: a systematic qualitative review. PLOS ONE. 2015; 10: e0137312.
Abu Bakar N, Lambru G, Stahlhut L, Shanahan P, Matharu MS. Efficacy and reproducibility of response of greater occipital nerve blocks in chronic cluster headache: a large-sample prospective analysis. The Journal of Headache and Pain. 2013; 14: 44.
Lambru G, Abu Bakar N, Stahlhut L, McCulloch S, Miller S, Shanahan P, et al. Greater occipital nerve blocks in chronic cluster headache: a prospective open-label study. European Journal of Neurology. 2014; 21: 338–343.
Peres MF, Stiles MA, Siow HC, Rozen TD, Young WB, Silberstein SD. Greater occipital nerve blockade for cluster headache. Cephalgia. 2002; 22: 520–522.
Wei DY, Jensen RH. Therapeutic approaches for the management of trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias. Neurotherapeutics. 2018; 15: 346–360.
May A, Evers S, Goadsby PJ, Leone M, Manzoni GC, Pascual J, et al. European Academy of Neurology guidelines on the treatment of cluster headache. European Journal of Neurology. 2023; 30: 2955–2979.
Chowdhury D, Kordcal SR, Nagane R, Duggal A. ANODYNE study: a double-blind randomized trial of greater occipital nerve block of methylprednisolone and lignocaine versus placebo as a transitional preventive treatment for episodic cluster headache. Cephalalgia. 2024; 44: 3331024241291597.
Ambrosini A, Vandenheede M, Rossi P, Aloj F, Sauli E, Pierelli F, et al. Suboccipital injection with a mixture of rapid- and long-acting steroids in cluster headache: a double-blind placebo-controlled study. Pain. 2005; 118: 92–96.
Leroux E, Valade D, Taifas I, Vicaut E, Chagnon M, Roos C, et al. Suboccipital steroid injections for transitional treatment of patients with more than two cluster headache attacks per day: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurology. 2011; 10: 891–897.
Gaul C, Roguski J, Shanib H, Totzeck A, Görlinger K, Diener HC, et al. Efficacy and safety of occipital nerve blocks in cluster headache: a prospective observational study. The Journal of Headache and Pain. 2013; 14: 60.
Fernandes L, Randall M, Idrovo L. Peripheral nerve blocks for headache disorders. Practical Neurology. 2021; 21: 30–35.
Lambru G, Stubberud A, Rantell K, Lagrata S, Tronvik E, Matharu MS. Medical treatment of SUNCT and SUNA: a prospective open-label study including single-arm meta-analysis. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry. 2021; 92: 233–241.
Guerrero ÁL, Herrero-Velázquez S, Peñas ML, Mulero P, Pedraza MI, Cortijo E, et al. Peripheral nerve blocks: a therapeutic alternative for hemicrania continua. Cephalalgia. 2012; 32: 505–508.
Lefel N, van Suijlekom H, Cohen SPC, Kallewaard JW, Van Zundert J. 11. Cervicogenic headache and occipital neuralgia. Pain Practice. 2024; 25: e13405.
Naja ZM, El‐Rajab M, Al‐Tannir MA, Ziade FM, Tawfik OM. Occipital nerve blockade for cervicogenic headache: a double‐blind randomized controlled clinical trial. Pain Practice. 2006; 6: 89–95.
Kissoon NR, O’Brien TG, Bendel MA, Eldrige JS, Hagedorn JM, Mauck WD, et al. Comparative effectiveness of landmark-guided Greater Occipital Nerve (GON) block at the superior nuchal line versus ultrasound-guided GON block at the level of C2: a Randomized Clinical Trial (RCT). The Clinical Journal of Pain. 2022; 38: 271–278.
Inan N, Ceyhan A, Inan L, Kavaklioglu O, Alptekin A, Unal N. C2/C3 nerve blocks and greater occipital nerve block in cervicogenic headache treatment. Functional Neurology. 2001; 16: 239–243.
Lauretti GR, Corrêa SWRO, Mattos AL. Efficacy of the greater occipital nerve block for cervicogenic headache: comparing classical and subcompartmental techniques. Pain Practice. 2015; 15: 654–661.
Elsayed AA, Elsawy TTD, Rahman AEA, Arafa SKH. Bilateral greater occipital nerve block; distal versus proximal approach for postdural puncture headache: a randomized clinical trial. Pain Physician. 2023; 26: 475–483.
Stohy ESMM, El-Sayed MMM, Bastawesy MSM. The effectiveness of bilateral greater occipital nerve block by ultrasound for treatment of post-dural puncture headache in comparison with other conventional treatment. Al-Azhar Medical Journal. 2019; 48: 479–488.
Naja Z, Al‐Tannir M, El‐Rajab M, Ziade F, Baraka A. Nerve stimulator‐guided occipital nerve blockade for postdural puncture headache. Pain Practice. 2009; 9: 51–58.
Abdelraouf M, Salah M, Waheb M, Elshall A. Suboccipital muscles injection for management of post-dural puncture headache after cesarean delivery: a randomized-controlled trial. Open Access Macedonian Journal of Medical Sciences. 2019; 7: 549–552.
Akyol F, Binici O, Kuyrukluyildiz U, Karabakan G. Ultrasound-guided bilateral greater occipital nerve block for the treatment of post-dural puncture headache. Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences. 2015; 31: 111–115.
Hasoon J, Urits I, Berger AA, Viswanath O. Interventional pain management for a patient with chronic post-traumatic headaches after a traumatic brain injury. Anaesthesiology Intensive Therapy. 2021; 53: 279–280.
Niraj G, Critchley P, Kodivalasa M, Dorgham M. Greater occipital nerve treatment in the management of spontaneous intracranial hypotension headache: a case report. Headache. 2017; 57: 952–955.
Rajagopalan S, Siva N, Novak A, Garavaglia J, Jelsema C. Safety and efficacy of peripheral nerve blocks to treat refractory headaches after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage—a pilot observational study. Frontiers in Neurology. 2023; 14: 1122384.
Seeger TA, Orr S, Bodell L, Lockyer L, Rajapakse T, Barlow KM. Occipital nerve blocks for pediatric posttraumatic headache: a case series. Journal of Child Neurology. 2015; 30: 1142–1146.
Gordon A, Roe T, Villar-Martínez MD, Moreno-Ajona D, Goadsby PJ, Hoffmann J. Effectiveness and safety profile of greater occipital nerve blockade in cluster headache: a systematic review. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry. 2024; 95: 73–85.
Mustafa MS, Bin Amin S, Kumar A, Shafique MA, Fatima Zaidi SM, Arsal SA, et al. Assessing the effectiveness of greater occipital nerve block in chronic migraine: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Neurology. 2024; 24: 330.
Macfarlane AJR, Gitman M, Bornstein KJ, El‐Boghdadly K, Weinberg G. Updates in our understanding of local anaesthetic systemic toxicity: a narrative review. Anaesthesia. 2021; 76: 27–39.
Zink W, Graf BM. Local anesthetic myotoxicity. Regional Anesthesia & Pain Medicine. 2004; 29: 333–340.
On’Gele MO, Weintraub S, Qi V, Kim J. Local anesthetics, Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity (LAST), and liposomal bupivacaine. Anesthesiology Clinics. 2024; 42: 303–315.
Neal JM, Neal EJ, Weinberg GL. American society of regional anesthesia and pain medicine local anesthetic systemic toxicity checklist: 2020 version. Regional Anesthesia & Pain Medicine. 2021; 46: 81–82.
Bushman ET, Blanchard CT, Cozzi GD, Davis AM, Harper L, Robbins LS, et al. Occipital nerve block compared with acetaminophen and caffeine for headache treatment in pregnancy: a randomized controlled trial. Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2023; 142: 1179–1188.
Chowdhury D, Datta D, Mundra A. Role of greater occipital nerve block in headache disorders: a narrative review. Neurology India. 2021; 69: S228–S256.
Stern JI, Chiang CC, Kissoon NR, Robertson CE. Narrative review of peripheral nerve blocks for the management of headache. Headache. 2022; 62: 1077–1092.
Lambru G, Lagrata S, Matharu MS. Cutaneous atrophy and alopecia after greater occipital nerve injection using triamcinolone. Headache. 2012; 52: 1596–1599.
Shields KG, Levy MJ, Goadsby PJ. Alopecia and cutaneous atrophy after greater occipital nerve infiltration with corticosteroid. Neurology. 2004; 63: 2193–2194.
Idrovo L, Wetherby S, Goadsby PJ. Peripheral nerve blocks for the treatment of headache disorders in the UK: an audit of BASH members’ practice. Cephalalgia. 2019; 39: 358–427.
Ashkenazi A, Blumenfeld A, Napchan U, Narouze S, Grosberg B, Nett R, et al. Peripheral nerve blocks and trigger point injections in headache management—a systematic review and suggestions for future research. Headache. 2010; 50: 943–952.
Unal-Cevik I, Uluduz D, Ozge A. A need for an expert consensus guideline on performing peripheral nerve blocks in headache patients. Cephalalgia. 2022; 42: 1091–1092.
Chowdhury D, Tomar A, Deorari V, Duggal A, Krishnan A, Koul A. Greater occipital nerve blockade for the preventive treatment of chronic migraine: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study. Cephalalgia. 2023; 43: 3331024221143541.
Gürsoy G, Tuna HA. Comparison of two methods of greater occipital nerve block in patients with chronic migraine: ultrasound-guided and landmark-based techniques. BMC Neurology. 2024; 24: 311.
Vanderpol J, Kennedy G, Ahmed F, Jonker L. Efficacy of greater occipital nerve block treatment for migraine and potential impact of patient positioning during procedure: results of randomised controlled trial. Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery. 2024; 239: 108210.
Juškys R, Šustickas G. Effectiveness of treatment of occipital neuralgia using the nerve block technique: a prospective analysis of 44 patients. Acta medica Lituanica. 2018; 25: 53–60.