From Prospective Evaluation to Practice: Model-Informed Dose Optimization in Oncology
One dose does not fit all, especially in oncolytic drugs, where side effects and therapy failures highlight the need for personalized dosing approaches. In recent years, the quest to apply model-informed precision dosing to oncology drugs has gained significant momentum, reflecting its potential to revolutionize patient care by tailoring treatments to individual pharmacokinetic profiles. Despite this progress, model-informed precision dosing has not (yet) become widely integrated into routine clinical care. We aimed to explain model-informed precision dosing from a clinical viewpoint while addressing all prospective model-informed precision dosing implementation and validation studies in the field of oncology. We identified 16 different drugs for which prospective model-informed precision dosing validation/implementation has been performed. Although these studies are mostly focused on attaining adequate drug exposures and reducing inter-individual variability, improved clinical outcomes after performing model-informed precision dosing were shown for busulfan, and high-dose methotrexate. Toxicities were significantly reduced for busulfan and cyclophosphamide treatment. In contrast, for carboplatin, for which model-informed precision dosing has been used in the Calvert formula, no prospective validation on outcomes was deemed necessary as the therapeutic window had been extensively validated. Model-informed precision dosing has shown to be of added value in oncology and is expected to significantly change dosing regimens in the future.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s40265-025-02152-6.

Key Points
In oncology, the integration of model-informed precision dosing into clinical practice remains limited.	 	Recent prospective research in the field demonstrates that, in certain cases, the application of model-informed precision dosing can enhance patient outcomes and reduce toxicity.

Introduction
Providing the optimal dose for antineoplastic therapies is crucial for effective treatment. These therapies often result in life-threatening toxicities, while a loss of efficacy can significantly shorten the expected lifespan of patients. For some treatments, a well-established relationship between pharmacokinetics—the exposure to a drug—and pharmacodynamics—the (anti-tumor) effects of a drug or toxicity—has been demonstrated. In these cases, achieving and maintaining plasma concentrations within the defined therapeutic window, i.e., target exposure, improves efficacy while reducing toxicity.
Typical Emax relationships between drug exposure and the likelihood of a tumor response and dose-limiting toxicity. Whereas the maximum tolerated dose lies at the 33% incidence of dose-limiting toxicities, the optimal exposure typically is lower, resulting in near-maximum efficacy while benefitting from a significant decrease in dose-limiting toxicities. MTD maximum tolerated dose
The administered dose is key in reaching adequate plasma concentrations, a surrogate for target-site concentrations. Standard doses for antineoplastic therapies are determined in phase I trials. As the effect on tumor growth cannot be assessed within a few days, traditionally, the maximum tolerated dose was selected for further study. Assuming a positive exposure–response relationship, this should maximize the therapeutic potential of a drug (Fig. 1). Nonetheless, it also resulted in a high incidence of severe adverse events, in drugs with a small therapeutic interval. In oncology, severe toxicities are often tolerated if the treatment effectively targets the tumor. However, the occurrence of dose-limiting toxicities necessitates treatment cessation or dose reductions, which can cause treatment failure. Treatment failure has severe implications, as the number of treatment options may be limited.
Therefore, a “one-dose-fits-all” approach using the maximum tolerated dose is inherently suboptimal, particularly when significant inter-individual variability in drug exposure and well-established exposure–outcome relationships are combined. Implementing a more sensitive method of individualized dosing can reduce toxicities, improve quality of life, and, in some cases, enhance overall survival (OS).
Model-informed precision dosing (MIPD) is such a method. This review aims to discuss the potential value by describing MIPD and providing an overview of all prospective studies evaluating the use of MIPD in oncology.

Model-Informed Precision Dosing
Depiction of steps to perform when implementing model-informed precision dosing. PD pharmacodynamic, PK pharmacokinetic
Impact of performing model-informed precision dosing (MIPD) when performed prior to treatment to inform a loading dose and subsequent steady-state dosing. The green area represents the therapeutic window. The labels illustrate the steps taken for each dosing approach with colors corresponding to the dosing approach. PK pharmacokinetic, TDM therapeutic drug monitoring
Model-informed precision dosing aims to provide the optimal dose for each individual patient by leveraging prior knowledge embedded in mathematical population pharmacokinetic (popPK) models to inform dosing decisions (Figs. 2 and 3). A popPK model is developed using pharmacokinetic (PK) data, capturing drug-specific estimates, such as clearance and distribution volume. It also quantifies the degree of variability among patients by capturing individual PK parameters. This variability between patients can thereafter (partly) be explained by incorporating patient characteristics as covariates in the model. For example, body weight may affect the volume of distribution or renal function may affect clearance of a renally excreted drug. After model validation, preferably in a different patient cohort (external validation), the model can be used for MIPD in the clinic.
Model-informed precision dosing can provide individualized dose recommendations in various ways both before and during treatment. Dose recommendations prior to treatment initiation (a priori MIPD) are informed by patient characteristics, i.e., covariates, known to affect PK parameters (Fig. 3). The recommended dose is based on population-based estimations for PK parameters. Dose recommendations during treatment (a posteriori MIPD) are usually based on a PK sample. This sample informs the model about individual PK parameters such as clearance, for which otherwise, the population value was used. This results in more precise dose recommendations. Individualized dose recommendations lead to fast attainment of adequate exposure. Second, if patient characteristics that have been shown to affect drug exposure in the popPK model change, such as the onset of an infection, alterations in renal function, or coadministration of an interacting drug, MIPD can predict the magnitude of these changes on drug exposure. This supports (temporary) dose adjustments to maintain therapeutic concentrations.
However, MIPD is only applicable in case of a well-established (narrow) therapeutic window predictive of efficacy and/or effectivity and significant inter-individual variability in drug exposure with limited intra-individual variability in drug exposure. Additionally, performing MIPD requires an externally validated popPK model that accurately describes the pharmacokinetics in a population and treatment setting. Additionally, education of prescribers on how and when to use MIPD is also required. This limitation should be tackled by easy-access, user-friendly intuitive MIPD software, preferably integrated in the electronic medical record software.
Nonetheless, when applying a broad definition, MIPD has been a part of clinical practice in oncology for decades, as dosing based on patient characteristics, i.e., covariates, influencing drug exposure or effect has been used extensively. For instance, dosing based on body surface area (BSA) was introduced under the assumption that BSA correlates positively with drug clearance. However, this assumption has been proven inaccurate for a wide variety of drugs. Other examples of covariate-based dosing include DPYD genotype-based dosing to prevent fluoropyrimidine toxicity and bodyweight-based dosing of monoclonal therapeutic antibodies where the clearance rate is associated with body weight.

Search Strategy
Overview of prospective studies performing prospective MIPD in oncology
Drug	Reference	Population	Study design	Patients (MIPD arm)	Primary endpoint	Outcomes	MIPD strategy	Therapeutic target	MIPD status	 	Carboplatin	Calvert et al. 	Various, mostly ovarian tumors	Prospective single-arm validation study	31 (31)	PK-predictive performance of the Calvert formula	Significant correlation between predicted and observed AUC	A priori MIPD based on GFR	5–7 mg/mL·min (AUC)	Implemented into dosing protocol	 	Cisplatin	Salas et al. 	Patients with testicular cancer	Prospective single-arm trial with conventional dosing extrapolations as control	19 (19)	Similarity between target and achieved Cmax	No significant difference between target and observed Cmax	Bayesian adaptation during treatment	A target Cmax of 1.95 mg/L	Validation of a therapeutic window needed	 	Busulfan	Bleyzac et al. 	Pediatric patients who underwent HSCT (both oncologic and non-oncologic indications)	Prospective MIPD study with a matched historical cohort	58 (29)	PK-predictive performance, occurrence of VOD + the proportion of full engraftment after 90 days, OS	Significant correlation between predicted and observed AUC, decreased rate of VOD (24.1% vs 3.4%) and increased rate of engraftment after 90 days (64.0% vs 92.9%)	Administer a lower test dose to individualize the first dose of therapy	853–1462 μM·min per dosing cycle (6 hours) [AUC]	Ready for implementation	 	Long-Boyle et al. 	Pediatric patients who underwent HSCT (both oncologic and non-oncologic indications)	Prospective MIPD study with a historical cohort	100 (21)	Percentage of individuals achieving a therapeutic concentration at steady state	Increased target attainment (52% vs 81%)	A priori MIPD based on body weight and age	900–1350 μM·min per dosing cycle (6 hours) [AUC]	 	Cyclophosphamide	McCune et al. 	Patients with hematologic malignancy	Prospective single-arm MIPD study with a historical cohort	150 (50)	Occurrence of toxicity and survival	Lower postconditioning peak total serum bilirubin (22.23 vs 29.07 µmol/L); a 38% reduction in the hazard of acute kidney injury, similar OS and PFS	Lower initial dose (45 vs 60 mg/m2) with concurrent Bayesian dose adaptation	325 ± 25 µmol/L·h (AUC)	Limited added value for traditional indications in combination with logistical constraints	 	Cyclophosphamide, thiotepa, and carboplatin	De Jonge et al. 	Patients with breast cancer	Prospective single-arm trial with a BSA-based initial dose	46 (46)	MIPD PK-predictive performance, feasibility, occurrence of toxicity	Less variability in drug exposure for all three drugs (not statistically tested)	Bayesian adaptation during treatment	Carboplatin: 3.5–5 mg/mL·min 4-hydroxy-cyclophosphamide, (active metabolite cyclophosphamide): 105–140 µmol/L·h thiotepa + tepa (metabolite) 276–374 µmol/L·h (AUC)	 	Docetaxel	Yamamoto et al. 	Advanced non-small-cell lung cancer	Prospective randomized trial	59 (29)	Decrease variability in drug exposure	SD in exposure from 0.40 mg/L·h to 0.22 mg/L·h	A priori MIPD based on measured cortisol clearance after administering exogenous cortisol, α-1-GP, AST, and age	2.66 mg/L·h	Validation with an updated therapeutic window needed	 	Engels et al. 	Various, mostly breast tumors	Prospective randomized trial with a BSA-based initial dose	30 (15)	Evaluate inter-individual variability and feasibility	Decrease in variability in both AUC (non-significant) and a decrease in variability in neutropenia	Bayesian adaptation during the first cycle	4.90 mg/L h	 	Paclitaxel	De Jonge et al. 	Patients with non-small cell lung cancer	Prospective single-arm trial with a BSA-based initial dose	25 (25)	Evaluate the feasibility of Bayesian dose individualization to attain paclitaxel plasma concentrations	Pharmacokinetically guided dosing strategy for paclitaxel is safe and technically feasible	Bayesian adaptation during treatment	0.1 μmol/L > 15 hours after dose	A priori MIPD regimen needed to improve adequate exposure	 	High-dose methotrexate, teniposide, and cytarabine	Evans et al. 	Children with newly diagnosed acute lymphoblastic leukemia	Prospective randomized trial	182 (91)	Proportion of CCR stratified on B- and T-lineage leukemia	B-lineage leukemia: CCR: 66% vs 76%. T-lineage leukemia: CCR: 46% vs 64% (non-significant) More therapeutic target attainment for each medication	Bayesian adaptation during the first cycle	MTX: 580–950 μM·h, teniposide: 360–525 μM·h, cytarabine: 22.5–60 μM·h (AUC)	Ready for implementation	 	High-dose methotrexate	Wall et al. 	Pediatric patients with relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia	Prospective single-arm trial with conventional dosing extrapolations as the control	24 (24)	Percentage of individuals achieving a steady-state concentration < 90 μM	Steady-state concentration < 90 μM 62% vs 100% (MIPD), lower steady-state concentration at 23 hours of 68.0 vs 87.4 μM, CV% 18% vs 41%	Bayesian adaptation during treatment	Steady-state concentration of 65 μM	 	Topotecan	Park et al. 	Patients with neuroblastoma	Prospective study incorporating MIPD in a new dose-intensive induction regimen	31 (31)	Tolerability (phase I trial)	MIPD led to adequate topotecan systemic exposure achievement in 84% of patients	Bayesian adaptation during treatment	50–70 ng/mL/h (AUC)	Need for improved popPK models	 	Etoposide	Ciccolini et al. 	Not specified	Prospective single-arm MIPD study with a historical cohort	39 (25)	Attainment of target exposure	No significant differences in a paired t-test comparing observed and target concentrations. Standard dose: 36% on target, MIPD: 77% on target	Bayesian adaptation during treatment	4–10 μmol/L at the end of the infusion	Need for improved popPK models	 	Imatinib	Gotta et al. 	Adult patients in the chronic or accelerated phase of chronic myeloid leukemia	Prospective randomized trial comparing “routine” and “rescue” TDM in which concentrations were extrapolated using a popPK model	55 (55)	Failure of therapy and toxicity-free survival while continuing imatinib treatment after 1-year follow-up	No statistical difference between “routine” and “Rescue” TDM	Concentration extrapolation towards true trough concentrations	750–1500 ng/mL	Not enough evidence that MIPD improves outcomes	 	Erlotinib, imatinib, lapatinib, and sorafenib	Escudero et al. 	Various, depending on the drug	Prospective interventional study with a conventional initial dose	58 (58)	Variability in exposure between patients in the first and last sample	Descriptive analysis	Concentration extrapolation towards true trough concentrations	Not specified	Not enough evidence that MIPD improves outcomes
α-1-GP alpha-1-glycoprotein, AST aspartate aminotransferase, AUC area under the curve, BSA body surface area, CCR continuous complete remission, Cmax maximum concentration, CV% coefficient of variation, GFR glomerular filtration rate, HSCT hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, MIPD model-informed precision dosing, OS overall survival, PFS progression-free survival, PK pharmacokinetic, popPK population pharmacokinetic, SD standard deviation, TDM therapeutic drug monitoring, VOD veno-occlusive disease
We aimed to include all prospective MIPD implementation/validation research in this article. As no clear consensus has been reached to what MIPD entails, we adopted a broad definition. This includes research that obtains individual PK parameters using popPK models—whether by using PK samples or covariates known to affect exposure; 1) to prospectively assess the therapeutic exposure, 2) the effect of deviating from a one-dose-fits-all approach by changing the dose prior to treatment based on clearance obtained using patient characteristics shown to affect the pharmacokinetics in a popPK model (a priori MIPD); or 3) changing the dose during treatment using target-based dose calculations using PK samples are included in the scope of this review. In all these approaches, the popPK model, and therefore prior knowledge on the pharmacokinetics, affects the outcome, i.e., dose recommendation. For example, in using popPK models to quantify exposure, errors introduced in PK samples, such as those arising from the quantification method or inaccuracies in documenting sampling times, can be accounted for when deviations from the expected drug concentration profile occur. In contrast, when using methods such as the trapezoidal approach or extrapolating using population values for a half-life, the sample is often treated as completely accurate, which is almost never true. After performing our search strategy (see Appendix in the Electronic Supplementary Material), we identified 563 articles potentially containing prospective MIPD research. After selection and using snowballing, 15 prospective studies describing 16 compounds were identified for which prospective MIPD implementation/validation studies have been performed (Table 1). Studies were excluded if they utilized popPK models solely to quantify exposure and based dosing recommendations on this metric.

Results

Platinum-Based Antineoplastics
One of the earliest applications of MIPD in oncology, dating back to 1989, is the use of the Calvert formula for dosing carboplatin, used to treat various forms of cancer. Increasing carboplatin exposure, quantified as the area under the curve (AUC), has been shown to result in an increasing occurrence of grade 3 or higher thrombocytopenia (AUC 4–5 mg/mL·min: 4%, AUC 6–7 mg/mL·min: 20%, AUC 8–9 mg/mL·min: 48%). Carboplatin also showed exposure–response relationships, resulting in a typical therapeutic interval of 4–6 mg/mL· min, depending on the indication.
Initially, the registered carboplatin dose was dependent on BSA. However, as carboplatin is primarily excreted renally, the glomerular filtration rate was shown to be a more sensitive predictor of carboplatin. As clearance along with dose is one of the determinants of total exposure (Eq. 1), this equation was rewritten to obtain a dosing algorithm based on the measured glomerular filtration rate, as the principal determinant of carboplatin clearance, and the target exposure as AUC (Eq. 2).
The Calvert formula adequately predicted carboplatin exposure, and for feasibility purposes, additional research validated the use of the estimated glomerular filtration rate in the Calvert formula. As the relationship between exposure and both myelotoxicity and response has been extensively reported, a prospective validation of performing MIPD on pharmacodynamic endpoints was deemed unnecessary before implementation into clinical practice.
Cisplatin also shows both exposure–response and exposure–toxicity relationships. Model-informed precision dosing results in adequate attainment of target cisplatin exposure, mostly by decreasing subsequent doses as cisplatin clearance decreased over time, most probably because of renal toxicity. The authors conclude that performing MIPD, by estimating clearance and adjusting dosing, for cisplatin is feasible and should lead to improved outcomes. The authors showed that the cycle count was a more influential covariate compared with BSA. To date, cisplatin MIPD has not been implemented into routine clinical care, most probably as no powered study on outcomes has been performed.

Busulfan
Busulfan, an alkylating agent, is used in combination with various agents such as cyclophosphamide and fludarabine, as part of the conditioning regimen before hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. It suppresses the immune system while also exerting a myeloablative effect. Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of busulfan, in which PK samples are directly used to adjust dosing, is standard clinical care owing to the large inter-individual variability in busulfan exposure and strong associations between exposure and both engraftment and toxicity, targeting a cumulative AUC of 78–101 mg·h/L.
In a prospective MIPD implementation study, in which individual PK parameters were obtained using a Bayesian approach, 29 pediatric patients who were to be treated with both busulfan and cyclophosphamide received a test dose of busulfan (0.5 mg/kg, normal dose range 0.8–1.2 mg/kg, as a 2-h long infusion every 6 h during 4 days after which the transplantation is performed) after which three plasma samples were obtained. These were used as an input into a popPK model to determine individual busulfan clearance, which was used to determine the most optimal starting dose that aimed to achieve a cumulative busulfan exposure of 56–86 mg·h/L. During regular treatment, the AUC was determined at each of the 4 treatment days, allowing for dose adjustments as needed. Implementation of MIPD resulted in busulfan dose decreases for 69% of patients (median reduction: −12.7%). When matched with a historical cohort of patients treated with standard dosing, the rate of full engraftment 90 days after a transplant significantly increased in the MIPD group (92.9% vs 64.0%). Long-term survival rates were not significantly different between the groups (82.8% survival after a median follow-up of 1.6 years in the MIPD group vs 65.5% survival after 2.0 years in the control group). Additionally, the incidence of busulfan-induced veno-occlusive disease, which may result in the need for a liver transplant, was significantly lower in the MIPD group (3.4%), versus the control group (24.1%). The test-dose approach was further prospectively validated in a study in which PK-guided busulfan was combined with conventionally dosed fludarabine. Because of differences in the distribution of characteristics affecting patient outcomes in the conventional dosing arm compared with the MIPD arm, the direct comparison was unreliable (which showed a significant improvement for PK-guided dosing in both OS and progression-free survival). A subgroup analysis showed that the probability of a beneficial effect was 92.2%, which the authors classified as moderately significant. Model-informed precision dosing was beneficial for patients with clinical remission prior to the start of the conditioning regimen. Interestingly, the researchers showed similarity in outcomes when patients within the two treatment groups were matched for busulfan exposure, leading to the conclusion that MIPD was in fact the major cause of improved outcomes.
However, ideally, the first dose can be based on patient characteristics, avoiding the need for a test dose and accompanying PK analysis. Long-Boyle et al. developed a popPK model for pediatric and adolescent patients and prospectively studied the attainment rate of a cumulative busulfan AUC of 56–86 mg·h/L in 21 patients treated with busulfan and cyclophosphamide when administering an initial dose using a priori MIPD based on age and patient weight, which were correlated with busulfan clearance (reduction in unexplained inter-individual variability was not provided). Out of the model-development cohort, 79 patients receiving conventional weight-based dosing were used as the control cohort. In the control group, 52% of patients attained adequate exposure after three doses, with 42% underexposed and 6% overexposed. When prospectively applying MIPD, 81% of patients achieved adequate exposure at the time of the first PK sample collection (first or third dose out of 16 doses), with equal shares of patients being overdosed and underdosed (9.5%). No variability parameters were provided in the article.
As demonstrated, implementation of MIPD for busulfan leads to improved clinical outcomes. A limitation for the interpretation and implementation of these results is that the combination between busulfan and cyclophosphamide is not currently used regularly in clinical practice because of excessive toxicity, which could be, at least partially, avoided by individualization of busulfan doses. By using a priori MIPD, involving patient age and weight, clinicians can determine an optimal dose without the need for PK quantifications based on a test dose. This approach can be easily integrated into routine clinical practice.

Cyclophosphamide
Cyclophosphamide, an alkylating agent, is part of multiple hematopoietic stem cell transplantation conditioning regimens. It is for example intensively used in a pre-conditioning regimen with concomitant fludarabine for CAR-T cell therapy. Its metabolite, carboxyethylphosphoramide mustard, exhibits significant inter-individual variability, and a reduced incidence of severe liver injury has been linked to exposure levels below 325 µmol/L·h.
In a prospective phase II MIPD study involving 50 patients, personalized cyclophosphamide dosing was implemented alongside total body irradiation. Typically, cyclophosphamide is administered as a daily bolus of 60 mg/kg for 2 consecutive days. However, in the MIPD group, the initial dose was adjusted to 45 mg/kg. Blood samples were collected at 2, 4, 8, and 16 h post-administration, and the data were used to obtain individual PK parameters. These parameters guided the dosing of the second and final cyclophosphamide dose on the following day, aiming for a target carboxyethylphosphoramide mustard AUC of 325 ± 25 µmol/L·h.
The MIPD approach resulted in a wide range of administered dosages (total dose: 45–145 mg/kg), showing the large inter-individual variability in exposure. When compared to a historical control cohort that received standard dosing, the MIPD group exhibited comparable non-relapse rates and OS, despite receiving lower average total doses. As no PK samples were obtained in the control group, the proportion of target attainment could not be compared between the groups. Furthermore, the MIPD group demonstrated a lower risk of acute kidney injury (hazard ratio: 0.62) and reduced serum bilirubin levels (22.23 vs 29.07 µmol/L) within the first 20 days post-hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. These findings show that model-informed individualized dosing maintains efficacy while reducing cyclophosphamide-associated toxicity.
In a similar single-arm study with a historical cohort involving 46 patients with breast cancer, MIPD guided cyclophosphamide, thiotepa, and carboplatin dosages, a dosing combination no longer used in clinical practice. After a conventional first dose, PK samples were used to obtain individual PK parameters, which were used to adjust dosing. In addition to a higher proportion of target attainment (>85% vs 60%) after dose adjustments, the occurrence of veno-occlusive disease was lower in the MIPD group compared with a reference cohort (not statistically tested).
Model-informed precision dosing for cyclophosphamide has, to date, not been implemented because of limited efficacy benefits for traditional indications, and the resource-intensive nature of the process, which demands rapid processing of PK samples in the laboratory. However, with cyclophosphamide expected to play a much larger role in the future owing to its inclusion in CAR-T-cell therapy, optimizing its use in conjunction with CAR-T-cell treatment could open new opportunities for enhancing cyclophosphamide therapy through MIPD.

Taxanes
Taxanes inhibit depolymerization of microtubules resulting in cell death. Taxanes are used to treat various types of tumors, such as non-small cell lung cancer and prostate cancer. Taxanes are usually dosed based on BSA. However, this results in significant inter-individual variability in, for example, docetaxel pharmacokinetics. As studies had shown that docetaxel exposure during the first cycle is correlated with both progression-free survival and the incidence of febrile neutropenia, the need for more precise dosing strategies became evident.
Building on these insights, Yamamoto et al. showed that exogenous cortisol clearance was closely associated with docetaxel clearance. In a prospective randomized trial involving 59 patients, patients in the a priori MIPD arm (n = 29) were administered exogenous cortisol whereafter the amount of 6-beta-hydroxycortisol in 24-h urine was quantified. This concentration, in combination with plasma α-1-glycoprotein levels, plasma aspartate aminotransferase, and patient age, was used to predict docetaxel clearance and to provide an a priori MIPD recommendation to achieve a median docetaxel exposure similar to the median exposure following a 60-mg/m2 dose. Implementing an a priori dosing recommendation significantly decreased variability between patients in terms of docetaxel exposure (standard deviation of AUC: 0.40 mg/L·h toward 0.22 mg/L·h). No differences in response rates or intensity of neutropenia were seen between the MIPD dosing and standard BSA-based dosing arm. Notably, the relative decrease in the absolute neutrophil count showed less variability between patients as well. Similar findings were seen in a prospective study using Bayesian dose adaptation following a BSA-based initial dose. A (non-significant) decrease in both variability in docetaxel exposure (35% less in the standard deviation of natural log-transformed [ln] AUC) and a decreased standard deviation in decreases in both neutrophil (52%) and white blood cell counts (57%).
Although both studies did not show the superiority of MIPD in clinical endpoints, recent prospective research showed that attaining a therapeutic interval of 2.5–3.7 mg/L·h, using TDM, resulted in reduced docetaxel‐related neutropenia severity and a neuropathy hazard. Consequently, MIPD for docetaxel might still be of added value when dosing on this target interval.
The relationships between paclitaxel exposure and both toxicity and OS have been demonstrated. In a study involving 25 patients, an initial BSA-based dose was compared to subsequent dose changes using popPK models to quantify exposure. The target exposure was achieving paclitaxel concentrations > 0.01 µmol/L for more than 15 h. During the first administration using conventional dosing, in which PK samples were obtained, 64% of patients achieved adequate exposure. After predicting individualized doses, 77% of patients attained adequate exposure. After continuous target evaluation during subsequent treatment cycles, 89% of all patients received an adequate exposure after five cycles. Nonetheless, to implement MIPD for paclitaxel, target exposure should be attained more quickly. Identifying covariates affecting clearance with which an a priori MIPD regimen can be developed may render paclitaxel ready for further exploration of the added value of MIPD. A prospective trial using an a priori MIPD arm focused on outcomes may be needed before implementation.

High-Dose Methotrexate
High-dose methotrexate (HD-MTX), dosed at > 1000 mg/m2, is used in the treatment of certain types of cancer, including lymphomas, leukemia, breast cancer and osteosarcoma. High-dose methotrexate was shown to be more effective compared with normal dose MTX. To avoid toxicity, a leucovorin rescue is administered directly after a 24-h HD-MTX infusion. High-dose methotrexate pharmacokinetics show high inter-individual variability, particularly in clearance, which can be delayed, i.e., temporarily reduced, resulting in elevated plasma MTX concentrations for as long as 2–3 weeks. Delayed MTX clearance can cause renal toxicity, creating a vicious cycle as MTX is excreted renally. Higher exposure to MTX (>1100 μmol*L−1 h) has also been associated with both an increased event-free survival and OS (hazard ratio event-free survival: 0.51, hazard ratio OS: 0.50). As approximately 75% of patients do not achieve this exposure, HD-MTX is a suitable candidate for applying MIPD.
In a study by Evans et al., 182 pediatric patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia receiving HD-MTX, teniposide, and cytarabine were assigned to either standard BSA-based dosing group or MIPD-based dosing. In the MIPD group, the individual clearance was estimated by a popPK model using PK samples obtained in the first treatment cycle. Then, doses were adjusted to achieve 580–950 μM·h for methotrexate, 360–525 μM·h for teniposide, and 22.5–60 μM·h for cytarabine. Model-informed precision dosing resulted in significantly more patients within the therapeutic range for all three medications. In patients with B-lineage leukemia, implementing MIPD resulted in significantly improved outcomes with a continuous complete remission rate of 76% after 5 years, compared with 66% in the BSA-dosing group. In contrast, among the patients with T-lineage leukemia, no significant difference in outcome was found (64% vs 46%), although the researchers note that the study had limited power in this subgroup. The exposure–outcome analyses showed a significant MTX exposure–outcome relationship, while it was non-significant for teniposide or cytarabine, suggesting that adequate HD-MTX exposure is most critical to achieve. No significant changes in MTX-related toxicity were observed between the groups. In a single-arm, cross-over, model-assisted TDM study performed by Wall et al., targeting a steady-state concentration of 65 μM, the coefficient of variation in steady-state MTX concentrations was significantly decreased after applying MIPD (41% toward 18%), while the median MTX concentration decreased from 87.4 μM toward 68.0 μM, which was significantly closer to the target. As TDM is already used for HD-MTX, studies focusing on a priori MIPD or showing the added value of MIPD to conventional TDM, which logically should be present, will help implement MIPD and therefore improve patient outcomes.
Additionally, research has explored whether the dose of leucovorin, the rescue medication, can be adjusted using MIPD, and if a model could inform a physician whether glucarpidase should be administered to avoid severe toxicities. However, these have, until now, not been shown to improve clinical outcomes.

Topoisomerase Inhibitors
In an effort to optimize efficacy, dose-intensive topotecan and cyclophosphamide were added to induction therapy for newly diagnosed high-risk neuroblastoma. In previous research, a PK/PD relationship was observed for the efficacy of topotecan, proposing a window of 50–70 ng/mL/h. In 31 patients, the achievement of target AUC was increased from 45.2% toward 83.9% after performing MIPD. When administering the same model-informed dose in the second cycle, 21 days later, 38.7% of patients attained adequate exposure, underlining the need for continuing PK analyses throughout treatment. Therefore, the authors conclude that the intra-individual variability renders performing MIPD resource intensive and not feasible in most medical centers.
Etoposide, a DNA topoisomerase II inhibitor, shows exposure–response relationships, with significant toxicity, and significant inter-individual variability in exposure. To counter this, Ciccolini et al. performed a two-stage study in which in the first setting data obtained from 14 patients were used to develop a popPK model. Subsequently, a MIPD strategy derived from this popPK model was applied prospectively to dosing regimens of 25 patients. Performing MIPD resulted in 77% of patients within the therapeutic interval compared with 36% in the control group. To date, no models explaining the inter-individual variability in exposure, a complex interplay between various drug transporters and enzymes likely to be explained by pharmacogenetics, have been developed, hampering the development of an a priori MIPD strategy. Additionally, although shown in small trials, no large trials have validated the therapeutic interval of etoposide. Implementation of MIPD is likely to benefit patients; however, both popPK models and PK/PD research need to be improved before implementing them for etoposide.

Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors
For several tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), TDM strategies have been proposed, with imatinib being the most widely implemented. The relationship between trough concentrations and both molecular and cytogenetic responses has been described and validated, resulting in an efficacy threshold of 1000 ng/mL for patients affected by chronic myeloid leukemia. In both studies utilizing MIPD, popPK models were employed to estimate individual clearances, which were then used to extrapolate true trough concentrations. Given that most PK/PD relationships have been established using trough concentrations, these have become the standard for dosage adjustments. The study by Gotta et al. prospectively compared routinely performed model-assisted TDM, in which models were used to quantify exposure, to applying model-assisted TDM when problems arose. However, no significant changes in event-free survival were seen. Notably, in the routine MIPD group, doctor adherence to dosage recommendations was low (52%), whereas the group in which doses were correctly adjusted showed less unfavorable events (28% vs 77% of patients, p = 0.03). The second study focusing on performing MIPD for TKIs did not perform a sample size calculation and relied solely on descriptive analyses of achieving adequate pharmacokinetics without a comparator group, limiting the ability to detect a benefit of MIPD.
Consequently, there is currently not enough evidence that MIPD improves outcomes for patients treated with TKIs. However, several studies are being performed that aim to define a therapeutic window for several TKIs in real-world patient cohorts while also searching for influential covariates that could assist in administering an individualized dose. Nonetheless, until this moment, the added value of MIPD for treatment with TKIs other than imatinib has not yet been prospectively evaluated, and further studies are needed.

Opportunities and Pitfalls
To date, MIPD has not been widely adopted in the field of oncology. Efforts are ongoing aimed at optimizing outcomes for other medications by means of MIPD, including tamoxifen (EudraCT: 2022-002426-28,), 5-FU (EUCT: 2024-510576-21-00), and most probably others. In this review, we show that MIPD can be easily implemented into clinical practice and incorporated into dosing protocols in case a clear therapeutic window is present and that MIPD results in less variability in the pharmacokinetics, which has been done for carboplatin. Additionally, MIPD changed the dosing protocol for pediatric use of busulfan to be more precisely tailored to body weight. Although a priori MIPD research showed that age is also an influencing factor affecting the pharmacokinetics and therefore outcomes, this new dosing regimen should lead to increased target attainment. The potential of MIPD to optimize outcomes is in other cases hampered by various reasons, such as the absence of a prospectively validated therapeutic window, whereas preliminary data do suggest a therapeutic window (cyclophosphamide), the logistical constraints, the absence of adequate popPK models (topotecan, etoposide, and paclitaxel), the use of a deprecated therapeutic window (docetaxel), or the absence of an a priori MIPD regimen (HD-MTX).
Opportunities for improving outcomes using MIPD most predominantly exist where TDM, adjusting dosing based directly on PK samples without the need for a popPK model, has proven beneficial or in the case of well-established exposure–outcome relationships. For example, TDM for taxanes, cabazitaxel, docetaxel, and paclitaxel, has been effective in reducing toxicity. Notably, for cabazitaxel, TDM has also been associated with improved OS. Pharmacometric studies have also shown a great need for MIPD for fludarabine, used in the conditioning regimen for CAR-T cell therapy. MIPD offers advantages over TDM by incorporating prior PK data, and in some cases PD data as well, allowing for more precise dosing adjustments. Second, TDM is inherently reactive and may fall short in situations where achieving optimal drug exposure quickly is critical, or when PK parameters fluctuate, as seen in neutropenic patients. In these cases, multiple PK samples are required, which can be cumbersome. Although promising popPK models have been developed for drugs such as cabazitaxel, none of the cabazitaxel popPK models has been externally validated, limiting their clinical applicability. Among 17 PK models describing imatinib pharmacokinetics, for which TDM has already been implemented, only two have been externally validated. Prospective validation of MIPD models can confirm the applicability of MIPD dosing regimens in new populations, identify possible overparameterization, and ensure model-guided dosing is feasible in clinical settings while, ideally, assessing clinical outcomes. However, the successful application of MIPD for carboplatin not only illustrates that MIPD can be easily integrated into routine clinical care in resource-limited settings, it also illustrates that once a clear exposure–response relationship is established and validated, further prospective validation may be less critical. In such cases, enhancing the proportion of patients achieving optimal drug exposure can directly improve outcomes. To encourage broader adoption of MIPD, demonstrating its efficacy in large clinical trials could be instrumental. While many clinicians recognize the need for individualized dosing, robust clinical evidence showing improved patient outcomes with MIPD could be the key to integrating it into routine practice.
Manufacturers also share the responsibility to ensure adequate drug exposure and optimize patient outcomes. This responsibility has been emphasized by Project Optimus of the Oncology Center of Excellence. Project Optimus highlights that the current dose-selection paradigm in oncology results in unnecessarily increased risks for toxicity without additional efficacy. It advocates for selecting the optimal dose instead of the maximum tolerated dose. During drug development, popPK modeling is often used to select the dose regimen to be tested in clinical trials and to adjust dosing as needed throughout these trials. However, most registered doses are still following a one-dose-fits-all approach. The US Food and Drug Administration urges manufacturers to incorporate biomarkers in early clinical development to predict dose efficacy and to evaluate multiple dosing regimens in randomized clinical trials. This could lead to the incorporation of MIPD into the drug label and therefore to implementation in the clinic.
The success of implementing a MIPD strategy depends on various factors beyond the scope of improving patient outcomes. Performing MIPD must also be feasible, ready to use, easy to understand, and user friendly. Various applications (i.e., InsightRX, BestDose, TDMx, and others) have been developed to assist pharmacists and physicians in selecting the appropriate dose for each patient. Clinicians need proper education on how to use MIPD software, and ideally, this software should be incorporated into the hospital information systems. This integration allows the incorporation of real-time data into the model-informed dose recommendation and would be able to alert physicians for missing patient information important for dose recommendations, or when influential covariates change, subsequently initiating a dose change.
One of the largest pitfalls for implementing MIPD is the Medical Devices Regulation in the European Union, which came into full application in May 2021. As MIPD software affects the administered dose, it qualifies as a medical device. This classification means that the software, along with its documentation, data verification, safety protocols, and risk management, must adhere to strict regulatory requirements before advancing to the research phase. These stringent requirements pose a significant financial burden on researchers and necessitate specialized expertise, which may not be readily available to all research teams. While these criteria are logical when implementing MIPD strategies and software, they can discourage researchers from conducting small proof-of-concept studies, which are often essential stepping stones toward larger implementation trials.
The field of MIPD is rapidly evolving, particularly with the integration of advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence. Artificial intelligence has the potential to significantly enhance the accuracy of MIPD by enabling more sophisticated pattern recognition in the pharmacokinetics and covariate relationships. Additionally, artificial intelligence can help quantify uncertainty in PK samples, further refining dosing precision. Alongside AI, model-ensembling techniques are being developed, building on the idea that just as one dose does not fit all, one popPK model might also not fit all. Model-ensembling techniques involve identifying the best-performing models for each patient that can be used for individual dose recommendations. Moreover, continuous learning methods are emerging, allowing models to be updated with data from specific centers to improve accuracy for particular populations. External innovations might also increase the need for MIPD. There are new approaches for assessing individual resistance to chemotherapy using ex vivo tumors to determine sensitivity to chemotherapy and define individual therapeutic intervals. This results in a multitude of targets that may precisely and rapidly be reached by applying MIPD, thereby enhancing the clinical value and effectiveness of MIPD. Several limitations should be considered when interpreting the findings of this review. First, publication bias may influence the results, as studies with positive or significant outcomes are more likely to be published, potentially skewing the evidence. Additionally, we may have overlooked relevant published information because of the use of different terms for MIPD in the scientific literature. However, we have attempted to minimize this limitation through reference searching and the application of clinical expertise. Finally, given the rapidly evolving nature of this field, there is a risk that the review’s conclusions may become outdated quickly as new research emerges.

Conclusions
Model-informed precision dosing has been demonstrated to be feasible and of added value for attaining adequate exposure in oncology. These examples illustrate that when a drug exhibits clear exposure–response or toxicity relationships and a well-defined therapeutic interval is established, MIPD can significantly improve clinical outcomes. Moreover, conducting large-scale trials may not always be required if a therapeutic interval has been identified. Ongoing advancements in methodologies promise to further augment the benefits of MIPD, making it an increasingly vital tool in personalized medicine.

Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
In this article, Figure 1 was published with error and now been updated.
Change history
3/16/2025
In this article, Figure 1 was published with error and now been updated.
Change history
3/20/2025
A Correction to this paper has been published: 10.1007/s40265-025-02174-0

Declarations

Funding
No external funding was used in the preparation of this article.

Conflicts of Interest/Competing Interests
Bram C. Agema, Birgit C.P. Koch, Ron H.J. Mathijssen and Stijn L.W. Koolen have no conflicts of interest that are directly relevant to the content of this article.

Ethics Approval
Not applicable.

Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

Consent for Publication
Not applicable.

Availability of Data and Material
No datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.

Code Availability
The search strategy is available in the supplementary material.

Authors’ Contributions
BCA and SLWK conceptually designed the article, BCA designed and performed the literature search, BCA drafted the manuscript, and all authors conceptualized the figures and critically reviewed and revised the manuscript.

References
Therapeutic drug monitoring of kinase inhibitors in oncology
Determining the optimal dose in the development of anticancer agents
Dose optimization of sotorasib: is the US Food and Drug Administration sending a message?
The drug-dosing conundrum in oncology: when less is more
Therapeutic Drug monitoring in oncology: International Association of Therapeutic Drug Monitoring and Clinical Toxicology recommendations for 5-fluorouracil therapy
Don't be misled: three misconceptions about external validation of clinical prediction models
The use of body surface area as a criterion of drug dosage in cancer chemotherapy
Flat-fixed dosing versus body surface area based dosing of anticancer drugs in adults: does it make a difference?
Comparison of toxicity and effectiveness between fixed-dose and body surface area-based dose capecitabine
DPYD genotype-guided dose individualisation of fluoropyrimidine therapy in patients with cancer: a prospective safety analysis
Model-based population pharmacokinetic analysis of nivolumab in patients with solid tumors
Evaluation of covariate effects on pharmacokinetics of monoclonal antibodies in oncology
Perspectives on model-informed precision dosing in the digital health era: challenges, opportunities, and recommendations
Carboplatin dosage: prospective evaluation of a simple formula based on renal function
Therapeutic drug monitoring for dose individualization of cisplatin in testicular cancer patients based upon total platinum measurement in plasma
Improved clinical outcome of paediatric bone marrow recipients using a test dose and Bayesian pharmacokinetic individualization of busulfan dosage regimens
Population pharmacokinetics of busulfan in pediatric and young adult patients undergoing hematopoietic cell transplant: a model-based dosing algorithm for personalized therapy and implementation into routine clinical use
Personalized dosing of cyclophosphamide in the total body irradiation-cyclophosphamide conditioning regimen: a phase II trial in patients with hematologic malignancy
Accuracy, feasibility, and clinical impact of prospective Bayesian pharmacokinetically guided dosing of cyclophosphamide, thiotepa, and carboplatin in high-dose chemotherapy
Randomized pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of docetaxel: dosing based on body-surface area compared with individualized dosing based on cytochrome P450 activity estimated using a urinary metabolite of exogenous cortisol
Therapeutic drug monitoring for the individualization of docetaxel dosing: a randomized pharmacokinetic study
Bayesian pharmacokinetically guided dosing of paclitaxel in patients with non-small cell lung cancer
Conventional compared with individualized chemotherapy for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Individualized methotrexate dosing in children with relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Pilot induction regimen incorporating pharmacokinetically guided topotecan for treatment of newly diagnosed high-risk neuroblastoma: a Children's Oncology Group study
Population pharmacokinetics of etoposide: application to therapeutic drug monitoring
Clinical usefulness of therapeutic concentration monitoring for imatinib dosage individualization: results from a randomized controlled trial
Relevance of therapeutic drug monitoring of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in routine clinical practice: a pilot study
Relationships between carboplatin exposure and tumor response and toxicity in patients with ovarian cancer
Prospective validation of a pharmacologically based dosing scheme for the cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) analogue diamminecyclobutanedicarboxylatoplatinum
Utility of individualized carboplatin dosing alone and in combination regimens
Carboplatin: current status and future prospects
Phase I studies with carboplatin at the Royal Marsden Hospital
Pharmacokinetics of cis-diammine-1,1-cyclobutane dicarboxylate platinum(II) in patients with normal and impaired renal function
Clinical pharmacokinetics and dose optimisation of carboplatin
Measured versus estimated glomerular filtration rate in the Calvert equation: influence on carboplatin dosing
Prediction of carboplatin clearance calculated by patient characteristics or 24-hour creatinine clearance: a comparison of the performance of three formulae
Evaluation of predictive formulae for glomerular filtration rate for carboplatin dosing in gynecological malignancies
Difference of carboplatin clearance estimated by the Cockroft-Gault, Jelliffe, Modified-Jelliffe
Improving carboplatin dosing based on estimated GFR
A new equation to estimate glomerular filtration rate
Adaptive intrapatient dose escalation of cisplatin in combination with low-dose vp16 in patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer
Association between busulfan exposure and outcome in children receiving intravenous busulfan before hematologic stem cell transplantation
Intra-individual pharmacokinetic variability of intravenous busulfan in hematopoietic stem cell-transplanted children
Association of busulfan exposure with survival and toxicity after haemopoietic cell transplantation in children and young adults: a multicentre, retrospective cohort analysis
Fludarabine with pharmacokinetically guided IV busulfan is superior to fixed-dose delivery in pretransplant conditioning of AML/MDS patients
Intensity of cyclophosphamide-based bridging therapy before chimeric antigen receptor T cell therapy in myeloma
Cyclophosphamide metabolism, liver toxicity, and mortality following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
Population pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics of docetaxel in phase II studies in patients with cancer
A population pharmacokinetic model for docetaxel (Taxotere): model building and validation
Population pharmacokinetics and pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationships for docetaxel
Review of therapeutic drug monitoring of anticancer drugs. Part 1: cytotoxics
Clinical pharmacokinetics and drug exposure-toxicity correlation study of docetaxel based chemotherapy in Chinese head and neck cancer patients
Correlation between docetaxel clearance and estimated cytochrome P450 activity by urinary metabolite of exogenous cortisol
Therapeutic drug monitoring of docetaxel by pharmacokinetics and pharmacogenetics: a randomized clinical trial of AUC-guided dosing in nonsmall cell lung cancer
Paclitaxel therapeutic drug monitoring: International Association of Therapeutic Drug Monitoring and Clinical Toxicology recommendations
Rapid infusion of high-dose methotrexate resulting in enhanced penetration into cerebrospinal fluid and intensified tumor response in primary central nervous system lymphomas
Biochemical and pharmacologic rationale for high-dose methotrexate
High dose methotrexate in adult patients with osteosarcoma: clinical and pharmacokinetic results
Preventing and managing toxicities of high-dose methotrexate
LaCasce AS. Therapeutic use and toxicity of high-dose methotrexate. In: Rosmarin AG, editor. UpToDate. Waltham (MA): Wolters Kluwer; 2024. https://www.wolterskluwer.com/en/solutions/uptodate/resources/educator-resources.
Methotrexate area under the curve is an important outcome predictor in patients with primary CNS lymphoma: a pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic analysis from the IELSG no. 20 trial
Area under the curve of methotrexate and creatinine clearance are outcome-determining factors in primary CNS lymphomas
Evaluating performance of a decision support system to improve methotrexate pharmacotherapy in children and young adults with cancer
Bayesian population model of methotrexate to guide dosage adjustments for folate rescue in patients with breast cancer
Phase I trial and pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) study of topotecan using a five-day course in children with refractory solid tumors: a pediatric oncology group study
Population pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of oral etoposide
Etoposide pharmacokinetics and survival in patients with small cell lung cancer: a multicentre study
Pharmacokinetic optimisation of treatment with oral etoposide
G Veal. Etoposide [Internet]. Newcastle Cancer Centre Pharmacology Group. https://nccpg.ncl.ac.uk/etoposide. Accessed Feb 2025.
Pharmacokinetics and dose adjustment of etoposide administered in a medium-dose etoposide, cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation regimen before allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
Imatinib pharmacokinetics and its correlation with response and safety in chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia: a subanalysis of the IRIS study
Trough imatinib plasma levels are associated with both cytogenetic and molecular responses to standard-dose imatinib in chronic myeloid leukemia
Improving the tolerability of osimertinib by identifying its toxic limit
van Nijnatten RYM, Buijs SM, Agema BC, Fischer RMJ, Moghaddam-Helmantel IG, Contant CME, de Jongh FE, Huijben AMT, Kop M, van der Padt-Pruijsten A, Zuetenhorst HJM, van Schaik RHN, Koch BCP, Jager A, Koolen SLW, Mathijssen RHJ. Breast. 2025;79:103880. 10.1016/j.breast.2025.103880.
Open-label, randomized study of individualized, pharmacokinetically (PK)-guided dosing of paclitaxel combined with carboplatin or cisplatin in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
Randomized phase II cabazitaxel dose individualization and neutropenia prevention trial in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
Randomized study of individualized pharmacokinetically-guided dosing of paclitaxel compared with body-surface area dosing in Chinese patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer
Fludarabine exposure predicts outcome after CD19 CAR T-cell therapy in children and young adults with acute leukemia
Pharmacokinetics and model-based dosing to optimize fludarabine therapy in pediatric hematopoietic cell transplant recipients
Antimicrobial treatment of febrile neutropenia: pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic considerations
Model of chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression with parameter consistency across drugs
Early identification of patients at risk of cabazitaxel-induced severe neutropenia
Population pharmacokinetics and pharmacogenetics analyses of imatinib in Chinese patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in a real-world situation
Population pharmacokinetics of imatinib mesylate in patients with chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukaemia: results of a phase III study
Oncologists' perspectives on individualizing dose selection for patients with metastatic cancer
Excellence OCo. Project Optimus. 5 January 2024. Available from: https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/oncology-center-excellence/project-optimus. Accessed 11 Jul 2024.
Toward Project Optimus for oncology precision medicine: multi-dimensional dose optimization enabled by quantitative clinical pharmacology
US Food and Drug Administration. Population pharmacokinetics; guidance for Industry. In: Pharmacology DoC, editor. Silver Spring (MD): US Food and Drug Administration; 2022.
Improving dose-optimization processes used in oncology drug development to minimize toxicity and maximize benefit to patients
Prospective validation of a model-informed precision dosing tool for vancomycin in intensive care patients
Towards model-informed precision dosing of piperacillin: multicenter systematic external evaluation of pharmacokinetic models in critically ill adults with a focus on Bayesian forecasting
Accurately achieving target busulfan exposure in children and adolescents with very limited sampling and the BestDose software
Adoption of machine learning in pharmacometrics: an overview of recent implementations and their considerations
Reinforcement learning and Bayesian data assimilation for model-informed precision dosing in oncology
Synthetic Model Combination: A new machine-learning method for pharmacometric model ensembling
A model averaging/selection approach improves the predictive performance of model-informed precision dosing: vancomycin as a case study
A continued learning approach for model-informed precision dosing: updating models in clinical practice
Continuous learning in model-informed precision dosing: a case study in pediatric dosing of vancomycin
Proof-of-concept study linking ex vivo sensitivity testing to neoadjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy response in breast cancer patients
Tumor slice culture system to assess drug response of primary breast cancer
Patient-derived cancer organoid cultures to predict sensitivity to chemotherapy and radiation