How Epstein Barr Virus Causes Lymphomas
Since Epstein–Barr Virus (EBV) was isolated 60 years ago, it has been studied clinically, epidemiologically, immunologically, and molecularly in the ensuing years. These combined studies allow a broad mechanistic understanding of how this ubiquitous human pathogen which infects more than 90% of adults can rarely cause multiple types of lymphomas. We survey these findings to provide a coherent description of its oncogenesis.

1. Introduction
Epstein–Barr Virus (EBV) causes lymphomas, “cancers that arise from the clonal proliferation of B cells, T cells and natural killer (NK) cells”. By EBV causing lymphomas, we mean that the lymphomas that have EBV genomes in the tumor cells are dependent on EBV for their development. We know EBV-positive lymphomas depend on the virus because its genome is present as a circular replicon and is lost from cells if it does not provide them with one or more advantages. The replication and partitioning of EBV plasmids in live cells have been visualized and found to be imperfect. Each cell division, each circular genome, has an 84% chance of being synthesized and an 88% chance of being partitioned faithfully (ibid.). With each generation, some of the EBV is therefore lost from the division of cells. Only if the cells that retain it outgrow those that have lost it will it be found in growing cells. EBV-positive lymphoma biopsies generally have circular EBV genomes in most/all cells, indicating that the virus provides these tumors benefits in survival/growth or both. Occasionally, EBV DNA becomes integrated into the host genome of a lymphoma cell. The sequencing of the EBV’s genome in 128 samples of NK/T cell lymphomas in France and Japan, for example, identified that 6% had deletions of OriP, the cis-acting viral element required for EBV DNA synthesis. These viral genomes could only be maintained in the proliferating tumor cells if they were integrated.
At least five types of lymphomas are associated causally with EBV: Burkitt lymphoma, NK/T cell lymphoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL), and Primary Effusion Lymphoma (PEL). While each of these lymphomas have cases that are EBV-positive, the fraction of cases with EBV in the tumor cells varies. For example, more than 90% of Burkitt lymphomas are EBV-positive in Central Africa, where it is endemic, but only 29% are positive in the US. About 90 to 100% of nasal NK/T cell lymphomas are EBV-positive throughout the world. About 40% of Hodgkin’s, 5 to 10% of DLBCL, and 80–90% of PELs are EBV-positive. These different frequencies of being virus-positive for lymphomas associated with EBV have two implications. First, the clinical diagnoses do not distinguish between EBV-positive and virus-negative lymphomas of the same type. Second, given that we know EBV contributes causally to the virus-positive lymphomas, the EBV-negative variants must have some genetic changes to provide the oncogenic functions that EBV uses to drive the virus-positive lymphomas.
There are now about 8.2 billion people in the world and EBV causes about 50,000–120,000 new cases of lymphomas per year in the world, meaning these cancers are rare. This rarity is particularly striking because it is estimated that greater than 90% of all of us are infected with EBV, indicating that only one per hundred thousand people develop a lymphoma caused by EBV per year. This rarity leads to the question of what, in addition to infection with EBV, leads to the development of its associated lymphomas. There are at least three possible answers to the question that merit consideration: 1. Rare variants of EBV are sufficient to cause lymphomas; 2. Genetic variants in people coupled to infection with EBV contribute to lymphomagenesis; and 3. Co-factors in concert with EBV infection foster lymphomagenesis.

1.1. Rare Variants of EBV Are Not Sufficient to Cause Lymphomas
If a rare variant of EBV is sufficient to cause a lymphoma, then that lymphoma would be expected to occur in a cluster in space and time as that variant infects people locally. While such clustering has been reported, its interpretation is complex. EBV-associated lymphomas are rare and viral variants cluster geographically. In a recent study, researchers extended the sequencing of EBV genomes in 54 patients with NK/T-cell lymphoma in Guatemala to compare it to data from a similar 101 patients in Southeast Asia. They concluded “that the previously suggested variants were not disease-specific but rather common to EBV in East Asia”. No single variant of EBV has been found to be sufficient to cause a lymphoma in otherwise healthy people.

1.2. Genetic Variants Coupled with EBV Contribute to Lymphomagenesis
Human genetic variants coupled with infection by EBV do contribute to lymphomagenesis. Two of these mutations, while rare, have been studied in detail. Duncan’s syndrome is an X-linked immunodeficiency with mutations in either the SH2D1A gene or XIAP gene. Mutations in the SH2D1A gene that encode the SLAM-associated protein (SAP) lead to immune failures in recognizing and controlling EBV-infected cells. These failures have been uncovered in studies of female carriers of these mutations who are healthy while males succumb to EBV-induced diseases including lymphomas. Only the SAP-positive CD8+ T cells from female carriers respond to EBV peptides; SAP-negative CD8+ T cells cannot. This failure reflects the absence of inhibitory signaling by SAP on the CD8+ T cells following the recognition of antigens of B cells and explains SH2D1A being essential to control infections by EBV (ibid.).
Mutations in the Magnesium transporter 1, MAGT1, also limit the T cell control of EBV-infected B cells leading to the X-linked disease, XMEN, predisposing patients to EBV-associated lymphomas. Studies of cells from XMEN patients have shown that both T cells and NK cells have low intracellular concentrations of free Mg2+ and decreased capacities to kill autologous EBV-positive B cells. The supplementation of culture media with Mg2+ for T cells and NK cells from patients led to the increased expression of the NKG2D receptor on both cell types and increased the cytotoxicity of T cells (ibid.). The diminished expression of NKG2D on NK cells in XMEN patients is likely to contribute to EBV lymphomagenesis, too. Both T cells and NK cells control EBV infections. The NK cell killing of EBV-infected cells from healthy donors is directly regulated by EBV. Its EBNA1 protein binds to the promoter of ULBP1, a ligand for NKG2D, and decreases it expression and decreases the NK cell killing of EBV-infected cells.

1.3. Co-Infections Augment Lymphomagenesis
Co-infections with multiple different pathogens can promote EBV’s lymphomagenesis by modifying the viral-host environment to limit some immune responses. These co-infecting pathogens include both protozoa and viruses. A host’s immune response to EBV is essential to control it. For example, during primary infections, children in The Gambia have been shown to develop 6–16% of CD8+ T cells responding to an EBV-specific epitope. Co-infections that limit a person’s ability to mount an effective immune response to EBV are therefore likely important in supporting its lymphomagenesis.

1.3.1. Malaria Co-Infection
Malaria is one of the most prevalent infectious diseases worldwide with approximately 250 million cases in 2022 according to the World Health Organization. It is caused by parasites from the genus Plasmodium and transmitted from humans to humans through the bites of infected Anopheles mosquitoes.
Studies of children with Burkitt lymphoma in regions of Africa where it is endemic have found that the number of malaria parasites, nutritional status, and EBV viral load correlate with the incidence of the lymphoma. The number of EBV-infected B cells in young patients in The Gambia also correlates with their malarial status, being five times higher during acute malarial infection. Malarial infection where Burkitt lymphoma is endemic appears not to limit a host’s immune response generally but does decrease its ability to control infection with EBV. For example, children with endemic Burkitt lymphoma have decreased IFN-γ-producing T cell responses to EBNA1 peptides compared to controls but higher levels of these T cell responses to a malarial antigen. These children also have different sets of NK cells as assessed by the distributions of subsets of killer immunoglobulin-like receptor genes on these NK cells. These differences are likely to underlie a decreased NK cell response that contributes to EBV’s pathogenesis.

1.3.2. Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Co-Infection
Individuals living with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) were found to have a 10–100-fold increased incidence of all EBV-positive lymphomas before the introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Between 1996 and 2006, a U.S. registry-based cohort study of 83,282 people with AIDS reported that among cancer-related deaths, 36% of HIV-infected individuals had non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma as the cause, often associated with EBV co-infection. One study on HIV–EBV co-infection, involved reconstituting nonobese diabetic-severe combined immunodeficiency (NOD-scid) null mice with human CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells, infecting the mice with EBV, and subsequently exposing them to HIV. This exposure led to a transient increase in CD8+ T cells observed two weeks after HIV exposure. By the sixth week, the level of EBV-DNA in the plasma was 15 times higher in the subgroup of mice co-infected with HIV compared to the EBV-only group. All co-infected mice developed macroscopic lymphomas with tumors in the spleen, liver, kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, and salivary glands. In contrast, tumors in the EBV-only group were confined to the spleen and liver. This study is consistent with previous work that found a synergistic effect of HIV and EBV in promoting lymphoma development.
HIV co-infection suppresses immune responses against EBV, contributing to developing EBV-associated lymphomas. However, the impact of antiretroviral therapy (ART) on EBV-associated lymphomas in HIV-infected individuals remains unclear. While most cases of Hodgkin’s lymphoma in people with AIDS are linked to EBV, the incidence of these lymphomas has not declined despite ART usage. It has even been reported that non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), a key component of ART regimens, are associated with an increased risk of Hodgkin’s lymphoma. It will be important to determine if NNRTIs do contribute causally to Hodgkin’s lymphoma and, in particular, to those that are EBV-positive.
These results collectively indicate that HIV co-infection enhances EBV-associated lymphomagenesis. Additionally, they illustrate a need to understand any effects of ART on EBV-associated lymphomas in HIV-co-infected patients.

1.3.3. EBV and KSHV Co-Infection of B Cells
Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), also known as Human Herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8), causes multiple cancers, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. As with other herpesviruses, KSHV can remain latent in human B cells and endothelial cells, expressing few viral genes and tethering its circular genome to host chromosomes. But the conditions that support KSHV infection, particularly in B cells, remain unclear. B cells can only be infected inefficiently in vitro and have not been found to be transformed by the virus. However, more than 80% of PELs worldwide are infected by both EBV and KSHV, with both viral genomes being in the same malignant B cells. The infection of B cells by EBV alone in vitro induces their proliferation and can lead to their long-term transformation, outcomes that may explain its contribution to PELs.
The infection of NOD/LtSz-scid IL2Rgamma (NSG) null mice reconstituted with CD34+ human hematopoietic progenitor cells with both KSHV and EBV leads to an increase in lymphomas relative to mice infected in parallel with KSHV alone. This finding supports EBV’s fostering lymphomagenesis with KSHV as an etiological co-factor. Infections of primary B cells in vitro with both KSHV and EBV are consistent with this conclusion, too. While only 1–2% of these cells can be co-infected, both viruses are required to initiate and maintain the proliferation of the infected cells in the absence of added cytokines.

2. Sociological Factors Also Affect Lymphomagenesis
Even though EBV can reside in memory B cells asymptomatically for life in most people, some sociological factors can increase the risk of its lymphomagenesis. For example, gender, ethnicity, and the physiological effects of poverty contribute to the incidence of both Hodgkin’s lymphoma and Burkitt’s lymphoma. The incidence of these diseases is higher in males compared to females and more prevalent in economically less-developed regions than in more-developed ones. NK/T cell lymphomas are also more common in males and mutations on the X chromosome possibly contribute to this difference. Additionally, the Asian population appears to be more susceptible to EBV-related malignancies, like nasopharyngeal carcinoma and particular forms of gastric carcinoma in immunocompetent individuals. However, the correlation with lymphoma remains unclear.
These sociological factors along with human genetics and co-infections work in concert with EBV’s own oncogenic functions to explain its lymphomagenesis. EBV’s success in evolving to infect most people asymptomatically by its controlled latency explains the rarity of these cancers.

3. EBV Drives Its Lymphomagenesis in a Background of Impaired Immune Responses
Both a host’s genetics and being co-infected with disparate pathogens can promote EBV’s lymphomagenesis by limiting a host’s immune responses. EBV drives this tumor formation, altering the infected cells and the host with at least three mechanisms: 1. inducing and maintaining cell proliferation; 2. inhibiting cell death; and 3. inhibiting the immune recognition of infected cells. Here, we describe these mechanisms, noting that the viral genes assigned to them reflect only some of what is known now and will surely prove to be an over-simplification (Table 1).

3.1. EBV-Induced Proliferation Is Mediated in Part by EBNA2 and LMP1
Early experiments of infecting B cells with EBV demonstrated that the infected cells proliferated in bulk or as clones while the non-infected cells died. The induced proliferation has been termed “transformation”. This transformation leads rapidly to an increased expression of most cellular and all viral latent genes. Analyses of the viral DNAs in these transformed cells indicated both that the viral DNA was present as extrachromosomal replicons and intact. Multiple virally encoded RNAs and proteins were detected in these cells, but which ones were required for EBV’s induced proliferation remained unknown until genetic assays were developed to address this uncertainty. The derivatives of the EBV lacking EBNA2 failed to yield proliferating cells. A functionally inducible derivative of EBNA2 was used also to demonstrate its requirement for maintaining proliferation in infected B cells.
An important insight into EBNA2’s role in mediating the proliferation of EBV-infected B cells came from Henkel et al. who showed that EBNA2 binds to the cellular protein RBJ kappa and they together bind transcriptional promoters to drive RNA expression. RBJ kappa is part of the Notch signaling pathway and EBNA2, through binding, it acts through this pathway. In this way, EBNA2 activates many genes, including c-Myc to foster proliferation. A further increase in expression of c-Myc is common in EBV-associated Burkitt lymphoma in which c-Myc is usually translocated to one of three immunoglobulin loci. The translocation leads to the constitutive expression of this oncogene and correlates with the absence of expression of EBNA2. Thus, EBNA2, while it is required for the proliferation of B cells infected in vitro, can be replaced functionally by mutations acquired by the host–cell. One advantage for the evolving tumor cell to lose expression of EBNA2 would be its ability to escape from the immune recognition of this viral antigen.
EBNA2 also induces the expression of the LMP1 gene of EBV. LMP1 is essential for the transformation of B cells. It acts as a constitutively active mimic of the CD40 receptor by binding TRAF molecules to signal through NFκB. The conditional expression of a derivative of LMP1 renders the proliferation of B cells conditional, too, indicating that LMP1 is required also to maintain this proliferation. While LMP1 is usually expressed in EBV-positive Hodgkin’s lymphoma, it is usually absent from Burkitt lymphomas, illustrating again that some EBV-associated lymphomas can evolve to become independent of some viral oncogenes. It is likely that the absence of EBNA2 and LMP1 from some EBV-positive lymphomas does reflect an evolution from cells that originally expressed these oncogenes. Analyses in vivo of cells in patients with infectious mononucleosis, which occurs in weeks following infection, found these viral oncogenes to be expressed in the cells.
EBV genes, in addition to EBNA2 and LMP1, are expressed in some/all lymphomas including minimally EBNA1, EBERs, and miRNAs. These genes are likely to contribute to the proliferation of the infected B cells in disparate, complex ways. For example, EBNA3A and EBNA3C affect cell proliferation by inhibiting the expression of the tumor suppressors, p16INK4A and p14ARF. EBNA2, through Notch, and LMP1, through NFκB, being essential for cell growth underscore EBV’s commandeering of these cellular pathways to transform lymphoid cells.

3.2. EBV’s Inhibition of Apoptosis Is Mediated by Multiple Viral Genes Including EBNA3A, EBNA3C, LMP2A, and Its miRNAs
When B cells are induced to proliferate during normal immune responses, their expansion is limited by a balance of pro- and anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family. EBV overrides this cell death signaling with multiple genes, affecting the distinct modes of apoptosis induced by B cell proliferation. This inhibition of apoptosis is an integral step in EBV’s transformation of B cells. Genetic analyses of EBV found both EBNA3A and EBNA3C to be essential for the initial cell transformation, while EBNA3A is not required for its maintenance. One essential function these viral genes provide is the inhibition of the expression of the pro-apoptotic gene Bim. EBNA3C, in conjunction with EBNA3A, inhibits the expression of Bim by binding its promoter and increasing levels of H3K27me3 locally by recruiting the H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2 to it. EBNA3A and EBNA3C together also inhibit the expression of p16INK4A and p14ARF, two tumor suppressors, that regulate cell cycle progression. This inhibition contributes to the growth of the infected B cells and to the inhibition of Bim-mediated apoptosis.
LMP2A is not essential for the EBV’s transformation of B cells isolated from the blood, but it contributes significantly to its efficiency. For the subset of primary B cells isolated from nasal adenoids that do not express the B cell receptor, LMP2A is essential to block apoptosis. B cells in vivo require tonic signaling mediated by the B cell receptor (BCR) to avoid apoptosis. This signaling indicates to the cell that immunoglobulin is expressed functionally at the cell surface. LMP2A provides this function. It has, for example, been engineered to replace a portion of the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus in transgenic mice so that these B cells do not express the BCR. LMP2A supports the development and survival of these cells in vivo, illustrating its capacity to provide the cell with essential tonic signaling. While LMP2A mimics some facets of the BCR, it has additional properties that contribute to the proliferation of EBV-infected cells.
LMP2A’s mimicking BCR tonic signaling is important in EBV’s lymphomagenesis. The tumor cells in Hodgkin’s lymphomas, termed Reed–Sternberg cells, often fail to express a BCR. Most of these tumors are infected with EBV and express LMP2A, consistent with EBV being essential for this fraction of Hodgkin’s lymphoma by LMP2A’s tonic signaling inhibiting apoptosis.
Many cellular and viral genes have been identified as potential targets of EBV’s miRNAs. Genetic analyses have shown that sets of these miRNAs inhibit apoptosis or facilitate growth. Several of EBV’s miRNAs have been shown specifically to target Casp3, a gene product pivotal for initiating apoptosis. EBV also inhibits apoptosis early after infection. It encodes two relatives of Bcl-2, a cellular gene central to inhibiting apoptosis. These genes, BALF1 and BHRF1, have not been found generally to be expressed in B cells transformed in vitro or in tumor cell lines. However, the derivatives of EBV, in which both genes are inactivated, fail to transform cells in vitro. These viral inhibitors of apoptosis are expressed transiently in newly infected B cells, are essential for their initial survival, and are therefore required for their rare evolution into lymphomas.

3.3. EBV’s Regulation of Its Host’s Immune Response Is Mediated in Part by EBNA1, EBNA2, EBNA3B, and Its miRNAs

3.3.1. EBNA1
EBNA1 can be the only viral protein expressed in some EBV-positive lymphomas, making it a candidate for affecting the host’s recognition of those tumor cells. It limits its HLA class I-restricted presentation by limiting its proteosomal processing through an extensive Gly-Gly-Ala repeat. It is, however, presented as an exogenous peptide to generate recognition by CD4+ T cells. This complex control of its own recognition by the host’s immune response presumably reflects its being essential for the synthesis and partitioning of the viral genome in proliferating cells.
EBNA1 also directly inhibits the recognition of EBV-infected B cells by inhibiting their expression of the NKG2D ligands ULBP1 and ULBP5. The infected cells thereby escape efficient recognition by natural killer cells.

3.3.2. EBNA2
While EBNA2 can positively regulate cellular genes, it has also been found to inhibit the expression of some of them. Importantly, when conditional derivatives of EBNA2 are expressed in two different Burkitt lymphoma cell lines, multiple HLA class II genes are inhibited. This inhibition reflects EBNA2’s inhibiting expression of the master regulator of HLA class II gene transcription, CIITA (ibid.). It should decrease the recognition of infected cells both at early times following initial infection and for the lymphoma cells that express it.

3.3.3. EBNA3B
EBNA3B binds RBPJ sites in the cellular genome in part by association with several transcription factors, as do EBNA3A and EBNA3C. Unlike EBNA3A and EBNA3C, though, it is not needed for the transformation of B cells in vitro. It is, therefore, intriguing to know that it inhibits tumor formation in vivo. When a mutant of EBV deficient in EBNA3B was used to infect NOD-scid null mice reconstituted with human immune cells, the animals developed more, larger tumors than those infected with wild-type virus. The lack of EBNA3B did not decrease the generation of CD8+ T cells but their infiltration into the tumor sites (ibid.). Importantly, human lymphomas often carry variants of EBV mutated in EBNA3B (ibid.). Thus, EBNA3B appears to inhibit lymphomagenesis; its mutational inactivation would foster oncogenesis.

3.3.4. miRNAs
EBV encodes more than 40 miRNAs, and many genes have been proposed to be regulated by them. Several studies have documented explicit roles for multiple viral miRNAs inhibiting the immune recognition of EBV-infected lymphoid cells. For example, nine viral miRNAs have been shown to target cellular mRNAs involved in antigen-processing, peptide transport, and cytokine synthesis required for CD8+ T cell recognition. EBV’s miRNAs also inhibit the recognition of the infected cells by CD4+ T cells by inhibiting both antigen presentation and the release of IFN-γ and GM-CSF. One EBV miRNA also targets MICB, a ligand for natural killer cells, to inhibit the killing of infected cells. These findings are consistent with studies in which variants of EBV deleted for most or all of its miRNAs were used to infect NOD-scid null mice reconstituted with human immune cells. Infected cells lacking viral miRNAs were inhibited in their growth relative to those infected with wild-type EBV.
EBV genes, including EBNA1, EBNA2, and its miRNAs, inhibit the expression of cellular genes that mediate recognition of infected cells by different arms of the human immune response. This inhibition both supports infection in healthy people and can promote lymphomagenesis.

3.3.5. EBERs
The EBERs are two non-coding RNAs that were recognized early as being EBV-encoded and expressed at high levels, even up to 107 molecules per cell. This high level of expression has allowed the detection of the EBERs by in situ hybridization, which has become the go-to clinical method for detecting EBV in infected tissues, in part because these RNAs are also uniformly expressed in infected cells. Early genetic experiments showed that EBER2, not EBER1, was necessary for the efficient transformation of B cells, making it likely to play some role in EBV’s lymphomagenesis. Meanwhile, deletion of either one of them correlates to changes in gene expression profile in lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs), particularly genes in membrane signaling, apoptosis regulation, and antiviral interferon responses, suggesting that the EBERs can keep infected cells from interferon alpha-induced apoptosis. EBER2 has subsequently been found to bind the terminal repeats of the viral genome, to recruit PAX5 there, and in so doing, inhibit the expression of LMP2A. EBER2 has also been found to bind the mRNA encoding the cellular deubiquitinase, UCHL1, to increase its expression and enhance the growth of infected cells. EBER2 has thus been found to encode multiple functions, the sum of which contributes to transformation in vitro and, thus, to lymphomagenesis.

3.4. EBV Appears to Have the Potential to Be Profoundly Oncogenic; Why Are Its Lymphomas So Rare?
Although the majority of adult humans carry EBV, most never develop EBV-associated malignancies. Why? EBV has evolved to be a “pathobiont”, a virus native to us that only under certain conditions becomes pathogenic and induces disease. It shares this trait with other herpesviruses which have evolved to co-habit successfully with mammalian hosts, an extreme example being Human Herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6). The most common means for congenital infection by HHV-6 is for a newborn to inherit an integrated copy. Multiple features of EBV and its human host foster the virus, being both ubiquitous and non-pathogenic.

4. Latency: Trading Pathogenicity for Longevity
EBV can infect a human host, replicate itself and infect many cells, but can progress to reside in some cells quiescently or latently where it expresses only genes that escape immune recognition. Latency allows it to sacrifice continued replication and disease-causing potential for a long-term presence within the host. EBV exhibits four types of latency (Type III, II, I, and 0), following a pattern of successive downregulations of gene expression (Figure 1). In one model, upon infection of naïve B cells, EBV is proposed to express all latent genes, termed Latency III, and progressively restricts protein expression along the path of B cell differentiation, ultimately reaching Latency 0, where no viral proteins are detectable. In this state, the virus persists in recirculating memory B cells, in which it can rarely enter the lytic phase to support its replication. This model of progression, known as the “germinal center model of EBV persistence”, was proposed by Thorley-Lawson. Corresponding to the model, the risk of lymphoma increases when latent B cells are activated and begin expressing viral proteins, as seen in Latency I, II, or III, which can drive cellular proliferation and potentially lead to malignancy. Such activation may result from immunosuppression, chronic immune activation, or mutations. For example, cells in Latency III can be found in healthy carriers but may lead to lymphoma in individuals with compromised immune systems, for example, in patients with post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD). The most quiescent form, Latency 0, occurs in EBV-positive resting memory B cells in asymptomatic healthy individuals, where no viral proteins are detectable. An alternative to this linear differentiation model posits that EBV can reach Latency 0 without passing through Latency III. This alternate route allows EBV to persist in the memory B cell pool without potentially increasing the risk of lymphomagenesis, optimizing infection without the development of lymphoma.
Whatever the route EBV follows to arrive at Latency 0, it relies on the host’s immune response to eliminate most infected B cells that express detectable viral antigens. Some cells in Latency 0 do likely reactivate, that is, they reenter the productive cycle to replicate viral progeny, so that immunocompetent hosts will be re-stimulated to recognize EBV-infected cells. Approximately 7% of all CD3+ T cells in adults target these virally infected cells. The immune system therefore plays a pivotal role in eliminating those EBV-infected cells that express the viral genes which drive proliferation. It is only these cells that can progress to lymphomas.
Current treatments for EBV-associated lymphomas do not usually target EBV. The only viral protein uniformly expressed in these cancers is EBNA1, for which some inhibitors are now being tested. T cells can be educated in vitro and used successfully to treat these lymphomas, but this approach is not yet widely used. Vaccines against EBV are also being developed and are now in clinical trials. A major therapeutic goal for EBV research is to develop safe inhibitors of its oncogenes, to expand the use of cell-based therapies, and to develop effective vaccines that block its infection. All of these goals are likely to spurred on by the recent appreciation of EBV’s being a risk factor for the development of multiple sclerosis, a chronic disease more common in developed countries than are EBV’s lymphomas.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

Author Contributions
All authors contributed to the conception and design, literature analysis, interpretation, writing, and final approval. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted without commercial or financial relationships that could create a conflict of interest.

References
Lymphoma
The coupling of synthesis and partitioning of EBV’s plasmid replicon is revealed in live cells
Integrated and episomal forms of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in EBV associated disease
Comprehensive Genetic Profiling Reveals Frequent Alterations of Driver Genes on the X Chromosome in Extranodal NK/T-cell Lymphoma
Endemic Burkitt lymphoma—An aggressive childhood cancer linked to Plasmodium falciparum exposure, but not to exposure to other malaria parasites
Epstein–Barr virus patterns in US Burkitt lymphoma tumors from the SEER residual tissue repository during 1979–2009
Nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma: Epidemiology and pathogenesis
Lymphomas associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection in 2020: Results from a large, unselected case series in France
Estimating the global burden of Epstein-Barr virus-related cancers
Geographic EBV variants confound disease-specific variant interpretation and predict variable immune therapy responses
X-Linked Lymphoproliferative Disease Type 1: A Clinical and Molecular Perspective
XIAP deficiency in humans causes an X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome
Molecular pathogenesis of EBV susceptibility in XLP as revealed by analysis of female carriers with heterozygous expression of SAP
Human immunity against EBV-lessons from the clinic
Primary Immunodeficiencies Associated with EBV Disease
Mg2+ regulates cytotoxic functions of NK and CD8 T cells in chronic EBV infection through NKG2D
The immunology of Epstein-Barr virus-induced disease
The Epstein-Barr Virus Oncogene EBNA1 Suppresses Natural Killer Cell Responses and Apoptosis Early after Infection of Peripheral B Cells
The Role of Coinfections in the EBV-Host Broken Equilibrium
Early virological and immunological events in asymptomatic Epstein-Barr virus infection in African children
Microgeographic variations in Burkitt’s lymphoma incidence correlate with differences in malnutrition, malaria and Epstein–Barr virus
Circulating Epstein-Barr virus-carrying B cells in acute malaria
Malaria—How this parasitic infection aids and abets EBV-associated Burkitt lymphomagenesis
Children with endemic Burkitt lymphoma are deficient in EBNA1-specific IFN-gamma T cell responses
Association of killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors with endemic Burkitt lymphoma in Kenyan children
HIV infection and lymphoma
Cancer as a cause of death among people with AIDS in the United States
HIV Co-Infection Augments EBV-Induced Tumorigenesis In Vivo
EBV renders B cells susceptible to HIV-1 in humanized mice
Modification of EBV Associated Lymphomagenesis and Its Immune Control by Co-Infections and Genetics in Humanized Mice
Epstein-Barr virus associated lymphomas in people with HIV
Does persistent HIV replication explain continued lymphoma incidence in the era of effective antiretroviral therapy?
Cumulative incidence of cancer among individuals with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in the United States
Evaluation of Epstein-Barr Virus Salivary Shedding in HIV/AIDS Patients and HAART Use: A Retrospective Cohort Study
Highly active antiretroviral therapy and the incidence of non-AIDS-defining cancers in people with HIV infection
Kaposi sarcoma
Transcription Mapping of the Kaposi’s Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus (Human Herpesvirus 8) Genome in a Body Cavity-Based Lymphoma Cell Line (BC-1)
The Lytic Transcriptome of Kaposi’s Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus Reveals Extensive Transcription of Noncoding Regions, Including Regions Antisense to Important Genes
Generation of a doxycycline-inducible KSHV producer cell line of endothelial origin: Maintenance of tight latency with efficient reactivation upon induction
Limited transmission of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus in cultured cells
Host range of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus in cultured cells
The restricted cellular host range of human herpesvirus 8
Primary effusion lymphoma: A distinct clinicopathologic entity associated with the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpes virus
The role of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV-8) in lymphoproliferative diseases
Assay of the infectivity of Epstein-Barr virus by transformation of human leucocytes in vitro
Efficiency of transformation of lymphocytes by Epstein-Barr virus
Clonal transformation of adult human leukocytes by Epstein-Barr virus
Persistent KSHV Infection Increases EBV-Associated Tumor Formation In Vivo via Enhanced EBV Lytic Gene Expression
How Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus stably transforms peripheral B cells towards lymphomagenesis
Primary B Lymphocytes Infected with Kaposi’s Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus Can Be Expanded In Vitro and Are Recognized by LANA-Specific CD4+ T Cells
Epstein-Barr virus-associated Hodgkin’s disease: Epidemiologic characteristics in international data
Epstein-barr virus-associated malignancies: Epidemiologic patterns and etiologic implications
Genome-wide scan for familial nasopharyngeal carcinoma reveals evidence of linkage to chromosome 4
Selection pressure-driven evolution of the Epstein-Barr virus-encoded oncogene LMP1 in virus isolates from Southeast Asia
Stable replication of plasmids derived from Epstein-Barr virus in various mammalian cells
Mapping genetic elements of Epstein-Barr virus that facilitate extrachromosomal persistence of Epstein-Barr virus-derived plasmids in human cells
Inhibition of antigen processing by the internal repeat region of the Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen-1
Inhibition of ubiquitin/proteasome-dependent protein degradation by the Gly-Ala repeat domain of the Epstein–Barr virus nuclear antigen 1
Human CD8+ T cell responses to EBV EBNA1: HLA class I presentation of the (Gly-Ala)-containing protein requires exogenous processing
Self-inhibition of synthesis and antigen presentation by Epstein-Barr virus-encoded EBNA1
Genetic analysis of immortalizing functions of Epstein-Barr virus in human B lymphocytes
Epstein-Barr virus nuclear protein 2 is a key determinant of lymphocyte transformation
Immortalization of human B lymphocytes by a plasmid containing 71 kilobase pairs of Epstein-Barr virus DNA
Notch1IC partially replaces EBNA2 function in B cells immortalized by Epstein-Barr virus
Activated Notch1 modulates gene expression in B cells similarly to Epstein-Barr viral nuclear antigen 2
Cellular target genes of Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 2
The proto-oncogene c-myc is a direct target gene of Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 2
Mediation of Epstein-Barr virus EBNA2 transactivation by recombination signal-binding protein J kappa
EBNA2 driven enhancer switching at the CIITA-DEXI locus suppresses HLA class II gene expression during EBV infection of B-lymphocytes
ARF tumor suppressor induces mitochondria-dependent apoptosis by modulation of mitochondrial Bcl-2 family proteins
Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigens 3C and 3A maintain lymphoblastoid cell growth by repressing p16INK4A and p14ARF expression
EBNA3B-deficient EBV promotes B cell lymphomagenesis in humanized mice and is found in human tumors
The Epstein-Barr virus transforming protein LMP1 engages signaling proteins for the tumor necrosis factor receptor family
Latent membrane protein 1 of Epstein-Barr virus mimics a constitutively active receptor molecule
Epstein-Barr virus-transforming protein latent infection membrane protein 1 activates transcription factor NF-κB through a pathway that includes the NF-kappaB-inducing kinase and the IkappaB kinases IKKalpha and IKKbeta
Latent membrane protein 1 of Epstein-Barr virus coordinately regulates proliferation with control of apoptosis
Identification of latent membrane protein 2A (LMP2A) domains essential for the LMP2A dominant-negative effect on B-lymphocyte surface immunoglobulin signal transduction
Epstein-Barr Virus Latent Membrane Protein 2A (LMP2A) Drives B Cell Development and Survival in Transgenic Mice
Latent membrane protein 2A of Epstein-Barr virus binds WW domain E3 protein-ubiquitin ligases that ubiquitinate B-cell tyrosine kinases
The c-Cbl proto-oncoprotein downregulates EBV LMP2A signaling
Rescue of “crippled” germinal center B cells from apoptosis by Epstein-Barr virus
Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 2A is a B-cell receptor mimic and essential for B-cell survival
Epstein-Barr virus infection in vitro can rescue germinal center B cells with inactivated immunoglobulin genes
Epstein-Barr virus provides a new paradigm: A requirement for the immediate inhibition of apoptosis
Micro RNAs of Epstein-Barr Virus Promote Cell Cycle Progression and Prevent Apoptosis of Primary Human B Cells
The Epstein-Barr Virus BART microRNAs target the pro-apoptotic protein Bim
Epstein–Barr virus maintains lymphomas via its miRNAs
Epstein-Barr viral microRNAs target caspase 3
Cell Death Signaling
A Viral microRNA Cluster Strongly Potentiates the Transforming Properties of a Human Herpesvirus
MicroRNAs of Epstein-Barr Virus Attenuate T-Cell-Mediated Immune Control In Vivo
Epstein–Barr virus microRNAs reduce immune surveillance by virus-specific CD8+ T cells
Epstein-Barr viral miRNAs inhibit antiviral CD4+ T cell responses targeting IL-12 and peptide processing
Diverse Herpesvirus MicroRNAs Target the Stress-Induced Immune Ligand MICB to Escape Recognition by Natural Killer Cells
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded RNA 2 (EBER2) but not EBER1 plays a critical role in EBV-induced B-cell growth transformation
The role of Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNAs (EBERs) in oncogenesis
Protection from interferon-induced apoptosis by Epstein-Barr virus small RNAs is not mediated by inhibition of PKR
The Epstein-Barr virus noncoding RNA EBER2 transactivates the UCHL1 deubiquitinase to accelerate cell growth
Human lymphoid cell transformation by Epstein-Barr virus
Epstein–Barr virus reprograms human B lymphocytes immediately in the prelatent phase of infection
First Days in the Life of Naive Human B Lymphocytes Infected with Epstein-Barr Virus
Covalently closed circular duplex DNA of Epstein-Barr virus in a human lymphoid cell line
Comparison of Epstein-Barr viral DNAs in Burkitt lymphoma biopsy cells and in cells clonally transformed in vitro
B-cell proliferation and induction of early G1-regulating proteins by Epstein-Barr virus mutants conditional for EBNA2
Specific chromosomal translocations and the genesis of B-cell-derived tumors in mice and men
Epstein-Barr Virus Nuclear Antigen 2 (EBNA2) Gene Deletion Is Consistently Linked with EBNA3A, -3B, and -3C Expression in Burkitt’s Lymphoma Cells and with Increased Resistance to Apoptosis
Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 2 transactivates latent membrane protein LMP1
Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 is essential for B-lymphocyte growth transformation
Analysis of Epstein–Barr virus latent gene expression in endemic Burkitt’s lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma tumour cells by using quantitative real-time PCR assays
Guidelines for interpreting EBER in situ hybridization and LMP1 immunohistochemical tests for detecting Epstein-Barr virus in Hodgkin lymphoma
Epstein-Barr virus latency in blood mononuclear cells: Analysis of viral gene transcription during primary infection and in the carrier state
The Bcl2 family: Regulators of the cellular life-or-death switch
Essential role of BAX, BAK in B cell homeostasis and prevention of autoimmune disease
Epstein-Barr virus nuclear proteins EBNA-3A and EBNA-3C are essential for B-lymphocyte growth transformation
Two Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) oncoproteins cooperate to repress expression of the proapoptotic tumour-suppressor Bim: Clues to the pathogenesis of Burkitt’s lymphoma
BIM promoter directly targeted by EBNA3C in polycomb-mediated repression by EBV
MYC activation and BCL2L11 silencing by a tumour virus through the large-scale reconfiguration of enhancer-promoter hubs
The latent membrane protein 2 gene of Epstein-Barr virus is important for efficient B cell immortalization
ITAM-mediated tonic signalling through pre-BCR and BCR complexes
B cell receptor signal strength determines B cell fate
Rewiring of B cell receptor signaling by Epstein–Barr virus LMP2A
Molecular biology of Hodgkin’s and Reed/Sternberg cells in Hodgkin’s lymphoma
EBV and human microRNAs co-target oncogenic and apoptotic viral and human genes during latency
The Viral and Cellular MicroRNA Targetome in Lymphoblastoid Cell Lines
Human CD4+ T lymphocytes consistently respond to the latent Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen EBNA1
Epstein-Barr Virus Nuclear Antigen 3 (EBNA3) Proteins Regulate EBNA2 Binding to Distinct RBPJ Genomic Sites
Use of second-site homologous recombination to demonstrate that Epstein-Barr virus nuclear protein 3B is not important for lymphocyte infection or growth transformation in vitro
Two small RNAs encoded by Epstein-Barr virus and complexed with protein are precipitated by antibodies from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
Detection of EBV gene expression in Reed-Sternberg cells of Hodgkin’s disease
Cellular gene expression that correlates with EBER expression in Epstein-Barr Virus-infected lymphoblastoid cell lines
EBV noncoding RNA binds nascent RNA to drive host PAX5 to viral DNA
Gammaherpesviruses and lymphoproliferative disorders
Chromosomal integration of human herpesvirus 6 is the major mode of congenital human herpesvirus 6 infection
Epstein-Barr virus: 40 years on
Latency and lytic replication in Epstein-Barr virus-associated oncogenesis
EBV Persistence—Introducing the Virus
The expression pattern of Epstein-Barr virus latent genes in vivo is dependent upon the differentiation stage of the infected B cell
EBV persistence in memory B cells in vivo
EBV persistence without its EBNA3A and 3C oncogenes in vivo
Antiviral T-Cell Frequencies in a Healthy Population: Reference Values for Evaluating Antiviral Immune Cell Profiles in Immunocompromised Patients
Structure-based design of small-molecule inhibitors of EBNA1 DNA binding blocks Epstein-Barr virus latent infection and tumor growth
Adoptive T-Cell Therapy for Epstein-Barr Virus–Related Lymphomas
Epstein-barr virus vaccines
A virus-like particle-based Epstein-Barr virus vaccine
Assessing the Efficacy of VLP-Based Vaccine against Epstein-Barr Virus Using a Rabbit Model
Longitudinal analysis reveals high prevalence of Epstein-Barr virus associated with multiple sclerosis
Depicted are possible relationships between cells expressing different sets of EBV genes and the types of lymphomas found to express these subsets. Many of the assays for EBV gene expression also come from analyzing cells grown in vitro so that the subsets of genes expressed in vivo are not certain. The arrows represent possible progressions of cells that express one subset of viral genes to ones that express another subset. How each of these cell types evolves to be a bona fide lymphoma must be complex and uncertain. Upon the infection of naïve B cells, EBV expresses all latent genes (Latency III) which appear eventually to be restricted in expression along the path of B cell differentiation, which includes the germinal center reaction. Ultimately, EBV persists in recirculating memory B cells and expresses no detected viral proteins (Latency 0). Latent EBV may be activated by immunosuppression, chronic immune activation, or mutations, and can begin expressing viral proteins (Latency II and III), leading to B cells proliferating and potentially to lymphomagenesis.
EBV genes and functions implicated in lymphomagenesis.
Gene	Role in Lymphomagenesis	Where Expressed #	Phase	 	EBNA1	Required for the synthesis and partitioning of the viral genome Limits its own HLA class I presentation Inhibits recognition of infected cells by natural killer cells 	HL, BL, DLBCL,NK/T cell lymphoma	Latency I Latency II Latency III	 	EBNA2	Mediates B cell proliferation through the Notch signaling pathway Inhibits HLA class II presentation 		Latency III	 	EBNA3A/EBNA3C	Inhibits apoptosis and foster B cell proliferation by repressing tumor suppressor genes 	PEL, DLBCL	Latency III	 	EBNA3B	Inhibits tumor formation 	PEL, DLBCL	Latency III	 	LMP1	Mimics CD40 signaling to promote B cell proliferation through the NFκB pathway 	HL, PEL, DLBCL, NK/T-cell lymphoma	Latency IILatency III	 	LMP2A	Substitutes for B cell receptor signaling and thereby blocks apoptosis 	HL, PEL, DLBCL, NK/T-cell lymphoma	Latency IILatency III	 	BALF1 and BHRF1	Viral homologs of Bcl-2 that inhibit apoptosis during initial infection of B cells 		Early in initial infection	 	EBV miRNAs	Inhibit apoptosis Facilitate growth of tumor cells Inhibit CD8+ T cell recognition Inhibit CD4+ T cell recognition Inhibit NK cells 	All infected cell types	Latency ILatency II Latency III	 	EBERs	Involved in B cell transformation Protect infected cells from interferon alpha-induced apoptosis Foster the growth of infected cells 	All infected cell types	Latency 0Latency ILatency II Latency III
# HL, Hodgkin’s lymphoma; BL, Burkitt lymphoma; DLBCL, Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma; PEL, Primary Effusion Lymphoma; EBNAs, Epstein–Barr nuclear antigens; LMP, latent membrane protein; miRNAs, microRNAs.