Optimising small island developing states and overseas countries and territories classification for comparative public health research: an alternative methodological approach
Abstract
Aiming to investigate small island resilience in public health emergencies, we found existing classifications of Small Island Developing States (SIDS) failed to provide a homogeneous group suitable for comparative studies. While SIDS classifications highlight small states’ challenges globally, they include countries with vast differences in geography, population, economy and health systems, making them ineffective for studying public health emergency resilience. Islands classified as Overseas Countries and Territories (OCTs) face similar challenges to SIDS. Considering both in comparative research offers deeper insights into shared vulnerabilities and strengths, policy effectiveness and the variability in response strategies. As global health efforts focus on pandemic preparedness, a more precise classification system is essential to identify patterns across similar small island contexts. To improve comparability for public health research, we propose an alternative classification method that integrates SIDS and OCTs, using clear, data-driven criteria.
We applied three criteria to identify islands with comparable characteristics relevant to public health emergency resilience: population size≤1.5 million, insularity and Gross Domestic Product per capita≤US$30 000. This data-driven approach identified 51 islands forming a more homogeneous group for comparative analysis. Despite limitations in data availability, indicator reliability and the application of not universally standardised thresholds, our method offers a pragmatic response to the lack of uniform classification and highlights the need for standardised, context-sensitive data collection. While acknowledging the need for ongoing refinement and broader multidimensional indicators, this approach allows for more accurate research on public health emergency resilience, enabling small islands to better advocate for tailored support.

SUMMARY BOX
Existing classifications of Small Island Developing States result in highly heterogeneous groups and are therefore unsuitable for comparative public health research.
Many overseas island countries and territories share similar vulnerabilities, despite their affiliation to sovereign states. Their inclusion strengthens comparative analysis in public health research in small island settings.
Clear and data-driven selection criteria based on the study’s objectives enable the identification of a more homogeneous group of small islands, enhancing the validity of comparative public health research.
Significant limitations in data availability and reliability hinder rigorous analysis. A systematic, standardised approach to data collection and classification is needed to refine future research and inform targeted health policies for small island settings.

Limitations of current SIDS classifications and the need for refinement
SIDS are a distinct group of states across the Caribbean, Pacific, Atlantic, Indian Ocean and South China Sea (AIS), facing particular economic, developmental and environmental challenges. Although these challenges gained attention in the 1970s, SIDS were only formally recognised during the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. The SIDS classification provides political identity, supporting aid negotiations and resource allocation for economic and developmental purposes. While economic issues remain the primary focus, analytical and operational public health activities in SIDS have increased, particularly post-COVID-19. The SIDS classification is also frequently used in scientific literature. For research purposes, classification criteria should be transparent, data-driven and aligned with the study’s objectives. However, current SIDS classifications are inconsistent and lack uniformity. Different institutions use varying criteria, resulting in multiple SIDS lists. Mac Feely et al identified eight SIDS classifications, some of which have since evolved or aligned with others. table 1 presents the number of SIDS in the Caribbean, Pacific, AIS and Mediterranean Sea, according to each classification.
Number of SIDS in seven SIDS classifications
Classification scheme	Caribbean	Pacific	AIS	Mediterranean	Total	 	UN-OHRLLS	29	20	8	··	57	 	M49	27	20	8	··	55	 	UNESCO	23	17	8	··	48	 	AOSIS	16	15	8	··	39	 	OECD (DAC recipients)	12	16	7	··	35	 	SSF (Islands)	10	12	8	2	32	 	World Bank (IDA)	5	9	4	··	18
M49=United Nations standard country or area codes for statistical use.
··, no representation; AIS, Atlantic, Indian Ocean, and South China Sea; AOSIS, Alliance of Small Island States; DAC, Development Assistance Committee; IDA, International Development Association; OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; SIDS, Small Island Developing States; SSF, Small State Forum; UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; UN-OHRLLS, United Nations Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States.
While the SIDS classifications help highlighting small states’ challenges on the global agenda, they are unsuited for comparative public health research. Despite common challenges, SIDS within these classifications are not a homogeneous group. Multiple classification criteria and the possibility of self-appointment lead to significant variation in geographic, demographic, economic, social, cultural, political and health aspects. For instance, Belize, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana and Suriname experience a state of remoteness but are not islands or ‘small’. Bahrain and Singapore are islands, but structurally connected to the mainland. Meanwhile, Tristan da Cunha is known as the world’s most remote inhabited island without an airport. In 2021, SIDS populations ranged from 1836 (Niue) to 11 447 596 (Haiti). Similarly, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita ranged from US$836.90 (Guinea-Bissau) to US$114 274.60 (Bermuda).
Aiming to investigate small island resilience in public health emergencies, we evaluated different SIDS classifications but found that they failed to provide a homogeneous group suitable for our study. For the purpose of our study, we developed a research-driven, methodological approach, aimed at identifying a homogeneous group of islands for comparative public health research, without seeking to alter or challenge existing SIDS classifications or their administrative applications. Our focus was on small island settings with characteristics similar to the Dutch OCTs. Although often politically linked to sovereign states, OCTs share common characteristics with SIDS, including geographic isolation, resource limitations and economic dependence. Considering OCTs alongside SIDS offers deeper insights into policy effectivity, common vulnerabilities and strengths and the variability in responses to common challenges. To improve comparability among small islands for public health research, this paper presents an alternative classification method for identifying homogeneous groups of SIDS and OCTs.

A data-driven approach to classifying small islands for comparative public health research
First, we compiled a comprehensive list of small islands classified as SIDS and OCTs. We used the list of the United Nations Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN-OHRLLS), which includes the most SIDS compared with other classifications. Additionally, we included OCTs from Australia, Denmark, France, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, the UK and the USA. Duplicate entries, territories without permanent population (eg, uninhabited areas, military/research bases) and disputed territories were removed.
Second, we identified key dimensions and indicators to investigate small islands’ resilience in public health emergencies, particularly their capacity to prepare for and manage (re-)emerging health threats. Frameworks such as WHO’s health system resilience indicators, the Sendai framework for disaster risk reduction, WHO’s Health Emergency and Disaster Risk Management Framework and the International Health Regulations highlight key resilience components. However, no standardised indicators specifically assess public health emergency resilience in small islands. Drawing on our expertise in emergency preparedness and response in these settings, we selected geographic, demographic, socioeconomic and health system-related indicators, based on determinants of health.
Third, we gathered data on these indicators from the World Bank, United Nations Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) databases. Often, countries’ data were missing or outdated, requiring us to seek additional sources. This data scarcity significantly limited our ability to select suitable indicators for identifying a homogeneous group of small islands for our study. Finally, we applied three dimensions and selection criteria: size (population); insularity (geographical isolation with no causeways) and development (GDP per capita in current US$); based on MacFeely et al’s definition of SIDS.

Applying a 1.5 million population limit for comparability
In SIDS literature, small size often refers to small economies, usually measured by population size, land area, population density, GDP or income per capita. Although various definitions exist, no universal criteria define a small island setting. Small populations struggle in generating economies of scale, leading to limited capacities, expertise and higher costs when importing and maintaining basic services. Population size is a frequently used indicator and widely available in regional and global data centres. Thresholds defining small populations range from 1.5 million to over five million, with 1.5 million being the most common. Accordingly, we applied a 1.5 million cut-off to our SIDS and OCTs list.

Insularity as a measure of vulnerability
For the purpose of this study, we classified islands as insular if they are geographically isolated, shared if they are politically divided between two or more states, and connected if they have a physical link to the mainland, such as a bridge or causeway. Due to their physical distance and limited connections to larger economies, insular islands rely heavily on air and sea transportation, leading to high costs, logistical challenges and vulnerable supply chains. According to Cantu-Bazaldua, SIDS are generally less integrated into global shipping networks, but have better international air connections, likely due to their dependence on tourism. A notable exception is Tristan da Cunha, the most remote island without an airport, where travel and provisioning depends on the limited number of passing vessels. The journey from Cape Town takes approximately 6 days.
Reliable transport is crucial during public health emergencies to ensure access to medical supplies, personnel, evacuation and patient transfer. An island’s geographical location can therefore be a significant vulnerability. We used insularity as a proxy for these challenges. However, we assumed that islands physically connected to the mainland via causeways do not face the same degree of vulnerability. Consequently, shared islands were included, while islands tangibly connected to the mainland were excluded.

Applying a GDP-based threshold of <US$30 000
Ideally, a country’s development should not be defined solely by its economy, but also consider human well-being and capabilities. The Human Development Index (HDI), for instance, includes indicators such as life expectancy and years of schooling. Due to limited data (particularly for OCTs), we faced restrictions in selecting suitable development indicators for small island settings. GDP per capita is often used to measure economic strength and was available for most SIDS and OCTs in global data sets. In 2020, most developed countries reported a GDP per capita above US$30 000. Accordingly, we applied a <US$30 000 GDP per capita threshold to our SIDS and OCTs list.

Identification of 51 small islands for comparative analysis
Within our first methodological step, we identified 57 SIDS and 78 OCTs. Several OCTs appeared in the SIDS classification, so we removed duplicates (n=20). Additionally, we excluded disputed territories (n=5) and those without permanent populations (n=25). This resulted in 85 countries and territories for further investigation. Applying our selection criteria led to the exclusion of 30 more. GDP per capita data were unavailable for Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Pitcairn Islands and Svalbard, leading to their exclusion. table 2 presents an overview of excluded SIDS and OCTs.
Excluded SIDS and OCTs based on the criteria: total population, insularity and GDP per capita
Size	 	Total population >1 500 000	Cuba, Dominican Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Hong Kong, Jamaica, Papua New Guinea, Puerto Rico, Singapore	 	Insularity	 	Non-insular*	Belize, French Guiana, Gibraltar, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hong Kong, Macao, Singapore, Suriname	 	Development	 	GDP per capita US$ >30 000	Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Faroe Islands, Gibraltar, Greenland, Guam, Guernsey, Hong Kong, Isle of Man, Jersey, Macao, New Caledonia, Norfolk Island, Puerto Rico, Singapore, St Barthélémy, St Pierre and Miquelon, US Virgin Islands
Non-insular meaning mainland and causeway islands.
GDP, Gross Domestic Product; OCTs, Overseas Countries and Territories; SIDS, Small Island Developing States.
Ultimately, we considered 51 countries and territories a comparable group of small islands for our study. table 3 presents the selected islands and corresponding data per indicator. Data supporting this study’s findings are openly available.
Selected group of island settings and identified data per indicator
States/countries/economies	SIDS*	OCTs†	Region	Population, total	Insularity‡	GDP per capita (US$)	 	American Samoa	x	x	Pacific	45 035	Insular	16 653.70	 	Anguilla	x	x	Caribbean	14 503	Insular	19 106.00	 	Antigua and Barbuda	x		Caribbean	93 219	Insular	17 178.50	 	Aruba	x	x	Caribbean	106 537	Insular	29 127.80	 	Azores		x	Atlantic Ocean	236 413	Insular	17 398.00	 	Bahamas	x		Caribbean	407 906	Insular	27 871.40	 	Barbados	x		Caribbean	281 200	Insular	17 568.30	 	Bonaire		x	Caribbean	26 805	Insular	23 700.00	 	Cabo Verde	x		Atlantic Ocean	587 925	Insular	3490.00	 	Comoros	x		Indian Ocean	821 625	Insular	1577.50	 	Cook Islands	x	x	Pacific	15 204	Insular	16 099.00	 	Curaçao	x	x	Caribbean	152 369	Insular	17 908.10	 	Dominica	x		Caribbean	72 412	Insular	7668.20	 	Fiji	x		Pacific	924 610	Insular	4656.10	 	French Polynesia	x	x	Pacific	304 032	Insular	20 230.20	 	Grenada	x		Caribbean	124 610	Insular	9010.50	 	Guadeloupe	x	x	Caribbean	407 400	Insular	23 925.00	 	Kiribati	x		Pacific	128 874	Insular	2244.10	 	Madeira		x	Atlantic Ocean	250 744	Insular	18 485.00	 	Maldives	x		Indian Ocean	521 457	Insular	10 076.30	 	Marshall Islands	x		Pacific	42 050	Insular	6130.40	 	Martinique	x	x	Caribbean	353 285	Insular	25 047.00	 	Mauritius	x		Indian Ocean	1 266 334	Insular	9069.00	 	Mayotte		x	Indian Ocean	294 431	Insular	10 735.00	 	Micronesia	x		Pacific	113 131	Insular	3447.30	 	Montserrat	x	x	Caribbean	4440	Insular	15 971.00	 	Nauru	x		Pacific	12 511	Insular	14 018.90	 	Niue	x	x	Pacific	1836	Insular	19 464.00	 	Northern Marianas	x	x	Pacific	49 481	Insular	17 302.90	 	Palau	x		Pacific	18 024	Insular	12 752.90	 	Reunion		x	Indian Ocean	868 084	Insular	23 360.00	 	Saba		x	Caribbean	1911	Insular	22 800.00	 	Samoa	x		Pacific	218 764	Insular	3857.70	 	São Tomé and Príncipe	x		Atlantic Ocean	223 107	Insular	2350.50	 	Seychelles	x		Indian Ocean	99 258	Insular	14 982.90	 	Solomon Islands	x		Pacific	707 851	Insular	2151.30	 	St Eustatius		x	Caribbean	3142	Insular	28 200.00	 	St Helena		x	Atlantic Ocean	5415	Insular	11 370.00	 	St Kitts and Nevis	x		Caribbean	47 606	Insular	18 036.00	 	St Lucia	x		Caribbean	179 651	Insular	10 213.10	 	St Maarten (Dutch side)	x	x	Caribbean	40 708	Shared island	28 433.00	 	St Martin (French side)		x	Caribbean	31 948	Shared island	20 320.70	 	St Vincent and the Grenadines	x		Caribbean	104 332	Insular	8360.10	 	Timor-Leste	x		Pacific	1 320 942	Shared island	2742.00	 	Tokelau		x	Pacific	2225	Insular	7445.00	 	Tonga	x		Pacific	106 017	Insular	4426.00	 	Trinidad and Tobago	x		Caribbean	1 487 715	Insular	16 056.30	 	Turks and Caicos Islands	x	x	Caribbean	45 114	Insular	23 180.90	 	Tuvalu	x		Pacific	11 204	Insular	5372.80	 	Vanuatu	x		Pacific	319 137	Insular	2978.00	 	Wallis and Futuna		x	Pacific	11 590	Insular	11 674.00
According to UN-OHRLLS classification.
Including island territories affiliated to the USA, UK, the Netherlands, France, New Zealand, Portugal and Australia; derived from multiple sources.
Excluding causeway islands.
OCTs, Overseas Countries and Territories; SIDS, Small Island Developing States; UN-OHRLLS, United Nations Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States.

Navigating complexities and data limitations in identifying comparable small island groups
We developed an alternative method to classify SIDS and OCTs for studying public health emergency resilience of small islands. Existing SIDS classifications were unsuitable, as they grouped islands with significant demographic, economic, political and health variations. Also, some OCTs share similar challenges to SIDS but have distinct political and economic ties to larger nations. Incorporating both SIDS and OCTs allows comparative analysis and enriches small island representation in public health research, offering a more holistic perspective. Identifying a homogeneous group is crucial for effective comparisons and meaningful conclusions on public health emergency resilience in small island settings.
Adequate parameters, relevant to the study’s objectives, are needed to identify small islands with similar characteristics and yield meaningful insights. Our study sought parameters related to public health emergency resilience. While WHO provides health system resilience indicators, broader determinants of health, for example, economic, political or sociocultural indicators, are lacking. The United Nations and other international institutions use indices such as the Economic Vulnerability Index (EVI) and the Multidimensional Vulnerability Index (MVI) for SIDS to assess financial vulnerability. Few consider multidimensional aspects of preparedness and response, like the US COVID-19 Community Vulnerability Index. Socioeconomic status, healthcare system, epidemiological and environmental factors (including household composition, housing type and transportation) should be integrated in data sets. Current planetary health perspectives emphasize that human health is inextricably linked to environmental and social conditions.  Small islands are highly vulnerable to climate change and environmental hazards, which directly impact health. In the absence of uniform determinants defining public health emergency resilience in small island settings, we investigated key dimensions and indicators relevant to our study.
Data availability proved a major challenge, as global and regional data centres lacked information, particularly on demographics, health, education and labour. About 50% of the selected countries and territories had limited data, especially OCTs, whose data are often aggregated with their sovereign states. By limiting our selection to indicators available for all islands, we minimised the risk of missing data. However, this restriction also narrows the scope of our selection approach. The validity of the proposed selection methodology for public health research is therefore constrained by the indicators used, which in our case reflect data availability, rather than the full range of determinants relevant for public health emergency resilience. In future applications, our method could incorporate different sets of indicators tailored to specific research questions, provided that consistent data are available. Our methodological approach, therefore, presents a pragmatic entry point, but its design is flexible. As data availability improves, additional indicators could be incorporated to capture public health emergency resilience in small island contexts more comprehensively. To ease the burden on resource-limited islands, a standardised method for systematic data collection should be developed.
Data validity and reliability were another concern. Different sources reported varying values for the same indicator in the same year. For instance, Fiji’s 2021 GDP per capita ranged from US$4305 to US$4791. In such cases, we prioritised World Bank data and used other credible sources when necessary. Not all commonly used indicators suit small island settings. Population-based indicators, such as the Maternal Mortality Ratio (per 100 000 live births), for example, can be misleading. On an island with 1000 births annually, one maternal death results in a ratio of 100, inflating statistical significance. Similarly, GDP per capita can be skewed by economic reliance on a single commodity like tourism. The GDP paradox highlights that high GDP per capita does not ensure better quality of life or equitable wealth distribution. Broader measures like the HDI or Gini index offer better insights, but are often unavailable.
We recognize the limitations of our criteria and cut-off values for identifying a homogeneous group of small island settings. While the 1.5 million population threshold excluded highly populated countries, significant variations remain. For instance, Trinidad and Tobago (1 487 715 people) is hardly comparable to Niue (1836 people). Even among the Dutch Caribbean, population differences from Curaçao (152 369) to Saba (1911) complicate comparisons. However, this does not mean findings of our resilience study are inapplicable to other islands. The insularity criterion may also exclude countries like Suriname, which share similar health and political challenges with small islands. In some cases, landlocked countries with small populations may be more comparable to small islands than larger island states. Ultimately, criteria and cut-off values must align with the specific research objectives.
Our selection process applied fixed cut-off values for population and GDP per capita. Since these values vary annually, our 2021 data represent only a snapshot. The reliance on fixed thresholds inevitably limits the long-term utility of our methodology. Future population growth or economic shifts could change which islands meet the inclusion criteria, even if their vulnerabilities remain unchanged, reducing consistency in the selected group. Such variability has implications for the practical utility of the method. While fixed cut-offs provide clarity and reproducibility, differences observed in future analyses may reflect changes in group membership rather than genuine trends, thereby reducing the reliability of conclusions. Nevertheless, the current approach retains practical value. Its transparency and reproducibility make it suitable for establishing a baseline, enabling snapshot comparisons and providing an entry point for research and policy dialogue. To enhance the stability of our methodology and strengthen its utility, further research is needed to adjust these variations. A dynamic selection approach could mitigate these fluctuations, such as using broader value ranges, a 3-year rolling average or weighting indicators based on their stability or significance. From a public health emergency resilience perspective, developing an index, based on multidimensional health factors, could provide a consistent framework and encourage cross-learning among islands.

Towards a more suitable SIDS classification for public health research
SIDS classifications provide political identity and support aid negotiations for economic development. Yet, we argue that they are unsuitable for comparative public health research due to their high heterogeneity. We propose an alternative classification with newly defined criteria tailored to public health research. Our method successfully identified a more comparable group of small islands to study public health emergencies resilience. However, its applicability and validity could be further improved to better address the complexities of small islands in public health research.
Funding: This study was funded by the Dutch Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport (VWS) through the WHO Collaborating Centre activities within the National Coordination Centre for Communicable Disease Control at the National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM).
Handling editor: Henry E E Rice
Patient consent for publication: Not applicable.
Ethics approval: Not applicable.
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

References
United nations office of the high representative for least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing states. List of SIDS
United nations conference on trade and development. third session of the united nations conference on trade and development (unctad iii)
Constructing a criteria-based classification for Small Island Developing States: An Investigation
United nations statistics division. methodology: standard country or area codes for statistical use (m49)
UNESCO and small island developing states (sids)
AOSIS member states
ODA recipients: countries, territories, and international organisations
Support to small states
Borrowing countries
Towards an ocean-based large ocean states country classification
Tristan da cunha shipping schedules
Our world in data
World bank group open data
Health system resilience indicators: an integrated package for measuring and monitoring health system resilience in countries
Sendai framework for disaster risk reduction 2015-2030
Health emergency and disaster risk management framework
International health regulations (2005)
Small economies: a literature review
Report of the global conference on the sustainable development of small island developing states
Cantu-Bazaldua F. Remote but well connected? Neighbouring but isolated? Measuring remoteness in the context of small island developing states 2021. contract no.: unctad research paper no.67 (unctad/ser.rp/2021/10)
Human development index (HDi)
Handbook of statistics 2021 [internet]
Data from: Supplemental material for “Optimizing Small Island Developing States and Overseas Countries and Territories classification for comparative public health research: An alternative methodological approach
Towards a multidimensional vulnerability index
Comparison of National Vulnerability Indices Used by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for the COVID-19 Response
Safeguarding human health in the Anthropocene epoch: report of The Rockefeller Foundation-Lancet Commission on planetary health
The 2024 report of the Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: facing record-breaking threats from delayed action
Explorer
The GDP paradox
Caribbean netherlands; population, sex, age and country of birth

Data availability statement
Data are available in a public, open access repository.