One Acne™: A holistic management approach to improve overall skin quality and treatment outcomes in acne with or without sensitive skin
Abstract
Acne and sensitive skin can take a profound toll on patients' well‐being, which can be exacerbated if the conditions are experienced together. This narrative review aims to identify appropriate treatments to facilitate a holistic management approach to acne (One Acne™), sensitive skin, and acne‐induced sequelae and describe the role of treatments in improving skin quality. Topical retinoids are considered the preferred first‐line option for acne treatment by dermatologists, either as monotherapy or in combination with other treatments, because of their ability to target various aspects of the disease. Tretinoin, trifarotene, adapalene, and tazarotene have all been assessed in clinical studies for managing acne‐associated scarring, with varying success, with the latter three reported to improve skin quality. Moreover, some corrective procedures, e.g., injectable non‐animal stabilized hyaluronic acid (NASHA) fillers, have proven effective for treating acne scarring. Both treatment types may complement each other to provide optimal treatment outcomes and patient satisfaction, as observed in several patients receiving concomitant treatment with NASHA fillers/topical trifarotene. Adjunctive use of cleansers, moisturizers, and photoprotection‐containing ingredients such as vitamin B3, glycerin, or pro‐vitamin B3 may also complement drug/corrective treatments to reduce skin irritation and risk of scarring, as well as improve skin hydration, tone, and overall appearance. This narrative review highlights that comprehensive skincare regimens should be used throughout acne patients' journeys to reduce treatment‐related irritation, improve treatment outcomes, adherence, and satisfaction, and enhance overall skin quality. Patients with sensitive skin should choose tailored skincare products to maintain skin barrier integrity and restore skin function.

Introduction
The physical and emotional effects of dermatologic conditions can profoundly affect patients' psychological well‐being and quality of life. In particular, acne can significantly impact its sufferers, which is thought to be responsible for a greater disease burden than psoriasis, cellulitis, and melanoma. According to the 2019 Global Burden of Disease study, acne is the greatest dermatologic cause of burden in individuals aged 10–24. Quantified by the percentage of disability‐adjusted life years (DALYs), this is an increase of 41.5% since 1990 (1.1–1.6 DALYs). Additionally, another global burden survey found that adults and children with combined facial and truncal acne were twice as likely to report a “very large” or “extremely large” impact on their quality of life than those with only facial acne. This has implications for patients' daily lives, with truncal acne sufferers spending a substantial amount of time on their daily skincare routine (60 min/day). Self‐management skincare options such as hydrocolloid patches have the potential to be a convenient and effective approach for managing mild‐to‐moderate facial acne, and could help reduce the time spent on daily skincare routines.
Additionally, acne sequelae such as atrophic scarring and acne‐induced hyperpigmentation (AIH) can exacerbate the burden that sufferers already experience. Many patients report experiencing stigma because of their acne and subsequent scarring, with 37% reporting instances of verbal and/or physical bullying because of their sequelae. Patients may experience embarrassment and reduced self‐esteem, so they look for products that help to manage or cover up their visible lesions. According to one survey, over 80% of patients with a Dermatology Life Quality Index over 10 (indicating their skin condition has a “very” or “extremely” large effect on their life) routinely used cosmetic camouflage to hide their acne scarring.
Sensitive skin, another highly prevalent dermatologic condition, affects approximately 60%–70% of women and 50%–60% of men globally. A condition that has been historically ambiguous in nature, sensitive skin is characterized by specific sensory reactions, such as stinging or burning, that are induced by contactors and/or environmental factors, often without visible clinical manifestations. One survey study reported that individuals with sensitive skin experienced a significantly greater burden compared with those without the condition (N = 100; P < 0.001).
Additionally, some patients may experience multiple dermatologic conditions simultaneously, exacerbating the overall burden. A skin‐profiling survey study found that 92% of patients with acne reported sensitive skin on their face, and 85% reported sensitive skin on their body.
Despite the well‐documented burden of both acne and sensitive skin, there is still a lapse in communication between healthcare professionals (HCPs) and patients in several key management areas, particularly for acne, as identified by the Personalizing Acne: Consensus of Experts (PACE) panel. Notably, facilitating clear and effective education regarding patients' treatment may significantly improve compliance, as patients were four times more likely to follow HCP directions when the role of skincare products was explained versus when no explanation was given. Moreover, it is vital for HCPs to provide patients with comprehensive and reliable information about skincare products that complement and enhance the efficacy of acne therapies such as drug treatments (e.g., topical retinoids) and corrective procedures (e.g., injectable non‐animal stabilized hyaluronic acid [NASHA] fillers). This is particularly important considering the often misguided but increasingly sought‐after advice given by social media influencers. Some dermatologists have already established themselves as social media influencers to provide accurate and reliable patient information. One study found that acne‐related content created by physician influencers had higher engagement than content created by private companies or non‐physician influencers, suggesting that consumers generally seek and trust health information from medical professionals when researching their condition and skincare options.
The Cleanse, Treat, Moisturize, Protect (CTMP®) regimen, as conceptualized by Goh et al., that utilizes cleansers, moisturizers, and photoprotection (CMP) can be used to complement drug treatments and corrective procedures (T). When addressing the needs of patients with acne, we introduce the concept of One Acne™—an approach tailored for those suffering from this condition. By using a holistic management approach such as One Acne™, patients may experience improved treatment outcomes and enhanced overall skin quality throughout their acne treatment journey. This article reviews the feasibility and efficacy of the One Acne™ approach.

Methods
A search was conducted to identify various aspects of current literature on using a holistic skincare regimen to manage acne and/or sensitive skin. Establishing the pathogenetic differences between acne‐prone/sensitive skin and “normal” skin provided insight into how cleansers, moisturizers, and photoprotection—when used as an adjunct for drug treatments or corrective procedures—can enhance overall skin quality and treatment outcomes in patients with acne and/or sensitive skin.
PubMed was used to search MEDLINE articles published between January 1, 2000, and February 16, 2024, using terms designed to review aspects relating to the use of cleansers, moisturizers, and photoprotection to complement acne and/or sensitive skin treatment (e.g., “cleansers,” “moisturizers,” “photoprotection,” “pharmacodynamics,” “sensitive skin,” “acne,” “esthetic”). Additional searches were performed from the resulting 2323 articles to remove duplicated publications that did not contribute to the research questions or had no abstract available until 37 references remained.

Evidence

Skin profiling of acne‐prone and sensitive skin
Understanding the profile of acne‐prone and sensitive skin is vital for developing effective management strategies such as One Acne™. A global skin‐profiling survey found that 56% of participants have a greater prevalence of acne on the face compared with other parts of the body and that individuals with oily skin are more prone to developing acne. Further research has identified several contributing factors, including increased keratinization and cornification of sebaceous follicular ducts, excessive sebum production via dysfunctional sebocyte differentiation, dysbiosis of the skin microbiome, and loss of Cutibacterium acnes diversity. These factors, alongside a heightened inflammatory response, contribute to the impaired skin barrier integrity observed in acne‐prone skin, which may be responsible for comedone formation and increased skin sensitivity. Additionally, the duration and severity of inflammation may contribute to the atrophy of sebaceous gland structures and, consequently, increase the risk of acne scarring, highlighting the need for early intervention using acne drug treatments to prevent or reduce the risk of scar development.
Similarly, impaired skin barrier function is implicated in sensitive skin; reflectance confocal microscopy has shown significant differences between sensitive skin and healthy controls in “disarranged honeycomb patterns,” “honeycomb structure depths,” and “spongiform edema” proportions (P < 0.05). This can facilitate the penetration of irritants and allergens, increase trans‐epidermal water loss (TEWL), and heighten the sensitivity of nerve endings to neurogenic inflammation. Additionally, inflammation in sensitive skin is related to increased levels of inflammatory PGE‐2, which can induce further inflammation and excessive skin cell division in high concentrations.
Patients with both acne and sensitive skin may experience a greater risk of skin irritation versus those with only acne, which can manifest as itching, redness, and burning. These findings highlight the need for a multi‐faceted management approach to address the underlying causes and symptom burden. Tailored skincare products and prescription treatments can improve treatment tolerability, enhance patient satisfaction, and ultimately improve treatment outcomes. However, despite ~40% of sufferers having been prescribed a treatment to manage their acne, only 11% of these were also prescribed a skincare regimen (e.g., moisturizers, cleansers) to support their overall skin health during acne treatment.

One Acne™ Treat (T): Topical drug treatments for acne management
The American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) 2024 acne guidelines consider retinoids such as adapalene, tretinoin, tazarotene, and trifarotene as fundamental among topical acne treatments as they target various aspects of the disease, e.g., comedones, inflammation, and dyspigmentation. Alongside treating active acne, trifarotene, adapalene, tretinoin, and tazarotene have all been assessed as monotherapies for preventing and managing acne‐associated scarring in a clinical trial setting. Trifarotene was well tolerated and showed promising results in a large phase 4 study (N = 121), with significantly reduced total atrophic acne scar counts compared with vehicle within 24 weeks (mean absolute change from baseline count: −6.2 vs. −2.8; P < 0.0001), and statistical significance established as early as Week 2 (P = 0.001). Patients also reported a greater reduction in the severity of active acne and atrophic acne scars with trifarotene compared with vehicle (−3.2 vs. −2.5 and − 3.0 vs. −2.3, respectively). Post hoc analyses demonstrated that trifarotene significantly reduced atrophic acne scar counts compared with vehicle across all age groups, sexes, and Fitzpatrick skin phototypes I–IV. Significant reductions were also observed in individuals categorized as White or Asian; however, while improvements were observed in Fitzpatrick skin types V–VI, and individuals categorized as Black, these differences were not statistically significant. Beyond its efficacy in scarring, Alexis et al. investigated the efficacy of trifarotene in combination with a skincare regimen for treating AIH (N = 63), with trifarotene significantly improving AIH overall disease severity compared with vehicle at Week 12 (P = 0.03), but with comparable scores by Week 24. Treatment with adapalene also demonstrated improvements in skin texture and atrophic scarring, as assessed by global scarring grade and investigator/subject global assessments, in 50% of patients within 20 weeks of treatment initiation in a phase 2 study (N = 20). Early studies of tretinoin (N = 21 and N = 11) demonstrated marked size reductions of hypertrophic scars and keloids after daily application, establishing retinoids as a key component of the acne armamentarium. Moreover, treatment outcomes with once‐daily home application of tazarotene were found to be comparable with invasive microneedling for the management of acne‐associated scarring in a prospective, randomized clinical trial (N = 36).
These topical retinoids have also been investigated for their effects on overall skin quality improvement. During a gene expression profiling study, trifarotene was found to improve skin hydration through the activation of aquaporin 3 and peptidyl arginine deiminase expression, as well as downregulate matrix metalloproteinases to reduce the degradation of elastic fibers and maintain skin elasticity, both of which could contribute to improved skin quality. Additionally, TEWL, skin hydration, general skin tone, and number of wrinkles were significantly improved in patients with cutaneous photoaging after treatment with adapalene (P < 0.05), assessed quantitatively using systems to measure complexion (VISIA® Complexion Analysis System) and skin elasticity (Cutometer MPA 850®). Daily application of tazarotene reduced the severity of fine wrinkles and AIH compared with vehicle treatment in a randomized, parallel‐group study where evaluators assessed response to treatment on a 7‐point scale (N = 349). Topical tretinoin has been assessed and subsequently approved by the FDA for the palliation of wrinkles, mottled hyperpigmentation, and tactile roughness in photodamaged facial skin. In post hoc analyses, both tretinoin and tazarotene demonstrated efficacy for reducing AIH, with varying degrees of improvement observed across ethnic groups (e.g., Hispanic patients experienced greater improvements in AIH following tretinoin treatment than Asian patients).

One Acne™ Treat (T): Corrective procedures for the treatment of acne and/or sensitive skin
Some corrective procedures have proven to be effective additions to the treatment armamentarium for various dermatologic conditions, including acne and sensitive skin. In a study of patients with sensitive skin (N = 226), a multifunctional laser photoelectric platform and topical moisturizer as adjuvant to oral hydroxychloroquine led to a significantly greater improvement in symptoms versus hydroxychloroquine alone (P < 0.05). The study suggests that the laser enhances epidermal penetration for swifter and greater delivery of the moisturizer, providing immediate soothing and anti‐inflammatory relief. A novel 1726 nm infrared diode laser device has also been assessed for its ability to treat mild‐to‐severe acne in adult patients (N = 17) by selectively targeting sebum in the sebaceous glands. The laser reduced the total inflammatory lesion count by 52% within the first month, and although all patients experienced mild erythema, the treatment was well tolerated overall.
Furthermore, an interventional study showed that NASHA fillers were effective and well tolerated for treating moderate‐to‐severe atrophic acne scarring, with treatment outcomes continuously improving until study completion at Week 36 (N = 12). Adverse events were primarily mild‐to‐moderate, treatment‐related, and expected. Hyaluronic acid injections may contribute to soft‐tissue augmentation and improved skin quality, including managing acne scarring, by stimulating collagen production. This may be achieved in several different ways—through the mechanical stretching of fibroblasts, stimulation of growth factors, or the inhibition of collagen breakdown.
Drug treatments and corrective procedures may complement each other to provide optimal treatment outcomes and patient satisfaction. A sequential approach to acne management involving topical trifarotene followed by NASHA injections showed effective improvements in the appearance of acne scars, as well as in overall skin quality, e.g., elasticity, tone, and hydration.
Additionally, chemical peels and ablative lasers are recommended for managing acne scarring and skin aging for all skin types, including those with photodamaged skin and/or skin of color, because they are deemed noninvasive. However, proper pre‐ (e.g., UV protection, retinoids, skin‐brightening agents) and post‐treatment skincare (e.g., light‐hydrating moisturizers, broad‐spectrum UV protection, avoiding sweating to support wound healing) should be used concomitantly to enhance outcomes and reduce downtime (wound‐healing period).

One Acne™ Cleanse, Moisturize, Protect (CMP): Skincare products to improve skin quality
An expert panel recently defined skin quality into four distinct and measurable domains – texture (e.g., pores, lines, scars), discoloration (e.g., redness, pigmentation, dullness), firmness (e.g., laxity), and hydro‐lipid balance (e.g., dryness, oiliness). Dermocosmetics show promise in enhancing most, if not all, of these skin quality categories. While many clinical trials incorporate some form of CMP alongside active acne treatments, the specific contributions of these products are not the primary focus. However, the observed improvements in treatment outcomes in control groups prompt the tentative hypothesis that CMP can independently contribute to positive treatment outcomes.
Understanding the mechanism of action behind these observed improvements can enable HCPs to recommend the most suitable products to their patients for concomitant use alongside therapies. For example, cleansers should effectively remove sebum and debris from the skin's surface while preserving its natural intercellular lipid integrity and ensuring optimal moisturization, with lipid‐free cleansers thought to be optimal for acne‐prone skin as they are associated with a lower risk of skin irritation and a near‐physiological stratum corneum pH. Similarly, moisturizers have been shown to repair damaged skin by restoring stratum corneum integrity, increasing skin hydration, reducing TEWL and susceptibility to irritation, and improving overall skin appearance. To reduce skin irritation, the PACE panel identified that cleansers should be used twice daily, contain a well‐tolerated surfactant, and be noncomedogenic, while moisturizers should be light‐textured, noncomedogenic, and lipid‐free. The use of photoprotection may reduce the likelihood of ultraviolet (UV) radiation exacerbating active acne and causing AIH or erythema, as well as improve treatment adherence, conceal lesions (if using tinted sunscreen), and decrease inflammation.
Our review has found that specific ingredients commonly found in CMP products can effectively address various skin concerns that are relevant to patients with acne with or without sensitive skin, as presented in Table 1. For example, the plant‐derived retinol alternative bakuchiol has demonstrated efficacy in improving skin smoothness, clarity, radiance, hydration, and overall appearance in patients with sensitive skin.54 In an in‐vitro study, the active ingredient Sensiline® Complex (CECI–Innovation and Consumer Studies Center, Barueri/SP and Hypermarcas S/A [Mantecorp Skincare]; consisting of bisabolol, hydroxymethoxyphenyl decanone, and pentylene glycol 4‐5‐butylcyclohexanol) decreased levels of PGE‐2, a marker associated with sensitive skin, by 66.4%.
Recommended properties of cleansers, moisturizers, and photoprotection to improve treatment outcomes and satisfaction in patients with acne and/or sensitive skin
Cleansers	 	Intended effect on skin	Property/Ingredient	 	Reduces skin irritation	Lipid‐free, pH‐balanced, well‐tolerated surfactant	 	Reduces risk of comedone development	Noncomedogenic	 	Improves skin hydration	Bakuchiol, Ceramides, Vitamin B3 (through de novo synthesis of ceramides), Pro‐vitamin B3, Glycerin, Hyaluronic acid	 	Improves skin barrier function	Ceramides, Vitamin B3	 	Soothes disrupted skin	Vitamin B3	 	Enhances overall skin appearance	Bakuchiol, Vitamin B3	 	Improves skin tolerance to active ingredients (e.g., via promoting a reduced inflammatory response)	SensC,a Bakuchiol	 	Augments soft tissue and stimulates collagen/elastin production	Hyaluronic acid	 	Moisturizers	 	Reduces skin irritation	Lipid free, Light‐textured	 	Reduces risk of comedone development	Noncomedogenic	 	Improves skin hydration	Bakuchiol, Ceramides, Vitamin B3 (through de novo synthesis of ceramides), Pro‐vitamin B3, Glycerin, Hyaluronic acid	 	Improves skin barrier function	Ceramides, Vitamin B3	 	Soothes disrupted skin	Vitamin B3	 	Enhances overall skin appearance	Bakuchiol, Vitamin B3	 	Improves skin tolerance to active ingredients (e.g., via promoting a reduced inflammatory response)	SensC,a Bakuchiol	 	Augments soft tissue and stimulates collagen/elastin production	Hyaluronic acid	 	Photoprotection	 	Reduces risk of AIH and/or treatment‐induced photosensitivity	Minimum SPF 30,, UV‐A and high‐energy visible, light protective	 	Reduces skin irritation	Light‐textured	 	Reduces risk of comedone development	Noncomedogenic	 	Improves skin hydration	Glycerin, Hyaluronic acid
Contains bisabolol, hydroxymethoxyphenyl decanone, pentylene glycol 4‐5‐butylcyclohexanol.
AIH, acne‐induced hyperpigmentation; SPF, sun protection factor; UV, ultraviolet.
Vitamin B3 (niacinamide), commonly used in dermo‐cosmetic products, has been demonstrated to increase glucosylceramide and sphingomyelin levels, as well as stimulate the synthesis of ceramides by keratinocytes in patients with dry skin. Vitamin B3 is also thought to combat skin dryness that can develop following topical retinoid treatment by attenuating the overexpression of aquaporin‐3 through the inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor and extracellular signal‐regulated kinase. Additionally, vitamin B3 is thought to soothe disrupted skin by attenuating oxidative stress and inflammatory responses. It is also thought to enhance skin barrier function and smooth skin tone by upregulating ceramide and filaggrin synthesis and inhibiting melanosome transfer to disrupt the pigmentation process, respectively.
Skincare products containing ceramides can exogenously replenish natural skin ceramides to improve barrier function, reduce TEWL, and maintain stratum corneum hydration. Other widely used ingredients in dermo‐cosmetic products, pro‐vitamin B3 and glycerin, can reduce TEWL to increase hydration and keep skin moisturized. However, hyaluronic acid is a prime component of skincare products because it improves skin hydration by enhancing water‐retaining aspects of the skin barrier, stimulating collagen and elastic production, and augmenting soft tissue. Topical hyaluronic acid as an adjunct to fractional laser treatment was also found to significantly enhance acne scar improvement and patient satisfaction vs. fractional laser treatment alone (N = 242; P < 0.0001).
Dysfunction in various components of the epidermal barrier, such as stratum corneum lipids, natural moisturizing factors, corneocyte maturation, desquamation, and the microbiome, can cause the skin to become dry, flaky, or sensitive. The One Acne™ approach emphasizes selecting CMP products tailored to individual acne‐prone and sensitive skin needs. This is particularly important as research shows that nearly 75% of patients with acne do not prioritize specialized formulations when choosing skincare products.
Further individualizing treatment plans and skincare recommendations to account for the diversity of patient populations is also crucial, as ethnicity, skin type, age, and gender can all influence treatment outcomes and adherence. Patients prone to irritation and sequelae development—for example, those from an Asian background or those with sensitive skin or darker Fitzpatrick types—should adopt a One Acne™ treatment approach when initiating a retinoid or potentially irritating topical treatment. This approach would incorporate ingredients that restore skin barrier function (e.g., vitamin B3, ceramides) to alleviate skin irritation and aid the lesion healing process. Patients with acne should also prioritize using broad‐spectrum photoprotection with a minimum SPF of 30 to prevent and treat AIH, particularly among those with darker Fitzpatrick skin types. For these patients, sunscreen that is protective against UV‐A and high‐energy visible light is also recommended, as darker Fitzpatrick skin types are more prone to hyperpigmentation induced by UV‐A and visible light than by UV‐B radiation.
Although pediatric acne is uncommon, nonprescription products and skincare are pivotal for its management as many drug treatments are not approved for use in patients under 9 years old, and oral isotretinoin is commonly reserved for severe acne in adolescents. Cleansers and moisturizers that contain or promote the synthesis of ceramides can alleviate dryness and irritation; however, additional research is warranted to clarify their specific role in pediatric acne management. Furthermore, skin is thought to become less hydrated, less elastic, more permeable, and more prone to irritation as it ages; therefore, mature patients with acne may benefit from lipid‐free, pH‐balanced skincare products that contain ingredients such as ceramides, vitamin B3, glycerin, and hyaluronic acid.
Gender differences may also play a role in skincare recommendations. Men often experience higher sebum production and may benefit from sebum‐regulating, lipid‐free, and non‐comedogenic products. Women may experience hormonal shifts that affect skin thickness, potentially impairing barrier function and causing dryness; therefore, products containing bakuchiol, ceramides, vitamin B3, or hyaluronic acid may be recommended.
Furthermore, corrective procedures and skincare regimens are complementary and, when combined, can lead to reduced downtime, decreased risk of scarring, improved patient satisfaction, and better treatment outcomes. These outcomes have been reported following the adjuvant use of noninvasive facial rejuvenation methods (e.g., photoprotection, moisturizers, retinoids, alpha‐hydroxy acids, and antioxidants) alongside invasive procedures like neuromodulators and filler injections. A study involving patients with acne who underwent microneedling demonstrated that a probiotic regimen with photoprotection led to superior results and reduced downtime compared with traditional skincare (N = 40).

Skincare throughout the Patient Journey
Developed using market research data and presented in Figure 1, acne sufferers' journey reveals key insights into how individuals manage their condition. Many sufferers initially attempt to control their acne themselves through various skincare products. For example, hydrocolloid patches containing ingredients such as salicylic acid and benzoyl peroxide (BPO) are popular options for reducing inflammation and the appearance of active lesions. The use of BPO, in particular, is recommended by the AAD guidelines because of its antimicrobial and comedolytic properties. However, despite these initial self‐management attempts, roughly 33% of sufferers eventually consult an HCP, often triggered by worsening symptoms or the development of truncal acne/sequelae. However, the report highlights a potential gap in acne management: Only half of dermatologists recommend skincare products during initial consultation. This highlights a need for HCPs to proactively discuss skincare regimens and provide recommendations for products specifically formulated for their patient's needs, as many individuals currently rely on general skincare products not designed for acne.
The journey of acne sufferers was compiled following an analysis of 28 primary research reports to assess a range of stakeholders' beliefs, feelings, and actions throughout their journey. *Stakeholders included teenagers (12–18 years of age), young adults (18–24 years of age), adults (25+ years of age), parents, and HCPs. Cx, consumer; HCP, healthcare professional; JPAC, Japan, Pacific, Asia, and China; OTC, over‐the‐counter; Rx, prescription; US, United States.
The global skin‐profiling study further supports the need for tailored skincare recommendations. Patients with acne and sensitive skin believe that skincare products should be cleansing (54%), hydrating (48%), tailored for sensitive skin (44%), provide photoprotection (41%), and brighten skin (36%). The PACE panel also recommended that patients' daily skincare regimens be discussed at each consultation to facilitate an individualized management approach.
Moreover, the use of decorative cosmetics over topical treatments is counterproductive because it is thought to exacerbate follicular plugging to cause lesions, thus counteracting the therapeutic actions of the treatment. However, if the patient wishes to persist with decorative cosmetic use, HCPs should recommend noncomedogenic, nonirritating, oil‐free, and photoprotective products to cover lesions. HCPs should also ensure that they advise patients to use appropriate decorative cosmetics that are compatible with prescribed medications, photoprotective, improve self‐esteem and quality of life, and reduce skin‐picking.

Conclusions
Establishing a skincare regimen incorporating cleansers, moisturizers, and photoprotection can improve overall acne treatment outcomes and skin quality, tone, and texture in most individuals, regardless of specific factors influencing skin type. Additionally, incorporating effective and highly tolerable skincare products into acne treatment regimens or supplementing invasive corrective procedures (One Acne™) may improve treatment outcomes. By improving treatment tolerability and overall skin quality, these products may increase treatment adherence and increase patient satisfaction. The One Acne™ approach may be particularly beneficial for patients with sensitive skin or those who have previously experienced adverse reactions to drug treatments or corrective procedures. Different skincare products may be more beneficial at different stages of a patient's acne treatment journey, so HCPs should recommend complementary skincare products at each key decision point that will provide optimal results when used in conjunction with their treatment regimen. Factors contributing to skin type differences, such as age, gender, ethnicity, Fitzpatrick skin type, and sensitivity, should also drive a personalized approach to One Acne™ regimens.
The data suggests that the One Acne™ approach may improve acne treatment outcomes across various treatment modalities. This article has reviewed its application in sensitive skin to supplement drug treatments for acne and its use alongside corrective procedures, highlighting the importance of a comprehensive and tailored One Acne™ regimen to enhance overall skin quality.

References
A call for action to tackle the increasing global burden and challenges of acne
Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019
Acne's hidden truth: burden summary report; combined facial and truncal acne 2020
A pilot study on efficacy treatment of acne vulgaris using a new method: results of a randomized double‐blind trial with acne dressing
Identifying gaps and providing recommendations to address shortcomings in the investigation of acne sequelae by the personalising acne: consensus of Experts panel
Acne's hidden truth: burden of scarring summary report
The prevalence of sensitive skin
Sensitive skin: review of an ascending concept
Burden of sensitive skin (BoSS) questionnaire and current perception threshold: use as diagnostic tools for sensitive skin syndrome
Diversity and inclusion in dermatology: a worldwide profiling of sensitive skin. Presented at World Congress of Dermatology (WCD) 2023. July 3–8 2023, Singapore, Singapore
The Personalised Acne Care Pathway‐recommendations to guide longitudinal management from the Personalising Acne: consensus of Experts
Recommendation of moisturizers and cleansers: a study of unmet needs among dermatology patients
Social media in dermatology and an overview of popular social media platforms
Navigating digital dermatology: an analysis of acne‐related content on Tiktok
Expert consensus on holistic skin care routine: focus on acne, rosacea, atopic dermatitis, and sensitive skin syndrome
Characterization of acne‐prone skin with reflectance confocal microscopy and optical coherence tomography and modifications induced by topical treatment and probiotic supplementation
Biophysical and biological tools to better characterize the stability, safety and efficacy of a cosmeceutical for acne‐prone skin
Transcriptomics analysis indicates trifarotene reverses acne‐related gene expression changes
The microbiome and acne: perspectives for treatment
Impaired water barrier function in acne vulgaris
Skin barrier function and the microbiome
Acne vulgaris and the epidermal barrier: is acne vulgaris associated with inherent epidermal abnormalities that cause impairment of barrier functions? Do any topical acne therapies alter the structural and/or functional integrity of the epidermal barrier?
Effect of multifunctional laser photoelectricity platform combined with hydrozychloroquine treatment sensitive facial skin
Inflammation in acne scarring: a comparison of the responses in lesions from patients prone and not prone to scar
Atrophic scar formation in patients with acne involves long‐acting immune responses with plasma cells and alteration of sebaceous glands
Reflectance confocal microscopy for the evaluation of sensitive skin
Role of topical emollients and moisturizers in the treatment of dry skin barrier disorders
Sensitive skin: lessons from transcriptomic studies
Neuromodulatory and anti‐inflammatory ingredients for sensitive skin: in vitro assessment
Anti‐inflammatory and skin barrier repair effects of topical application of some plant oils
Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris
Trifarotene reduces risk for atrophic acne scars: results from a Phase 4 controlled study
Adapalene 0.3% gel shows efficacy for the treatment of atrophic acne scars
The local treatment of hypertrophic scars and keloids with topical retinoic acid
Retinoic acid in the treatment of keloids
Topical tazarotene gel, 0.1% as a novel treatment approach for atrophic postacne scars: a randomized active‐controlled clinical trial
Phase 4 analyses: trifarotene reduces atrophic acne scars across all skin types with greater effect in subjects with higher baseline acne and acne scarring severity. Poster #P0028 presented at the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology 2024. September 25–28 2024, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Importance of treating acne sequelae in skin of color: 6‐month Phase IV study of trifarotene with an appropriate skincare routine including UV protection in acne‐induced post‐inflammatory hyperpigmentation
Nonclinical and human pharmacology of the potent and selective topical retinoic acid receptor‐gamma agonist trifarotene
Clinical efficacy of adapalene (Differin®) 0.3% gel in Chilean women with cutaneous photoaging
Tazarotene cream for the treatment of facial photodamage: a multicenter, investigator‐masked, randomized, vehicle‐controlled, parallel comparison of 0.01%, 0.025%, 0.05%, and 0.1% tazarotene creams with 0.05% tretinoin emollient cream applied once daily for 24 weeks
40 years of topical tretinoin use in review
Effects of topical retinoids on acne and post‐inflammatory hyperpigmentation in patients with skin of color: a clinical review and implications for practice
Selective photothermolysis with a novel 1726 nm laser beam: a safe and effective solution for acne vulgaris
Effectiveness and safety of acne scar treatment with nonanimal stabilized hyaluronic acid gel
Association between collagen production and mechanical stretching in dermal extracellular matrix: in vivo effect of cross‐linked hyaluronic acid filler. A randomised, placebo‐controlled study
In vivo stimulation of de novo collagen production caused by cross‐linked hyaluronic acid dermal filler injections in photodamaged human skin
Sequential treatment with topical trifarotene and injectable NASHA gel in acne scars: a case series
Pre‐ and post‐interventional skin care for laser and peel treatments
An advanced physician‐strength retinol peel improves signs of aging and acne across a range of skin types including melasma and skin of color
Development of a Novel Skin Quality Assessment Scale (SQS). Presented at the Aesthetic & Anti‐aging Medicine World Congress (AMWC) 2024. March 27–29 2024, Monte Carlo, Monaco
Choosing the right partner: complementing prescription acne medication with over‐the‐counter cleansers and moisturizers
Gentle cleansing and moisturizing for patients with atopic dermatitis and sensitive skin
Clinical evaluation of a nature‐based bakuchiol anti‐aging moisturizer for sensitive skin
Clinical effectiveness of moisturizers in atopic dermatitis and related disorders: a systematic review
Psoriasis and skin barrier dysfunction: the role of gentle cleansers and moisturizers in treating psoriasis
The importance of photoprotection and moisturization in treating acne vulgaris
Sun exposure, a relevant exposome fator in acne patients and how photoprotection can improve outcomes
The structure, function, and importance of ceramides in skin and their use as therapeutic agents in skin‐care products
Nicotinamide increases biosynthesis of ceramides as well as other stratum corneum lipids to improve the epidermal permeability barrier
Mechanistic basis and clinical evidence for the applications of nicotinamide (niacinamide) to control skin aging and pigmentation
Skin moisturizing effects of panthenol‐based formulations
Dynamics of glycerine and water transport across human skin from binary mixtures
Hyaluronic acid, a promising skin rejuvenating biomedicine: a review of recent updates and pre‐clinical and clinical investigations on cosmetic and nutricosmetic effects
Hyaluronic acid: a key molecule in skin aging
Photoprotection according to skin phototype and dermatoses: practical recommendations from an expert panel
Make‐up improves the quality of life of acne patients without aggravating acne eruptions during treatments
Nicotinamide attenuates aquaporin 3 overexpression induced by retinoic acid through inhibition of EGFR/ERK in cultured human skin keratinocytes
The role of nicotinamide in acne treatment
Efficacy of fractional CO2 laser therapy combined with hyaluronic acid dressing for treating facial atrophic acne scars: a systematic review and meta‐analysis of randomized controlled trials
Epidermal barrier function in dry, flaky and sensitive skin: a narrative review
Racial/ethnic variations in acne: a practical algorithm for treatment and maintenance, including skincare recommendations for skin of colour patients with acne
A review of the topical management of acne and its associated sequelae in the Asia‐Pacific region with a spotlight on trifarotene
The many faces of pediatric acne: a practical algorithm for treatment, maintenance therapy, and skincare recommendations for pediatric acne patients
Insights into acne and the skin barrier: optimizing treatment regimens with ceramide‐containing skincare
Intrinsic and extrinsic factors in skin ageing: a review
Gender differences in skin: a review of the literature
A randomized study to assess the efficacy of skin rejuvenation therapy in combination with neurotoxin and full facial filler treatments
Skin care management for medical and aesthetic procedures to prevent scarring
Noninvasive facial rejuvenation. Part 3: physician‐directed‐lasers, chemical peels, and other noninvasive modalities
Topical application of skin biome care regimen containing live cultures and ferments of Cutibacterium acnes defendens strain XYCM42 and the impact on clinical outcomes following microneedle‐induced skin remodeling
Gelatin/chitosan bilayer patches loaded with cortex Phellodendron amurense/Centella asiatica extracts for anti‐acne application