Mini-review on the therapeutic vaccines targeting chronic infectious diseases: Evaluation system of therapeutic vaccines targeting HPV and EBV-related cancers
ABSTRACT
Chronic infectious diseases are threatening human health today, and their public health severity is increasing. The efficacy issues of drugs and the increase in drug-resistant pathogens require new response strategies for chronic infectious diseases, and therapeutic vaccines have recently been proposed as an effective alternative. However, research on therapeutic vaccines is still relatively underdeveloped. To solve this problem, an accurate understanding of the status and the challenge at hand of therapeutic vaccines targeting chronic infectious diseases is needed. In the present review, we provide an overview of the latest research trends in therapeutic vaccines targeting chronic infectious diseases and summarize the development status of therapeutic vaccines currently undergoing clinical research, focusing on the cases of human papillomavirus (HPV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) as representative examples. We highlight the importance of standard methods for the evaluation of therapeutic vaccine, focusing on the cell-mediated immune response, which might accelerate therapeutic vaccine development.

Introduction
Chronic infectious diseases, unlike acute infectious diseases, are infectious diseases that exhibit the characteristics of continuous and gradual onset and progression of the disease. As human lifespan has been extended with the development of medicine, the importance of maintaining health free from disease during one’s lifetime has been greatly increasing. And the need to respond to chronic infectious diseases, which are seriously threatening a healthy lifespan, are emerging as an important public health problem. Because chronic infectious diseases cause persistent symptoms and require long-term treatment, a large number of people are still suffering from the causative agents of chronic infectious diseases currently. For example, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), one of the representative chronic infectious diseases, currently causes about 1.65 million new infections and 700,000 deaths every year, but there is still no Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved therapeutic vaccine. In the case of hepatitis B virus (HBV), another major chronic infectious disease, a preventive vaccine has already been developed, but a therapeutic vaccine has not yet been developed, so the 257 million carriers who are already infected are exposed to the threat of cirrhosis and liver cancer. Accordingly, there is an urgent need to develop effective prevention/treatment methods to address the serious human, social, and economic burden caused by chronic infectious diseases.
With recent progress in immunology, the possibility of using therapeutic vaccines to treat chronic infectious diseases is emerging, and research and development of therapeutic vaccines targeting various chronic infectious diseases is in progress. However, there is still a lack of related research on therapeutic vaccines, and clear evaluation standards for verifying vaccine efficacy have not been established, resulting in many difficulties in actual development of therapeutic vaccines. Therefore, in order to effectively respond to chronic infectious diseases through the use of the therapeutic vaccines, an immunological understanding of the therapeutic vaccine and the establishment of a vaccine efficacy evaluation system based on it must be preceded. This review examines therapeutic vaccines for chronic infectious diseases, focusing on the development of vaccines for EBV and HPV, which are representative chronic infectious disease pathogens. Through this, we would like to understand the verification system for clinical evaluation of current therapeutic vaccines and propose an immunological analysis system necessary for the development of treatment vaccines for chronic infectious disease in the future.

The role of vaccines in treating chronic infectious diseases

Chronic infectious disease
Chronic infectious disease refers to an infectious disease in which the onset and progression of the disease is continuous and gradual. Although the official definition of chronic infectious disease is not established yet, generally cases that take more than 6 months from the onset of the disease to cure or death are classified as chronic infectious diseases. Unlike acute infectious diseases, where the onset of symptoms and the resulting human and social losses are immediately apparent, the symptoms and resulting ramifications of chronic infectious diseases appear gradually, and as a result, the public health seriousness caused by chronic infectious diseases tends to be relatively underestimated. However, chronic infectious diseases are difficult to cure and require long-term management and treatment due to the pathogenicity of long-term incubation and recurrence within the host. In addition, the continued progression of the disease imposes a significant socioeconomic cost burden on patients and causes a serious decline in quality of life. Furthermore, chronic infectious diseases not only cause symptoms due to the infectious disease itself, but also weaken the patient’s immune system and organ function, and induce continuous tissue damage, increasing the opportunity for additional infection with other pathogens and causing various complications, including cancer. However, chronic infectious diseases vary in the form of maintenance depending on the characteristics of the pathogen, and in the case of clinical symptoms, not only do they appear differently depending on the pathogens, but they can also appear in a very diverse spectrum even depending on the same pathogens. Accordingly, unlike preventive vaccines that target only the infectious pathogen itself, in the case of vaccines aimed at treating chronic infectious diseases, clinical symptoms caused by infection must be taken into consideration, so the efficacy of the therapeutic vaccine needs to be evaluated using different criteria depending on each clinical condition.

Therapeutic vaccine
The concept of conventional vaccines has been developed as a means of preventing diseases caused by pathogen infection in advance by activating the immune system to respond to pathogens before infection. However, recently, the concept of therapeutic vaccines has begun to emerge, aimed at treating diseases caused by abnormalities in the immune system or incurable diseases that cannot be cured by the natural immune system through regulation of the immune system. Therapeutic vaccines are distinct from general treatments with drugs which have a direct therapeutic function in that vaccines do not cure disease by itself but induce the immune response performing therapeutic effects. They are attracting attention as a means of selectively and effectively treating the disease by controlling the body’s immune system through selection and control of administered antigens.
However, the exact concept and definition of the term ‘therapeutic vaccine’ has not yet been clearly established. Especially in the field of infectious diseases, where the life-cycle of causative pathogen and clinical symptoms varies depending on the type of infectious disease, the standards and scope of treatment targets (symptom of pathogen) are ambiguous, leading to conflicting opinions related with therapeutic vaccine. The unclear concept of a therapeutic vaccine mainly arises from the mixing of ‘objects’ of treatment through vaccines. In light of the concept of a traditional vaccine (prophylactic vaccine) that prevents the infection mechanism of a pathogen, the target of a therapeutic vaccine can be understood as the infected pathogen itself (i.e., eradication of already infected pathogens is the goal of a therapeutic vaccine). In the case of some chronic infectious diseases, however, pathogens often maintained their genetic information by the genomic integration into host genome, which it is hardly possible to be completely eliminated through the function of immune system. In these cases, clinically important and practically targetable treatment targets are ‘symptoms’ caused by infectious conditions. In fact, many therapeutic vaccines currently entering the clinical trial stage are developed for the purpose of alleviating symptoms induced in latent infection situations rather than eradicating the genome of latently infected pathogens, and their efficacy is evaluated according to relevant standards. (Ex: EBV-related cancer treatment vaccine, HPV-related cancer treatment vaccine).
A clearer definition of therapeutic vaccines would be established by differentiating them from prophylactic vaccines. While prophylactic vaccines are administered to healthy people before infection by pathogens, therapeutic vaccines are administered to people with confirmed infection, so it is possible to distinguish between the two depending on the time of vaccination (before infection: prophylactic & after infection: therapeutic). Accordingly, we propose to redefine therapeutic vaccines for infectious diseases as ‘vaccines that are administered after infection by pathogens to stimulate the immune system and block the development of diseases caused by persistent infection.’

Current status of clinical research on therapeutic vaccines for chronic infectious diseases
In the design of vaccine formulations, except for first-generation vaccines that use the entire pathogen, such as killed- and live attenuated-vaccines, selection of an appropriate target antigen is a key factor in determining successful induction of protective immunity. In the case of a general prophylactic vaccine, as the main purpose of the immune system formed by the vaccine is to block the infection in advance by neutralizing the pathogen, surface proteins expressed on the outside of the intact pathogen are usually preferred as target antigens of the prophylactic vaccine.
Meanwhile, in order for a vaccine to work for therapeutic purposes, consideration of additional target antigens is often required depending on the characteristics of chronic infectious diseases. In the case of some chronic infectious diseases such as persistence infection of Varicella-Zoster virus (VZV) or cytomegalovirus (CMV) which have the characteristic of causing no risk in the latent infection state but inducing symptoms upon reactivation of the pathogen, a strategy for inducing an immune response that can neutralize re-activated virus particles can be applied in therapeutic vaccines for these, targeting surface antigens just like as prophylactic vaccines. However, in the case of other chronic infectious diseases such as HPV and EBV infections that can cause serious symptoms (tumor development) in the latent infection stage without production of virus particles, it is necessary to directly induce the death of cells which are already infected with the pathogen and express viral-latent proteins. As these case of therapeutic vaccines for tumorigenic chronic infectious diseases, the tumor-targeted treatment effect can be maximized by using viral-oncoproteins as direct target antigens, therapeutic vaccines targeting HPV and EBV that are currently being studied are in most cases, the target antigen is a viral-latent proteins rather than viral-surface proteins.

Therapeutic vaccine for HPV-associated cancer
HPV is a virus belonging to the Papillomaviridae family, and is divided into a high-risk group that mainly causes cancer and a low-risk group that causes benign lesions depending on the epidemiological relationship. Representative high-risk groups include HPV types 16 and 18, and when they infect various squamous cells or the skin, they cause malignant tumors in the uterus, anus, and genitals. As preventive vaccines for high-risk HPV infection, vaccine products developed by GlaxoSmithKline and Merck, respectively, have been approved and are already in clinical use. Both types of products are vaccines in the virus-like particle (VLP) formulation and use the late protein 1 (L1) capsid protein as a target antigen to induce neutralizing antibodies against virus particles. However, it is known that the HPV preventive vaccine is not effective in treating patients with advanced chronic infection. As the efficacy of the therapeutic vaccine for HPV-associated cancer is largely dependent on cellular immunity rather than humoral immunity, and as capsid genes are often missing as the HPV genome is integrated into the host gene, the target antigen of a therapeutic vaccine to treat chronic infection with HPV needs to be different than the preventive vaccine.
It is known that latent infection with HPV mainly expresses early protein 1, 2, 6, and 7 (E1, E2, E6, and E7), and it is well known that among these, E6 and E7 proteins are factors that play a very important role in the development of HPV-related tumors. E6 protein induces the decomposition of p53, a cancer suppressor, while E7 protein inhibits the activity of retinoblastoma protein (pRB), another cancer suppressor, thereby inducing indiscriminate proliferation of cells and inducing tumors. Accordingly, oncoproteins E6 and E7 are considered the two most important target antigens for HPV therapeutic vaccines, and are widely used as targets for most HPV therapeutic vaccines currently in development.
Most HPV therapeutic vaccines currently in clinical trials are being developed using E6 and E7 proteins as target antigens, and the clinical efficacy is evaluated based on the survival rate of participant and reduction of tumor diameter as primary indicators. However, although the evaluation of immune response by vaccination in each clinical study is ongoing as an auxiliary indicator in some studies, but it tends not to be presented as a direct evaluation standard for vaccine effectiveness.

Therapeutic vaccine for EBV-associated cancer
EBV is a virus belonging to the Orthoherpesviridae family, and it is mainly spread through saliva and can also be spread through blood transfusion or bone marrow transplant. EBV infection is one of the most common infections in humans, and in most cases, no special symptoms appear. However, when immunodeficient patients, such as AIDS or bone marrow transplant patients, are infected with this virus, they develop various malignant tumors malignant tumors such as lymphoma, gastric cancer, and nasopharyngeal cancer. Although there is no approved vaccine for EBV prevention of treatment yet, various studies of EBV vaccine development are proceeding.
In the case of prophylactic vaccines of EBV mainly use the viral envelope proteins (glycoprotein 350/220, glycoprotein 42, glycoprotein H, glycoprotein L, etc.) as target antigens, while therapeutic vaccines often use latent protein that promotes tumorigenesis as the main target antigen. Viral-latent proteins known to play an important role in the transformation of EBV-related tumors include Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1), latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1), and latent membrane protein 2 (LMP2). EBNA1 is an essential factor in maintaining the EBV episome and induces disruption of various signaling systems of host cells. LMP1 and LMP2 are cell membrane proteins and are known to promote tumorigenesis of infected cells by mimicking the constitutively activated signaling pathway of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor and B cell receptor, respectively.
Status of clinical trials for therapeutic vaccines targeting HPV and EBV*.
Vaccine	Antigen	Sponsor/developer	Platform	Clinical stage and ID	 	HPV	ADXS11–001	E7 (HPV16)	Advaxis, Inc	Bacterial vectored vaccine	Phase 2/NCT02291055,NCT02002182,NCT02164461,NCT02531854	 	TA-HPV	E6, E7 (HPV16/18)	European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer	Viral vectoredvaccine	Phase 2/NCT05799144	 	ProCervix	E7 (HPV16/18)	Genticel	Recombinantprotein	Phase 2/NCT01957878	 	ISA101b	E6, E7 (HPV16)	ISA pharmaceuticals	Recombinantprotein	Phase 2/NCT02128126,NCT03258008,NCT04646005	 	SGN-00101	E7 (HPV16)	Nventa Biopharmaceuticals	Recombinantprotein	Phase 2/NCT00054041,NCT00091130,NCT00060099	 	pNGVL4a-Sig/E7(detox)/HSP70	E7 (HPV16)	Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins	DNA vaccine	Phase 1/NCT00788164	 	INO-3112	E6, E7 (HPV16/18)	Inovio Pharmaceuticals	DNA vaccine	Phase 2/NCT03162224,NCT04001413,NCT02163057,NCT03439085	 	GX-188E	E6, E7 (HPV16/18)	Genexine	DNA vaccine	Phase 2/NCT03444376,NCT05286060,NCT02139267,NCT05280457,NCT05280457	 	BNT113	E6, E7 (HPV16)	BioNTech SE	mRNA vaccine	Phase 2/NCT04534205	 	EBV	Ad5-EBV-LMP2	LMP2	The People’s Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region	Peptide vaccine	Phase 1/NCT00078494	 	MVA-EL	EBNA1, LMP2	Cancer Research UK	Viral vectoredvaccine	Phase 1/NCT01147991	 	MVA-EBNA1/LMP2	EBNA1, LMP2	Chinese University of Hong Kong	Viral vectoredvaccine	Phase 2/NCT01094405	 	LPX-mLMP2	LMP2	West China Hospital	mRNA vaccine	Phase 1/NCT05714748	 	mRNA-1195	Detailed information not disclosed	ModernaTX, Inc.	mRNA vaccine	Phase 1/NCT05831111
*Data from the homepage of each company and Clinicaltrials.gov.
EBV therapeutic vaccines currently undergoing clinical trials are mainly being developed using EBNA1 and LMP1 proteins as target antigens, and most studies are still in the early stages of clinical trials, so it is understood that the focus is on confirming the safety of the vaccine rather than its efficacy. Representative research cases that have been developed for the treatment of HPV- and EBV-related tumors and are currently in the clinical trial stage are summarized in Table 1.

Efficacy evaluation of therapeutic vaccine
The clinical efficacy evaluation of therapeutic vaccines is often conducted on people who have already been confirmed to be infected and a relatively small number of recruitment groups is required, so it appears to be relatively advantageous compared to the cases of prophylactic vaccine in some aspects. However, unlike prophylactic vaccines which have clear purposed as protection against infection, since the type of symptoms in chronic infectious diseases have large variety depending on the characteristics of the pathogen, there are many difficulties in establishing clear standards for determining efficacy. For this reason, effective surrogate efficacy indicators for therapeutic vaccines are strongly demanded.
The immune correlate of protection (ICP) can play an important role in proving the immunogenicity and potential efficacy of vaccine candidates at the basic research stage and pre-clinical research stage, and in assessing the likelihood of success and selecting priorities for clinical trials. Especially in therapeutic vaccines, since induction of cell-mediated immunity (CMI) is considered as critical factors to block the development of chronic disease, establishment of ICP based on CMI is essential in the research and/or approval process. Indeed, the importance of T cell immune response has been emphasized in many recent therapeutic vaccine studies, and accordingly, efforts to quantify CMI using specific methods are in progress.
Examples of cell-mediated immune response analysis technique.
Technique	Examples of CMI factors to be analyzed	Mainly used detection devices	Technical characteristics	 	Cell surface marker staining	− Immune cell profiles− Memory T cell induction− Cell activation/proliferation	− Flow cytometer	− Provides basic information on immune cells subject to analysis− Requires specific marker information of cells to be analyzed and securing of fluorescent antibodies	 	Intracellular cytokine staining	− Cytokine-secreting cells	− Flow cytometer	− Numerical analysis of cells secreting specific cytokines− Analysis of the total amount of secreted cytokines is not possible	 	ELISpot(using antigen-stimulated cells)	− Secreted cytokines	− Spot reader/analyzer	− (Semi-)quantification of specific cytokines and proportion of cytokine-secreting cells by antigen stimulation− Dedicated device required for quantitative analysis of spot	 	ELISA(using serum)	− Secreted cytokines	− Spectrophotometers	− Quantification of specific ‘cytokines’− Requires relatively simple experimental procedures compared to ELISpot− Analysis of the proportion of cytokine-secreting cells is not possible− Direct measurement of cytokines secreted in body fluids has low specificity and sensitivity for specific antigens	 	Multimer assay	− Antigen-specific T cells	− Flow cytometer	− Detection and quantification of T cells binding to specific antigens− Information of antigenic epitope and MHC multimer production technology are required	 	CTL assay	− Cytotoxic activity of T cells to target cells	− Beta/Gamma counters (Cr51 release assay)− Flow cytometer(Fluorescent labeling/staining assay)	− Measurement of direct killing effect on cells expressing target epitope− In the case of Chromium-51 release assays, there is a risk of using radioisotopes
Various techniques can be used for measuring CMI Table 2. Pro-inflammatory cytokines which are secreted from activated T cells can be measured using Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSpot (ELISpot) or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) analysis, and cytokine secreted cell number is able to be quantified using flow cytometry analysis. In addition to analyzing cytokine secretion by activated T cells, quantifying of vaccine antigen-specific T cells using multimer/tetramer can also provide important information related with cellular immunity activated by therapeutic vaccination. Furthermore, through the cytotoxic T Lymphocyte (CTL) assay, which analyzes the killing efficacy of target protein expressing cells during co-culturing with CTL extracted from vaccinated animals/humans, the therapeutic effect against infected cells can be quantitatively analyzed. Due to the characteristic of chronic infectious diseases where infection persists for a long time, the induction of memory cells is also an important factor in affecting the efficacy of a therapeutic vaccine, and this can be analyzed through detection of memory cell-specific markers using flow cytometry. Since the type of required sample, sensitivity, and analyzable information for each test method are different, they need to be applied complementary to each other.
In a study conducted by Kast WM and his colleagues on the therapeutic vaccine for HPV-related tumors, the correlation between CMI which were confirmed through ELISpot assay, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) tetramer assay, and CTL assay and survival rates of mice xenografted with HPV-related tumors were confirmed. The results of this study showed that the activation of CD8+ T cells and the composition of memory T cells induced by the HPV therapeutic vaccine are major factors that determine the efficacy of the therapeutic vaccine. In addition, Lou PJ and his colleagues suggested that CMI as a major factor associated with the therapeutic effect of the vaccine for EBV-related nasopharyngeal cancers. In their study, after administering a DNA vaccine expressing EBV-LMP1 to mice xenografted with EBV-related tumors, they observed the tumor treatment effect of the vaccine. Along with this, overall/LMP1-specific cytokine levels were measured using ELISA/ELISpot, and activated CD8+ T cells were analyzed using flow cytometry. Through this, they suggested that the CMI induced by the vaccine is related to the tumor treatment effect of the vaccine.
Even in the case of clinical trials, in order to reduce the time, costs and size of subject recruitment, and to optimize the optimal vaccination dose, route, method, and schedule, establishment of ICP can be critical. However, the measurement standards for CMI responses in clinical trials of therapeutic vaccines have not yet been clearly established. Unlike humoral immune response, which can be determined by simple quantification of antigen-specific antibodies, there are difficulties in standardizing evaluation tests for CMI. The baseline activity for cellular immunity is different for each individual, and the variation in each measurement of cellular immunity indicators is very large, so setting a reference value for efficacy evaluation is complicated. In addition, standardization of experimental methods and related materials is still far away, and the correlation between certain cellular immunity and actual efficacy for each infectious disease is still ambiguous. Accordingly, in order to establish a clear ICP for a therapeutic vaccine, it is essential to establish standard operating procedures (SOPs) for the various cellular immune assessment methods described above and quantitative evaluation criteria for each infectious disease. In addition, securing standard/reference materials for SOP implementation is a task that must be resolved first. Lastly, in order for the standard materials and standard SOPs established in this way to be established as a practically usable system, an efficacy evaluation system for therapeutic vaccines for each disease must be listed, and an international agreement system for guiding and complying with the standard procedures of each evaluation system must be established.

Conclusion and perspective
Based on various medical, social, and environmental indicators, the clinical burden of chronic infectious diseases is predicted to increase more and more as time goes by. In this situation, therapeutic vaccines are expected to serve as a major response to incurable chronic infectious diseases in the future. To date, the development of therapeutic vaccines for chronic infectious diseases is relatively underdeveloped, but it is expected that therapeutic vaccine development research will develop rapidly in both quantity and quality in response to increasing clinical demand. In order for the therapeutic vaccines developed in this way to lead to actual clinical use, it is essential to establish an effective verification system for them. To achieve this, we will need to understand the immunological targets of therapeutic vaccines administered after infection, while making efforts to standardize analysis systems of vaccine-induced immune response based on them.
Advances in vaccine-related technology have enabled the development of vaccines with higher immunogenicity than before. mRNA vaccines, which have recently attracted the most attention, have proven their excellent efficacy during the COVID-19 pandemic. mRNA vaccines are known to induce CMI very effectively due to the formulation characteristics of lipid nanoparticles and nucleic acid vaccines used as carriers. These characteristics are noteworthy in therapeutic vaccines that primarily require cellular immune responses. From this perspective, research on the development of therapeutic vaccines based on mRNA formulations is being actively conducted recently, and it is expected that vaccines with higher therapeutic effects will be developed by incorporating mRNA formulation.
CMI is considered a key factor for host in responding to chronic infectious diseases. Its importance is especially emphasized in the treatment of chronic infectious diseases that require direct killing of infected cells, such as HPV- and EBV-related cancer. In addition, because it is well known that reactivation in latent infection with pathogens such as VZV and Mycobacterium tuberculosis, etc. is induced by a decrease in CMI activity of host cells formed after initial infection, CMI should be an important consideration not only in therapeutic vaccines but also in prophylactic vaccines to suppress primary infections in chronic infectious diseases. However, to date, there are few accurate standards regarding the type and value of CMI that can be directly used to determine the efficacy of vaccines for chronic infection. This can be due to the fact that the types of CMI associated with therapeutic effects vary depending on the type of infection, and requirement of relatively complex experimental procedures and materials in CMI analysis compared to humoral immunity analysis. Accordingly, efforts are needed to discover immune biomarkers that can be used as a standard for evaluating the therapeutic efficacy of each chronic infectious disease, and to develop novel techniques which have simpler and more efficient procedures. Although this review highlights the importance of CMI assays, the role of humoral immunity in the efficacy of therapeutic vaccines should not be overlooked. In the case of chronic infectious diseases such as VZV or CMV, which develop disease through reactivation of the pathogen, therapeutic vaccine should suppress reactivation/reinfection of the pathogen, and in this case, not only CMI but also neutralizing antibodies targeting the reactivated/reproliferated virus may play an important role, In addition, the production of binding antibodies may lead to the death of cells latently infected with pathogens by antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). When evaluating the efficacy of therapeutic vaccine for chronic infectious diseases, therefore, CMI responses and humoral immunity need to be considered together.
In order for the immune response analysis method to be actually used in clinical trials, standardization and validation of the test method are essential. To achieve this, the establishment of standard materials and reference materials to be used as evaluation criteria must be preceded. Currently, research is underway at various organizations, including the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC), to establish standard/reference materials that can be used in various testing methods. However so far, it mainly consist with materials that can be used in humoral immunoassays or diagnostic methods, such as serum, antibodies, and genetic material (DNA or RNA). Although it is relatively difficult to secure and standardize materials that can be used for CMI analysis (immune cells, T cell epitope library, MHC multimer, cytokines, etc.), in order to promote the development of therapeutic vaccines for chronic infectious diseases, it is urgently necessary to overcome current difficulties and develop reliable standard materials or replaceable materials through active use of various manufacturing and/or purification technologies.
The potential bias in vaccine efficacy assessments due to racial and regional limitations is another important challenge. Recent studies have shown that vaccine immunogenicity can vary significantly depending on race, age, underlying disease, and genetic influences. In a recent commentary paper, Jethwa H and colleagues suggested that the comparative evaluation of clinical trial data for Covid-19 vaccines should take into account not only ethnicity and geographic distribution but also sociocultural behaviors that may affect host-pathogen interactions. In this perspective, the establishment of a systematic and integrated strategy for cohort collection for vaccine efficacy evaluation is emphasized. Securing a test group that can encompass more diverse races, regions, and cultures can lead to more accurate and widely applicable evaluation results.
Schematic diagram of development and efficacy evaluation of therapeutic vaccine for chronic infectious disease. Figure is created with BioRender.com.
Based on the above summary, we propose the flowchart in Figure 1 as a procedure for evaluating the efficacy of therapeutic vaccines for chronic infectious diseases. Detailed evaluation criteria and their validation methods must be adjusted according to the characteristics of each pathogen and accompanying disease, but based on the special nature of chronic infectious diseases/therapeutic vaccines, consideration of each essential elements would result in more efficient and clear evaluation of vaccine candidates.
In addition to the analysis methods examined in this review, there are a variety of methods that can reveal information about the immunogenicity of therapeutic vaccines. And, currently, efforts to develop novel immunological analysis methods are continuing along with efforts to improve and standardize existing methods. In-depth research on chronic infectious diseases and therapeutic vaccines will be able to provide microbiological/immunological information that can be utilized in these methods. Additionally, the combination of multiplex analysis technology that allows simultaneous verification of various immune factors and high-throughput analysis technology for test of large quantities of samples could be of great help in efficient evaluation of therapeutic vaccine efficacy in the future. Finally, in line with this, a strict but flexible attitude of approval/licensing agencies to accept newly developed and established evaluation methods is also demanded.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

Author contributions
Conceptualization, K.J.H.; investigation and organization of data, S.W, P.G.P. and T.A.; writing the original draft preparation, P.G.P. and S.Y.L.; writing the final manuscript, M.F. and H.Y.; supervision, K.J.H. and H.Y. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Ethical approval and informed consent
Ethical Approval and informed consent were not required for this review.

References
Redefining chronic viral infection
Emerging infectious determinants of chronic diseases
Global, regional, and national burden of HIV/AIDS, 1990–2021, and forecasts to 2050, for 204 countries and territories: the global burden of disease study 2021
Therapeutic vaccination for treatment of chronic hepatitis B
Development of therapeutic vaccines for the treatment of diseases
Chronic infectious diseases
Shattuck Lecture. Chronic infectious disease and the future of health care delivery
Effects of infections on the pathogenesis of cancer
Chronic inflammation in the etiology of disease across the life span
Therapeutic vaccination to treat chronic infectious diseases: current clinical developments using MVA-based vaccines
Advances in HPV-associated tumor management: therapeutic strategies and emerging insights
Prophylactic and therapeutic EBV vaccines: major scientific obstacles, historical progress, and future direction
A guide to vaccinology: from basic principles to new developments
Varicella and herpes zoster vaccine development: lessons learned
Prophylactic and therapeutic HPV vaccines: current scenario and perspectives
Main targets of interest for the development of a prophylactic or therapeutic Epstein-Barr virus vaccine
Human papilloma virus findings in the perimeter of vulvo-vaginal malignancies
Human papillomavirus vaccines
Safety and efficacy data on vaccines and immunization to human papillomavirus
Immunocytochemical detection of HPV high-risk type L1 capsid proteins in LSIL and HSIL as compared with detection of HPV L1 DNA
The role of HPV E6 and E7 oncoproteins in HPV-associated cervical carcinogenesis
Epstein–Barr virus epidemiology, serology, and genetic variability of LMP-1 oncogene among healthy population: an update
EBNA1: oncogenic activity, immune evasion and biochemical functions provide targets for novel therapeutic strategies against Epstein-Barr virus- associated cancers
Epstein-Barr virus-encoded latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) and LMP2A function cooperatively to promote carcinoma development in a mouse carcinogenesis model
Features of effective T cell-inducing vaccines against chronic viral infections
High reproducibility of ELISPOT counts from nine different laboratories
Optimization and validation of an 8-color intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) assay to quantify antigen-specific T cells induced by vaccination
Flow cytometry as an integrative method for the evaluation of vaccine immunogenicity: a validation approach
T cell immunity is key to the pandemic endgame: how to measure and monitor it
Elispot for measuring human immune responses to vaccines
Vaccine applications of flow cytometry
Phenotypic analysis of antigen-specific T lymphocytes
A novel assay for assessment of HIV-specific cytotoxicity by multiparameter flow cytometry
Antigen specific in vivo killing assay using CFSE labeled target cells
Multiparametric flow cytometry analysis of naive, memory, and effector T cells
Investigation of the optimal prime boost spacing regimen for a cancer therapeutic vaccine targeting human papillomavirus
Therapeutic vaccine targeting Epstein-Barr virus latent protein, LMP1, suppresses LMP1-expressing tumor growth and metastasis in vivo
Prophylactic and therapeutic vaccine development: advancements and challenges
mRNA vaccines for infectious diseases: principles, delivery and clinical translation
Advances in COVID-19 mRNA vaccine development
The importance of RNA-Based vaccines in the fight against COVID-19: an overview
Current progress in the development of mRNA vaccines against bacterial infections
The clinical progress of mRNA vaccines and immunotherapies
Current development of therapeutic vaccines for the treatment of chronic infectious diseases
Vaccine therapy for cancer
Cell-mediated immune response to human papillomavirus infection
Immune Control and vaccination against the Epstein–Barr virus in humanized mice
Varicella zoster virus infection
Tuberculosis: latency and reactivation
Strain-specific antibody therapy prevents cytomegalovirus reactivation after transplantation
Humoral and cellular immunity to varicella-zoster virus: an overview
Development of antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity in response to recombinant and live-attenuated herpes zoster vaccines
The utility of ADCC responses in HIV infection
Factors that influence the immune response to vaccination
Evidence mounts on the disproportionate effect of COVID-19 on ethnic minorities
Covid-19 vaccine trials: ethnic diversity and immunogenicity
Evaluation of T-activated proteins as recall antigens to monitor Epstein–Barr virus and human cytomegalovirus-specific T cells in a clinical trial setting
Evaluation of immune responses induced by a novel human papillomavirus type 16 E7 peptide-based vaccine with Candida skin test reagent as an adjuvant in C57BL/6 mice
WHO international standards for antibodies to HPV6 hPV11 hPV31 hPV33 hPV45 hPV52 and HPV58
Standardized immunological assays for assessing COVID-19 vaccines by the CEPI-Centralized laboratory network