Territory health: A transdisciplinary approach of environmental, plant, animal, and human health interdependencies in a rural landscape in France
Summary
Health is increasingly understood as an integrated property of human, animal, plant, and environmental systems, as articulated by the One Health and EcoHealth concepts. The Territory Health project applies these perspectives within an agricultural landscape to examine interdependencies between environmental, non-human organisms, and human health. Using in a participatory and experimental approach, the project brings together researchers, local residents, farmers, decision-makers, and NGOs to investigate the relationships between pesticide use, in situ exposure to pesticide mixtures, and health effects on non-target organisms. A key objective is to establish a “partner cohort” to examine how changes in food production, dietary practices, and the human-nature relationship shape health of the territory under study. By situating the food-biodiversity-environment-health nexus within a socio-ecosystem perspective, this work supports agrifood system transformations toward long-term territorial health.
Public health; Veterinary medicine; Wildlife public health; Plant pathology; Interdisciplinary application studies

Introduction
There is now little doubt that humans impact and transform their environments and that, in return, those changing environments impact social and economic development or human health to such an extent that they represent an existential risk to societies. Industry, energy, and transportation have contributed to the crossing of critical planetary boundaries. Among human activities, agriculture is, however, by far the most stressful to the environment, causing the earth system to pass critical boundaries and tipping points, through climate change, habitat destruction, increasing landscape homogenization, and biodiversity loss. The latter, i.e., declines in insects, birds, and aquatic organisms, has been associated at least in part to pesticide use, which has further negative effects on human health and a decrease in air, water, and land quality. Recently, pesticide use has prompted social concerns, resulting in the launch of several political initiatives to, for instance, ban the use of synthetic pesticides (e.g., #StopGlyphosate; https://www.pan-europe.info/stop-glyphosate) or call for bee-friendly agriculture to benefit farmers, health, and the environment (Save Bees and Farmers; https://www.savebeesandfarmers.eu/eng). As a consequence of growing evidence on their detrimental impacts on biodiversity, some pesticides—such as dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) and neonicotinoids—have been withdrawn from the European market. However, banning one chemical can result in the use of others, or in alternative practices that are harmful to biodiversity or associated with increased greenhouse gas emissions. A well-documented example is the replacement of glyphosate with mechanical tillage, which often results in increased soil erosion and greenhouse gas emissions. Pesticide use can, therefore, be considered as a wicked problem spanning human, non-human organisms, and environmental health and having multiple interconnected economic, social, and environmental facets.
Assessing the effects of pesticide use on biodiversity, human health, and the environment, and developing solutions to this wicked problem requires whole-system thinking to adequately grasp the interrelationships between the multiple causal factors. In rural landscapes, the environment, non-human organisms, and humans are typically exposed to various synthetic chemicals at the same time. For instance, over 380 molecules and 309 different compounds are applied, generally in a mixture, to protect cereals in Switzerland (https://www.fedlex.admin.ch) or France (https://ephy.anses.fr/). Yet, risk assessments in Europe and the United States are currently established on standardized trials based on the use of a single pesticide substance or product on a specific crop. Moreover, non-target organisms, humans (usually agricultural workers), and the environment are repeatedly, sometimes continuously, exposed to pesticides, resulting in long-term effects occurring after chronic exposure with variable time lag. Thus, delayed or lagged non-lethal or sublethal effects also need to be evaluated. Since they are seldom quantified in natura, this can lead to the underestimation of pesticide effects on non-target organisms in laboratory assessments, which may account for the repeatedly observed contrasting results when comparing in situ and laboratory assessments. To add to this complexity, such assessments need to consider agricultural landscapes as mosaics of several crops, the composition of which varies greatly across time and space. This heterogeneous composition results in spatiotemporal variation in the type and intensity of pesticide pressure—i.e., the pesticides and the amount of each being applied to a crop type—and hence, also varied exposure. Despite the presence of pesticide residues in air, soil, rain, groundwater and surface water, plants and animals, and even humans having been confirmed in many studies highlighting the widespread environmental contamination by chemical compounds and their by-products and raising concerns about their long-term ecological and health impacts, only a static picture emerges. Indeed, the important dynamic processes that involve the interaction between these components, the mobility of living organisms, including humans, and the detoxification, persistence, bioaccumulation, and biomagnification processes, are still not captured.
A good example is provided by the most widely used herbicide, glyphosate (commercially known under trade names such as Roundup). It is far more persistent than initially believed and was detected in 30% of global cropland soils, and in earthworms, and in rodents in its unaltered form. Recent studies also emphasize that glyphosate residues in soils and biota may disrupt microbial communities and affect soil biodiversity, further exacerbating environmental risks. Its primary metabolite, aminomethylphosphonic acid, is even more pervasive, being found in over 90% of global cropland soils, as well as in earthworms and rodents. Finally, assessments of pesticide effects typically have a narrow focus on specific subgroups of non-target organisms, assuming that an absence of effect for a studied group (e.g., a model bird species such as the Japanese quail, Coturnix japonica) holds for the whole system (e.g., all bird species). As such, the human health impacts of pesticides have been primarily demonstrated among farmers, but recent evidence suggests increased risks of cancer, neurological disorders, and developmental issues in populations living near agricultural fields.
All this evidence underlies the urgent need for a complex systems approach to understanding pesticide exposure pathways and developing strategies to mitigate their effects on the health of humans, non-humans, and the environment. To ensure scientific relevance and offer comprehensive insights for decision-makers and policymakers, this approach should encompass the interconnected health impacts on humans, non-humans, and the environment; integrate diverse scientific disciplines; and actively involve stakeholders and citizens in the process.
In this paper, we present a research project designed to address the critical knowledge gaps identified above. This project, led by a multidisciplinary research team that also includes non-academics, is implemented by conducting an integrated, holistic, interdisciplinary, and transdisciplinary research study within a French agricultural landscape that is also a long-term socio-ecological research (LTSER) platform, the LTSER site Zone Atelier Plaine & Val de Sèvre (ZA-PVS). Referred to as the Territory Health project, it aims to demonstrate that biota and ecosystems, far from being a menace to human health (i.e., zoonosis), can provide solutions that enhance the overall health of a region, particularly in rural areas. By fostering a deeper understanding of the relationships between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning, agricultural practices, and health, Territory Health seeks to promote sustainable solutions that benefit both human and environmental well-being. Territory Health thus adopts a complex systems perspective that simultaneously considers human, non-human, and environmental health, recognizing the validity of multiple perspectives and the interdependencies between ecosystems and social systems across multiple scales. By doing so, it aligns with various postmodern views that challenge the positivist, value-free objectivity of “normal” science, such as the concept of “post-normal” science. Territory Health is grounded on the EcoHealth approach, an extended version of one health, which emphasizes the interconnectedness of human, animal, plant, and environmental health.
In the following sections, we first describe the conceptual framework and basis of Territory Health. We then outline its main hypotheses and the various stages of its implementation, including the development of the research design and protocols, the formation of an interdisciplinary consortium, and the active involvement of citizens, local stakeholders, schools, and healthcare professionals in the research process. Next, we focus on two fundamental aspects of the project: its experimental approach and the process of building and monitoring a partnership cohort over time and across different locations. Finally, we reflect on the challenges encountered, highlighting key mistakes to avoid and precautions to consider when managing such a complex project. We also offer guidance on how similar initiatives can be replicated in other regions, emphasizing the importance of local context, stakeholder engagement, and adaptability.

Conceptual background of the territory health project: EcoHealth approach

Concepts for a united view of health
Several concepts fall under the broad umbrella of environmental health, including the One Health, Planetary Health, and EcoHealth frameworks. These approaches collectively represent a paradigm shift in our understanding of health, moving from a solely human-centered perspective to a broader paradigm that integrates the health of humans with that of their environment. All of these concepts rely on a holistic approach that links humans, animals, plants, and the environment (including water and air), recognizing that their states of health are interdependent. However, they differ from one another—sometimes in subtle ways, sometimes more profoundly—in how these relationships are defined and explicitly considered. The differences primarily stem from the relative emphasis placed on human health versus other components of health, as well as the role and importance attributed to non-human organisms. The One Health concept primarily focuses on the interconnectedness of human, animal, and environmental health, with an emphasis on zoonotic diseases and health systems. In contrast, Planetary Health broadens this perspective, addressing the interplay between human health and the state of Earth’s natural systems, emphasizing the sustainability of those systems for future generations. In the Territory Health project, we specifically refer to the EcoHealth concept, as we believe biodiversity and ecosystems play multiple critical roles in human health and well-being. These roles have been explicitly acknowledged, quantitatively analyzed, and actively promoted.
Territory Health is grounded in the EcoHealth approach, an environmental health framework (Box 1). This approach is multifaceted, encompassing the co-production of knowledge, governance, social ethics and human values, gender equality, and the pivotal role of ecosystems in improving health. More than other environmental health approaches, the EcoHealth approach raises the way we understand health as a paradigm shift, moving from a solely human-centered perspective to embrace a broader view that focuses on the relationships, interdependence, and cooperation between humans and other living organisms. From an EcoHealth perspective, biodiversity, ecosystem functioning, and nature in its broader sense are viewed as essential components by providing nature-based solutions that improve the health of all living beings. By recognizing the interconnectedness of human and ecosystem health through shared risks and solutions, Territory Health posits that biodiversity and ecosystems can serve as critical levers for reducing exposure to pathogens and pollutants, thereby mitigating their impacts on humans and the ecosystems. Through more effective management practices, biodiversity and ecosystems provide systemic and sustainable pathways to improving the health of all components within the socio-ecosystem, adaptive system linking human societies and ecosystem through feedbacks that shape their dynamics and resilience. This postulate drives our research team and its partners to test hypotheses that are rooted in ecological theory, such as the dilution or barrier effects that result from biodiversity and landscapes. In particular, from an academic perspective regarding the wicked issue of pesticide exposure, it aims at evaluating the role of biota in the transfer of pesticides (i.e., bioaccumulation), or in their mitigation by detoxification through landscapes or soils, as well as the role of nature for humans in decreasing pesticides’ impacts on health.
Adopting an EcoHealth approach to promoting health in socio-ecosystems not only requires an interdisciplinary approach with a systemic vision, but also a form of research based on action (action research) that actively engages both researchers and non-academic stakeholders through transdisciplinary collaboration. The approach adopted in Territory Health is interdisciplinary in that it requires the knowledge and methods of several disciplines. The project team gathers researchers in agroecology, ecology, ecotoxicology, plant, animal, and human epidemiology, ergonomics, public health, sociology, and management sciences. Equally importantly, the approach is also transdisciplinary, going beyond academic boundaries by involving non-academic stakeholders with diverse and complementary expertise and roles. The project thus engages local stakeholders such as local elected representatives and health practitioners and further extends transdisciplinarity by engaging residents (including farmers), as well as primary school children and their teachers from the 24 municipalities of the ZA-PVS, in the research process. Transdisciplinarity is designed to be inclusive by including non-academic actors as integral members of the project consortium. This means that the ideas and actions of the research project are not solely led and implemented by a group of researchers, but will emerge from a collaborative and enriched consortium that includes representatives of local associations, practitioners, and territorial actors. In addition, the project’s approach must have a territorial dimension that emphasizes place-based research and a redefinition of human societies, where non-humans are recognized as full members. This latter perspective acknowledges the intrinsic interconnection between humans, non-humans, and the environment within specific territories, reinforcing the need for locally grounded approaches that respect the agency and role of all living and non-living components in shaping sustainable, healthy ecosystems. Territory Health is thus based on three key components: (i) nature-based solutions, which emphasize the co-benefits for humans and ecosystems through the implementation of sustainable solutions that address long-term environmental changes and risks; (ii) the territory, as a political concept referring to the existence of a collective deeply connected to a geographic area and united by a shared political project; and (iii) the socio-ecosystem, a complex adaptive system that highlights the interdependence and interconnectedness of ecological and social systems through non-linear, feedback processes across multiple spatial and temporal scales. Thus, the project rests upon three core components: a defined territory (the ZA-PVS), a collaborative group of researchers and non-academic stakeholders, and funding. The interactions between these components require the implementation of adaptive management and governance to ensure that the project adapts quickly to the uncertainties and unexpected challenges that arise when conducting research in real-word conditions and engaging local communities.

A research project testing hypotheses using a quasi-experimental design to assess pesticide exposure and its impacts at the landscape level
Location of the study site and its spatial organic farming distribution
(A) Map of the study site, Long-term socio-ecological research site Zone Atelier Plaine & Val de Sèvre, which is a rural territory in western France. Green areas represent fields under organic farming.
(B) Location of the study site on the French map. Each yellow spot shows arable fields.
The Territory Health project has been set up in a 450 km2 agricultural region in the southern part of the Deux-Sèvres department (Western France), the LTSER ZA-PVS (Figure 1). Long-term monitoring of major components of the socio-ecosystem have been carried out for 30 years. Since 1994, biodiversity, ecological functions, agricultural practices, local food consumption, and land use have been annually monitored and analyzed. The LTSER comprises 24 municipalities with populations ranging from 166 to 5,377 inhabitants and nearly 400 farms, approximately 19% of which are certified organic. This extensive and continuous monitoring has yielded a rich dataset, offering both implicit knowledge of pesticide pressure—through the location of organic versus conventionally managed fields, as well as interviews conducted with farmers to obtain detailed data on pesticide treatments —and enabled in-depth analysis of long-term socio-ecological dynamics. This makes the area a valuable living laboratory for EcoHealth research in practice, allowing researchers to analyze pesticide exposure according to the pesticide pressure and evaluate its impact on the ecosystem (biota and the environment) and human health.
Schematic representation of the transdisciplinary and quasi-experimental approach, based on a double gradient of pesticide pressure, to assessing pesticide exposure and its consequences on health within the long-term socio-ecological research site Zone Atelier Plaine & Val de Sèvre (ZA-PVS)
The Territory Health project uses a “pressure-exposure-impact” chain. In the right upper corner: the colored square shows a schematic representation of the landscape around the villages within the ZA-PVS in which the amount of organic farming varies from 0 to 99% (within 1 km). Colored squares represent landscape pesticide pressure around villages (from low [green] to high [red]). In each village, sampling is performed in houses and gardens distributed along a gradient of distance to the nearest conventionally managed field. On the bottom left, the box presents the matrices sampled to assess pesticide exposure in humans (feces, urine, and hair), biota (earthworms, insects, birds, and cats), and the environment (dust, water, and soil). Questionnaires are also conducted to collect data on the potential factors influencing pesticide exposure. All samples are analyzed to detect and quantify pesticide residuals. Health is assessed through proxies such as the human microbiome, soil organic matter recycling, and bird species diversity and life history traits (upper right part of the figure).
One central question in Territory Health investigates, in real-world conditions, the relationships between pesticide pressure in the environment and its effects on humans and non-human organisms, mediated through exposure. Addressing this question requires researchers to contrast levels of pesticide pressure at the landscape scale, thereby enabling the detection of differential impacts according to these contrasts. This quasi-experimental approach has been designed to deal with two major issues: it involves humans, and it is designed at a large scale (the territory). For these reasons, we have implemented a specific approach that is quasi-experimental in its spatial design, similar to a space-for-time substitute. This innovative experimental design is structured around two nested explicit spatial gradients of pesticide pressure, one across villages and one within villages (Figure 2). The first gradient uses the percentage of area under organic farming surrounding the village as an inverse proxy for pesticide pressure, assuming that a higher presence of organic farming corresponds to lower pesticide pressure in the landscape around the village. The second gradient considers the distance of houses within a village to the nearest conventionally farmed field, with the assumption that proximity to such fields correlates with higher pesticide exposure. Together, these two gradients allow for evaluating the relative contribution of distance (proximity to conventionally managed fields) and quantity (the mass effect of organic farming) on pesticide exposure and its effects on ecosystem and human health in rural communities. Additionally, while the statistical unit of our design is houses, our focus here is on inhabitants who also have a garden so that we can measure the impact on non-human organisms, specifically birds. Consequently, this design provides a robust analytical framework for understanding the complex relationships between pesticide use, landscape management, the degree of pesticide exposure, and the associated risks. The analyses of pesticide exposures of the environment, humans, and non-humans along the gradients will be further used to understand and quantify the links and interdependencies between environmental, human, and non-human organisms’ health.
Specifically, we focus on two main hypotheses within the quasi-experimental design. H1 posits that the diversity and quantity of pesticides detected, both in terms of total concentrations and concentrations of crop-specific molecules, is positively associated with the percentage of area under conventional farming surrounding the village and with proximity to conventional fields, reflecting either short-range drift of applied compounds or short-distance foraging behavior for birds. Accordingly, we expect the total number of pesticides detected to be higher in villages surrounded predominantly by conventional agriculture. H2 proposes that villages with at least 20% of untreated habitats (organic farming and/or grasslands) will host higher insect and bird diversity and abundance, including a greater occurrence of rare species. This 20% threshold is supported by previous studies conducted in the LTSER ZA-PVS, which showed that semi-natural habitats covering at least one-fifth of the landscape significantly enhance pollination service, and by a systematic review comprising over 4,000 studies indicating that at least 20%–25% habitat per km is needed to sustain nature’s contributions to people.

Measuring pesticide exposure in real-life conditions
The exposome concept has gained popularity in human, animal, and plant epidemiology since it was first formalized in 2005. The exposome is understood as the cumulative measure of environmental exposures and associated biological responses across the lifespan of an individual, including exposures from the environment, diet, behavior, and endogenous processes. As such, the study of the exposome is complex and presents several challenges, making it difficult to comprehensively measure the exposome across the lifespan of humans and other living organisms. In the case of pesticides, exposure levels and types vary over time based on the application schedule. For an accurate exposure assessment with the aim of correlating pesticide pressure with exposure levels and health, selecting appropriate measurement time points is crucial. In fact, the health effects of a given exposure can vary across different developmental periods and may be modified by synergistic or interactive effects when combined with other exposures.
In the cereal plains of western France, pesticide applications peak during two key periods: pre-sowing treatments for winter cereals (from mid-October to late November) and oilseed rape, and spring treatments (roughly from mid-March to mid-May) for all crops. From an EcoHealth perspective, pesticide exposure is assessed in humans, in living organisms (earthworms, insects, and birds, as well as pets if there are any), and in the environment (household dust, air, soil and water) during these critical periods. Both recent and long-term exposures are considered in humans and birds. While urine and feces in humans and blood in birds offer insights into short-term pesticide exposure due to the rapid excretion of pesticides, hair in humans and feathers in birds serve as long-term biomarkers, capturing cumulative exposure over several months. The analysis of hair and feathers helps in understanding chronic exposure risks and provides a historical perspective on pesticide exposure.
Understanding exposure to complex chemical mixtures also necessitates screening a wide variety of molecules that have been applied, along with their metabolites and transformation products. In Territory Health, we adopt a nested approach that involves a broad screening (targeted/non-targeted screening) of more than 500 molecules, followed by quantitative assays of a predefined list of 164 molecules if detected in the first screening. This list of 164 molecules includes substances applied in the southern part of the Deux-Sèvres Department, identified using the national sales database (https://ventes-produits-phytopharmaceutiques.eaufrance.fr/), as well as molecules detected in previous studies conducted in the LTSER ZA-PVS (Table S1) and those found in surface water, according to the national database (https://naiades.eaufrance.fr/bienvenue-naiades). Additionally, we included long-lived molecules (such as lindane or DDT) and CMR substances (such as acetamiprid and metazachlor). The limit of detection (LOD), i.e., the lowest quantity of an exposure that can be detected by the screening method was different between matrix and molecules. For example, LOD in hair and in wipes used to collect dust varied between 0.78 and 3.12 pg/mg for hair, and between 0.01 and 0.5 ng/cm2 for dust, respectively.
The human exposome is further assessed indirectly through questionnaires designed to link exposure measurements to health indicators (see below). Based on the PESTIPREV study these questionnaires gather data on household members’ characteristics (age, gender, employment, and education), the home layout (number of floors, rooms, door and window placement, and the state of renovation), dietary habits (proportion of organic food consumed), hygiene habits (housekeeping, pets, and domestic pesticide use), and outdoor activities (gardening, exercise, play, eating, and relaxing). To complement this, twice per year during spraying period (spring and autumn), residents are asked to fill out a weekly food diary during the week when urine (three samples collected on three separate days) and feces (one sample during the week) samples are collected (with hair samples taken at the end of the week). The diary documents their meals, the provenance of food and beverages (e.g., supermarkets, local markets, or home gardens), whether the items were organically produced, and whether and how they were prepared by the residents. It also records details about outdoor activities and potential pesticide use during the week, whether being of domestic or professional use, as well as the dates of agricultural spraying in the nearby fields.

Evaluating the health consequences of pesticide exposure
In Territory Health, health, in its widest definition, is captured within an integrated, risk-oriented, and interdisciplinary framework applied at both individual and population or community levels for humans and birds, respectively. Environmental health is assessed through the lens of ecosystem function, focusing on the ability of soil to sustain healthy and productive ecosystems. Soil functioning is strongly influenced by soil microorganisms through their essential role in supporting plant and animal productivity, and maintaining or improving water and air quality, hence promoting plant and animal health. Organic matter cycling, used as a proxy for soil health, is estimated using the tea bag index, a method in which two types of tea bags (a green tea and a rooibos) are buried in the gardens of residents who are partners in the project. The health of the birds in these residents’ gardens is assessed by measuring morphological (tarsus, beak and wing lengths, body mass, coloration of carotenoid-dependent secondary sexual characteristics), physiological (oxidative stress, antioxidant capacity), parasitic (ectoparasites, blood parasites, intestinal parasites), behavioral (vigor, aggressiveness, tonic immobility), and immune (hematocrit, leukocyte count) parameters. Fecal analyses are also conducted to infer the birds’ intestinal microbiota diversity, which plays critical roles in nutrient acquisition, immune system functioning, and detoxification processes. This aspect is particularly relevant within an EcoHealth framework, as the connection between gut microbiota, immunity, and health in birds has parallels in humans. Additionally, to investigate the hypothesis that birds can serve as health sentinels for humans, bird diversity is monitored in each garden through call counts (in addition to capture during mist-netting operations) within a precise radius of 100 m. Counts are performed in the morning (between 7 a.m. and 11 a.m.) twice in the breeding season (usually between April 10th and May 10th, and between May 10th and June 25th). A garden with a diverse bird community is considered a healthy environment, as such diversity reflects an abundance of food resources (insects, seeds) and suitable nesting sites for birds; birds can thus be used as proxies for human health (see below). Finally, the health of humans is assessed indirectly by analyzing the composition of human intestinal microbiota and examining the urine metabolome; both are non-invasive methods of medical diagnostics. The composition of the intestinal microbiota is closely linked to overall health, influencing immune function, metabolism, and even mental health. Urinary metabolites, on the other hand, serve as biomarkers for various health conditions, including neurological diseases and cancers, that are suspected to be associated with pesticide exposure. The measurement of these health indicators is combined with an epidemiological study on pesticide exposure and cancer risk in humans using data from the population-based cancer registry of Poitou-Charentes. Since 2008, this Registry has been actively, continuously, and exhaustively collecting all new cancers occurring in the population living in Poitou-Charentes—regardless of where they are treated—for research and public health purposes. The average number of new cancer cases is approximately 12,500 per year.

A research project that sets up a “partnership cohort”
Rooted in the science of complexity, Territory Health recognizes that the system under study is dynamic, has non-linear properties, and is often unpredictable in regard to its trajectory. Consequently, the project has adopted a medium-term perspective spanning 10 years, with the aim of establishing a “partnership cohort” called the Nov’Land cohort. Inspired by medical cohorts in the traditional sense, the Nov’Land cohort includes humans who are monitored over the long term. However, it is distinguished by four key characteristics. Firstly, the Nov’Land cohort sits at the intersection of large-scale epidemiological studies and experimental controlled trials. While epidemiological studies are known for their strong statistical power due to large sample sizes, they often struggle with the potential effects of numerous covariates or confounding factors. Even when controlled for, shortcomings can persist, and only a small proportion of the variation is explained. On the other hand, experimental studies—typically clinical trials conducted under controlled clinical conditions—generally assess the effect of a single factor in isolation. While this approach allows for a clear causal inference, it lacks realism, as it is removed from the complexity of real-world conditions. In the Nov’Land cohort, we combine the strengths and weaknesses of both approaches by integrating the realism of multiple exposure sources using a quasi-experimental design using a two-gradient approach to capture an accurate and comprehensive understanding of pesticide exposure. Secondly, the Nov’Land cohort is spatially explicit, considering and leveraging the heterogeneity of the territory—such as the varying proportions of organic farming in the landscape—to contrast different exposure scenarios (Figure 2). Thirdly, the Nov’Land cohort allows us to monitor how solutions aimed at reducing pesticide pressure and exposure actually affect pesticide exposure and its consequences. The territory of the cohort is also a research infrastructure where socio-ecological experiments have been carried out with and by farmers to promote the agroecological transition, testing solutions for reducing pesticide use in real-world conditions, while maintaining production, economic performance, and biodiversity. In addition, actions have been taken with inhabitants to increase the amount of food consumption from local organic farming. Furthermore, within Territory Health, a series of targeted interventions has been thought to transform food consumption practices, foster capacity building, and improve the health of the territory (detailed in the next section). As a result, the Nov’Land partners—whether they be farmers or non-farming inhabitants—are expected to actively modify their environment through changes in agricultural production practices, diets, and behavior. Fourthly and finally, the Nov’Land cohort includes non-human species, specifically the birds in residents’ gardens. Birds are of particular interest because they share their environment with the inhabitants, living in the same gardens, and as many health-related parameters can be measured in birds to assess the impact of various pesticide exposures. Moreover, our project will explore the extent to which garden-foraging or -dwelling birds can serve as sentinels of human health. The underlying reasoning is that a garden rich in birds serves as an indicator of a healthy, thriving environment, with the consequence that the human inhabitants of such gardens will likely also enjoy better health. As members of the cohort, birds can thus act as early warning signals for both environmental and human health risks. If our hypotheses are confirmed, this could provide inhabitants with a means of improving their gardens’ health—by offering more and healthier resources to birds—as well as a tool for monitoring the effects of changes in garden management, such as through birdsong patterns.
Overall, the Nov’Land cohort monitors and measures how shifts in landscape, time, and the practices of its members will modify the impact of pesticide use and exposure on health across individuals (humans and birds), collectives, and landscapes. “Practices” are considered in a wider sense, being related to food production and consumption, diet, garden and housekeeping management, and the environment within which each member of the cohort lives. What makes the Nov’Land cohort particularly innovative is its focus on the diverse sources of pesticide exposure, whether through food or environmental pathways, while also being experimental and explicitly integrating human-nature relationships. The cohort adopts a pluralistic and inclusive approach, encompassing all inhabitants of the ZA-PVS—humans who are not necessarily patients, but everyday residents, including farmers—and non-humans, alongside their shared environment (specifically the gardens). The ultimate aim is for the Nov’Land cohort to encompass all 34,000 residents of the area.

Creating a territorial dynamic to improve health in the territory
The challenge lies not only in characterizing these changes and their impact on human and ecosystem health through the existence of the cohort, but also in assessing the wider implications for the trajectory of the socio-ecosystem under study and understanding whether these changes ultimately contribute to more sustainable practices and healthier communities and environments. This raises the question of how to characterize the trajectory of the socio-ecosystem and, in particular, how to assess its overall health, as well as the health of its individual components. In Territory Health, we aim to co-design a set of indicators—ecological, health, social, and economic—with the cohort partners to provide critical insights into animal and human well-being, ecosystem functioning, economic viability of economic actors (such as farmers), species diversity, and so forth.
Strategy to foster a territorial dynamic for improving population health
The strategy combines background actions (A), targeted actions (B), and transformative actions (C). Background actions are implemented across the entire LTSER ZA-PVS area, while targeted actions focus on the villages involved in the research program.
(A) Examples of background actions: a stand at a local market and participation in the Science Festival (Fête de la Science.
(B) School interventions where children created posters illustrating their understanding of one health and its links with biodiversity and ecosystems. Two posters produced during the June 2024 closing days are shown.
(C) Workshops will engage participants in sharing visions of a desirable territorial future and identifying common uncertainties.
Territory Health seeks to identify novel solutions that enhance health by actively involving diverse stakeholders in structured, deliberative learning and decision-making processes. It is grounded in a collaborative adaptive management framework that integrates multiple perspectives and knowledge sources to minimize uncertainty and promote a shared understanding of ecosystem dynamics and management outcomes. The project therefore promotes the participation and collaboration of inhabitants and stakeholders, not only by monitoring pesticide exposure and its health effects but also through a series of targeted interventions. Our approach expands a strategy that has been conceptualized and implemented for more than ten years in the LTSER ZA-PVS. Our strategy combines what we call background actions, targeted actions and transformative actions (Figure 3). While background actions are carried out across the entire LTSER ZA-PVS area, targeted actions take place only in the villages where the research program is implemented.
The background actions aim to build trust in the research process, in science, and among participants, thus facilitating citizen engagement in the research process. For example, we take part in local markets or community events to introduce the program to residents and to gather their perspectives on health, as well as on the roles of biodiversity and ecosystems (Figure 3A). We also communicate through electronic letters that are sent to approximately 2,000 inhabitants of the LTSER ZA-PVS (four to six letters per year).

First findings from household dust and citizen feedback
Between July and September 2025, five meetings were organized between scientists from the Territory Health program and residents of the LTSER ZA-PVS to present and collectively discuss the first results on pesticide exposure from dust samples collected in four villages monitored in 2023 (two) and 2024 (two) (Figure Box 2A). Four of these meetings were held in collaboration with the municipal councils and took place in community halls, while the fifth was hosted at the research laboratory and targeted healthcare professionals and agricultural stakeholders. Attendance ranged from 40 to 70 participants per event, and the presentation of results lasted approximately 1 h.
The figure below (Figure Box 2B) shows a first result: the number of pesticide molecules quantified in dust samples from 77 households increased with the proportion of area in conventional farming within a 1,500 m radius around each village. The boxplots show the interquartile range, with the horizontal line indicating the median value for each village sorted by the proportion of area in conventional farming. The presentation of these preliminary findings sparked extensive discussion—almost all participants actively engaged in the exchange, and many were already seeking practical ways to reduce pesticide exposure. Among the actions mentioned were banning domestic pesticide use for mosquito control, finding alternatives to flea collars containing neonicotinoids for pets, and increasing the consumption of local and organic food products. Workshops will be organized in autumn 2025 to continue these reflections, with the aim of generating ideas for individual and collective actions to reduce pesticide use and exposure.
The targeted actions encompass, in targeted villages, a range of research and intervention activities designed to generate actionable knowledge on the interconnections between human health, biodiversity, and the environment; while no such activities occur in the other villages of the LTSER ZA-PVS allowing for comparison. Within this framework, the Territory Health project is presented to health professionals or municipal councils during dedicated meetings. In addition, the members of our consortium, comprising associations, NGOs, and farmers’ cooperative enterprises, collaborate with schools and high schools to address the “agriculture-food-environment-health” nexus. Four separate interventions address each of these themes individually, before bringing the scholars together to reflect and create projects that connect all four themes, emphasizing their views on the interdependencies between human health, biodiversity, and the environment (Figure 3B). Since 2023, a total of six schools, representing about 900 children between 5 and 11 years of age, have taken part in these interventions. In high schools, the interventions are designed to empower teenagers to act to improve health within the framework of the EcoHealth approach. In this context, the high school is envisioned as a territory, and the interventions aim to empower the scholars to develop projects that enhance its overall health. In addition, meetings are organized to foster social interactions and engagement within a reflexive process, while establishing relationships, strengthening collaborative capacity, promoting social learning and identifying local leaders. These meetings seek to gather inhabitants and stakeholders from diverse backgrounds, knowledge, and experiences, who may have differing concerns about health and the risks related to pesticide exposure. Participants include local residents, farmers, healthcare professionals (including practitioners, pharmacists, and nurses), decision-makers, and representatives from local NGOs, ensuring a balanced and representative mix of local and regional stakeholders. Building on previous transdisciplinary projects, the Territory Health project emphasizes knowledge exchange, knowledge generation, and social learning to strengthen adaptive capacity through cooperation between scientists and participants. To support this process, scientists share and discuss the data and insights they have gathered on local pesticide exposure, its health effects, and the potential factors that may mitigate or amplify exposure (including the roles of biota and ecosystems). For example, public disseminations of pesticide exposure results were organized in summer 2025 in the villages, in the presence of cohort members, others residents and local elected representatives (Box 2). These events each brought together from 40 to 70 participants and provided a first space for questioning potential individual and collective solutions to reduce pesticide exposure.
Building on these discussions, transformative actions will be carried out to design transformed practices and indicators to assess the efficiency of these practices to improve health (Figure 3C). Examples of such transformations could be a reduction in the use of pesticides by farmers, an increase in the consumption of organic food by local inhabitants, or a change in garden management to increase biodiversity, especially of bird species. Although the final methodology has not yet been decided, we are considering approaches such as scenario analysis, strategic foresight and speculative fiction, back casting and scenario-building, complemented by participative tools such as forum theater or participatory prospective analysis. These methods enable participants to share visions of a desirable future for their territory and identify common unknowns. Workshops will be documented and transcribed for thematic analysis, combining both inductive and deductive approaches with explicit reference to the Territory Health conceptual framework (see for an example based on the analysis of farmers’ surveys). Evaluation will rely on surveys to assess the processes of knowledge co-production, the diversity of participation, and the range of ideas generated, complemented where relevant by pre- and post-tests to examine changes in perceptions or knowledge.
By connecting diverse communities and sharing knowledge over time and across the boundaries of stakeholder organizations, the overall interventions will contribute to building a knowledge infrastructure: a substrate supporting how the issues are conceptualized and acted upon. Its ability to enhance the processes of knowledge creation and integration related to improved health at multiple scales (from the individual to the territory in an EcoHealth Perspective) to achieve the required transformed practices will be evaluated by social scientists.

Important issues in conducting ecohealth research, and suggested guidance

Ethical considerations
The first two years of the project were devoted to developing and drafting research protocols for submission to the relevant ethics committees. These steps are essential to ensuring the ethical integrity and scientific rigor of the project. For birds, the protocols were submitted to the Comité d’Ethiques en Expérimentation Animale (CE2A) and the Centre de Recherches sur la Biologie des Populations d’Oiseaux (CRBPO), which ensures that the study meets ethical standards for the treatment and monitoring of wild bird populations. Authorization for the proposed bird health monitoring procedures was obtained in 2023 for 20 bird species. All procedures involving birds prioritize animal welfare, ensuring that the birds are not subjected to undue stress, injury, or death throughout the study. For humans, the protocols were submitted to the Comité de Protection des Personnes (CPP), which reviews and approves research involving human subjects to protect their rights, welfare, and privacy (including personal data protection). The ethical approval process for the proposed studies on humans was more challenging due to the innovative nature of the research project, which differs significantly from conventional clinical trials. This led to some initial misunderstandings (e.g., the members of the partner cohort are not patients suffering from a disease for whom we are seeking explanatory factors.) and necessitated adjustments and clarifications to align our protocol with the requirements of the CPP, while maintaining the aims of our research. Despite these challenges, only minor changes were required and the project received approval in June 2024.
Since its set up, the project is responsibly run. Informed consent is obtained from all participants. Data are pseudo-anonymized to protect participant privacy, and individual results are returned directly to participants by the field investigators, who conduct the surveys and collect the various samples. Researchers responsible for data analysis do not have access to participants’ identities.

Data integration and analysis
Number of samples collected per village and matrix
A	B	C	D	E	F	Total	 	Human	 	 Hair	31	28	26	26	26	29	102	 	 Urine	93	84	81	87	84	103	489	 	 Feces	28	23	21	25	21	29	149	 	 Feces—microbioteb	28	24	21	26	22	29	149	 	Biodiversity	 	 Earthworm	34	30	17	26	13	16	106	 	 Insects	19	21	21	21	20	21	126	 	 Birds—blood	∼400 (10)	∼400 (10)	∼350 (8)	∼350 (8)	∼400 (10)	∼400 (10)	∼2,300	 	 Birds—behaviorb	>380 (10)	∼400 (10)	∼350 (8)	∼350 (8)	∼400 (10)	∼400 (10)	∼2,300	 	 Cat Hair	18	22	14	16	7	12	66	 	Environment	 	 Aira	2	1	2	1	2	2	10	 	 Dust	123	117	63	66	60	63	375	 	 Soil	64	61	34	35	34	35	125	 	 Water	53	53	41	31	26	20	124	 	 Tea-bagb	204	196	204	201	146	166	552
Bird sampling was conducted in a subset of households which had gardens suitable for bird surveys. The number of households, in which bird sampling was performed, is indicated in parentheses next to the number of blood samples and behavioral measurements. Samples were collected in villages A and B in 2023, villages C and D in 2024 and villages E and F in 2025.
Started in summer 2025.
Proxies of health.
Examples of data analyses conducted within the Territory Health project in primary schools
Data analyses follow an integrated “pressure-exposure-impact” conceptual framework.
(A) The number of molecules detected or the total concentrations quantified in urine are modeled using a generalized linear model as a function of variables representing pesticide pressure, such as landscape elements and pesticide use. The model also includes covariates such as diet during the urine collection week and socio-economic factors (e.g., occupation, sex, and age).
(B) Multivariate analyses are used to explore correlations between pesticide profiles in humans, biodiversity, and/or environmental samples collected at the same sites. Depending on the analysis type, variables serving as proxies for pesticide pressure can also be included.
(C) The effects of pesticides on bird health are quantified using a structural equation model that integrates the relationships between pesticide pressure (landscape, pesticide use), pesticide exposure in the environment and preys, and bird exposure. This approach allows both direct and indirect effects of pesticide exposure on bird health to be assessed.
Since 2023, over 6,000 samples of human, non-human and environmental matrices have been collected (Table 1), generating diverse datasets encompassing human, non-human, and environmental exposure measures, survey data, and health records. To ensure interoperability, each sample was assigned a unique identifier beginning with the housing code. Data analysis follows a “pressure-exposure-impact” framework (Figure 4). In the first step, pesticide pressure, which is approximated by landscape parameters (percentage of area in conventional farming) and pesticide sales or applications, is linked to exposure levels (Figure 4A). Exposure is quantified either as the number of detected molecules or total concentrations using generalized linear models (GLMs) or generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs, when multiple samples of a given matrix were collected); or through multivariate analyses assessing pesticide profiles. The second step investigates the relationship between human, non-human and environmental exposure, for example, by exploring the correlations between dust, bird and urine pesticide exposures (Figure 4B). Here, GLMs are used when evaluating species richness or diversity, while multivariate approaches, such as k-table methods, explore how exposure profiles shape microbiota community structure. The third step explores the entire pressure-exposure-impact chain using structural equation modeling, assessing how pesticide pressure affects health outcomes indirectly through its influence on exposure (Figure 4C). All steps incorporate relevant covariates into the statistical models and, where appropriate, apply predictive gradients (e.g., the percentage of area under organic farming as a potential mitigating factor for exposure) to evaluate the robustness of observed associations. The strength of this approach relies on both the size of the dataset and the availability of high-quality covariate information, including socio-economic and geographic characteristics.

Recruiting participants and partners
The success of Territory Health largely depends on effective recruitment, achieved through a multimodal approach. To maximize recruitment success, we combine passive methods such as flyers and newsletters—in some cases, some of which are distributed by municipality staff—with direct strategies that involve person-to-person interactions. The studies conducted by the research team in the LTSER ZA-PVS since 1994 have played a key role in building community relationships and fostering trust and credibility, which are essential for successful participation in research. In addition, a significant proportion of the LTSER ZA-PVS population is interested in the research topic and eager to gain a deeper understanding of pesticide exposure in their environment. For the pesticide exposure study, the sample size was set at 20 households per target village to ensure both a sufficiently large sample for accurate data analysis and practical ease of sample collection and analysis. The inclusion criteria also accounted for the distance of each household from the nearest conventional arable field, and required garden characteristics allowing bird health assessment, socio-economic factors representative of the village population (such as age, occupations), and for the study cohort to be composed of at least 10% agricultural workers. Only LTSER ZA-PVS residents aged 18 years or older who are willing and able to give informed consent are considered eligible. Inhabitants who are interested but either do not fit the inclusion criteria or are too busy to participate in the pesticide exposure study are invited to attend workshops on designing solutions for reducing pesticide exposure and on indicators of health and well-being.

Maintaining participants within the cohort
Maintaining participants within the Nov’Land cohort over time will be challenging. We have therefore developed a strategy that combines communication, capacity building, trust-building relationships, and invitations to increase participants’ involvement in the research project. A member of the consortium is the dedicated contact person for the cohort participants. This person is in charge of making appointments for data collection, conducting the surveys, inviting the participants to research-centered events and answering any specific questions the participants may have on the research. To avoid disturbing participants in their daily lives, we prefer to contact them by text messages. To foster a sense of inclusion in the research process, we produced a booklet for the cohort members. The booklet presents the aims of the project and provides a detailed explanation of its methodology. A portion of the booklet is reserved for the documentation of research outcomes—including but not limited to bird diversity, results of pesticide exposure measurements, and home-range movements of domestic cats—giving participants a clear understanding of how their contributions are being used. In addition, the booklet includes a feedback section that encourages participants to share their thoughts, experiences and suggestions, promoting active engagement and facilitating improvement of the research throughout the project. Cohort members are also invited to attend seminars in which the project’s initiatives and achievements are presented. These events provide an opportunity for members to meet other members in the cohort and speak with the researchers, fostering a collaborative atmosphere. They are also encouraged to contribute to workshops involving other residents, health professionals, and local elected officials. These workshops focus on co-designing the indicators that will be used to characterize the trajectory of the socio-ecosystem, ensuring that the indicators reflect the shared goals and concerns of the local population. This strategy has proven to be effective, as only six among the 214 participants have dropped out since the start of the project: two due to relocation, one due to health issues, and three due to changes in their availability for participation.

Conclusion
Improving the health of humans, non-human organisms, and the environment requires a dedicated effort to fully understand the interrelationships between various causal factors of poor or good health, and to develop solutions that consider the multidimensional, interrelated, and dynamic nature of these factors. Rooted in the EcoHealth perspective, the Territory Health project addresses this challenge by adopting whole-system thinking and a transdisciplinary approach with the goal of building the capacity of local inhabitants (whether they be farmers, consumers, health practitioners, or students) to create knowledge and hence build a knowledge infrastructure.
Part of this knowledge emerges from our innovative quasi-experimental design, which enables hypothesis testing on the relationships between pesticide pressure, exposure, and health impacts. Preliminary results on pesticide residues in household dust support our first hypothesis: the number of pesticide molecules detected in dust increases with the proportion of conventional crop types in the surrounding landscape (Box 2). Discussions of these findings during public dissemination workshops in summer 2025 were particularly encouraging: almost all participants engaged actively in the dialog, many already seeking practical solutions to reduce pesticide exposure.
These preliminary results and participatory exchanges demonstrate the value of such projects in reshaping science-society relationships and developing fundamental alternative practices that enhance the overall well-being of humans, non-human organisms, and the environment, and ultimately create a more sustainable, resilient, and inclusive socio-ecosystem system. The Territory Health project holds promise for informing regional public policies such as the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region roadmap NéoTerra (https://www.neo-terra.fr/) and the Regional Health-Environment Plan (PRSE4, https://www.nouvelle-aquitaine.ars.sante.fr), both of which promote agroecology, healthy diets, and a One Health perspective. If successful, this model could be replicated in other regions to generate locally grounded knowledge and identify concrete levers for reducing chemical exposures and fostering healthier socio-ecological systems.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the participation of the “habitants-partenaires” in the research. We thank Audrey Bailly (AB), Antonin Chesneau, Etienne Debenest, Jean-Luc Gautier, Roxane Hertz, Swann Heuveline, and many students and field workers for excellence in conducting surveys, developing methodology, organizing workshops and restitutions, and data collection. We are also deeply grateful to our non-academic partners: the , the , the , and the SCOP Wision. We are also grateful to the mayors and councilors of the communities where the project has been implemented for their support and help in recruiting “habitants-partenaires.”
This work was supported by the  (projects Nov’Land “Territoire en transition pour améliorer la santé des sociétés et des écosystèmes et la résilience alimentaire” and Together “Concilier agriculture et riverains en territoire rural en réduisant l’utilisation des pesticides et en améliorant la santé des écosystèmes”),  Metaprogramme Metabio (through the cofounding of AB’s PhD thesis), and   (through the cofounding of F.O.’s Post-Doctorate role). This research was funded, in part, by the  (), grant  «  ». Action under Ecophyto II + plan, led by the , with financial support of the French Office for Biodiversity for the projects  “Opérationnaliser le concept “une seule santé” par la recherche-action pour comprendre les liens entre exposition aux pesticides et santé d’un territoire” and  “Co-conception d’un cadre méthodologique visant à l’élaboration d’un panel d’indicateurs précoces d’impacts de l’exposition aux pesticides sur la santé globale d’un territoire.” This work is part of the  project (Living-Lab 2.Sèvres) of the French national research program on nature-based solutions and has benefited from a government grant operated by the  as part of the France 2030 program, reference . S.G. is funded by .

Author contributions
Conceptualization, S.G. and V.B.; methodology, S.G., V.B., J.M., S.L., and R.T.; writing – original draft, S.G.; writing – review & editing, all authors; funding acquisition, S.G., V.B., and J.M.; supervision, S.G.

Declaration of interests
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work, the authors did not use generative AI.

References
Geology of mankind
Earth beyond six of nine planetary boundaries
Biodiversity: The ravages of guns, nets and bulldozers
Solutions for a cultivated planet
Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet
Overhaul environmental risk assessment for pesticides
Persistent negative effects of pesticides on biodiversity and biological control potential on European farmland
Ecology: Pesticides linked to bird declines
Pesticides have negative effects on non-target organisms
Chemical Pesticides and Human Health: The Urgent Need for a New Concept in Agriculture
Non-cancer health effects of pesticides: Systematic review and implications for family doctors
Parkinson’s disease and exposure to agricultural work and pesticide chemicals
Emerging contaminants: A One Health perspective
Tracking societal concerns on pesticides
Commission, E. (2025). Neonicotinoids. https://food.ec.europa.eu/plants/pesticides/approval-active-substances-safeners-and-synergists/renewal-approval/neonicotinoids_en.
A new leaf: A decade ago, France launched an ambitious effort to cut pesticide use by half. It failed. Now, the country is trying again
Soil carbon dioxide and methane fluxes as affected by tillage and N fertilization in dryland conditions
The wicked problem of chemicals policy: Opportunities for innovation
Assessment of chronic sublethal effects of imidacloprid on honey bee colony health
Pesticide impacts on avian species with special reference to farmland birds: a review
Non-dietary personal pesticide exposure using silicone wristbands across 10 European countries
A common pesticide devreases foraging success and survival in Honey Bees
Reconciling laboratory and field assessments of neonicotinoid toxicity to honeybees
A multiresidue analytical method on air and rainwater for assessing pesticide atmospheric contamination in untreated areas
Residues of currently used pesticides in soils and earthworms: A silent threat?
Pesticides in groundwater at a national scale (France): Impact of regulations, molecular properties, uses, hydrogeology and climatic conditions
Assessing pesticide residues occurrence and risks in water systems: A Pan-European and Argentina perspective
Contamination of wild plants near neonicotinoid seed-treated crops, and implications for non-target insects
Occurrence of pesticide residues in harvested products of various crops from European conventional and organic farming systems
Identifying pesticides of high concern for ecosystem, plant, animal, and human health: A comprehensive field study across Europe and Argentina
The global environmental hazard of glyphosate use
Glyphosate, AMPA and glufosinate in soils and earthworms in a French arable landscape
Exposure of wild mammals to glyphosate, AMPA, and glufosinate: a case for “emerging organic contaminants”? Peer community
Glyphosate perturbs the gut microbiota of honey bees
Impacts of repeated glyphosate use on wheat-associated bacteria are small and depend on glyphosate use history
Indirect effects of the herbicide glyphosate on plant, animal and human health through its effects on microbial communities
Cancer incidence in the AGRICAN cohort study (2005–2011)
Exposure to pesticides and the associated human health effects
An extensive review on the consequences of chemical pesticides on human health and environment
Chemical pollution: A growing peril and potential catastrophic risk to humanity
The role of public consultations in decision-making on future agricultural pesticide use: insights from European Union’s Farm to Fork Strategy public consultation
Towards sustainable and multifunctional agriculture in farmland landscapes: Lessons from the integrative approach of a French LTSER platform
Uncertainty, complexity and post-normal science
Evolution and expansion of the One Health approach to promote sustainable and resilient health and well-being: A call to action
Social-ecological resilience and biosphere-based sustainability science
Biodiversity and Disease Risk: the Case of Lyme Disease
On the usage and measurement of landscape connectivity
A comparison of three holistic approaches to health: One health, ecohealth, and planetary health
Safeguarding human health in the Anthropocene epoch: report of The Rockefeller Foundation–Lancet Commission on planetary health
The one health concept: 10 years old and a long road ahead
Participatory action research
Transdisciplinary research in sustainability science: Practice, principles, and challenges
Organising inter-and transdisciplinary research in practice. The case of the meta-organisation French LTSER platforms
An exploration of the influence of problem wickedness on project pluralism in sustainability science
Nature-based solutions: new influence for environmental management and research in Europe
Moore, M. (2015). A Political Theory of Territory (Oxford University Press)
Social-ecological systems as complex adaptive systems
Understanding protected area resilience: a multi-scale, social-ecological approach
Place-based social-ecological research is crucial for designing collective management of ecosystem services
INSEE (2024). Bilan démographique 2024. https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/8313983#consulter-sommaire
Étude des trajectoires socio-écologiques dans le temps long : une histoire recomposée de la Zone Atelier Plaine & Val de Sèvre Statistiques & Société
Trade-offs in the provisioning and stability of ecosystem services in agroecosystems
Securing Nature’s Contributions to People requires at least 20%–25%(semi-) natural habitat in human-modified landscapes
Complementing the genome with an “exposome”: the outstanding challenge of environmental exposure measurement in molecular epidemiology
The exposome: from concept to utility
The nature of nurture: refining the definition of the exposome
Biomonitoring in the era of the exposome
Tracking pan-continental trends in environmental contamination using sentinel raptors-what types of samples should we use?
Hair analysis for biomonitoring of environmental and occupational exposure to organic pollutants: state of the art, critical review and future needs
Pesticide Exposure of Residents Living in Wine Regions: Protocol and First Results of the Pestiprev Study
Soil microbiomes and one health
Soil health and sustainability: managing the biotic component of soil quality
Soil quality – A critical review
Tea Bag Index: A novel approach to collect uniform decomposition data across ecosystems
Organic farming positively affects the vitality of passerine birds in agricultural landscapes
Comparison of pesticide contamination between captive-reared and wild grey partridges: insights into environmental exposure disparities
Avian gut microbiomes taking flight
The human urine metabolome
The microbiome and innate immunity
Comprehensive urinary metabolomic profiling and identification of potential noninvasive marker for idiopathic Parkinson’s disease
Analysis of urinary metabolites for breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy by CE-MS coupled with on-line concentration
Gut Microbiota: A Key Factor in the Host Health Effects Induced by Pesticide Exposure?
Gut microbiota: An underestimated and unintended recipient for pesticide-induced toxicity
Cancer incidence and mortality trends in France over 1990–2018 for solid tumors: the sex gap is narrowing
Epidemiology beyond its limits
Experimental and empirical evidence shows that reducing weed control in winter cereal fields is a viable strategy for farmers
Social-ecological experiments to foster agroecological transition
Setting-up place-based and transdisciplinary research to foster agrifood system transformation: Insights from the Aliment'Actions project in western France
A critical assessment of collaborative adaptive management in practice
Social learning and collective action in flood-hazard management in Manitoba, Canada
What is social learning?
Building capacities for transformative change towards sustainability: imagination in intergovernmental science-policy scenario processes
Imagining transformative futures: participatory foresight for food systems change
A meaningful performative experience: using Forum Theatre as an ethical method in sustainability science
Foresight for all: Co-elaborative scenario building and empowerment
Farmers’ limited perceptions of the role of ecological processes in crop production, a potential obstacle to agroecological transition
Building knowledge infrastructure for diverse stakeholders to scale up co-production equitably

Supplemental information
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2026.114956.