Organ-Sparing Approach after Neoadjuvant Treatment in Oesophageal Cancer
Abstract
Background
Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (nCRT) or perioperative chemotherapy followed by surgical resection is the standard of care for oesophageal and gastroesophageal junction cancer. Up to a third of patients will have a pathological complete response to neoadjuvant treatment. Given the significant morbidity associated with surgery, active surveillance is considered as a potential alternative for patients with clinical complete response post-nCRT.
Summary
The preSANO and preSINO trials have validated a multimodal diagnostic strategy combining oesophagogastroduodenoscopy with bite-on-bite biopsies, endoscopic ultrasonography with fine-needle aspiration of suspicious lymph nodes, and PET-CT to detect residual disease. The SANO trial is assessing whether active surveillance leads to non-inferior overall survival compared to planned surgery. Early results of randomized studies support previous retrospective reports of comparable oncological outcomes, with improved quality of life in the surveillance group. Despite concerns of increased morbidity of postponed surgery upon recurrence, recent data indicate comparable surgical outcomes of delayed oesophagectomy. Ongoing trials, including SANO-2, CELEAC, and NEEDS, aim to rationalize surveillance protocols, while SANO-3 is investigating the role of adding immunotherapy in improving response durability.
Key Messages
Active surveillance represents a promising alternative to surgery for oesophageal cancer patients achieving complete clinical response after neoadjuvant therapy. While it can spare patients the morbidity of oesophagectomy and significantly improve quality of life, it requires accurate response assessment and structured follow-up. Future developments, including immunotherapy and non-invasive diagnostics, may further refine this approach and expand its safe applicability.

Introduction
Oesophageal cancer (OC) is the seventh leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Significant differences in biology and tumour behaviour exist between oesophageal SCC (OSCC) and adenocarcinoma (OAC). Despite these differences between the subtypes of OC, standard curative intent treatment for both OAC and OSCC is neoadjuvant chemoradiation (nCRT) or perioperative chemotherapy (pCT) followed by surgical resection. For nearly 10 years, CROSS protocol nCRT was one of the most widely used neoadjuvant treatments. More recently, ESOPEC trial demonstrated superiority of FLOT pCT to CROSS nCRT for patients with OAC.
Surgery for OC is associated with approximately 60% complication rate and 3–5% 90-day mortality. Furthermore, the negative impact of oesophagectomy on patients’ quality of life is long-lasting, even when patients did not suffer complications.
The rates of pathological complete response (pCR) to nCRT or pCT have been reported between 10 and 29% in various trials, with SCC more likely to achieve pCR. These results have raised a question whether surgery is beneficial in patients who had complete response to neoadjuvant treatment. Conversely, approximately a third of patients develop metastatic disease within 12 months following an oesophagectomy. Active surveillance (AS) can help to identify these patients avoiding futile surgery.
The aim of this paper was to review the current state of AS approaches in patients with OC who had clinical complete response (cCR) to neoadjuvant treatment. It focuses on the methods by which AS is undertaken, the possible risks and benefits, and the outcomes reported in trials thus far.

Model of AS
Accurate clinical assessment of response to neoadjuvant treatment is the first key element of AS approach. Relevant definitions of treatment response evaluation have been agreed upon by the Delphi consensus expert group. When cCR is confirmed on initial tests, patients are offered ongoing surveillance as an alternative to standard surgery. Patients that choose to continue with surveillance undergo interval examinations with endoscopy, EUS, and PET-CT. If local or regional recurrence is detected, patients are offered surgery. In cases of distant metastatic disease developing during surveillance, palliative anti-cancer treatment is offered.
Clinical response evaluation (CRE) includes examination of the tumour bed, regional lymph nodes, as well as assessment for interval distant metastasis. The preSANO trial established that OGD with bite-on-bite biopsies, supplemented by EUS and fine-needle aspiration (FNA) of suspicious lymph nodes, is a valid strategy for the diagnosis of locoregional residual disease after nCRT in combination with PET-CT to identify any distant metastases. This approach showed a 10% rate of false negatives and a 45% negative predictive value (NPV) for tumour regression grade (TRG) 3–4 tumours. When stratified according to histology, most false negatives occurred among adenocarcinoma and suggested lower diagnostic reliability compared with squamous cell carcinoma, though numbers for SCC were limited. PET-CT was useful in the identification of distant metastases (9% of patients), mainly adenocarcinoma, but was limited in specificity (37%) and NPV (44%) for ruling out locoregional disease. Overall, this combination was adequate for response assessment, but performance may be variable between tumour types. This assessment approach is supported by the histopathological data on location of residual tumour in resected specimens following nCRT.
This model of CRE has been further tested in a prospective multicentre diagnostic study for optimization in the detection of residual disease following neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy in patients with OSCC – preSINO trial. The results of preSINO trial demonstrated potential value of circulating-tumour DNA in predicting systemic recurrence. Specifically, the study found that patients with positive ctDNA at CREs had a systemic recurrence rate of 28.0%, compared to only 5.3% in those with negative ctDNA. Furthermore, the study confirmed the accuracy of bite-on-bite biopsies and EUS-FNA, which achieved a sensitivity of 81.7%, specificity of 93.2%, and a NPV of 68.7% in detecting residual disease after nCRT in SCC. The false-negative rate for detecting high-risk residual disease (TRG 3–4 or TRG 1–2 with ypN+) was 13.5%, which was below the predefined threshold of 19.5%, supporting the reliability of these diagnostic modalities. However, the moderate NPV indicates that a proportion of patients with residual disease may be missed. This is an important consideration in AS strategies, where treatment decisions depend on the confident exclusion of tumour.
A study by Eyck et al. demonstrated that post-nCRT ctDNA detection is highly indicative of major residual disease, with a positive predictive value of 100% and specificity of 100%. Nonetheless, despite the low rate of false positives, the study demonstrated that ctDNA by itself was not superior in detection of residual disease than conventional diagnostic techniques. These results indicate that although ctDNA has considerable promise as a non-invasive biomarker in risk stratification, it is perhaps best utilized in combination with current diagnostic modalities in AS protocols.
In addition to ctDNA, radiomics-based approaches have emerged as promising tools for non-invasive response prediction. Liu et al. in a multicentre study validated an MRI radiomics-based machine learning model, which demonstrated outstanding predictive value for pCR after nCRT in oesophageal SCC patients. The model demonstrated an area under the curve of 0.968 in the training cohort and 0.885 in external validation and in the test achieved accuracy of 82.2% (95% CI: 72.6–90.4%), sensitivity of 75.0% (95% CI: 58.3–91.7%), and specificity of 85.7% (95% CI: 75.5–96.0%).
A recent meta-analysis of 9 studies in 719 patients reported that radiomics-based models had modest diagnostic performance for the prediction of lymph node metastases in OC with pooled sensitivity and specificity of around 72–76%. The evidence is in favour of the role of radiomics and AI-driven methods more broadly as complementary, non-invasive adjuncts to post-nCRT surveillance. Their application may help to optimize risk stratification and patient selection for AS strategies, offering a less invasive alternative to more invasive diagnostic testing.
Patients with recurrent disease detected during response evaluations are offered surgery. As many patients will develop local or regional recurrence remote to completion of nCRT or pCT, safety of surgery in such cases was questioned. Concerns regarding safety of surgery are based on the knowledge of significantly increased morbidity and mortality of salvage oesophagectomy after definitive chemo-radiotherapy.
Shapiro et al. showed that delaying surgery beyond standard 4–6 weeks following nCRT may enhance pCR rates without compromising survival. However, these findings have been challenged by the NeoRes II trial with decreased early survival in the group with delayed surgery, raising concerns about potential risks associated with longer intervals. Similarly, Boerner et al. found that salvage oesophagectomy after delayed surgery also correlated with increased postoperative morbidity and worse disease-free and overall survival. Comparable surgical outcomes in delayed surgery are likely due to the lower neoadjuvant dose of radiation (41.4 Gy) compared to the definitive CRT (dCRT) dose (50.4 Gy) as well as possibly more favourable tumour profile when compared to patients selected for dCRT.
The NeoRes II trial evaluated the effect of delayed surgery after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for oesophageal cancer from a standard 4–6 weeks to a prolonged interval of 10–12 weeks. Although overall survival at 3 years was comparable between the groups, first-quartile survival was significantly shorter in the prolonged group, 14.2 months versus 26.5 months in the standard group (p = 0.003). The prolonged group also had a 35% increased risk of mortality during follow-up (HR 1.35, 95% CI: 0.94–1.95), raising red flags regarding the safety of delaying surgery beyond 6 weeks. Subgroup analysis by TRG showed significantly worse OS in TRG 4 patients with delayed surgery (HR 2.52, 95% CI: 1.09–5.83). When stratified by histology, no significant difference in overall survival was observed in either subgroup. However, among patients with adenocarcinoma, a higher risk of mortality was noted between months 7 and 23 (HR 1.43, 95% CI: 0.95–2.20; p = 0.089). No survival difference was found in patients with SCC (HR 1.02, 95% CI: 0.46–2.26; p = 0.955). Clinical response to nCRT was not systematically assessed in NeoRes II patients; hence, results are probably not fully applicable to patients undergoing AS. Patients in the SANO trial who had an incomplete response to nCRT and a 12-week delay to surgery did not experience worse outcomes.

Risks and the Benefits of AS
The main benefit of AS of patients with cCR is the potential to avoid oesophageal resection. This has the immediate advantages of evading complications of surgery, small risk of dying, as well as life-long negative impact of oesophagectomy on quality of life, especially in nutritional and gastro-intestinal functioning domains.
Quality of life is an important consideration when discussing AS after nCRT. Recent data from the SANO trial showed that patients undergoing AS had a better global health-related quality of life, with a mean EORTC QLQ-C30 global health score of 78.2 (SD 15.4) at 16 months, compared with 66.5 (SD 18.7) in the surgery group.
Valkema et al. also found that dysphagia was uncommon during AS, with median EORTC QLQ-OG25 scores remaining at 0 up to 16 months after nCRT. Moreover, only 1.5% of patients developed clinically significant stenosis.
The NOSANO study also reported on psychological well-being: although trait anxiety levels (measured via STAI) were comparable between groups at baseline, patients who preferred surgery had a greater increase in anxiety and decisional regret over time. In contrast, those patients who chose AS wished to preserve quality of life and belief in recovery, often adopting a “live in the moment” mindset.
Additional benefits include avoidance of psycho-social impact of major surgery on patients and their families, escaping prolonged recovery from oesophagectomy and reduced burden on caretakers. Patients’ autonomy is enhanced when they are provided with various treatment options. Societal benefits include significant savings in direct costs of surgery as well as loss of productivity of patients recovering from oesophagectomy. Finally, patients who develop early metastatic disease are spared morbid surgery improving palliative systemic treatment prospects.
Multiple risks associated with AS strategy have been considered including accuracy of response evaluation and thus possible increased risk of interval metastasis, potential increased morbidity of delayed surgery, the cost of AS, as well as psychological impact of regular response evaluations. Growing body of literature is directed at examining these risks and is summarized below (Table 1).
Overview of studies comparing AS and surgery in patients with cCR after neoadjuvant therapy for oesophageal cancer
Author (year)	Country	N	Definition of cCR	Diagnostics used for cCR	Objective	AS scheme	Main findings	 	Castoro et al. (2013)	Italy	77	Absence of visible tumour lesion and negative biopsy specimens	Endoscopic biopsies and CT (PET-CT from 2005 onwards)	Compare OS and DFS between immediate surgery and AS	Patients were examined at regularly scheduled intervals after 1, 3, 6, 12 months, and every 6–12 months thereafter	5-year OS: 50% (surgery) vs. 57% (surveillance), p = 0.99; DFS higher in surgery group (55.5% vs. 34.6%, p = 0.15) but not statistically significant	 	Furlong et al. (2013)	Ireland	25	Negative endoscopic biopsy and CT scan	Endoscopic biopsies and CT	Evaluate OS of selective surgery vs. AS in elderly patients after nCRT	Endoscopy every 3 months and multiple (>10) biopsies, CT scanning every 6 months for 3 years	cCR yields 3-year OS of 50%; no significant survival advantage for surgery in cCR patients (p = 0.861)	 	Taketa et al. (2013)	USA	305	Negative endoscopic biopsy and PET	Endoscopic biopsies and PET-CT	Compare OS, DFS, and RFS of TMT vs. AS	Patients were followed periodically until 5 years or death	Median OS: 57.9 months (AS) vs. 50.8 months (surgery); no significant difference in relapse-free survival	 	Piessen et al. (2013)	France	177	Negative endoscopic biopsies and CT scan	Endoscopic biopsies, barium swallow, and CT	Compare OS, DFS, and recurrence patterns of AS vs. surgery	Clinical examination, CT, endoscopic biopsies, and PET scan (optional) were performed serially until disease progression (every 4 months for 2 years, every 6 months for 3 years, and then annually)	Surgery improved OS and reduced recurrence risk compared to surveillance (median survival: 83 vs. 31 months; recurrence: 50.8% vs. 32.7%)	 	Murphy et al. (2013)	USA	143	No disease progression on post-CXRT PET-CT and negative biopsy	PET-CT, EUS, and biopsy	Compare OS and DFS between CXRT alone vs. CXRT followed by surgery	Patients underwent close monitoring after CXRT with periodic imaging and clinical assessment. Surgery was reserved for locoregional failure	Surgery improved OS (median 41.2 vs. 20.3 months, p = 0.012) and DFS (median 21.5 vs. 11.4 months, p = 0.007)	 	Jeong et al. (2014)	South Korea	154	Decrease in FDG uptake of primary tumour and lymph nodes to a level indistinguishable from that of the surrounding normal tissue	PET-CT	Compare OS, DFS, and LRFS of TMT vs. definitive CRT	FU interval was 3 months for the first 2 years and then every 6 months until 5 years	Surgery did not significantly improve OS (OS: 60.3% vs. 61.3%)	 	van der Wilk et al. (2021)	The Netherlands	98	No cyto-/histological evidence of locoregional residual disease (at endoscopic biopsies or EUS-FNA) and distant metastases on PET-CT were detected during 2 CREs 6 and 12 weeks after completion of nCRT	Endoscopic biopsies, EUS, FNA, and PET-CT	Compare OS and PFS of AS vs. immediate surgery	Patients in the AS group were planned to undergo CREs every 3 months during the first year, every 4 months during the second year, twice a year during the third year, and annually during the 4th and 5th years	No significant difference in OS (3-year OS: 77% for surveillance vs. 55% for surgery; p = 0.104) and PFS (3-year PFS: 60% for surveillance vs. 54% for surgery; p = 0.871)

Retrospective Cohort Studies
The study by Castoro et al. compared outcomes in patients with OSCC achieved cCR who underwent immediate surgery versus AS. The 5-year overall survival rates were comparable, at 50% for surgery versus 57% for surveillance, p = 0.99. Although 5-year disease-free survival seemed higher in the surgery group, 55.5% versus 34.6%, p = 0.15, these differences did not reach statistical significance after adjustment for propensity score. In cases of recurrence, surgery was performed with comparable outcomes.
In a propensity-matched multicentre analysis of 98 patients (75% AC, 25% SCC), no differences in OS and PFS between patients undergoing AS or planned surgery were identified; 3-year OS for surveillance compared with surgery was 77% versus 55%, respectively, p = 0.104.
Similar results in the series by Taketa et al. were reported. The propensity score-matched comparisons demonstrated that OS was not significantly different between surgery and surveillance groups, with median survivals of 57.9 months in the surveillance versus 50.8 months in the surgical group (p = 0.28). When stratified by histology, outcomes remained comparable, with no significant OS difference in either the AC subgroup (p = 0.24) or the SCC subgroup (p = 0.59). Of importance, 31% of those patients in the surveillance group went on to surgery for recurrence with outcomes no different from those in the immediate surgical cohort.
Furlong et al. reported high rates (45%) of cCR in elderly patients (70 years or older) including both AC (59%) and SCC (41%) and reported 67% 3-year survival in AS group compared to 50% in the surgery group (p = 0.861), indicating no significant survival advantage for immediate surgery. Among those with adenocarcinoma, 3-year OS was 65% for surveillance and 41% for surgery (p = 0.466), while in patients with SCC, survival rates were 70% and 67%, respectively (p = 0.989).
A systematic review with individual patient data meta-analysis including seven studies demonstrated comparable survival between AS and planned surgery groups. Total of 451 (256 standard oesophagectomy vs. 195 AS) propensity-matched patients were included with median follow up >50 months. All-cause mortality, overall survival, and radicality (R0 resection) of surgery were similar between the groups despite a higher number of unfit patients in surveillance group.

Prospective Trials
The randomized phase III ESOPRESSO trial compared AS to planned surgery in 37 patients with locally advanced OSCC with complete response to CRT. In this study, 2-year DFS was 66.7% in the surgery arm versus 42.7% in the AS arm (p = 0.262). Recurrences in the observation arm were considered disease recurrence despite all recurrences being resectable. The overall survival rate did not show a statistically significant difference, with a hazard ratio of 1.48 (95% CI: 0.40–5.51; p = 0.560).
In the prospective non-randomized trial by Fujita et al., the benefit of oesophagectomy following CRT was evaluated in T4N0-1M0 OSCC patients. Patients underwent contrast swallow, CT scan and endoscopy after the first chemoradiotherapy cycle to assess response. Among responders, 5-year survival rates were identical for surgical and non-surgical patients at 23%. However, non-responders experienced improved survival with surgery, with 1- and 2-year survival rates of 64% and 33% versus 20% for non-surgical patients.
The Dutch SANO trial is a multicentre, stepped-wedge cluster randomized trial to assess the non-inferiority of AS compared to standard surgery in patients with AC and SCC of the oesophagus and gastro-oesophageal junction. Two-year survival rate was the primary end point and non-inferiority tested as within 15 percentage points of the 2-year OS seen in the standard surgery group. The randomization was at an institutional level, and patients starting nCRT were assigned to either surgery or AS for those who achieved cCR, as assessed with CREs at 4–6 and 10–12 weeks after nCRT. AS consisted of regular CREs made up of OGD with biopsies, EUS-FNA, and PET-CT. Assessments were made every 3 months in the first year, every 4 months in the second year, every 6 months in the third year, and annually in the fourth and fifth years. Patients with no residual disease at the end of the follow-up were considered cured. The results of the SANO trial demonstrated that AS is non-inferior to standard surgery in patients who achieved cCR after nCRT. Two-year OS was 74% in the AS group versus 71% in the standard surgery group. Median OS was 43 months for AS and 53 months for standard surgery (HR 1.14, 95% CI: 0.74–1.78; p = 0.55). Nearly half of the patients in the surveillance group (48%) had locoregional regrowth, and 17% had distant metastases, while 35% had a durable cCR. Notably, in patients with AC who comprised the majority histological subtype in the study, 30% achieved durable cCR, and OS did not differ by histological subtype. Postponed oesophagectomy after locoregional regrowth was not associated with increased postoperative morbidity or mortality, and R0 resection rates remained comparable to standard surgery. Furthermore, patients undergoing AS experienced significantly better health-related quality of life (HRQOL) at 6 and 9 months post-treatment.
Although longer follow-up is needed to confirm the long-term safety of this approach, the SANO trial offers a basis for guiding patient discussions and the development of structured response evaluation protocols. Of note, during the SANO trial, about a quarter of patients in the standard surgery group declined oesophagectomy, opting for AS, which represented patient preference for less invasive management in cases where no residual disease was detected.
The SANO-2 study is an ongoing prospective cohort study with primary goal of monitoring adverse events associated with AS. Data captured in SANO-2 address potential risks of AS such as adverse events during response evaluations, rate of distant metastasis, complications of delayed surgery, as well as oncological outcomes.
The ongoing CELAEC trial is comparing OS between surveillance and surgery at the predicted 5-year OS rate of 50% versus 29.4% in favour of surveillance. Patients are randomized to either dCRT or nCRT followed by surgery. Surgery is an option following dCRT if cCR has not been achieved within 16 weeks and the disease is resectable. The goal of the trial was to establish the relative effectiveness of surgery and AS in an Asian population with OSCC.
The ongoing NEEDS trial is a phase III randomized multicentre study comparing nCRT followed by surgery with dCRT and selective salvage surgery for locally advanced OSCC. The primary objective was to establish the non-inferiority of dCRT with selective surgery compared to nCRT with surgery in terms of OS, with the added goal of demonstrating superior HRQOL in the dCRT group. The trial aims to randomize 1,200 patients, with the follow-up period of 5 years to assess survival, recurrence, and HRQOL outcomes.
The ESOSTRATE trial, a phase III multicentre study in France, aimed to randomize 600 patients with cCR, regardless of neoadjuvant treatment protocol to planned surgery or surveillance, hypothesizing a 2-year DFS rate of 45% for surgery versus 30% for surveillance. However, the trial closed prematurely due to poor accrual, and no results or details of study protocol are available to date.
An ongoing PALACE3 (NCT06339060) study is a phase III trial comparing neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy plus immunotherapy (camrelizumab) followed by AS in responders versus standard neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy with surgery. The primary endpoint is 3-year overall survival, with secondary endpoints of pathological response rates, perioperative morbidity, and quality of life. If successful, this approach has the potential to increase organ preservation rates without compromising oncological results.

Discussion
Current evidence indicates that for some patients with OC neoadjuvant treatment alone can be curative. Existing methods of response evaluation appear sufficiently sensitive to accurately detect complete response as well as recurrence but may be enhanced in the future by incorporating newer diagnostic modalities such as MR radiomics and ctDNA analysis. Whilst long-term follow-up of the randomized studies (SANO, CELEAC) are yet to be published, preliminary outcomes encourage AS approach in OC.
Available data consistently support safety of delayed surgery after neoadjuvant CRT, in contrast to salvage surgery following definitive CRT. It is however crucial to evaluate clinical response prior to deciding on the timing of surgery as delay may have negative impact on patients with incomplete or no response to nCRT.
While only a third of patients maintain initial cCR, the impact of organ preservation on quality of life is profound, making AS a worthy treatment consideration. Significance of quality of life for patients with OC was demonstrated by the unexpectedly high number of patients declining surgery for disease recurrence in SANO trial.
Repeat response evaluations include invasive tests, are costly, and carry procedure-associated risks. With increasing number of patients choosing AS outside randomized studies, it is likely that response evaluations will be refined and rationalized over time. Direct costs of AS may currently be higher than standard surgery, especially considering significant rates of disease recurrence during surveillance requiring surgery. However, when significant impact of oesophagectomy on productivity and quality of life is taken in consideration, overall and economic benefit of organ sparing is possible. Current mode of AS can be challenging in resource-limited settings and in low-income countries due to labour-intensive, resource-consuming nature of response evaluations. Amongst the potential advantages of AS in low-income countries is the improved participation in the workforce of patients under AS compared to those recovering from oesophagectomy. Until economic results of the AS approach are established, it should be applied with caution in resource-limited settings ensuring distributive justice is not impaired.
Approximately 40% of patients undergoing curative intent oesophagectomy following neoadjuvant treatment will develop metastatic disease. Although AS does not reduce the number of distant metastases, sparing this group the morbidity of surgery can offer possible advantages of improved quality of life and performance status and, as a result, better chance at receiving life-prolonging anti-cancer treatment.
Amongst the challenges of AS strategies is the high rate of recurrence in initial cCR. One promising approach to address this is the integration of immunotherapy with nivolumab. The role of immunotherapy in AS is currently being examined by the phase IIb SANO-3 study with results expected in 2026. AS can be challenging in large countries with low-density population such as Australia or Canada where patients would have to travel vast distances for expert response evaluations. Perhaps with improvements in radiomic and non-invasive response metrics, distance barrier can be overcome.

Conclusion
Patients achieving complete clinical response to neoadjuvant treatment can choose to undergo AS reserving surgery for treatment of local disease recurrence. The outcomes of delayed surgery for recurrence of disease are comparable with planned surgery. Individuals that achieve cure with neoadjuvant treatment for OC are spared oesophagectomy and have significantly improved quality of life. The challenges of AS approach are invasive, costly, and labour-intensive response evaluation tests, psychological impact of fear of recurrence, and high rates of recurrence following initial cCR. Future directions include developing treatments to achieve more sustained response and rationalization of surveillance protocols favouring less invasive and more sensitive diagnostic modalities.

Conflict of Interest Statement
Bas P.L. Wijnhoven was a member of the journal’s editorial board at the time of submission. All other authors declare no conflicts of interest related to the content of this manuscript.

Funding Sources
No funding was received toward the creation of this manuscript.

Author Contributions
All authors contributed to the creation of this paper as follows: M.P.: literature review, writing, and editing. O.K.: planning, literature review, writing, and editing. S.M.L. and B.M.: planning, review, and editing of manuscript. B.P.L.W.: planning, review, and overall project oversight.

References
Global cancer statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries
Integrated genomic characterization of oesophageal carcinoma
Perioperative chemotherapy or preoperative chemoradiotherapy in esophageal cancer
Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy plus surgery versus surgery alone for oesophageal or junctional cancer (CROSS): long-term results of a randomised controlled trial
Trimodality therapy versus perioperative chemotherapy in the management of locally advanced adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus and oesophagogastric junction (Neo-AEGIS): an open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial
Benchmarking complications associated with esophagectomy
Long-term quality of life after oesophagectomy with gastric conduit interposition for cancer
Recurrent disease after esophageal cancer surgery: a substudy of the Dutch nationwide ivory study
International expert consensus on semantics of multimodal esophageal cancer treatment: Delphi study
Detection of residual disease after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for oesophageal cancer (preSANO): a prospective multicentre, diagnostic cohort study
Residual esophageal cancer after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy frequently involves the mucosa and submucosa
Detecting residual disease after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma: the prospective multicentre preSINO trial
Detection of circulating tumour DNA after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy in patients with locally advanced oesophageal cancer
MR radiomics predicts pathological complete response of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy: a multicenter study
Radiomics diagnostic performance for predicting lymph node metastasis in esophageal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Prolonged time to surgery after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy increases histopathological response without affecting survival in patients with esophageal or junctional cancer
Waiting to operate: the risk of salvage esophagectomy
Oncological outcomes of standard versus prolonged time to surgery after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for oesophageal cancer in the multicentre, randomised, controlled NeoRes II trial
Prolonged time to surgery in patients with residual disease after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for esophageal cancer
Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy followed by active surveillance versus standard surgery for oesophageal cancer (SANO trial): a multicentre, stepped-wedge, cluster-randomised, non-inferiority, phase 3 trial
Active surveillance of oesophageal cancer after response to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy: dysphagia is uncommon
Patient preferences for active surveillance vs standard surgery after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy in oesophageal cancer treatment: the NOSANO-study
Insights in work rehabilitation after minimally invasive esophagectomy
Impact of esophagectomy for cancer on patients’ occupational status
Complete clinical response after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for squamous cell cancer of the thoracic oesophagus: is surgery always necessary?
Targeting therapy for esophageal cancer in patients aged 70 and over
Propensity-based matching between esophagogastric cancer patients who had surgery and who declined surgery after preoperative chemoradiation
Is there a role for surgery for patients with a complete clinical response after chemoradiation for esophageal cancer? An intention-to-treat case-control study
Surgery is an essential component of multimodality therapy for patients with locally advanced esophageal adenocarcinoma
Role of surgical resection in complete responders on FDG-PET after chemoradiotherapy for locally advanced esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
Active surveillance versus immediate surgery in clinically complete responders after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for esophageal cancer: a multicenter propensity matched study
Chemoradiotherapy followed by active surveillance versus standard esophagectomy for esophageal cancer: a systematic review and individual patient data meta-analysis
A randomized phase III trial on the role of esophagectomy in complete responders to preoperative chemoradiotherapy for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESOPRESSO)
Esophagectomy: is it necessary after chemoradiotherapy for a locally advanced T4 esophageal cancer? Prospective nonrandomized trial comparing chemoradiotherapy with surgery versus without surgery
Updated protocol of the SANO trial: a stepped-wedge cluster randomised trial comparing surgery with active surveillance after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy for oesophageal cancer
Chemoradiation versus oesophagectomy for locally advanced oesophageal cancer in Chinese patients: study protocol for a randomised controlled trial
Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and surgery for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma versus definitive chemoradiotherapy with salvage surgery as needed: the study protocol for the randomized controlled NEEDS trial
Post-neoadjuvant surveillance and surgery as needed compared with post-neoadjuvant surgery on principle in multimodal treatment for esophageal cancer: a scoping review
Adjuvant nivolumab in resected esophageal or gastroesophageal junction cancer