Evaluation of stem/stromal cell transplantation safety and efficacy in children diagnosed with cerebral palsy: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Background
Cerebral palsy is a neurological disorder that affects both postnatal and prenatal children. It results from brain damage in the cerebral motor cortex. The three types of CP are spastic, dyskinetic, and mixed forms. This study aims to evaluate the efficacy and safety of stem or stromal cell therapy in children diagnosed with cerebral palsy.
Main body of the abstract
A systematic search was conducted across four databases: PubMed, ISI Web of Science, Scopus, and Embase from inception to August 23, 2024, to identify studies evaluating the efficacy and safety of stem cell therapy for cerebral palsy. Data extraction was performed for all randomized controlled clinical studies. ROB2 (Risk of Bias Tool 2) was used to assess the risk of bias in the included studies. The main outcome measures were extracted from each study for meta-analysis, and a PRISMA flow diagram was used to illustrate the study selection process. Eventually, thirteen studies met the inclusion criteria. The Gross Motor Function Measure (GMFM) is crucial for assessing motor function changes and evaluating the impact of stem cell therapy. Subgroup analysis of GMFM scores were conducted based on assessment time points (3, 6, and 12 months post-treatment), route of administration, and type of stem cell used. The results demonstrate that stem cell therapy remarkably improved GMFM score in the treatment group. For safety analysis, adverse events such as irritability, fever, nausea, and vomiting were assessed, and risk ratios (RRs) were calculated to confirm the safety of stem cell therapy.
Conclusion
The findings suggest that stem cell transplantation was safe and effective for treating cerebral palsy. However, further high-quality RCTs with standardized protocols are necessary to investigate the efficacy of alternative stem cell types for cerebral palsy.

Background
Cerebral palsy presents a set of heterogeneous symptoms affecting neonatal and postnatal children, with prevalence influenced by factors such as gestational age, birth weight, and other factors. Still, the overall pooled prevalence is approximately 2.11 per 1,000 live births. Various factors like gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) may be associated with cerebral palsy, but prematurity remains the most significant risk factor for CP. Spasticity that is resulting from upper motor neuron lesions often leads to secondary consequences, including pain, insomnia, and pressure ulcers. analyzing patients’ cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) exhibits a meaningful increase in the inflammatory cytokines in CP patients. Cerebral encompasses a range of disabilities, including hemiplegia, quadriplegia and impaired motor coordination. This condition mainly reduces the quality of life and imposes considerable psychological burdens both children and caregivers. Early neurodevelopmental assessment is critical, as it helps identify impairments early and may reduce the progression of disability in infants with severe CP. However, some assessment methods such as General Movements (GMs) during the writhing phase, show limited predictive value for diagnosing CP in infants under four months of age. The Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) categorizes the severity of motor function impairment in children with CP. This have been classified into five types. The process of diagnosing cerebral palsy relies on clinical examination, while modern neuroimaging techniques help identify brain lesions neurobiological studies combined with pathological evaluations contribute to understanding its etiology. One of the brain imaging methods is MRI which detect brain abnormalitiesin approximately 86% of CP patients. Hypoxic-ischemic brain activation therapy (HBAT) and hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) lead to considerable GMFM improvement in affected individuals with CP. Another way for spastic CP is Botulinum toxin type A (BoNT-A) injection in gastrocnemius muscle (GM) elucidate muscle recovery impairment after several administrations repeated doses should be administered no sooner than six months after the initial injection. Microbiopsy of the medial gastrocnemius muscle in children with CP exhibits SC-derived progenitors capable of undergoing myogenic differentiation. Over fifteen years, stem cell transplantation has shown multiple potential benefits for the treatment of cerebral palsy. Cell therapy may play its role through paracrine and signaling pathways with the purpose of reducing inflammation and promote angiogenesis. Moreover, this mechanism could help neural stem cells to migrate and proliferate in brain-damaged injured regions. Finally, based on some in vivo studies, CD34+ HSCs and CD34− cells may attenuate brain injuries in CP. Nasal transplantation of cytoglobin (CYGB) may enhance the therapeutic effects of human umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells (CYGBHuMSCs) in the hypoxic-ischemic model of brain damage (HIBD). There are several types of stem cells; umbilical cord blood and mesenchymal stromal cells are the safest and most applicable in clinical trials. Human neural stem cells (hNSCs), which are renewable and homogeneous, have the capacity to differentiate into neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes, and have also been shown to reduce infarct size in brain injury models. Besides, NSCs have a tendency to migrate to injured brain tissue. Significant improvement in modified Ashworth scale (MAS) shows that MSC positively impact muscle tone in CP patients. For instance, mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes have numerous benefits through miRNA role in Parkinson’s Disease. Therefore, compiling and analyzing all available randomized controlled trials to explore the efficacy of alternative stem cell types in cerebral palsy should be prioritized.

Methods
A protocol for this study was registered in PROSPERO (CRD: 42024588170 https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/ ). The screening process was performed independently by two reviewers in order to complete the PRISMA flow diagram.

Inclusion criteria
All randomized controlled trials (RCTs) conducted on patients diagnosed with cerebral palsy (CP), regardless of race, region, gender, literacy level, or other demographic differences, were included. Therefore the main outcome measurement conducted on Gross Motor Function Measure (GMFM) and subgroup analysis conducted on intervention time at 3,6,12 months after the intervention, route of administration, type of stem cells and for safety analysis, adverse events have shown.

Exclusion criteria
The following were excluded: Review articles, animal models, in vitro experiments, literature reviews, editorials, book chapters, retrospectives, cohort studies, non-randomized clinical trials, unavailable studies, some studies were not accessible, and all studies that are not relevant to stem cell infusions or did not report GMFM in their studies.

Data sources
We searched four English databases (PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, Embase) from inception to 23 August 2024; its elaboration with search strategy and syntax was reported in Table 1. We used a combination of keywords and MESH terms for search: Cerebral palsy, spastic, Muscle spasticity, Stem cell, Stromal cell, and Stem cell transplantation.

Data extraction and quality assessment
Two independent reviewers (RF and SMM) screened articles using https://www.rayyan.ai/ for data extraction. Risk of bias was assessed using the Risk of Bias 2 (ROB2) tool. All data from study characteristics include country, year, first author, study design and population number, type and dose of stem cells, route of administration, follow-up period, and main outcome measurements.

Data analysis
Data analysis was performed with STATA (version 18). While most data were directly extracted, certain values required calculation. For example, in the study standard error (SE) converted to standard deviation (SD) and in studies and, the SD of GMFM score was derived from the sample size. Our meta-analysis employed the Random Effects Model and for safety analysis, we tended to utilize the Fixed Effects Model. We used Standard Mean Difference (SMD) for GMFM and Risk Ratio (RR) for adverse events. All results extracted from the meta-analysis were reported with 95% Confidence Intervals (CI). Heterogeneity was calculated via the I2 test. Subgroup analyses were conducted both before and after sensitivity testing due to high heterogeneity. All forest plots presented reflect post-sensitivity analysis results.
Search strategy and syntax
Pub medResults: 85	(“cerebral palsy“[Title/Abstract] OR “spastic“[Title/Abstract] OR “muscle spasticity“[Title/Abstract]) AND ((“stem cell“[Title/Abstract] OR “stromal cell“[Title/Abstract]) AND “transplantation“[Title/Abstract])	 	ScopusResults: 581	( ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( cerebral AND palsy ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( spastic ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( muscle AND spasticity ) ) ) AND ( ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( stem AND cell ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( stromal AND cell ) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY ( transplantation ) ) )	 	Web of ScienceResults: 669	(TS=(stem cell or stromal cell and transplantation)) AND TS=(cerebral palsy or spastic or muscle spasticity)	 	EmbaseResults: 160	(‘stem cell’: title, abstract, keyword OR ‘stromal cell’:: title, abstract, keyword ) AND transplantation:: title, abstract, keyword AND (‘cerebral palsy’:: title, abstract, keyword OR spastic:: title, abstract, keyword OR ‘muscle spasticity’:: title, abstract, keyword)

Results

Results of the search
The search strategy, including detailed syntax for each database, is presented in Table 1. PRISMA diagram describes the screening process and the selection of eligible articles in Fig. 1. Totally we extracted 1064 articles from four databases: Embase (n = 160), Web of Science (n = 669), Scopus (n = 581), and PubMed (n = 85). After screening, 65 studies were sought for full-text retrieval and 47 studies were excluded. The reasons varied: non-randomized clinical trials, not RCT, did not report the same outcome measurement, and were irrelevant to the topic. Besides 14 studies due to lack of data related to the control group and we had no access to full texts, finally, 13 studies were included in this systematic review and meta-analysis.

Characteristics of the studies
The characteristics of the included studies are summarized in Table 2. In total, we included 13 studies four of them were published in Korea, five from China, two from Iran, and one each published in the USA and Americas. All of them were randomized controlled trials in which the control and treatment groups were separated in Table 2. A study conducted simultaneous two types of stem cells considering bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell (BMMSC) and bone marrow mononuclear cell (BMMNC), similarly another one performed allogeneic cord blood and human cord tissue mesenchymal stem cell. Therefore, we separated each stem cell type was analyzed separately in Table 2.

Risk assessment of bias
The risk of bias measurement with its elaboration was reported in Fig. 2. Since all studies were RCT, the first domain of the RoB 2 tool refers to the randomization process considered low risk. In the second domain, bias due to deviations from intended interventions—related to personnel and participant awareness—was generally rated as “some concerns” or “low risk”. For the third domain (missing outcome data), study was rated as high risk due to outcome exclusion. Three studies had “some concerns” due to unclear missing data, while the remaining studies were considered low risk. The fourth domain assessed whether outcome assessors were aware of participant group assignments, and the fifth domain examined the selection of reported results. Ratings for these domains are summarized in Fig. 2.
Prisma Diagram
Risk Assessment of Bias
Clinical studies of stem cell therapy for CP
Study	Country	Design	Sample Size	Age, y	Patient Condition	Therapy	Control	Follow up.M	Main outcome measures	 							sample size	average age, y	cell type	Dosecell/kg	administration route	Sample Size	Average age, y	Intervention			 	Suh et al.(2023)	Korea	open-label extension study of randomized placebo-controlled trial	69	2_7.5	CP with severe dysfunction, GMFCS levels were IV and V	16	4.3	AllogeneicUCB + EPO	4.4 × 10^7	intravenous infusion	18	4.5	placebo	3,6,12	GMFM-66, GMPM, BSID-II	 	Lv et al.(2023)	China	randomized phase 1/2 controlled trial	25	3_12	spastic cp. with GMFMII to V	15	6.73	AllogeneicNSC	5 × 10^5	intranasal infusion	10	5.72	rehabilitation therapy	1,3,6,24	GMFM-88, ADL, SDSC, FBN, VBM, FMFS, SS, LAS, EAS	 	Zarrabi et al.(2022)	Iran	randomized double-blind, multi-center	72	4_14	spastic cp. and GMFCS level II to V	36	9.37	AllogeneicUCB-MNC	5 × 10^6 single dose	intrathecal route	36	8.54	sham procedure, Bobath concept	1,3,6,12	GMFM-66, MAS, PEDI, CP-QoL, FA and MD of CST and PTR	 	Sun et al.(2022)	USA	single site, prospective, randomized, open-label, phase 2 trial	91	2_5	hypertonic CP, GMFCS levels I to IV	31	3.83	AllogeneicAlloCB	10 × 10^7 single dose	intravenous route	31	3.67	rehabilitation therapy	6,12,24	GMFM-66, PDMS-2, PEDI	 							28	3.75	AllogeneichCT-MSC	2 × 10^6 three doses							 	Amanat et al. (2021)	Iran	RCT, double-blind	72	4_14	spastic CP, GMFCS level II to IV	36	8.475	AllogeneicHUC-MSC	2 × 10^7	intrathecal route	36	8.542	sham procedure, Bobath therapy	1,3,6,12 M	GMFM-66, MAS, PEDI, CP-Qol, FA and MD of CST and PTR	 	Gu et al.(2020)	China	RCT, double-blind	40	2_12	CP	20	3.83	AllogeneicHUC-MSC	4.5–5.5 × 10^7	intravenous route	20	4.775	placebo, Bobath therapy, and conductive education	12 M	GMFM-88, ADL, CFA, F-FDG, PET/CT	 	Huang et al.(2018)	China	RCT, single blind	54	3_12	CP	27	7.3	AllogeneicHUCB-MSC	5 × 10^7	intravenous	27	7.5	normal saline, basic rehabilitation	3,6,12,24 M	GMFM-88, CFA, LAB test, EEG, MRI	 	Liu et al.(2017)	China	RCT, double-blind	105	0.5_12.5	spastic CP	35	4.129	A: AutologousBMMSC	10^6	intrathecal route	35	4.105	Bobath therapy	3,6,12 M	GMFM, FMFM	 							35	4.092	B:AutologousBMMNC								 	Rah et al.(2017)	Korea	RCT, double-blind, cross over	47	2_10	CP	47	4.1	AutologousmPBMC	5.97 × 10^8	intravenous route	47	4.1	personalized physiotherapy and occupational therapy	1,7,13 M	GMFM-88, PEDI, QUEST, MRIDTI,18Ffluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), PETCT, DDST-II, MACS	 	Sun et al.(2017)	America	randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, cross-over	63	1_6	CP, GMFCS level II-IV	32	2.1	Autologous cord blood(ACB)	1_5 × 10^7	intravenous route	31	2.3	placebo, traditional rehabilitation therapies	12,24 M	PDMS-2, GMFM-66, brain MRI	 	Kang et al.(2015)	Korea	randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind	36	0.5_20	CP	18	3.9	AllogeneicUCB	5.46 × 10^7	intravenous or intra-arterial	18	3.775	placebo	2 W,1,3,6 M	MMT, GMFM, GMPM, BSID2, Wee FIM, PEDI, F-FDG, PET	 	Min et al.(2013)	Korea	Double-blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial	96	0.5_7.3	CP	31	3.067	Allogeneic UCB + rh EPO	TNC ≥ 3 × 10^7 single dose	intravenous infusion	32	3.192	rehabilitation training	1,3,6 M	GMPM, Mental and Motor scales of the BSID-2 GMFM, PEDI, Wee FIM, (18 F-FDG, PET/CT) DTI	 	Luan et al.(2012)	China	RCT	94	0.4_3.3	severe CP, GMFCS level I-V	45	1.083	AllogeneicNPC	8–10 × 10^6	lateral ventricle injection	49	1.569	rehabilitation training	12 M	GMFM, PDMS-FM, Survey questionnaire
GMFM: Gross Motor Function Measure, FMFM: Fine Motor Function Measure, SCT: Stem Cell Transplantation, MAS: Modified Ashworth Scale, PEDI: Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory, CP-QoL: CP Quality of Life, FA: Fractional Anisotropy, CFA: Comprehensive Function Assessment, GMPM: Gross Motor Performance Measure, Wee FIM: Functional Independence Measure for Children, BSID-II: Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, MD: Mean Diffusivity, CST: Corticospinal Tract, PTR: Posterior Thalamic Radiation, h UC-MSC: Human Umbilical Cord Mesenchymal Stem Cells, h UCB-MSC: Human Umbilical Cord Blood Mesenchymal Stem Cell, UCB: Umbilical Cord Blood, BMMSCs: Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem cells, BMMNCs: Bone Marrow Mononuclear Cells, NPCs: Neural Progenitor Cells, PDMS-FM: Peabody Developmental Motor Scale-Fine Motor, rh EPO: recombinant human Erythropoietin, QUEST: Quality of Upper Extremity Skills Test, MACS: Manual Ability Classification System, ACB: Autologous Cord Blood, TNC: Total Nucleated Cell, VBM: Voxel-Based Morphological, SS: Sociability scale, SDSC: The Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children, FBN: Functional Brain Network, ADL: Activity of Daily Living, EAS: Expressive Ability Scale, Y: Year, M: Month, CP: Cerebral palsy, FA: Fractional Anisotropy, GMFCS: Gross Motor Function Classification System, MRI: Magnetic Resonance Imaging, DTI: Diffusion Tensor Imaging, QSM: Quantitative susceptibility mapping, WBV: Whole Body Vibration, EPO: Erythropoietin, MMT: Manual Muscle Testing, PET/CT: Positron Emission Tomography/ Computed Tomography, DDST-II: Denver Developmental Screening Test II, FDG: 18Ffluorodeoxyglucose, EEG: Electroencephalography, AlloCB: Allogeneic Cord Blood

Meta-analysis
Thirteen articles were included in this meta-analysis using a random effect model, considering GMFM as a main outcome measurement for efficacy and adverse events as safety assessment. The results showed that stem cell therapy is more effective in the treatment group than the control one as illustrated in Fig. 3 (SMD: 0.82; 95%CI [0.32,1.31]). Our results suggest that some articles are the major source of heterogeneity (I2 = 91.37%). We found that studies, and may be the main sources of heterogeneity. These were excluded in a sensitivity analysis with a revised forest plot. After removing them, heterogeneity decreased (I2 = 8.08%). Data refers to the second forest plot after sensitivity analysis (SMD: 0.50; 95%CI [0.33, 0.67] I2 = 8.08%) Fig. 4.
Forest Plot of GMFM Pooled Results Before Sensitivity Analysis
Forest Plot of GMGM Pooled Results After Sensitivity Analysis

Subgroup analysis

Time subgroup of GMFM
Subgroup analyses based on follow-up period, were conducted at three, six, and twelve months for both allogeneic and autologous stem cell and placebo administration. Pooled analysis indicated increasing level in GMFM scores at 3 months for treatment group (SMD: 0.27; 95%CI [0.05, 0.48], I2 = 0%) also subgroup analysis indicated that GMFM score increased at 6 months (SMD: 0.53; 95%CI [0.30, 0.76] I2 = 12.51%) finally GMFM score was increased at 12 months (SMD: 0.52; 95%CI [0.34, 0.70] I2 = 0%). All time-based subgroups were analyzed using the Random Effects Model after conducting a sensitivity analysis (Fig. 5).
Time Subgroup of GMFM

Stem cells type subgroup of GMFM
As a whole, bone marrow contains mesenchymal stem cells, which might be derived from adipose tissue, umbilical cord, muscle, cord blood, peripheral blood, and placenta. Mesenchymal stem cells are multipotent and demonstrate immunosuppressive properties that are not restricted by human leukocyte antigen (HLA). They can be identified by the expression of cell surface markers such as CD73, CD90, and CD105. Umbilical cord blood stem cells come with numerous benefits, ranging from ease of collection, low risk of infection transmission, and less rejection to reduced need for precise HLA-matching.
To indicate which type of stem cell is more effective for cerebral palsy, we conducted a subgroup analysis for each type of stem cell that was administered in the studies. Four studies explored MSCs: three derived from umbilical cord (UC) Wharton’s jelly (WJ) and one from bone marrow (BM-MSCs). The UCB group included various cell products made from umbilical cord blood. In the UCB group, four sources were allogenic, while one was autologous. MSC indicated a convincing GMFM increase (SMD: 0.63; 95%CI [0.35, 0.91] I2 = 0%). Moreover, an analysis of those who received UCB reported GMFM improvement post-infusion (SMD: 0.30; 95%CI [0.04, 0.55] I2 = 0%). Since only two studies received NSC and the results showed similar efficacy to other stem cell types (SMD: 0.88; 95%CI [0.28, 1.49] I2 = 45.22%). Finally, stem cell subgroup analysis has shown meaningful increases in GMFM (SMD: 0.44; 95%CI [0.24, 0.64] I2 = 43.45%) Fig. 6.
Stem Cell Type Subgroup Analysis
Forest Plot of Administration Route

Administration route subgroup of GMFM
The routes of administration in all studies were: intrathecal and intravenous route, intranasal infusion, and lateral ventricle injection. After sensitivity analysis, two studies and were included in the intrathecal subgroup, while seven studies including were involved to the intravenous subgroup. A clear improvement in GMFM following intrathecal administration (SMD: 0.56; 95%CI [0.26, 0.87] I2 = 0%). Similarly, there was a similar positive change in the intravenous route (SMD: 0.29; 95%CI [0.04, 0.53] I2 = 36.42%). Our statistics on the administration route were based on 12 months of patient follow up. Pooled analysis has indicated GMFM had positive changes in GMFM (SMD: 0.44; 95%CI [0.24, 0.64] I2 = 43.45%) Fig. 7.

Safety indicator
To assess the safety of stem cell transplantation for cerebral palsy, adverse events (AE) of infusions were analyzed using a fixed effects model. A multitude number of adverse events have been shown in each study; meanwhile, we conducted a subgroup analysis for three types of events (fever, vomiting or nausea, irritability) after administration. Risk Ratio (RR) for each type of event was calculated showing that complications in the experimental group are not significant in comparison with the control one. To assess fever (RR: 0.66; 95% CI [0.18, 1.14] heterogeneity test: I2 = 0%) we found there is no meaningful difference between the two groups. Vomiting showed no significant difference between the treatment and control groups (RR: 0.98; 95% CI [0.21, 1.75]), and irritability yielded similar results (RR: 0.99; 95% CI [0.13, 1.84], I² = 0%) Fig. 8.
Forest Plot of Adverse Events

Discussion
Stem cells offer various advantages for brain injuries, including facilitating motor recovery after stroke and protecting the corticospinal tract. Although there are various types of stem cells, Umbilical Cord Blood and Mesenchymal Stem cells are by far the safest among them. Additionally, allogeneic cell therapy may trigger immunological reaction, whereas autologous cells do not pose this risk. More importantly, in brain traumas, UCB cells can decrease CD4 + T cell migration into the brain.
Intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) and CP have connections due to decrease in the interleukin-10 mRNA levels; however, the anti-inflammatory role of unrestricted somatic stem cells (USSCs) appears to improve the condition. UCB cells come with higher levels of effectiveness in intraventricular hemorrhage in comparison with hypoxia-ischemia. The density of MNCs in individuals diagnosed with neurological disorders(5.2 million cells) is lower than in the healthy population(7.5 million cells). Moreover, an intrathecal injection of BMMNCs appears promising for various types of CP, though the optimal timing for other injection routes remains unclear.
Surprisingly the synergistic effect of both UCB and EPO through the Wnt/β pathway and the anti-inflammatory mechanism is clearly evident. When mesenchymal stem cells are distributed intravenously most of them immigrate to the lungs and then arterial circulation; the proportion of cells that localize into brain injuries is insignificant Therefore, further research is needed to evaluate its therapeutic effects on injured brain tissue.
Cerebral palsy has numerous etiologies one of them is related to the high level of cytokines. Risk factors that are associated with cerebral palsy include preterm birth, perinatal infection, and intrauterine growth restriction.
Cerebral palsy signs and disabilities are hypotonic or dyskinetic, intellectual disability, epilepsy, and quadriplegic pattern. Postnatal cranial ultrasound can help detect potential brain injuries, while Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging (DMRI) can assess neuroplastic changes in injured white matter. Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) tract-based QSM (Quantitative susceptibility mapping) method exhibits a crucial role in determining white matter alterations in children with CP who received stem cell therapy.
There are rehabilitation therapies for CP consisting of Whole Body Vibration (WBV) helps improve knee extension movement. We included 13 studies to assess the safety and efficacy of stem cell therapy to improve motor functions by determining changes in Gross Motor Function Measure (GMFM). We also considered adverse events (AE) for safety indicators but in both of them there were no suggest significant differences between the treatment group and control group. Meta-analysis for GMFM and subgroup analysis demonstrated that SCT is more effective and safe for cerebral palsy. This systematic review and meta-analysis results showed that stem cell therapy improved GMFM score (SMD: 0.50; 95%CI [0.33, 0.67] I2 = 8.08%) compared with a control group.
Subgroup analysis using the Random Effects Model showed that the GMFM scores at 3,6,12 months after first administration have been increased. After 12 months of follow-up, GMFM score changed significantly (SMD: 0.52; 95%CI [0.34, 0.70] I2 = 0%) see Fig. 5. These results stands for both allogeneic and autologous cells. Limited number of studies prevented us from analyzing each stem cell’s origin separately.
Another analysis refers to stem cell type which we have separated into five groups comprising MSCs that exhibit a fundamental role in treatment outcomes (SMD: 0.63; 95%CI [0.35, 0.91] I2 = 0%). We used MSC in four studies, one was derived from bone marrow and others were from umbilical cord tissue. Due to limited number of studies and our tendency to expand the statistical power, we had to merge their statistics. Umbilical cord blood (UCB) revealed enhancement (SMD: 0.30; 95%CI [0.04, 0.55] I2 = 0%) in influenced individuals. Although there were few studies on NSC, BMMNC, and mPBMC, an overall assembled evaluation showed positive modifications (SMD: 0.44; 95%CI [0.24, 0.64] I2 = 43.45%) Fig. 6.
In each study, another subgroup evaluation focused on the route of administration. Studies mainly applied the intravenous route with general results (SMD: 0.29; 95%CI [0.04, 0.53] I2 = 36.42%), intrathecal route was the second applicable one (SMD: 0.56; 95%CI [0.26, 0.87] I2 = 0%). Only a few studies explored intranasal and lateral decubitus administration. (see Fig. 7).
Three adverse events were assessed including irritability, fever, and nausea /vomiting in order to indicate the safety of stem cell therapy for cerebral palsy. Following cell transplantation, CP patients showed a higher tendency to fever (RR: 0.66; 95% CI [0.18, 1.14], I² = 0%), followed by nausea /vomiting (RR: 0.98; 95% CI [0.21, 1.75], I² = 0%) and irritability. A forest plot of adverse events has shown there were no considerable difference between the treatment and control groups (see Fig. 8).
In each trial, researchers administered some drugs like diphenhydramine and methylprednisolone intravenously before cell therapy, according to their protocols. These preemptive medications helped to reduce the occurrence of adverse events.
Advances in the genetic technology, including whole-exome sequencing (WES) has this opportunity to detect prognosis in Malformations of cortical development (MCD). DNA methylation patterns at methylated CpG sites are particularly useful for diagnosing young patients with spastic CP. Gene expressions in muscle tissues are different from single and separated muscle cells, which investigate other factors that cooperate to occur CP. more studies and techniques in the future are still needed to diagnose and treat these patients.

Conclusion
Although high-quality studies with larger sample sizes, optimized stem cell types, and appropriate dosing are still needed, our findings suggest that stem cell therapy plays a crucial role in improving GMFM scores in patient with CP in comparison to the control group.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Authors’ contributions
K.M. introduced the subject and supervised each part of this project. F.H. conducted statistical analysis. R.F. and S.M.M. made data extraction independently. All authors read the final version of the manuscript.

Funding
Not applicable.

Data availability
All data and detailed processes are summarized in Fig. 1; Tables 1 and 2.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Abbreviations
GMFM
Gross Motor Function Measure
FMFM
Fine Motor Function Measure
SCT
Stem Cell Transplantation
MAS
Modified Ashworth Scale
PEDI
Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory
CP-QoL
CP Quality of Life
FA
Fractional Anisotropy
CFA
Comprehensive Function Assessment
GMPM
Gross Motor Performance Measure
Wee FIM
Functional Independence Measure for Children
BSID-II
Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development
MD
Mean Diffusivity
CST
Corticospinal Tract
PTR
Posterior Thalamic Radiation
hUC-MSC
Human Umbilical Cord Mesenchymal Stem Cells
hUCB-MSC
Human Umbilical Cord Blood Mesenchymal Stem Cell
UCB
Umbilical Cord Blood
BMMSCs
Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem cells
BMMNCs
Bone Marrow Mononuclear Cells
NPCs
Neural Progenitor Cells
PDMS-FM
Peabody Developmental Motor Scale-Fine Motor
rhEPO
recombinant human Erythropoietin
QUEST
Quality of Upper Extremity Skills Test
MACS
Manual Ability Classification System
ACB
Autologous Cord Blood
TNC
Total Nucleated Cell
VBM
Voxel-Based Morphological
SS
Sociability scale
SDSC
The Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children
FBN
Functional Brain Network
ADL
Activity of Daily Living
EAS
Expressive Ability Scale
AEs
Adverse events
M
Month
CI
Confidence Interval
SD
Standard Deviation
RR
Risk Ratio
SE
Standard Error
CP
Cerebral palsy
CST
Corticospinal Tract
FA
Fractional Anisotropy
GMFCS
Gross Motor Function Classification System
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Writhing GM
writhing general movement
HBOT
hyperbaric oxygen treatment
HBT
hyperbaric treatment
BoNT-A
Botulinum neurotoxin A
GM
Gastrocnemius Muscle
WES
whole-exome sequencing
MCD
Malformations of cortical development
SMD
Standardized Mean Difference
DMRI
Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging
CNS
Central Nervous System
HIBD
Hypoxic-Ischemic Brain Damage
DTI
Diffusion Tensor Imaging
QSM
Quantitative susceptibility mapping
WBV
Whole Body Vibration
USSCs
Unrestricted Somatic Stem Cells
IVH
Intra Ventricular Hemorrhage
EPO
Erythropoietin
MMT
Manual Muscle Testing
PET/CT
Positron Emission Tomography/ Computed Tomography
DDST-II
Denver Developmental Screening Test II
FDG
18Ffluorodeoxyglucose
EEG
Electroencephalography

References
An update on the prevalence of cerebral palsy: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Associations between maternal gestational diabetes mellitus and offspring cerebral palsy: a two-sample Mendelian randomization study
Finch-Edmondson M, Morgan C, Hunt RW, Novak I. Emergent prophylactic, reparative and restorative brain interventions for infants born preterm with cerebral palsy. Front Physiol. 2019;10.
Clinical Understanding of spasticity: implications for practice
Than UTT, Nguyen LT, Nguyen PH, Nguyen X-H, Trinh DP, Hoang DH et al. Inflammatory mediators drive neuroinflammation in autism spectrum disorder and cerebral palsy. Sci Rep. 2023;13(1).
Clinical prognostic messages from a systematic review on cerebral palsy
The quality of life of primary caretakers of children with cerebral palsy
Early neurodevelopmental assessments for predicting Long-Term outcomes in infants at high risk of cerebral palsy
Assessing the utility of neonatal screening assessments in early diagnosis of cerebral palsy in preterm infants
Development and reliability of a system to classify gross motor function in children with cerebral palsy
The application of the international statistical classification of diseases to neurology: ICD-10 NA
A report: the definition and classification of cerebral palsy April 2006
Population-based studies of brain imaging patterns in cerebral palsy
Marois P, Letellier G, Marois M, Ballaz L. Using the gross motor function measure evolution ratio to compare different dosage of hyperbaric treatment with conventional therapies in children with cerebral palsy– could it end the controversy? Front Neurol. 2024;15.
Short-Term effects of botulinum Toxin-A injection on the medial gastrocnemius histological features in ambulant children with cerebral palsy: A longitudinal pilot study
Reduced Cross-Sectional muscle growth six months after botulinum toxin Type-A injection in children with spastic cerebral palsy
Muscle microbiopsy to delineate stem cell involvement in young patients: A novel approach for children with cerebral palsy
Fifteen years of human research using stem cells for cerebral palsy: A review of the research landscape
Stem cell therapies in cerebral palsy and autism spectrum disorder
Umbilical cord blood CD34(+) cells administration improved neurobehavioral status and alleviated brain injury in a mouse model of cerebral palsy
Intranasal administration of Cytoglobin modifies human umbilical cord–derived mesenchymal stem cells and improves hypoxic–ischemia brain damage in neonatal rats by modulating p38 MAPK signaling–mediated apoptosis
Adherent Self-Renewable human embryonic stem cell-Derived neural stem cell line: functional engraftment in experimental stroke model
Neural stem cell treatment for perinatal brain injury: A systematic review and meta-analysis of preclinical studies
Smith MJ, Finch-Edmondson M, Miller SL, Webb A, Fahey MC, Jenkin G et al. Acceptability of neural stem cell therapy for cerebral palsy: survey of the Australian cerebral palsy community. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2023;14(1).
Allogeneic mesenchymal stem cells May be a viable treatment modality in cerebral palsy
Mesenchymal stem Cells-derived exosomes: A new possible therapeutic strategy for parkinson’s disease??
Maintenance of the synergistic effects of cord blood cells and erythropoietin combination therapy after additional cord blood infusion in children with cerebral palsy: 1-year open-label extension study of randomized placebo-controlled trial
Motor function and safety after allogeneic cord blood and cord tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells in cerebral palsy: an open-label, randomized trial
The safety and efficacy of umbilical cord blood mononuclear cells in individuals with spastic cerebral palsy: a randomized double-blind sham-controlled clinical trial
Comparative analysis of curative effect of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell and bone marrow mononuclear cell transplantation for spastic cerebral palsy
Neuroregenerative potential of intravenous G-CSF and autologous peripheral blood stem cells in children with cerebral palsy: a randomized, double-blind, cross-over study
A randomized, Placebo-Controlled trial of human umbilical cord blood mesenchymal stem cell infusion for children with cerebral palsy
Yield of human adipose-derived adult stem cells from liposuction aspirates
Umbilical cord revisited: from wharton’s jelly myofibroblasts to mesenchymal stem cells
Potential therapeutic applications of muscle-derived mesenchymal stem and progenitor cells
Isolation of human mesenchymal stem cells: bone marrow versus umbilical cord blood
Mesenchymal progenitor cells in human umbilical cord blood
Toward the identification of mesenchymal stem cells in bone marrow and peripheral blood for bone regeneration
Isolation of mesenchymal stem cells from human placenta: comparison with human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
Mesenchymal stem cells for clinical application
Minimal criteria for defining multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells. The international society for cellular therapy position statement
Umbilical cord blood: information for childbirth educators
Safety and efficacy outcomes after intranasal administration of neural stem cells in cerebral palsy: a randomized phase 1/2 controlled trial
Effects of neural progenitor cell transplantation in children with severe cerebral palsy
Clinical and imaging outcomes after intrathecal injection of umbilical cord tissue mesenchymal stem cells in cerebral palsy: a randomized double-blind sham-controlled clinical trial
Therapeutic evidence of umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cell transplantation for cerebral palsy: a randomized, controlled trial
Effect of autologous cord blood infusion on motor function and brain connectivity in young children with cerebral palsy: A randomized, Placebo-Controlled trial
Involvement of immune responses in the efficacy of cord blood cell therapy for cerebral palsy
Umbilical cord blood therapy potentiated with erythropoietin for children with cerebral palsy: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial
Efficacy of intravenous mesenchymal stem cells for motor recovery after ischemic stroke: a neuroimaging study
Single group multisite safety trial of sibling cord blood cell infusion to children with cerebral palsy: study protocol and rationale
McDonald CA, Penny TR, Paton MCB, Sutherland AE, Nekkanti L, Yawno T et al. Effects of umbilical cord blood cells, and subtypes, to reduce neuroinflammation following perinatal hypoxic-ischemic brain injury. J Neuroinflamm. 2018;15(1).
Human cord blood derived unrestricted somatic stem cells restore Aquaporin channel expression, reduce inflammation and inhibit the development of hydrocephalus after experimentally induced perinatal intraventricular hemorrhage
Factors influencing the efficacy of umbilical cord Blood-Derived cell therapy for perinatal brain injury
Nguyen KT, Hoang NTM, Nguyen H-P, Nguyen Thanh L. The density of bone marrow mononuclear cells and CD34 + cells in patients with three neurologic conditions. BMC Neurol. 2023;23(1).
Treatment of cerebral palsy with stem cells: A report of 17 cases
Role of Nuclear-Receptor-Related 1 in the synergistic neuroprotective effect of umbilical cord blood and erythropoietin combination therapy in hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy
Synergistic effect in neurological recovery via Anti-Apoptotic Akt signaling in umbilical cord blood and erythropoietin combination therapy for neonatal Hypoxic-Ischemic brain injury
Intravenous mesenchymal stem cell therapy for traumatic brain injury
Cerebral palsy: an overview
Inflammatory biomarkers in children with cerebral palsy: A systematic review
Epidemiologic associations with cerebral palsy
Intellectual disability in cerebral palsy: a population-based retrospective study
Utility of cranial ultrasound to investigate brain injury in Hypoxic-Ischemic encephalopathy
Changes in diffusion MRI and clinical motor function after physical/occupational therapies in toddler-aged children with spastic unilateral cerebral palsy
DTI Tract-Based quantitative susceptibility mapping: an initial feasibility study to investigate the potential role of myelination in brain connectivity change in cerebral palsy patients during autologous cord blood cell therapy using a Rotationally-Invariant quantitative measure
Efficacy of whole body vibration on fascicle length and joint angle in children with hemiplegic cerebral palsy
Malformations of cortical development: fetal imaging and genetics
Epigenetic machine learning: utilizing DNA methylation patterns to predict spastic cerebral palsy
Transcriptional analysis of muscle tissue and isolated satellite cells in spastic cerebral palsy