Immune system cells modulation in patients with reproductive issues: A systematic review approach
The aim of this study was to carry out a systematic literature review to investigate the main immune cells responsible for implantation failures. We selected papers from PubMed, Embase and Virtual Health Library databases. Eligible articles included publications between January 1, 2010 and April 24, 2022. Inclusion criteria were: observational and case-control studies; and the exclusion criteria were: review papers, letters to the editor, abstracts, animal studies and case reports. We extracted the following information: day of collection, number of patients, control group, age of patients, type of sample used, immune cells and cytokines. As main findings in our mapping, we found that in peripheral blood, CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, CD16+, CD56+, CD57+, CD69+, CD154+, CD158a+, NKp46 cells were increased and the CD4+, CD45+, Foxp3 and NKp46 markers were reduced. From the endometrial biopsies, there was an increase in CD3+, CD4+, CD5+, CD8+, CD16+, CD25+, CD45+, CD56+, CD57+, CD68+, CD127+ and a reduction in CD45+, CD56+, NKp46 and FoxP3 cells. Cytokines found increased in peripheral blood included IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, INF-γ, TGF-ß, TNF-α; while IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-35, FoxP3, TGF-ß, SOCS3 were reduced. As for the biopsies, there was an increase in IL-2, IL-6, IL-17, IL-22, IL-23, INF-A1, INF-B1, INF-γ, TNF-R and a reduction in IL-6, IL-10, INF-γ, TGFß, TNF-α. We concluded that immune cells can be modulated during pregnancy failure, but further studies are needed to elucidate the modulating effect of the immune system on the endometrium of these patients.

INTRODUCTION
Assisted Reproductive Techniques (ART) have evolved exponentially to improve the rates of obtaining clinical pregnancy in couples with infertility. Despite these advances, embryo implantation is still a limiting step in the success rate of these ARTs. Globally, the in vitro fertilization (IVF) technique enables a rate of 25 to 30% live births per initiated cycle, differing from rodents or rabbits, which have a 95% implantation rates. This fact may be directly associated with endometrial and decidual control in embryo implantation events in different mammalian species. Several factors can interfere with the embryo implantation process, such as endometrium, embryo, anatomical structure, lifestyle, thrombophilic conditions, and immunological factors.
Among these mechanisms, the immunological factor stands out. During the communication between the endometrium and the embryo, a pattern of pro-inflammatory cytokines is established to help regulate the endometrium receptivity. We assume that the uterus local immune system (IS) significantly assists in tolerance to the semi-allogeneic graft of the conceptum. Furthermore, it has been proposed that IS dysfunction in the endometrial milieu is related to mechanisms that compromise embryo implantation, potentially causing problems such as Recurrent Implantation Failure (RIF) and increased Recurrent Abortion Rates (RAR) in ART procedures. Given the potential relevance of the IS in embryo implantation rates, it may become an excellent reliable, non-invasive biomarker for verifying gestational success rates.
Despite multiple improvements in ARTs, implantation failure is still considered a relevant issue. Such a fact is mainly due to the emotional burden that unsuccessful ART cycles can generate in patients undergoing these procedures. Implementing biomarkers in reproductive medicine may be a viable alternative for reducing implantation problems. As an element distributed throughout the body, the IS may become an effective biomarker for specific implantation events . Thus, our study aims to investigate, through a systematic literature review, the main immune cells present in the process of embryo implantation failure.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study
This study is a systematic literature review based on papers from PubMed, Embase, and Virtual Health Library (VHL) databases. To this end, the study was prepared following the guidelines for Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA). It is worth noting that the entire protocol of this review was submitted to the National Institute for Health Research database (CRD42022343288).

Eligibility Criteria
For study selection, we adapted the PICOS methodological model used by. The full summary description of the criteria is presented in Table 1. The eligibility criteria adopted were:
Systematized search using the PICOS method.
Description	Abbreviation	Question Components	 	Population	P	Women who used ARTs had RAR, RIF, and	 	IVF failure.	 	Intervention	I	Performance of blood collection or	 	endometrial biopsy for dosage of immune cells and/or	 	inflammatory cytokines before and/or after embryo transfer.	 	Comparison	C	Fertile women who achieved clinical	 	pregnancy.	 	Outcome	O	Obtained key IS cells and/or secreted	 	cytokines found in peripheral blood or from endometrial	 	cells.	 	Study	S	Observational and case-control	 	studies.
Studies Included: Clinical and case-control trials that addressed the proposed topic;
Publication Period: The selected studies were published between January 1, 2010, and April 24, 2022;
Language of the Studies: we analyzed papers in English, Portuguese (Brazil), and Spanish;
Intervention Used: Patients with RAR, RIF, and fertilization failures submitted to ART, who underwent before or after endometrial biopsy, treatments, or blood collection to study their immune profile; and
Study outcome: Obtaining the major IS cells and/or secreted cytokines found in peripheral blood or endometrial cells.

Database Search
We searched the “PubMed”, “Embase” and VHL databases. The search was done manually using a combination of previously selected keywords from the Medical Subjects Headings (MESH) database in the advanced search. The following keywords were used: (immune system) AND (embryo implantation) AND (women).

Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
To filter the best results within the suggested scope of the review, we used the following inclusion and exclusion criteria:
Inclusion Criteria
Observational Studies; and
Case-Control Studies.
Exclusion Criteria
Articles out of scope;
Literature reviews;
Letter to the editor;
Abstracts;
Animal Studies; and
Case Reports.

Methodological Quality Assessment of Studies
To reduce the chance of bias among the selected papers we assessed the risk of methodological bias. To do so, we used the Newcastle Ottawa scale for bias assessment of observational studies. Studies considered to have a low risk of bias entered our review assessment. All data from the methodological evaluation are presented in Table 2.
Methodological Quality of Cross-sectional Studies (Newcastle Ottawa
Scale).
Study	Newcastle Ottawa Scale-items	 	Score	 	Criteria	 	Selection	Comparability 1a	Results	Total	 	1	2	3	4	1	2	3	 		1	1	0	1	1	1	1	1	7	 		1	1	0	1	1	0	1	1	6	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	0	1	1	0	1	1	6	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		0	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	7	 		1	1	0	1	1	1	0	1	6	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	0	1	1	1	0	1	6	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	0	1	1	1	0	1	6	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	0	1	1	1	0	1	6	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		0	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	7	 		0	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	7	 		0	1	1	1	1	1	0	1	6	 		0	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	7	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		0	1	1	1	1	1	0	1	6	 		1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	8	 		1	1	0	1	1	1	0	1	6

Data Collection and Extraction
After screening the articles mentioned above, they were evaluated by four authors (MGA; RYM; FLDM; JOF). In case of divergence, a fifth author (NR) specialized in the field would reevaluate the paper and the results were tabulated. The data extracted from each paper were:
Day on which the sample was collected;
Number of patients;
Control group;
Age of patients;
Type of sample used; and
Immune cell mediators.

RESULTS

Methodological Screening
According to the methodological model used to formulate the review, we found 467 papers. Of these, only 31 were selected for the review. Overall, 1,800 patients with a mean age between 20 to 39.9 years were evaluated. The data are available in Table 1. It is worth pointing out that the primary sampling methodologies to identify immunological profiles of these patients were acquired from endometrial biopsies and peripheral blood sampling. Based on this, we extracted the data extraction from these two different methodologies. Figure 1 depicts the entire methodological screening.
Methodological screening.

Immune Cell Mapping in Peripheral Blood
We found that in the peripheral blood of patients with implantation problems, there was an increase in cells compared to controls. The main increased cells were CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, CD16+, CD56+, CD57+, CD69+, CD154+, CD158a+, NKp46 (; ; ). On the other hand, CD4+, CD45+, Foxp3, and NKp46 cells were reduced in patients with reproductive issues, compared to control groups. Th1 type immune responses were also increased in two studies.

Immune Cell Assessment in Endometrial Biopsy Samples
The literature also infers that implantation issues may modulate the immune response in the endometrium. There was a marked increase of cells in samples from these patients when compared to control groups. Among these, CD3+, CD4+, CD5+, CD8+, CD16+, CD25+, CD45+, CD56+, CD57+, CD68+, CD127+ (; ; 2018; 2021). In contrast, cells such as CD45+, CD56+, NKp46 and Foxp3 had reduced levels in endometrial biopsies from patients with RIF, RAR, or who resorted to ART.

Inflammatory cytokines in the peripheral blood of patients
In our review, there was an increase in inflammatory cytokines in the peripheral blood of patients with gestational complications, among which we list IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, INF-γ, TGF-ß, TNF-α. In contrast, a group of inflammatory cytokines was reduced in patients with gestational complications in six studies, such as IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL- 35, FoxP3, TGF-ß, SOCS3 (; ). All data are detailed in Table 3.
Immunological profile of patients with peripheral blood collection.
Author	Collection Day	Number of Patients	Control Group	Age (Average)	Cytokine panel	Immune Cells	 		-	18 RIF group17 RAR group	Fertile women	RIF (35.6 years)RAR (35.1 years)	No significant differences	↑ CD154+↑ CD69+	 		-	20 RIF group23 RAR group	Fertile women	RIF (31.5 years)RAR (30 years)	-	↑ CD56+	 		-	34 non-pregnant women	Pregnant	32.4 years	-	↓ CD4+;↓ FoxP3	 		After LH peak (5-9 days)	26 fertile group	Fertile women	-	↓ IL-6	No significant differences	 		Cycle (21 day)	80 infertile group	Fertile women	30.2 years	↓SOCS3;↓IL-35;↓IL-4;↑	 	IFN-γ;↑ IL-17;↑	 	TGFβ;↑ IL-6;↑ TNF-α;↑	 	IL-10	-	 		Cycle (19-23 days)	20 RAR group	Fertile women	-	↑ IL-17;↓ TGFβ	-	 		Cycle (17-23 days)	75 failure to conceive group18 abortion	 	group	Conception group	23-35 years	-	↑CD56+;	 	↑CD158a+;↑CD4+; ↑CD8+	 		After LH peak (5-9 days)	73 RIF group	Fertile women	-	-	↑ CD56+	 		-	90 non-pregnant group	Conception group	28.2 years	-	↑ T CD3+↑ T CD8+	 		Cycle (19-23 days)	20 RPL group	Fertile women	30.72 years	↓ IL-10	-	 		After LH peak (7-9 days)	32 RIF group	Fertile women	32 years	-	↓ CD45+	 		Cycle (3-5 days)	56 RIF women	Fertile women	34,9 years	↑ IFN-γ;↑ TNF-α	No significant differences	 		-	34 RIF group28 RAR group	Fertile women	RIF (35.3 years)RAR (33.8 years)	-	↓ NKp46	 		-	41 RIF group54 RAR group	Fertile women	RIF (36.3 years)RAR (36.3 years)	-	No significant differences	 		Luteal phase (7-9 days)	7 RIF group20 RAR group	Fertile women	RIF (31.1 years)RAR (33.3 years)	-	No significant differences	 		-	23 RIF group	Fertile women	39.9 years	↓ IL-10	No significant differences	 		-	79 RIF group81 RAR group40	 	infertile group	Fertile women	RIF (37.6 years)RAR (38	 	years)Infertile (35.4 years)	-	↑ Th1	 		Implementation phase (16-20 days)	57 RIF group	Fertile women	29.5 years	-	↑ NKp46+	 		-	25 RIF group58 RAR group	Fertile women	RIF (36.0 years)RAR (36.9 years)	-	↓ NKp46+

Inflammatory cytokines from endometrial biopsies
Two studies reported an increase in inflammatory cytokines in endometrial biopsies, such as IL-2, IL-6, IL-17, IL-22, IL-23, INF-A1, INF-B1, INF-γ, TNF- R. In endometrial tissues, some inflammatory cytokines had their levels reduced in four studies, such as IL-6, IL-10, INF-γ, TGFß, TNF-α. All data are detailed in Table 4.
Immunological profile of patients who underwent endometrial biopsy
procedures.
Author	Collection Day	Patients (n)	Control Group	Age (Average)	Cytokine panel	Immune Cells	 		After LH peak (7-9 days)	40 RIF group	Fertile women	35 years	-	↑ CD56+	 		After LH peak (5-9 days)	26 infertile group	Fertile women	-	↓ IL-6	↑ CD16+	 		After LH peak (7-9 days) 	72 RIF group94 RAR group	Fertile women	RIF (33.4 years)RAR (33.1years)	-	No significant differences	 		After LH peak (5-9 days)	73 RIF group	Fertile women	-	-	↑ CD56+	 		Cycle (21-23 days)	15 RIF group13 RAR group	Fertile women	RIF (34.5 years)RAR (33.6 years)	↑ TNF-R;↑IL-22;	↑ CD3+;↑ CD4+↑	 	CD5+’↑ CD8+↓ FoxP3+	 		+14 TE	53 pregnant group	Pregnant women	33.1 years	↓ IL-10;↓ TGF-β	↑ CD4+;↑ CD25+↑	 	CD127dim	 		After LH peak (7-10 days)	58 RAR group	Fertile women	34.7 years	-	↑ CD56+	 		After LH peak (7-9 days) 	32 RIF group	Fertile women	32 years	-	↑ CD57+;↓ CD45+ ↓	 	CD56+↓ FoxP3+	 		-	34 RIF group28 RAR group	Fertile women	RIF (35.3 years)RAR (33.8 years)	↓ TNF-α;↓	 	INF-γ	↓ NKp46	 		After LH peak (7th day)	34 RIF group97 RAR group	Fertile women	RIF (35 years)RAR (37 years)	-	↑ CD56+	 		After LH peak (7th day) 	18 RAR group	Fertile women	34 years	-	↑ CD56+	 		After LH peak (6-8 days)	14 RIF group9 PRIF group	Implantation success	RIF (37.4 years)PRIF (38.1 years)	-	No significant differences	 		After LH peak (6-7 days)	11 RIF group	Fertile women	32.6 years	↑IL-2;↑	 	IL-6↑IFN-↑;↑IL-17A↑IL-23A;	 	↑ IFN-A1↑ IFN-B1	-	 		After LH peak (7th day) 	30 RAR group	Fertile women	20 - 42 years	-	↑ CD3+;↑ CD56+↑	 	CD68+	 		After LH peak (9th day) 	17 non-pregnant group	Pregnant women	34.3 years	-	↑ CD16+,↓ FoxP3+	 		After LH peak (7th day)	44 non-pregnant group	Pregnant women	35.92 years	-	↑ CD56+;↑ CD68+

Common Points Between Collections
To better plot, the commonalities between both collections, the main immune cells found in the studies were selected and placed in a Venn diagram, as shown in Figures 2 and 3. By plotting the main immune cells, we noticed that there was a common immune enhancement in both techniques in CD3 +, CD8 +, CD16 +, and CD57 + cells. In the cells found, there was an intersection point of the FoxP3+ phenotype. Interestingly, among the inflammatory cytokines in the endometrial biopsies used in the review, the only intersection point found in the study was the increase in IL-17 levels.
Venn diagram containing peripheral blood immune cells and embryo
biopsy in RIF, RAR, and infertile patients. Caption: Immune cells
from different types of collection. In blue: increase in cell
quantity. In pink: Reduction of cell quantity. A: Peripheral blood
immune cells. B: Immune cells derived from embryonic biopsies. C:
Just enlarged cells between the two collection types. D: Just
reduced cells between the two collection types.
Venn diagram containing peripheral blood inflammatory cytokines and
endometrial biopsies from RIF, RAR and infertile patients. Caption:
Cytokines from different types of collection. In blue: increase in
the number of cytokines. In pink: Reduction in the number of
cytokines. A: peripheral blood immunological cytokines. B: Immune
cytokines derived from embryonic biopsies. C: Only amplified
cytokine pattern between the two types of collection. D: Only
reduced cytokine pattern between the two types of collection.

DISCUSSION
In a successful pregnancy, the body must undergo many physiological processes that act directly on proper endometrial function and dynamic interaction between the endometrium and the blastocyst. This implantation process is somewhat inefficient in human reproduction, since about 25% of conceptual matings generate live births, and 5-15% can be identified clinically. In this context, investigating biomarkers and clinical trials to determine or prospect possible treatment and/or immune abnormalities in these patients could effectively improve conception rates .
One of the methodologies found in this search was the study of immune components from the peripheral blood of patients. Peripheral blood cell analyses consist mainly of evaluating lymphocytes and monocytes that are enabled in a wide range of assays, from the most straight forward, such as cytotoxicity assessments, to the most complex, such as functional and phenotypic evaluation of immune cells. Among the significant disadvantages of peripheral blood cell analyses is the similarity between immune responses in the body, which can lead to erroneous analysis and interpretation of data. However, non-generic-specific biomarkers can improve tissue specificity. However, one of the main advantages of peripheral blood collection over other collection types is its better accessibility.
Another well-used methodology for the identification of immunological biomarkers was an endometrial biopsy. The primary purpose of this technique is to obtain a sampling of endometrial material to evaluate lesions of the endometrial lining and investigate other benign pathologies. One of the main disadvantages of endometrial biopsy is still the invasiveness of the technique. Although it is less harmful compared to other methodologies, such as laparoscopy, it still requires anesthesia or strong analgesics in some cases. However, the endometrial tissue structure has many distinct molecules that may contribute to adhesion, cell distribution, transit, and more specific signaling processes involved in implantation disorders.
RIF, RAR, and infertile patients, had higher T lymphocyte counts (CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, CD69+, CD154+) in their peripheral blood and (CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, CD25+, and CD127+) in endometrial biopsies. The literature has already described that T-type lymphocytes are located in the tissue stroma and glandular epithelium. These cells control the Th1 response involved in immune surveillance, preventing excessive trophoblast invasion and assisting in allograft immune tolerance. However, the literature also reports that in many cases of maternal anti-fetal rejection and gestational problems, there is an increased infiltration of cytotoxic T-lymphocytes into the fetal tissues. This fact was previously observed in the study by who found an increased infiltration of cytotoxic CD8+ cells in women who had severe late preeclampsia.
Cells of the innate immune response have also been shown to be affected in cases of conception failure. The amount of CD68+ macrophages in endometrial biopsies increased in patients who intended to achieve clinical pregnancy from ART (; 2021). Under normal conditions, peripheral blood macrophages can reduce the invasiveness of trophoblast implantation. However, when these macrophages are dysregulated, there is no complete explanation for their effects on implantation. In a previous study by  there was an increase of macrophages in chorionic villi of patients with villitis of unknown cause, in addition to the macrophage infiltrate increase in the presence of CD8+ T cells in these patients.
One of the main unknowns in the literature is the impact of NK cells on embryo implantation. The attack of cytotoxic NK cells is immediate and does not require prior antigen preparation. Instead, these cells orchestrate the attack uniquely from interactions with receptors or inhibitory functions. An increase of NK cells in peripheral blood and endometrial biopsies (CD8+, CD16+, CD56+, CD57+, and CD158a+) in most studies (; ; ; 2018). In a previous retrospective study evaluating the ovarian reserve of women undergoing cycles of ART, they found that the high rate of NK cells led to a reduction in ovarian reserve, which confirms the reproductive impacts shown previously. However, NK cells in the peripheral blood of healthy individuals can vary around 5%-29% depending on gender, stress, ethnicity, and age. Based on this, confirming their actual activity on fecundity it is still a controversial issue in the literature.
A curious finding was that some immune system cells adopted both a growth and a declining pattern in the different studies analyzed. These patterns occurred in dendritic cell lineages (CD86+) in the peripheral blood and NK cells expressing NKp46 receptors. In addition, regulatory T (Foxp3) and (CD4+) cells were also expressed in a lower amount in endometrial biopsies. As for the lower expression in dendritic cells, the literature already reports that this low amount of cells can lead to a reduction in IL-10 that controls tissue levels of effector T-cells that consequently infiltrate the endometrium. Recent studies have reported that reducing NK cells expressing NKp46 receptors on endometrial cells increases the high risk of gestational loss. However, their correlation with this loss is still unknown in the literature.
Regulatory T-cells are defined by their expression of CD4+, CD25+, and the Foxp3 domain, which control the developmental function of naturally occurring T-reg populations. In this review, we found increased CD4+ cells in peripheral blood and a reduction in FoxP3. The primary function of these regulatory cells is endometrium modulation to receive the semi-allograft without complete immunosuppression during implantation, in addition to its protective function against opportunistic infections, which may risk the mother’s health. In a previous study, used mouse models with depletion for regulatory T-lymphocytes and reported that they had potential problems in embryo implantation, which is in tune with the findings of this review.
From the studies analyzed, we found a panel of cytokines sharply increased in the peripheral blood of the patients, including cytokines IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, INF-γ, TGF-ß, TNF-α. However, according to a review by , after the coitus phase until the apposition phase, the uterus is subjected to an inflammatory reaction with a transient cellular influx of lymphocytes and macrophages near the uterine lumen, leading to a high production of interleukins such as IL-6 and TNF-a, which could explain this change in peripheral blood cytokines, which also showed a reduction in IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-35, FoxP3, TGF-ß, SOCS3 cytokines (; 2016). On the other hand, when we checked the expression patterns of inflammatory cytokines in endometrial biopsies, IL-2, IL-6, IL-17, IL-22, IL-23, INF-A1, INF-B1, INF-γ, TNF-R were relatively increased in patients with reproductive complications. This fact was reported by  saying that Th1- cells, especially IL-2 and gamma interferon producers, play a crucial role in allograft rejection during fetal implantation. On the other hand, the levels of IL-6, IL-10, INF-γ, TGFß, TNF-α had their levels reduced. This fact can also be explained by as previously mentioned, in which the reduction of cytokines by defense cells can lead to an unfavorable environment for embryo development, resulting in development imbalance and pregnancy loss. One of the main limitations of that study is the unspecificity of immune factors collected mainly from peripheral blood, as mentioned before, which may account for the increase and decrease in some immune cells. Another factor that can lead to failures in these methodologies is the collections performed at different times, which can modulate the proliferation of immune cells and make it impossible to collect more homogeneous data and responses. Hormonal balance may be an interesting parameter to be addressed in further studies to investigate its correlation with the immune system and its implantation impacts on ART outcomes.
In conclusion, identifying immunological biomarkers may be an effective way to address fertility issues. Increased cytotoxic T-lymphocytes such as CD3+, CD25+, CD69+, CD127+, and CD154+ have been shown to correlate with fertility in patients. Innate immune response cells CD68+ were also increased in patients with problems to achieve pregnancy. CD8+, CD16+, CD56+, CD57+, and CD158a+ NK cells may exhibit a possible increase in the rates of reproductive problems. However, this finding is still uncertain in the literature. Regulatory T-cells such as Foxp3 have been shown to have the potential to aid in implantation immune tolerance, and their reduction has been seen in patients with reproductive disorders. In this context, further studies are needed to verify these cells’ main activity in the IS and identify functional biomarkers. In addition, the data presented in this review can be of great value for the design of studies aimed at developing methodologies, such as rapid tests that could predict the implantation rate of patients who resort to ARTs, enhancing the chances of clinical pregnancy success.

Abbreviations
RIF
Recurrent implantation failure
IVF
In vitro fertilization
MESH
Medical Subjects Headings
RAR
Recurrent Abortion Rates
ART
Assisted Reproductive Techniques
PRISMA
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis and
IS
Immune system

REFERENCES
A pilot study to evaluate the relative efficacy of endometrial biopsy and full curettage in making a diagnosis of endometriosis by the detection of endometrial nerve fibers
The uterine immunological changes may be responsible for repeated implantation failure
Recurrent Implantation Failure-update overview on etiology, diagnosis, treatment and future directions
Selection and expansion of natural killer cells for NK cell-based immunotherapy
Lipid emulsion therapy in women with recurrent pregnancy loss and repeated implantation failure: The role of abnormal natural killer cell activity
Cytokines, implantation and early abortion: re-examining the Th1/Th2 paradigm leads to question the single pathway, single therapy concept
Measurement of uterine natural killer cell percentage in the periimplantation endometrium from fertile women and women with recurrent reproductive failure: establishment of a reference range
Increased expression of angiogenic cytokines in CD56+ uterine natural killer cells from women with recurrent miscarriage
Favorable immune phenotype predicts successful implantation and pregnancy
Functional NK surrogate biomarkers for inflammatory recurrent pregnancy loss and recurrent implantation failure
Endometrial uNK cell counts do not predict successful implantation in an IVF population
Accentuated hypoand hyper-NK lymphocyte CD8 expression is a marker of NK subsets’ misbalance and is predictive for reproductive failures
Expression of natural cytotoxicity receptor NKp46 on peripheral blood natural killer cells in women with a history of recurrent implantation failures
Expression of natural cytotoxicity receptors and a2V-ATPase on peripheral blood NK cell subsets in women with recurrent spontaneous abortions and implantation failures
Expression of natural cytotoxicity receptors and cytokine production on endometrial natural killer cells in women with recurrent pregnancy loss or implantation failure, and the expression of natural cytotoxicity receptors on peripheral blood natural killer cells in pregnant women with a history of recurrent pregnancy loss
Regulatory T cells, inflammation, and endoplasmic reticulum stress in women with defective endometrial receptivity
Stimulation of α7 Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor by Nicotine Suppresses Decidual M1 Macrophage Polarization Against Inflammation in Lipopolysaccharide-Induced Preeclampsia-Like Mouse Model
Maternal T Regulatory Cell Depletion Impairs Embryo Implantation Which Can Be Corrected With Adoptive T Regulatory Cell Transfer
Peripheral blood natural killer cell proportion and ovarian function in women with recurrent implantation failure
Abnormal ratio of CD57+ cells to CD56+ cells in women with recurrent implantation failure
Peripheral white blood cell responses as emerging biomarkers for patient stratification and prognosis in acute spinal cord injury
Endometrial CD16(+) and CD16(-) NK cell count in fertility and unexplained infertility
Intrauterine G-CSF Administration in Recurrent Implantation Failure (RIF): An Rct
Enhancement of peripheral blood CD56(dim):cell and NK cell cytotoxicity in women with recurrent spontaneous abortion or in vitro fertilization failure
Involvement of Hofbauer cells and maternal T cells in villitis of unknown aetiology
Chronic inflammation of the placenta: definition, classification, pathogenesis, and clinical significance
Proportion of Cytotoxic Peripheral Blood Natural Killer Cells and T-Cell Large Granular Lymphocytes in Recurrent Miscarriage and Repeated Implantation Failure: Case-Control Study and Meta-analysis
Expression and significance of dendritic cells and Th17/Treg in serum and placental tissues of patients with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy
The role of IL-10-producing B cells in repeated implantation failure patients with cellular immune abnormalities
Uterine natural killer cells in patients with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage
Increasing number of implantation failures and pregnancy losses associated with elevated Th1/Th2 cell ratio
The prognostic value of uNK cell count and histological dating in the mid-luteal phase of women with reproductive failure
Characterization of dendritic cell (DC)-10 in recurrent miscarriage and recurrent implantation failure
Intrauterine insemination of cultured peripheral blood mononuclear cells prior to embryo transfer improves clinical outcome for patients with repeated implantation failures
Detailed endometrial immune assessment of both normal and adverse reproductive outcome populations
Peripheral blood as a source of stem cells
Biomolecular Markers of Recurrent Implantation Failure-A Review
Phenotypic and functional stability of leukocytes from human peripheral blood samples: considerations for the design of immunological studies
Endometrial Biopsy in an Outpatient Gynaecological Setting: Overinvestigation
KIR, LILRB and their Ligands’ Genes as Potential Biomarkers in Recurrent Implantation Failure
What is the impact of Th1/Th2 ratio, SOCS3, IL17, and IL35 levels in unexplained infertility?
Biomarkers in reproductive medicine: the promise, and can it be fulfilled?
The Impact of New Immunological Therapeutic Strategies on Recurrent Miscarriage and Recurrent Implantation Failure
Cell-free DNA discoveries in human reproductive medicine: providing a new tool for biomarker and genetic assays in ART
The unique pathophysiology of early-onset severe preeclampsia: role of decidual T regulatory cells
The impact of fake news on social media and its influence on health during the COVID-19 pandemic: a systematic review
Rapamycin Corrects T Regulatory Cell Depletion and Improves Embryo Implantation and Live Birth Rates in a Murine Model
Th17 cells and related cytokines in unexplained recurrent spontaneous miscarriage at the implantation window
T regulatory markers expression in unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion
Cytokines in recurrent pregnancy loss
Where and when should natural killer cells be tested in women with repeated implantation failure?
Do endometrial natural killer and regulatory T cells differ in infertile and clinical pregnancy patients? An analysis in patients undergoing frozen embryo transfer cycles
17β-Estradiol induces proliferation of endometrial NK cells (CD56+) in postmenopausal women
A 5-year multicentre randomized controlled trial comparing personalized, frozen and fresh blastocyst transfer in IVF
The effect of administration of intravenous intralipid on pregnancy outcomes in women with implantation failure after IVF/ICSI with non-donor oocytes: A randomised controlled trial
Co-expression of NKp46 with activating or inhibitory receptors on, and cytokine production by, uterine endometrial NK cells in recurrent pregnancy loss
Control of uterine microenvironment by foxp3(+) cells facilitates embryo implantation
Uterine natural killer cells in peri-implantation endometrium from women with repeated implantation failure after IVF
Endometrial scratching in women with implantation failure after a first IVF/ICSI cycle; does it lead to a higher live birth rate? The SCRaTCH study: a randomized controlled trial (NTR 5342)
Periodic elevation of regulatory T cells on the day of embryo transfer is associated with better in vitro fertilization outcome
Women with multiple implantation failures and recurrent pregnancy losses have increased peripheral blood T cell activation
Functional properties of peripheral CD8+ T cells in patients with repeated implantation failure
The use of multiplex staining to measure the density and clustering of four endometrial immune cells around the implantation period in women with recurrent miscarriage: comparison with fertile controls
The identification of endometrial immune cell densities and clustering analysis in the mid-luteal phase as predictor for pregnancy outcomes after IVF-ET treatment
An increase of Treg cells in the peripheral blood is associated with a better in vitro fertilization treatment outcome
T lymphocytes and preeclampsia: The potential role of T-cell subsets and related MicroRNAs in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia