Clinical trials for neuropsychiatric syndromes in major and mild neurocognitive disorders: A CONSORT-based approach
Neuropsychiatric syndromes (NPS) such as agitation, psychosis, apathy, and irritability are among the most disabling features of major and mild neurocognitive disorders including Alzheimer’s disease, other neurodegenerative disorders (NDD), and vascular cognitive impairment. Clinical trial methodologies for the treatment of these syndromes are evolving and the first agents to reduce NPS severity has been approved. Biomarkers are rapidly becoming available to guide clinical trial decision-making. Biomarkers can confirm the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and are playing a larger role in non-Alzheimer trials. The Consolidated Standards for Reporting Trials (CONSORT) specify the elements of clinical trials that must be reported when clinical trials are published. These criteria provide conventions for uniform reporting of all key aspects of a clinical trial and facilitate comparisons across trials. We describe best practices for clinical trials of NPS including research definitions of the NDD, use of biomarkers to support clinical diagnosis, research criteria for NPS, use of rating scales to define the severity of NPS at baseline and as endpoints for the clinical trial, and approaches to data analysis of specific interest in NPS trials. Standards for describing the limitations of trials and their generalizability are provided. The goal is to inform planning and reporting of NPS trials including the use of biomarkers based on CONSORT guidelines for best trial practices.

Introduction
The global burden of dementia extracts a high toll on individuals, families, health care systems, and national economies. The current worldwide dementia population is estimated at 57.4 million and this number is forecasted to increase to 152.8 million by 2050. These numbers do not include individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or with preclinical, asymptomatic dementia-related pathology in the brain. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of neurocognitive impairment. The prevalence of MCI attributed to AD is approximately 2-fold greater than the number of persons with AD-related dementia. Preclinical AD — defined as a cognitively normal individual with a biomarker indicative of AD — is approximately 7-fold more common than symptomatic AD although many of these individuals will not manifest symptoms of dementia or will succumb to competitive illnesses prior to dementia onset. Other neurodegenerative disorders (NDDs) have preclinical, prodromal (e.g., MCI), and manifest forms that account for the non-AD degenerative disorders in the world’s population. Cerebrovascular disease is common with aging and may produce vascular cognitive impairment (VCI) or contribute to the cognitive decline of patients with co-morbid AD. Parkinson’s disease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration and related disorders, AD, VCI, dementia with Lewy bodies, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Huntington disease account for an enormous global economic and personal burden.
AD is manifested as progressive cognitive and functional change with the emergence of neuropsychiatric syndromes (NPS) in many cases. At least 80 % of patients with AD dementia and 50 % of patients with MCI attributed to AD exhibit NPS. Among individuals expressing dementia and NPS, 55 % had two or more behavioral symptoms and 44 % had three or more such symptoms. The presence of NPS is strongly correlated with caregiver burden, and the relationship between NPS and burden is stronger than the relationship between cognitive decline and burden.
There is a marked unmet need for treatments for NPS in AD and other NDDs/VCI. Brexpiprazole is the only agent approved for an NPS in AD; it is approved in the US and other countries for treatment of agitation associated with AD dementia. Pimavanserin is approved in the US for the treatment of hallucinations and delusions associated with Parkinson’s disease psychosis. These are the only pharmacologic treatments approved for NPS in patients with NDD. Drugs in trials show promise for reducing NPS in NDDs/VCI and some nonpharmacologic interventions assessed in trials have decreased agitation and improved quality of life. There is an urgent need for treatment of NPS in patients with NDD/VCI, and approval of candidate interventions depends on the outcomes of well conducted clinical trials.
There has been substantial progress in advancing the methodology of clinical trials for NPS. Biomarkers are available to identify AD; a variety of clinical trial designs have been used in recent trials for NPS; outcome measures have been studied and are being refined; regulatory guidance has evolved; and recruitment strategies are being adjusted to ensure the generalizability of trial results. This progress provides the foundation for advances in development of new therapies for NPS in NDDs/VCI. We review key elements of clinical trials and drug development programs to advance new therapies for NPS in NDD/VCI. We use the Consolidated Reporting Standards for Trials (CONSORT) to provide a framework for the review.

Methods
This is a narrative commentary on advances in methodologies for clinical trials for NPS. The review applies to both pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic psychosocial and lifestyle interventions whose purpose is reduction of NPS. More clinical trials have been done in AD than other NDDs/VCI, and this perspective is based primarily on information available from AD trials; we note where outcomes or conduct of trials may differ for other NDDs and VCI. We present examples of trials in AD, other NDDs/VCI employing novel trial strategies.
We use the CONSORT guidelines to discuss the key aspects of trials for NPS therapies and innovations in NPS trials. The International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) requires use of CONSORT guidelines for reporting of clinical trials, and anticipation of reporting using CONSORT as a roadmap provides a trial planning tool for collection of the required information. Table 1 lists the major CONSORT elements used in this description. Recommendations for clinal trial protocol design that largely correspond to the reporting guidelines of CONSORT are available. We do not describe all aspects of the CONSORT criteria; we emphasize CONSORT recommendations that may apply differently in clinical trials for NPS compared to clinical trials targeting cognitive enhancement or slowing of cognitive decline. We emphasize the evolving role of biomarkers in clinical trials for NPS in AD/NDDs/VCI.

Terminology
The International Psychogeriatric Association (IPA) promotes education regarding behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) and has developed definitions of agitation and psychosis that can be used in clinical trials and non-interventional clinical research. The IPA has advanced BPSD as a terminology to capture the total repertoire of behavioral and psychological symptoms that may be exhibited by patients with dementia. BPSD is not a syndrome; it is a term for a group of syndromes such as depression, psychosis, agitation, and other behavioral changes observed in individuals with major or mild neurocognitive disorder. The BPSD terminology can be designated to apply to specific domains of behavior such as BPSD-depression or BPSD-psychosis.
NPS is a summary term for disorders such as depression, psychosis, and other behavioral changes occurring in persons with brain disorders. Tools comprised of summary scores of multiple syndromes within BPSD or NPS are usually not primary outcomes for clinical trials. Therapies are directed at individual NPS such as psychosis, agitation, apathy, or other emergent behaviors. Scores from tools with measures of these syndromes comprise the outcomes of trials. Total scores summarizing multiple NPS may serve as secondary or supportive outcomes in clinical trials.

Trials of treatments for nps organized according to consort guidelines

Background and objectives
Most drugs being developed for NPS in AD/NDDs/VCI have Phase 1 trials in healthy volunteers and Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials involving patients with AD/NDD/VCI and the NPS of interest. Many agents tested for utility in NPS of NDD/VCI are developed for major mental illnesses such as schizophrenia, bipolar illness, or major depressive disorder and are then directed into development programs for NPS indications. This extrapolation is based on the “psychobehavioral metaphor” that NPS occurring in AD/NDDs/VCI and resembling those of schizophrenia, bipolar illness, or depression and known to be treatment-responsive might respond to similar therapeutic interventions in the setting of a degenerative or vascular brain disorder. Brexpiprazole, for example, had Phase 1 trials in healthy volunteers followed by development programs for schizophrenia, adjunctive therapy for major depressive disorder, and pediatric schizophrenia. This was followed by Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials for agitation in dementia associated withAD. Some agents being developed for NPS have not been approved for any psychiatric indication. For example, cannabinoids are not approved for treatment of behavioral disorders and are being studied for their potential utility in reducing agitation in AD dementia.
As understanding of the neurobiology of NPS in NDDs/VCI evolves, it is possible the unique relationships between biological elements of NDDs/VCI and NPS will be identified. For example, preliminary data suggest that individuals with tauopathies often manifest disproportionate apathy and those with synucleinopathies are likely to manifest delusions and hallucinations. Disease-targeted therapies for NPS associated with specific proteinopathies and identified with biomarkers may evolve.
Agents in development for NPS in AD comprise a diverse array of mechanisms of action including atypical antipsychotics, 5-HT2A inverse agonists, muscarinic cholinergic agonists, cannabinoids, and psychedelics.

Trial design

Trial design to demonstrate efficacy
Placebo-controlled parallel group designs are the conventional means of demonstrating efficacy and demonstration of a drug-placebo difference in at least one parallel group study is expected in most Phase 3 programs. Innovations in clinical trial designs can accelerate development of new therapies or clarify the efficacy of agents in development (Table 1).
Randomized discontinuation trials include an initial open label period in which all patients are on active treatment for a specified period (usually 12 weeks); participants who respond to treatment in the open label period are then randomized to continue active treatment or are assigned to placebo. Responders in the initial open label phase are typically defined by a combination of reduction of symptom severity on symptom scales and a reduction on a global measure of severity such as the Clinical Global Impression – Improvement (CGI-I) or CGI-Severity (CGI-S). The primary outcome the drug-placebo difference is time to relapse in the active treatment group compared to the placebo group in the blinded portion of the trial. The definition of relapse is the inverse of response and typically requires an increase in NPS severity on a symptom scale plus worsening of severity on a global scale, requirement to be treated with an approved psychotropic agent, or hospitalization for behavioral management. Time to relapse is usually augmented by a key secondary outcome based on calculating the drug-placebo difference in the percentage of participants who relapse during the observation period. This design has the advantage of putting all participants on active treatment at trial initiation which may enhance recruitment; and the discontinuation relapse design allows assessment of the enduring effect of active therapy.
The sequential parallel comparison design (SPCD) is a two-stage trial designed to minimize placebo effects in trials of NPS. In stage 1, patients are randomized to drug or placebo as they are in a conventional parallel design. After a specified period (5–6 weeks), the placebo non-responders are re-randomized to active treatment or placebo in stage 2. The 2nd stage typically has a lower placebo response rate, facilitating demonstration of drug-placebo differences. In addition to applications in depression and pain, the SPCD has been used in an agitation trial in AD.
Response of NPS to active therapy is often apparent within a few days or weeks allowing cross-over designs to have a role in therapeutic development. Participants are randomized to drug or placebo and observed for a prespecified period (e.g., 6–12 weeks). After a washout period appropriate for the half-life of the test agent (usually 5 half-lives), participants then switch from drug to placebo or placebo to drug depending on their original treatment assignment. This design has the advantage of using all recruited participants in both the active and placebo groups. It has the disadvantage that treatment effects of the first phase of the trial may influence outcomes in the second phase. This design has been applied in trials for treatment of agitation in AD and for apathy in frontotemporal dementia.
Basket trials allow recruitment of more than one diagnostic group into a single trial to assess the effect of a therapy in multiple conditions. Each group is evaluated as if it is a separate trial; economies are achieved in recruitment and trial set-up. For example, the efficacy of an antidepressant could be assessed simultaneously in a basket trial including participants with AD or Parkinson’s disease with depression. Basket trials may have their greatest use in proof-of-concept (POC) trials to provide information critical to planning for Phase 3 trials. In a basket trial including populations with AD, progressive supranuclear palsy, and corticobasal degeneration, the putative anti-tau agent TPI-287 produced anaphylactic reactions in patients with AD but not the other two participant populations.
Bayesian adaptive trial designs may allow greater flexibility in post-randomization trial adjustment but must be exhaustively prespecified. Bayesian designs permit changes in the on-going trial based on data collected during the trial. Bayesian designs can be used to stop treatment arms if one arm has more side effects or less efficacy, adjust primary outcomes based on observed trends, increase the sample size as needed, or make other prespecified trial adjustments. Bayesian designs have been used in Phase 2 dose-finding trials for the anti-amyloid monoclonal antibody, lecanemab and to guide sample size adjustments for a trial of treatment of apathy in frontotemporal dementia.
Many patients with NPS are in residential facilities. Cluster randomization may be appropriate in these circumstances with randomization of residential facilities (rather than participants) to different treatment arms.
Open-label extensions are usually single arm longitudinal observation periods of patients who have completed a double-blind exposure to an experimental intervention. The open label extension allows the collection of additional safety data important to documenting the long-term safety and tolerability of the intervention. The absence of a placebo group in the open label extension makes it difficult to derive efficacy information from this portion of a trial. The combination of xanomeline and trospium for the treatment of psychosis of AD constructed a long-term extension study that included participants from three previous trials of the combination therapy (NCT05980949). .
Investigators consider the type of information that would best serve their development program and choose trial designs appropriate for their goals. This process is captured in the Target Product Profile (TPP) that guides program development by defining the end product and aligning each step with achieving the program goals. Patient-focused trial designs are encouraged to anticipate and minimize trial design aspects that may challenge patient participation, convenience, or safety. Review of design plans with regulatory authorities prior to trial initiation is key to anticipating possible regulatory concerns about the trial or the development program.

Mapping trial designs onto phases of drug development
Phase 2 trials are designed to determine if a treatment is beneficial enough to justify further development. The expectation in such studies is not to find definitive evidence of the efficiency of treatment but rather to identify the outcome measures most sensitive to treatment and the secondary domains most likely to be impacted by the treatment. Sample sizes of preliminary trials are typically small and may lack power to demonstrate significant drug-placebo differences. Effect sizes, magnitude of change, consistency of responses across measures, and convergence of evidence from multiple observers (clinicians, care partners, centralize raters, and patients) rather than statistical significance are used to assess likelihood of efficacy in larger trials. Several outcome measures are often included since one of the goals is to detect the instrument most sensitive to the effects of the specific treatment being evaluated.
Placebo controlled designs are most typical of Phase 2 trials, but active comparator designs might be considered if the NPS under study is very acute and there is a potential for harm to the participant or others from use of a placebo. For example, there is an approved treatment for agitation in dementia associated with AD, and a non-inferiority approach, with one arm using the approved treatment and the other arm using the experimental treatment, might be a preferred next-step design for some programs. In cases where information about the characteristics and potential types of response to a given treatment is limited, a single-arm study or a cross-over design might be appropriate. For example, studies assessing treatment for depression or sleep disturbances in NDDs can be evaluated in a Phase 2 trial using a single arm with clinical and biomarker outcomes(e.g., polysomnography).
The goal of Phase 3 trials is to provide compelling evidence of the efficiency and safety of an intervention. Phase 3 is most likely to succeed if the design replicates a successful Phase 2 trial for the same agent. Phase 3 studies include a larger number of individuals and may be more flexible in the inclusion/exclusion criteria to ensure generalizability of the results and applicability to real-world practice. Building on the information obtained in Phase 2 trials, investigators can usually select a primary endpoint for Phase 3 that will be both statistically significant and clinically meaningful. These studies usually follow a double-blind, multi-site design with placebo-controlled intervention. However, the situation may change with different NPS. With acute agitation, the optimal approach may be an active comparator design with an approved compound or a randomized discontinuation design (described above). Other approaches, such as the one being used to evaluate treatment of agitation in hospice-eligible cognitively impaired patients, might allow all individuals to receive the “best available treatment.” Then, if still symptomatic, the researchers will randomize the patients into one of the test interventions (NCT05644262).

Trial designs to reduce the placebo response
Worsening or absence of improvement in NPS in the placebo group is important to the success of clinical trials to allow demonstration of a drug-placebo difference. Placebo responses are robust in trials of NPS in AD making it more difficult to detect and interpret the effect of active therapy. Symptom improvement in participants receiving placebo likely reflect placebo responses from participants, placebo responses by care partners, raised family expectations accompanying involvement in the informed consent and research process, improved behavior through regular interaction with research staff, and increased interest by professional caregivers in residential settings or from family care partners deriving from the patient’s participation in a research project. Socialization with staff and other patients on clinic visits may provide important psychosocial responses and reduction of behavior abnormalities. All these influences improve patient behavior and may reduce the opportunity to observe a drug-placebo difference as all groups in the trial improve.
Strategies have been devised to attempt to reduce the placebo effect in trials of NPS. One key design aspect is to require participants to meet the trial entry criteria at screening and baseline. Patients who improve in the screening period (between screening and randomization) and no longer meet the inclusion criteria should not be randomized.
Placebo lead-in periods may assist in identifying patients who respond to trial participation with reduction in NPS scale scores. Patients who improve sufficiently that they no longer meet entry criteria are not randomized or included in the trial.
A variant of the placebo lead-in design is the lead-in with brief psychosocial therapy (BPST). Patients and caregivers receive a personalized intervention for 7–10 days prior to randomization and patients whose scores fall below the minimum entry criterion are not entered into the placebo-controlled portion of the trial. In a trial of pimavanserin for Parkinson’s disease psychosis, 17 % of patients meeting criteria at screening no longer met the criteria for study participation after BPST. In the absence of the BPST lead-in, these patients might have been randomized to trial participation and would have reduced the power of the trial to detect a drug-placebo difference. Training in BPST enhances patient engagement and improves outcomes without use of psychotropic medications.
In the SPCD design (described above), participants are randomized to drug or placebo in phase 1 and then placebo non-responders are rerandomized to drug or placebo in phase 2. Phase 2 is less likely to include placebo-responsive patients and facilitates detection of a drug-placebo difference.
Placebo responses may be exaggerated by site staff behaviors such as baseline NPS scale score inflation to allow the patient to enter the trial. This increases the likelihood of regression to the mean and minimization of the drug-placebo difference observed in the treatment period.
Central review of scale administration and scoring is useful and may detect site behaviors that could affect participant scale scores and might compromise observation of efficacy. When clinical trial sites or site raters appear to be making erroneous or anomalous decisions regarding scale administration and scoring, risk-based monitoring of the site may improve data quality, key to deriving valid trial results.

Participants

Clinical characterization workflow
The workflow of a clinical trial is to define the NDD/VCI of interest using biomarkers when available (discussed below), detecting NPS using a consensus clinical diagnosis, measuring the severity of the specific NPS syndrome at baseline as an eligibility criterion, and assessing the NPS at baseline and at trial termination to determine if a treatment-related response is demonstrated. Different tools are used for eligibility and for determining efficacy to prevent regression to the mean and compromising observation of a drug-placebo difference.

Clinical criteria for disease diagnosis
Diagnosis of participants for participation in NPS trials has undergone important transformations. Research diagnostic clinical criteria have been developed, and confirmatory biomarkers are present for AD and have an increasing role in non-AD NDDs.
Research diagnostic criteria exist for NDDs/VCI as well as for some syndromes within AD such as posterior cortical atrophy, logopenic aphasia, or frontal lobe dysfunction in AD. Biomarker confirmation for the diagnosis is available for AD but for few other NDDs.
Diagnosis of non-AD NDD’s depends on expert application of clinical criteria. Each NDD has a unique neurobiology that may affect circuits mediating emotional and behavioral responses in disease-specific ways, and NPS may respond differentially to intervention with psychotropic medication.
Preclinical and prodromal states are increasingly recognized as predementia states in NDDs. Clinical criteria are available for prodromal AD, frontotemporal dementia, and dementia with Lewy bodies. NPS occur in prodromal states, and these clinical criteria, particularly if accompanied by appropriate biomarker changes, can comprise trial populations for treatment of NPS appearing early in the symptomatic course of NDDs.

Use of biomarkers to define trial participants
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidance on clinical trials for early AD specifies that “eligibility for enrollment in trials intended to support an application for approval for treatment of early AD should be based on current consensus diagnostic criteria intended to establish the true biological presence of AD rather than criteria based on syndromic or other definitions; this approach is intended to avoid enrollment of a substantial number of subjects who would not actually have AD”. This diagnostic expectation was articulated in the guidance on early AD and may be extended to all clinical trials in which the indication is for AD or a clinical syndrome (e.g., NPS) associated with AD.
A positive phosphorylated tau (p-tau) or p-tau 217/ratio of Aß42/40 confirms the presence amyloid plaques in the brain as shown by the comparative standard of amyloid positron emission tomography (PET). The lumipulse version of this plasma measure has been approved by the FDA A negative p-tau 217 outcome excludes the presence of plaque amyloid but does not assist in the identifying the cause of the NPS. A positive lumipulse 217/ratio of Aß42/40 verifies the presence of plaque amyloid but does not exclude a variety of types of comorbidity common in AD including alpha- synuclein, TAR DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43), and vascular pathology.
The definition of AD is dependent on biomarkers indicative of the presence of brain amyloid. Other types of pathology may be present. As AD progresses, pathology accrues and is reflected in biomarkers of tau, p-tau, and neurodegeneration. NPS typically emerge in the stages of AD with more advanced pathology and greater pathological heterogeneity. Amyloid biomarkers acceptable for diagnosis and staging include amyloid PET, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) findings including hybrid ratios (p-tau181/Aβ42, t-tau/Aβ42, Aβ42/40), and plasma p-tau 217 or p-tau 217/ratio of Aß42/40. The use of plasma-based biomarkers such as p-tau 217 is evolving rapidly. The assay used in trials should meet acceptable performance standards, and the proposed context of use in the clinical trial should be reviewed by regulatory authorities prior to trial initiation.
The use of biomarkers for biological confirmation of the diagnosis of AD is new to clinical trials for NPS, reflects the emergence of more widely accurate and informative biomarkers, and will serve to create less heterogeneous trial populations with results applicable to more well understood and uniformly defined patients. There is a high rate of misclassification of AD with approximately 50 % of patients with MCI diagnosed with clinical criteria and approximately 25 % of AD dementia patients diagnosed with clinical criteria lacking amyloid biomarkers indicative of biological AD. Populations with AD diagnoses based only on clinical trial criteria will include patients with non-AD dementias. The proportion of non-AD participants may vary from trial to trial, and these non-AD patients have neuropathologic and biochemical substrates that differ from AD and may affect the response to pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic interventions.
Biomarkers do not yet provide measures of pharmacodynamic impact of therapy for NPS in AD/NDDs/VCI. In AD, higher neurofibrillary tangle density revealed by tau PET with flortaucipir is correlated with a higher likelihood of developing psychosis. Confirmation of a relationship between neurofibrillary tangles and psychosis might suggest that tau-related therapies will have a role in the pharmacologic approach to AD-related psychosis and that biomarkers may inform pharmacodynamic, prognosis, or monitoring contexts of use in clinical trials for NPS.
Drugs for NPS may have differential efficacy across NDDs, emphasizing the importance of accurate diagnosis. For example, anti-depressants of several neurochemical classes have shown efficacy in Parkinson disease with depression whereas most trials of anti-depressants in AD have been negative. Similarly, the relapse rate for psychosis of Parkinson’s disease was greater than the relapse rate for AD in a randomized discontinuation trial of pimavanserin suggesting differing biological underpinnings of the psychosis. These preliminary observations show that NPS in different NDD’s may have differential response profiles.
There has been less progress in identifying biomarkers for non-AD NDDs. Genetically defined populations such as frontotemporal dementia with C9orf72, granulin, or microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) mutations can be constructed for rare disease trials and orphan drug development. Synuclein seed amplification assays are available on a research basis to detect alpha-synuclein in CSF and could be used to construct trial populations with alpha-synuclein abnormalities (e.g, Parkinson’s disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, multisystem atrophy). Preliminary evidence suggests that plasma measures of TDP-43 and tau may become available for diagnosis of NDDs including frontotemporal dementia, progressive supranuclear palsy, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. When biomarkers are available, they should be used to define the specific NDD population included in the NPS trial.

Clinical criteria for neuropsychiatric syndrome diagnosis
Trial-ready definitions are available for agitation, psychosis, and apathy in major and mild cognitive disorder applicable across NDDs, and there are research criteria for diagnosis of depression in AD. A preliminary definition of the clinical syndrome of disinhibition is available but has not been applied in trials. Trial ready definitions of other syndromes commonly occurring in NDDs including anxiety and irritability are not available. Standardized consensus definitions should be used to define trial populations for pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic interventions. Updates of trial-ready definitions are required as advances are made in clinical and biomarker understanding of NDDs.
In addition to the specific NDD diagnosis and the syndromic identification of the NPS, participants are characterized by a minimum severity of the NPS at baseline. A specific score on the Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) in agitation trials or specific domain scores (e.g., agitation and aggression; hallucinations and delusions) from the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) are among the tools used to establish the required baseline severity.

Interventions
Many types of interventions might be anticipated to reduce severity of NPS and to be assessed in clinical trials. Pharmacologic agents, lifestyle modifications, psychosocial interventions involving the patient or the caregiver, or devices are entering trials. Combinations of these interventions might be considered for clinical trials of patients with NPS. The MET-FINGERS study, for example, is a combination trial in which appropriate individuals at risk for dementia will receive a combination of lifestyle modification and metformin. This trial does not have NPS as an outcome, but the structure of the trial is informative when considering drug-lifestyle combination interventions. For all types of interventions, the dose exposure for each active arm should be described as well as whether there is a placebo, sham, wait list, or active comparator group.

Outcomes

Clinical outcomes for trials of NPS
Outcome measures for clinical trials of NPS should address specific syndromes diagnosed with clinical definitions and measured with instruments appropriate to the individual syndrome. Composite outcomes such as measures of multiple BPSD domains, a total NPS score derived from the NPI, or summary score of the Mild Behavioral Impairment Checklist are typically not sufficiently informative and not acceptable to regulatory authorities for product approval. High scores on composite scales in one patient might reflect a very different constellation of behaviors compared to high scores in another, creating substantial uncertainty in the treatment response of the behavior of interest. Use of domain scores allows the effects of the drug mechanism to be related to the relevant outcome. Putative antidepressants can be linked to mood-related target symptoms; candidate antipsychotics can be assessed for effects on delusions and hallucinations; and anti-agitation agents in development can be understood in relation to their impact on agitation. Scales reflecting the intent of the proposed mechanism of action of the agent being assessed will best serve the purpose of the trial.
A single outcome on a behavioral rating scale appears to be sufficient for FDA approval and may be sufficient for approval by other regulatory authorities. The approval of brexpiprazole for the treatment of agitation associated with dementia due to AD as based on 2 positive trials that used the CMAI as the primary outcome. The Clinical Global Impression of Change – Severity (CGI-S) was key secondary for both trials. Other trials targeting agitation and currently in progress use similar measurement strategies. On-going trials of Cobenfy® (formerly KarXT)(xanomeline plus trospium) use the Neuropsychiatric Inventory – Clinician version (NPI-C) hallucinations and delusions domains. The CGI-S and the CMAI are secondary outcomes. Single primary outcomes are anticipated in other trials for drugs treating NPS.

Biomarker outcomes for clinical trials for NPS
Biomarkers that are specific for NPS such as depression, psychosis or agitation have proven to be elusive. Inflammatory biomarkers in blood are often abnormal in patients with agitation and other promising biomarkers observed in patients exhibiting agitation include measures of oxidative stress, changes in brain cholesterol metabolism, and increased clusterin, a chaperone protein. Proteomic and gene ontology studies have identified alterations in the abundance of proteins related to cell adhesion, immune response, and lipid metabolism in relation to specific NPS.
Proteomic studies suggest that distinct profiles of protein changes may accompany NPS and that changes in these profiles are induced by psychotropic agents. If confirmed, proteomics may play a role in monitoring treatment and assessing pharmacodynamic responses in clinical trials of NDDs.
Further study of these and other biomarkers may eventually allow their use in several contexts of use for clinical trials including assessing a pharmacodynamic response, providing prognostic guidance, or offering predictive information. Exploratory biomarkers can be included in trials to help identify the biological response to pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic interventions in clinical trials for treatments of NPS.

Sample size
The power to draw conclusions regarding an outcome in a clinical trial depends on having the appropriate sample size in the context of the anticipated treatment effect size. The latter is calculated based on the known or positied effect size of the intervention derived from previous studies using the measure and the standard deviation on that measure or is based on the minimal acceptable drug-placebo difference at trial termination and the standard deviation on that instrument.
Once the sample size is determined and the rate of recruitment by sites is understood, the number of sites required to recruit the trial in a specific period can be calculated.

Statistical methods
The statistical analysis chosen will depend on the goals of the study and the phase of development of the intervention. Phase 2 trials have characteristics of experimental medicine trials and will examine effect sizes, consistency across outcomes, and overall magnitude of benefit or harm observed. There is less emphasis on statistical significance and p values Phase 3 trials are powered to show a statistically significant difference on the primary outcome between active treatment and placebo groups. An estimand framework is promoted by regulatory authorities as a means of accounting for events that occur during the trial and may affect outcomes (e.g., adding new therapies). Sample size must also account for the expected attrition occurring during the study with relevant increases in the total number of participants to compensate for those who exit the trial.
A hierarchical framework may be used such that a key secondary outcome is tested for statistical significance only if the primary outcome was significantly different between active treatment and placebo groups. Other secondary and exploratory outcomes are tested for nominal statistical significance without adjustment for multiplicity of comparisons.
Responder analyses are often calculated to complement the primary prespecified outcomes. In the trial of brexpiprazole for the treatment of agitation in dementia associated with AD, the percent of patients on drug or placebo experiencing any reduction in agitation or 20 % reduction, 30 % reduction, and 40 % reduction in agitation as measured by the CMAI were reported.
Trials using Bayesian designs have statistical approaches determined by the prespecified Bayesian structure of the trial. Coleman and colleagues used a Bayesian approach in a crossover study of the treatment of apathy in frontotemporal dementia with vasopressin. Interim analyses (IA) may be employed for a variety of purposes in trials of NPS. These analyses are typically executed when 50 % of the population has completed the trial although other means of defining the timing of the IA can be considered. Because the IA usually involves unblinded data, it is performed by external consultant statisticians not on the primary trial team. Using a prespecified decision framework, choices can be made to stop the trial for futility if the data analysis indicates that the trial will not be positive with the current sample size and observed drug-placebo difference; stop the trial for success if the analysis shows that a drug-placebo difference in favor of active treatment is demonstrable in the current smaller population; or make adjustments in population size, dose arms (e.g., stop a low dose arm), or outcomes if these options were among those prespecified before trial initiation. Trials of treatments for NPS are typically short (12 weeks) and IAs are less useful since most of the participants will have been randomized at the time 50 % of participants reach the trial termination and would be included in the IA.

Baseline data
Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of the trial participants including age, sex, educational level, severity of cognitive impairment (typically using the Mini-Mental State Examination score), severity of behavioral disturbances as represented on scale scores, and relevant biomarker measures often including apolipoprotein E ϵ4 (APOE4) gene carrier status.
Baseline demographic description should also include the number of participants from understudied groups included in the trial.

Populations analyzed
Efficacy outcomes are analyzed in clinical trials according to the intent to treat (ITT) principle specifying the inclusion in the statistical analysis of all participants randomized regardless of what treatment they received (if any). In some cases, a modified intent to treat (mITT) population is used based on patients who were randomized and received at least one post-randomization assessment. The ITT /mITT analysis is used for the outcome of interests — primary, secondary, and exploratory — of the clinical trial.
The per protocol analysis includes the population of participants who received the medication or other intervention as specified in the protocol. This analytic approach may provide insight into drug efficacy but may be biased according to who remained in the trial and received treatment and can lead to spurious conclusions.
The safety population typically includes all individuals recruited into the trial.

Outcome analyses
Once a trial of NPS is completed, data lock ensues, and the analysis phase begins. The primary outcomes, key secondary outcomes, and exploratory analyses are prespecified in the statistical analysis plan (SAP). The trial is determined to be positive or negative based on the prespecified primary outcome(s). Positive outcomes on prespecified primary outcomes are hypothesis-confirming and allow progression of the development program to the next step including review by regulatory authorities. Key secondary analyses assist in determining if the directionality of the response is consistent across outcomes. Exploratory outcomes may provide information not available from the primary and secondary outcomes.

Ancillary analyses
Non-prespecified post-hoc analyses are hypothesis-generating. These analyses are based on outcomes that may not have been anticipated in the trial planning. Post hoc analyses are often applied to negative trials where subgroups appeared to have responded to treatment. These analyses can be misleading since the subgroups were not subject to the original randomization plan and may be confounded by factors other than drug response. The credibility of the post hoc analysis is enhanced if the outcome is rational given the drug and the disease state, the population involved in the analysis is like the randomized population of the trial, the primary and secondary outcomes perform consistently in the subgroup, the subgroup analyses were performed on a small number of comparisons, and, if other studies are available, the observed subgroup difference is consistent across studies.

Harms
Nearly all interventions are associated with some harms or adverse events, and these must be fully described as a clinical trial outcome. Adverse events (AEs or treatment emergent adverse event (TEAEs)) include any unintended event that occurs to a participant in a trial. Adverse events include symptoms reported by trial participants, laboratory abnormalities, and electrocardiographic changes. AEs are classified as serious or non-serious and expected or unexpected.
AEs occur in 30–80 % of participants in placebo groups. For example, in studies of brexpiprazole (2 or 3 mg vs placebo) for the treatment of agitation associated with AD dementia, 31 % of participants assigned to placebo has AEs; when 2 mg or 1 mg doses of brexpiprazole were compared to placebo, 45.9 % of participants on placebo reported AEs; and in the study of flexible dosing of brexpiprazole compared to placebo, 58.4 % of participants receiving placebo reported AEs. Similarly, in a study of treatment of dementia related psychosis with pimavanserin, 36.6 % of participants on placebo in the double-blind period of the study experienced AEs. Neither study partner type nor total weekly time spent with participants in AD trials appear to affect the rate of AE reporting.

Limitations
The limitation section of the study report describes any events or circumstances that may have affected the trial or its outcome. For example, trial recruitment was affected during the COVID epidemic and sample size adjustments or other types of changes that could affect confidence in trial outcomes occurred.
Approval of a new medication for the same indication as that of the agent in the trial might also affect recruitment during the trial and could bias the population that remains in or enters the trial. Such circumstances would be described in the limitation section of the trial report.

Generalizability and moving from trials to practice
Generalizability of trial outcomes depends on the fidelity to which the trial population reflects the real-world population in which the agent will be used. Eligibility criteria for clinical trials tend to narrow the population to those who are relatively healthy and on relatively few concomitant medications. These inclusion and exclusion criteria will limit the generalizability of the trial outcomes since the agent may be used in patients who have concomitant medical illnesses and are taking a variety of drugs. Trial participants tend to be younger, healthier, and more well educated than the population to which AD/NDD/VCI NPS medications will be applied. Most clinical trials have had limited ethno-racial, geographic, and age diversity. These limitations on generalizability should be included in the trial report.
The design of Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials should aim to meet the needs of patients and clinicians in real-world settings. Using eligibility criteria and outcome instruments whose results can be readily translated to care will facilitate the safe and effective use of drugs assessed in trials. Convenient formulations and dosing schedules will facilitate patient adherence to the desired regimen and will produce less medication-related burden on care partners. These goals are captured in the TPP that guides the development program to a product that will be safe, effective, and competitive in the treatment landscape.

Discussion
Advances in the design and conduct of randomized clinical trials are progressing rapidly. Research clinical definitions are increasingly complemented by confirmatory biomarkers. This is particularly true in AD, where imaging, CSF, and plasma biomarkers are now available for diagnosis and staging of trial participants. Biomarkers are rapidly evolving for other potential trial populations. Research diagnostic criteria have also advanced, with trail-ready definitions for agitation, psychosis, apathy, and depression in NDDs/VCI. Regulatory standards have evolved with guidance for trials in early AD And many other aspects of clinical trial operations.
This review used the CONSORT framework to describe best practices for conduct of randomized clinical trials. for treatment of NPS The increasingly important role of biomarkers for diagnostic confirmation of participants in NPS trials is emphasized. The CONSORT structure is required for reporting and publication of clinical trials and provides an architecture for clinical trial design, conduct, and data collection. Best practices for NPS trials have evolved in each dimension of the CONSORT criteria. CONSORT documents have been developed for reporting many types of clinical trials including reporting of multi-arm parallel group trials, cluster trials, pilot and feasibility trials, and pragmatic trials. The failure rate of drug development is high and improved definitions of trial populations, biomarkers, and trial conduct will improve the rate of trial success. By adhering to CONSORT criteria, implementing best practices for conduct of trials for NPS, and using biomarkers to augment clinical trial decision making, drug development can bring new treatments to patients faster.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jacobo Mintzer: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Mary Sano: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Data curation, Conceptualization. Clive Ballard: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Kate Zhong: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Investigation, Conceptualization. Cummings Jeffrey: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

References
Estimation of the global prevalence of dementia in 2019 and forecasted prevalence in 2050: an analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019
Population estimate of people with clinical Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment in the United States (2020–2060)
Forecasting the prevalence of preclinical and clinical Alzheimer’s disease in the United States
Alzheimer’s disease
Prevalence of neuropsychiatric symptoms in dementia and mild cognitive impairment: results from the cardiovascular health study
Neuropsychiatric symptoms, quality of life and caregivers’ burden in dementia
Brexpiprazole for the treatment of agitation in Alzheimer dementia: a randomized clinical trial
Pimavanserin for patients with Parkinson’s disease psychosis: a randomised, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial
Impact of person-centred care training and person-centred activities on quality of life, agitation, and antipsychotic use in people with dementia living in nursing homes: A cluster-randomised controlled trial
CONSORT 2010 statement: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomized trials
Guidelines for reporting outcomes in trial reports: the CONSORT-outcomes 2022 extension
CONSORT 2025 statement: updated guideline for reporting randomised trials
SPIRIT 2013 statement: defining standard protocol items for clinical trials
Behavioral and psychologic symptoms of dementia
Agitation in cognitive disorders: International Psychogeriatric Association provisional consensus clinical and research definition
Criteria for psychosis in major and mild neurocognitive disorders: International Psychogeriatric Association (IPA) consensus clinical and research definition
Agitation in cognitive disorders: Progress in the International Psychogeriatric Association consensus clinical and research definition
Pharmacologic therapy for behavioral symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease
A critical review of brexpiprazole oral tablets as the first drug approved to treat agitation symptoms associated with dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease
Randomized placebo-controlled trial of nabilone for agitation in Alzheimer’s disease
Tau-induced focal neurotoxicity and network disruption related to apathy in Alzheimer’s disease
Validity of CSF alpha-synuclein to predict psychosis in prodromal Alzheimer’s disease
Alzheimer’s disease drug development pipeline: 2025
Relapse risk after discontinuation of risperidone in Alzheimer’s disease
Trial of pimavanserin in dementia-related psychosis
Assessing treatment benefit in the presence of placebo response using the sequential parallel comparison design
Effect of dextromethorphan-quinidine on agitation in patients with Alzheimer disease dementia: A randomized clinical trial
FOXY - a phase 2 clinical trial of intranasal oxytocin for frontotemporal dementia
The role of basket trials in drug development for neurodegenerative disorders
Reactions to multiple ascending doses of the microtubule stabilizer TPI-287 in patients with Alzheimer disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, and corticobasal syndrome: a randomized clinical trial
Lecanemab for patients with early Alzheimer disease: Bayesian analysis of a phase 2b dose-finding randomized clinical trial
Rational and practical considerations to guide a target product profile for patient-centric drug product development with measurable patient outcomes - A proposed roadmap
An overview of phase 2 clinical trial designs
Value-generating exploratory trials in neurodegenerative dementias
Phase III design: principles
Change in agitation in Alzheimer’s disease in the placebo arm of a nine-week controlled trial
New approaches to symptomatic treatments for Alzheimer’s disease
Brief psychosocial therapy for the treatment of agitation in Alzheimer disease (the CALM-AD trial)
Regression to the mean: implications for clinical trials of psychotropic agents in dementia
Inaccuracy in clinical trials: effects and methods to control inaccuracy
Risk-based monitoring in clinical trials: 2021 update
The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease
Proposed research criteria for prodromal behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia
Research criteria for the diagnosis of prodromal dementia with Lewy bodies
Diagnostic accuracy of plasma p-tau217/Abeta42 for Alzheimer’s disease in clinical and community cohorts
Revised criteria for diagnosis and staging of Alzheimer’s disease: Alzheimer’s Association Workgroup
The development and convergence of co-pathologies in Alzheimer’s disease
Acceptable performance of blood biomarker tests of amyloid pathology - recommendations from the Global CEO Initiative on Alzheimer’s Disease
Amyloid PET screening for enrichment of early-stage Alzheimer disease clinical trials: experience in a phase 1b clinical trial
Increased retention of tau PET ligand [(18)F]-AV1451 in Alzheimer’s Disease Psychosis
Sertraline for the treatment of depression in Alzheimer disease
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of antidepressants in Parkinson disease
Advances in treatment of frontotemporal dementia
Seed amplification assay for the detection of pathologic alpha-synuclein aggregates in cerebrospinal fluid
Plasma extracellular vesicle tau and TDP-43 as diagnostic biomarkers in FTD and ALS
Diagnostic criteria for apathy in neurocognitive disorders
Provisional diagnostic criteria for depression of Alzheimer disease
Progress in pharmacologic management of neuropsychiatric syndromes in neurodegenerative disorders: a review
Assessing patterns of agitation in Alzheimer’s disease patients with the Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory
The Neuropsychiatric Inventory: comprehensive assessment of psychopathology in dementia
A multimodal precision-prevention approach combining lifestyle intervention with metformin repurposing to prevent cognitive impairment and disability: the MET-FINGER randomised controlled trial protocol
An adaptive method for assigning clinical trials wait-times for controls
Accelerated theta burst stimulation: safety, efficacy, and future advancements
The Mild Behavioral Impairment Checklist (MBI-C): A rating scale for neuropsychiatric symptoms in pre-dementia populations
Efficacy and safety of brexpiprazole for the treatment of agitation in Alzheimer’s dementia: two 12-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials
The Neuropsychiatric Inventory-Clinician rating scale (NPI-C): reliability and validity of a revised assessment of neuropsychiatric symptoms in dementia
Blood-based biomarkers of agitation in Alzheimer’s disease: Advances and future prospects
Cerebrospinal fluid proteome alterations associated with neuropsychiatric symptoms in cognitive decline and Alzheimer’s disease
Proteomic analysis of plasma markers in patients maintained on antipsychotics: comparison to patients off antipsychotics and normal controls
Precision medicine in depression: the role of proteomics and metabolomics in personalized treatment approaches
Marking 2-years of new thinking in clinical trials: the estimand journey
Design of clinical trials with failure-time endpoints and interim analyses: An update after fifteen years
Understanding the Intention-to-treat Principle in Randomized Controlled Trials
How to use a subgroup analysis: users’ guide to the medical literature
Development of the Instrument to assess the Credibility of Effect Modification Analyses (ICEMAN) in randomized controlled trials and meta-analyses
Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative, S. Study partner type and adverse event reporting in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease clinical trials
Predicting the COVID-19 pandemic impact on clinical trial recruitment
Generalizability of findings from a clinical sample to a community-based sample: A comparison of ADNI and ARIC
Older patients are still under-represented in clinical trials of Alzheimer’s disease
Diversity in Alzheimer’s disease drug trials: The importance of eligibility criteria
Reporting of multi-arm parallel-group randomized trials: extension of the CONSORT 2010 statement
Consort 2010 statement: extension to cluster randomised trials
CONSORT 2010 statement: extension to randomised pilot and feasibility trials
Improving the reporting of pragmatic trials: an extension of the CONSORT statement
The adaptive designs CONSORT extension (ACE) statement: a checklist with explanation and elaboration guideline for reporting randomised trials that use an adaptive design
Key elements of the Consolidated Standards for Reporting Trials (CONSORT); elements without implications specific to trials for Neuropsychiatric Syndromes (NPS) are not included.
CONSORT Element	Application to Trials for Treatment for Neuropsychiatric Syndromes (NPS)	 	Background and objectives	The development program for the agent, the mechanism of action, and the relationship of the mechanism to treatment of NPS. Specify the objectives of the clinical trial.	 	Trial design	Trial design chosen to generate the data that will confirm or disconfirm the hypothesis guiding the trial.	 	Participants	Eligibility criteria including diagnosis of the specific neurodegenerative disorder; how the specific NPS was diagnosed; whether a level of severity for the NPS symptoms was required for trial participation; diagnostic biomarker if available	 	interventions	Pharmacologic agent; lifestyle intervention; psychosocial intervention; or device	 	Outcomes	Prespecified primary outcomes; prespecified secondary outcomes; prespecified biomarker outcomes, if included; prespecified exploratory outcomes	 	Sample size	How the sample size was determined including efficacy expectations and attrition from the trial	 	Statistical methods	How the data are to be analyzed including the primary and secondary outcomes; methods for additional analyses such as investigation of subgroups and correlations between biomarkers and clinical outcomes; use of estimand framework to account for events occurring during the trial that may affect outcomes	 	Participant flow	Number of patients who were randomly assigned to each group; number who received treatment; number analyzed for efficacy and safety outcomes	 	Baseline data	Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics for each group arm of the trial; the trial population composition including percent from underrepresented groups	 	Outcomes	Primary and secondary outcomes; results for each group (arm) of this study; estimated effect size and confidence interval; responder analysis if prespecified	 	Ancillary analyses	Other analyses performed, including subgroup analyses, identifying those that were prespecified and those that were exploratory	 	Harms	Harms or unintended effects in each group (arm); adverse events; treatment emergent adverse events; serious adverse events; adverse events by system organ class; serious adverse events, adverse events leading to study discontinuation; whether harms were considered to be related to the study intervention	 	Limitations	Limitations including sources of potential bias, multiplicity of analyses, small sample size and limited power	 	Generalizability	External validity of the trial findings; limits on the generalizability of the trial outcomes	 	Interpretation	Interpretation of results considering benefits and harms; primary and secondary outcomes; adverse events; further assessment of this intervention; implications for this class of interventions
Trial designs appropriate for determining treatment efficacy of treatments of neuropsychiatric syndromes (defined in text).
• Double-blind you, placebo-controlled, parallel group	 	• Randomized discontinuation	 	• Sequential parallel comparison design (SPCD)	 	• Cross-over	 	• Basket	 	• Adaptive Bayesian	 	• Cluster randomization of residential facilitates	 	• Open-label extensions