Diagnostic approach to leukemia cutis : A differential diagnostic step-by-step algorithm
Abstract
Objectives
Leukemia cutis is a conflicting term to describe neoplastic hematopoietic infiltrates in the skin. Cutaneous myeloid or lymphoid proliferations often present a serious differential diagnostic challenge for pathologists.
Methods
This review aims to outline the confusion associated with the term leukemia cutis and discuss in detail the foremost common differential diagnoses in daily practice. The review is based on a summary of the relevant literature as well as on the authors’ experience.
Results
It addresses precursor cell myeloid and lymphoid tumors that are strictly considered true leukemia cutis but also more mature neoplasms, including some recently described mature extramedullary myeloid proliferations. Finally, a practical, comprehensive stepwise approach combining traditional immunohistochemical marker panels, novel lineage- or mutational-specific markers, and other ancillary tests is suggested to reach an entity-specific diagnosis.
Conclusion
The proper combination of ancillary techniques can help the pathologist to provide an accurate diagnosis of these challenging skin lesions.

Key points
Leukemia cutis and its mimickers—cutaneous infiltrates of small blue cell tumors of various hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cell origin—pose a challenge in the daily histopathologic diagnostics.
Determination of the cell of origin and the distinction between mature and immature lesions are crucial for therapeutics and/or prognostics.
Using a combination of classical and new ancillary techniques in a step-by-step approach can enable establishing an accurate diagnosis of such challenging skin lesions.

INTRODUCTION
Leukemia cutis is a nonspecific term that describes the infiltration of the skin by neoplastic leukemic cells, most often in conjunction with systemic leukemia. It reflects a specific variant of extramedullary leukemic disease. In the context of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), extramedullary presentations are generally referred to as myeloid sarcomas. In addition, leukemia cutis may rarely occur in the context of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
Extramedullary involvement in AML can be seen in around 10% of the cases, whereas the occurrence of leukemia cutis is 3% to 5%, with the skin thus being the most prevalent organ system affected. The prevalence in the pediatric age group is similar to that in adults.Leukemia cutis most commonly affects patients with monocytic forms of AML and especially cases with NPM1 mutation.
Most commonly, leukemia cutis is seen in the context of known (advanced) leukemic disease (ie, after a diagnosis of systemic leukemia has been established), but it may concomitantly occur (30% of cases) with newly diagnosed leukemia, occasionally (<10% of cases) precede clinically detectable leukemia, or, exceptionally, be the sole presentation. The latter 2 scenarios are often referred to as “aleukemic leukemia cutis” and are responsible for a body of differential diagnostic problems.
The nomenclature of extramedullary myeloid tumors is highly controversial and heterogeneous in the literature, and leukemia cutis is not an exception; for example, some authors use the term leukemia cutis for certain cutaneous manifestations of mature B-cell (eg, chronic lymphocytic or hairy cell leukemia) or T-cell (eg, T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia) lymphomas as well. Moreover, leukemia cutis–like manifestations can be observed in myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), including chronic myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndromes/neoplasms (MDSs), and myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms, particularly in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML). In such cases, the skin infiltration usually represents a more immature extramedullary compound of the chronic myeloid disease but occasionally even mature extramedullary myeloid proliferations, such as sclerosing extramedullary hematopoietic tumor (SEMHT), or myelodysplasia cutis can be present FIGURE 1. These entities also do not fall into the strict category of leukemia cutis, but they further broaden the spectrum of its differential diagnosis and raise prognostic and therapeutic questions regarding cutaneous myeloid neoplasms. In the setting of myeloid disorders, tumorous presentation of cutaneous involvement is often linked to clinical and/or molecular progression even if the infiltrate is not completely blastoid; therefore, the correct interpretation is inevitable for optimal patient management. With this in mind, in addition to blastoid lesions, which are traditionally interpreted as leukemia cutis, we also describe the more mature extramedullary myeloid proliferations in this review as well.
H&E morphology of myeloid and lymphoid leukemia cutis. A, Acute myeloid leukemia (AML), not otherwise specified (NOS) according to the International Consensus Classification and AML with maturation according to World Health Organization 5 (H&E, ×40). Infiltration of the dermis composed of medium-sized blastoid cells with round to oval nuclei and visible nucleoli intermingled with some lymphocytes and a few eosinophils. B, T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma, NOS (H&E, ×40). Infiltration of the dermis and subcutis by small blastoid cells with a high N:C ratio, basophilic chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleoli.

CLINICAL AND GENETIC CHARACTERISTICS OF LEUKEMIA CUTIS
Generally, extramedullary disease is thought to affect less than 5% of patients with leukemia, yet newer and especially functional imaging (positron emission tomography [PET]–based) studies in AML propose that it may be found in 15% to 20% of patients with a special preference for lymph nodes, spleen, liver, kidneys, and connective tissues. This suggests an underestimated propensity of especially myeloid neoplasms for spread out of the bone marrow and the blood that may be a source of significant morbidity and mortality, including being the source of relapses. Indeed, in a wide German AML registry study encompassing 1,583 cases, extramedullary disease was evident in 225 instances (roughly 15%; with skin involvement in roughly 45% of cases being the commonest) and was linked to higher lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), white blood cell, and blast counts; monocytic/monoblastic differentiation; PTPN11 and NPM1 mutations and FLT3-ITD; decreased complete remission; increased early mortality rates; and reduced overall (independent of ELN2017 risk groups) and—in histologically confirmed instances—event-free survival. According to other studies, myeloid leukemia cutis is also often associated with central nervous system involvement and numerical abnormalities of chromosome 8. Importantly, survival differences between AML cases with and without extramedullary manifestation can be equalized by allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation, suggesting a role of immunologic control over the “sanctuary” sites outside the bone marrow to prevent leukemia recurrences. In this context, sole cutaneous relapses in patients with leukemia who have otherwise complete hematologic and molecular remission seem to respond to total skin electron beam therapy. Both facts suggest potentially existing therapeutic actions upon the diagnosis of leukemia cutis. Notably, leukemia cutis appears often negative on PET, underscoring the unsurpassed value of thorough clinical examination of patients.
Patients with leukemia cutis may have typically multiple, less often single lesions, usually representing nodules, plaques, and papules, but rarely, erythema, ulcers, or blisters may also appear. The most affected body parts are the legs, followed by arms, back, chest, scalp, and face, while palmoplantar and oral mucosa involvement is rare. Sites of previous or concomitant inflammation tend to be preferentially involved. It is important to note that a high proportion of patients with leukemia have skin lesions that are not leukemia cutis, mainly bleeding abnormalities (petechiae, purpurae) and infectious skin lesions due to cytopenia that should be taken into differential diagnostic considerations, both clinically and histologically.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis of Leukemia Cutis

Nonspecific Reactive Skin Lesions
Clinically and histologically, leukemia cutis can be confused with a wide array of skin conditions. The major clinical differential diagnoses are nonleukemic cutaneous manifestations of leukemia mentioned above that are known as leukemids. These cutaneous complications may be caused by various factors, such as cytopenias due to bone marrow failure, cutaneous side effects of antileukemic treatment, or immune-mediated diseases (eg, petechiae, purpura, ecchymoses, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, neutrophilic/eosinophilic/blistering dermatoses, herpesvirus disease). Together with the evidence for a major clinical impact of only histologically confirmed extramedullary leukemia manifestations, this suggests that, whenever possible, histologic confirmation in any suspect case of leukemia cutis should be attempted.

Diagnosis of Leukemia Cutis in the Context of a Known Leukemic Disease
The histologic diagnosis may be easy and/or unequivocal in the context of a known leukemic disease. Most leukemia cutis cases show a small blue round cell tumor morphology with a deeper than expected perivascular and/or periadnexal pattern or a dense interstitial or nodular infiltrate of dermis and subcutis with sparing of the upper papillary dermis (Grenz zone). The infiltrate consists of medium to large blasts with round to oval nuclei and often detectable nucleoli. In monocytic differentiation, irregular, convoluted, and/or lobulated nuclei can be seen. The blasts of ALL are morphologically indistinguishable from myeloid blasts, yet they less often display nucleoli, and the infiltrate usually affects even deeper cutaneous structures.
A caveat of certain discordant antigen expression/antigenic shift applying to the blast population affecting the skin should be considered, such as decreased/lacking expression of CD34 and/or CD117 and gain of CD56, lysozyme, and/or myeloperoxidase (MPO) compared to that observed in the bone marrow or the blood. This may be explicable by a distinct subgroup of blasts that preferentially occupy extramedullary sites.

Diagnosis of Leukemia Cutis in the Clinical Context of a Known Leukemic Disease
In contrast, significant differential diagnostic difficulties in clinically contextless cases are expected, with extramedullary leukemia being among the most common misdiagnoses in surgical pathology. This can be explained by the fact that in small blue round cell tumors, which are the usual histologic presentation of extramedullary leukemia in general and leukemia cutis in particular, stains for hematolymphoid markers—beyond CD45, which may be weakly expressed or negative—are rarely performed.
In case of suspected leukemia cutis, a first round of phenotypic examination with CD43, CD45, INSM1, lysozyme, MPO, pan-cytokeratin (CK22), and TdT is advisable and a characteristic phenotype with CD43+, CD45±, INSM1–, lysozyme±, MPO±, CK22–, and TdT± should lead to next-step examinations to establish an entity-specific diagnosis.

Hematolymphoid Tumors to Be Considered in the Differential Diagnosis
If the above-described phenotype (CD43+, CD45±, INSM1–, lysozyme±, MPO±, CK22–, TdT±) is observed in a contextless case, the suspect diagnosis of a hematolymphoid small round cell tumor can be rendered, and a specific diagnosis should be established as suggested below.

Lymphoid Leukemia Cutis
In myeloid marker–negative cases, expression of either or combined CD2, CD3, CD5, CD7, TCRβF1, or δ for the T-cell lineage and CD19, CD20, CD22, CD79a, or PAX5 for the B-cell lineage indicates lymphoid origin. To avoid potential diagnostic pitfalls, it is important to note that dim MPO staining in B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) and weak CD79a expression and CD117 in early T-cell precursor ALL (ETP-ALL) is allowed, CD2 and CD7 can be expressed on AML blasts, and RUNX1-mutated or translocated AML can express CD19, CD79a, and/or PAX5.
In a small-blastoid T-cell background, BCL11B, CD1a, CD10, CD34, CD117, LMO2, NOTCH1, TdT, TTF1 (gene NKX2.1), and PU.1 (gene SPI1) are markers of an immature phenotype and will help to discern precursor cells from mature lymphomas, while in the same context for B cells, these are CD10, CD34, CD99, ERG, dim MPO, NUT1, SOX11, and TdT. As a last step, a World Health Organization 5 (WHO-5)/International Consensus Classification (ICC) 2022 diagnosis should be established.
Cases of ETP-ALL are defined by phenotype (CD1a−, CD2±, cCD3+, CD4±, CD5 [<75%], CD7+, CD8−), combined with expression of 1 or more myeloid markers (CD11b, CD13, CD33, CD34, CD65, CD117, HLA-DR), but are by definition MPO negative. Cases of ETP-ALL with BCL11B rearrangement are defined by phenotype and cytogenetics, while all other cases fall into the category of T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), not otherwise specified (NOS).
In the case of B-cell lineage, with the exception of B-ALL with BCR::ABL1 or ETV6::RUNX1 fusions and MLL-, NUTM1-, and MYC-rearranged instances, subentity-specific diagnosis may not feasible/achievable with the disposable diagnostic tools FIGURE 2. In this scenario, cases should be addressed as B-ALL, not further classified and only called “B-ALL, NOS” if the tumor lacks entity-defining genetic abnormalities after comprehensive analysis.
A, B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (H&E, ×20). Diffuse infiltration of the dermis and subcutis by small blastoid cells with a high N:C ratio, basophilic chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleoli with (B) expression of CD79a.
Mature lymphoid neoplasms involving the skin are not leukemia cutis sensu stricto but may occasionally cause differential diagnostic difficulties. In this review, we focus only on mature B- and T-cell lymphomas that predominantly display blastoid morphology but lack expression of TdT and CD34.
Among B-cell lymphomas, the most prominent examples are blastoid and pleomorphic mantle cell lymphomaFIGURE 3. However, skin involvement is rare, and although the neoplastic cells are medium sized, resembling lymphoblasts in the blastoid type, or larger, more atypical cells in the pleomorphic type, they display an unequivocally diagnostic phenotype: CD5+, CD23−, CCND1+, SOX11±, p53±. Almost all cases bear a CCND1 rearrangement.
A, Pleomorphic mantle cell lymphoma (H&E, ×20). Diffuse infiltration of the dermis by medium- to large-sized lymphoid cells with marked cytologic atypia and numerous mitotic figures with (B) positivity for cyclin D1.
Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type is a high-grade lymphoma presenting as a pan-dermal infiltration by large centroblasts and immunoblasts with a strong expression of BCL2, MUM1, FOXP1, and IgM; variable expression of CD5 and BCL6; and negativity for CD10 FIGURE 4. MYC rearrangements and MCD-type mutations will be detected in many cases. It may rarely cause differential diagnostic difficulties in leukemia cutis with a monoblastic morphotype, but the phenotype is unequivocal.
A, Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (H&E, ×20). Infiltration of the dermis with a Grenz zone by immunoblastoid cells showing characteristic positivity for (B) FOXP1 and (C) IgM.
Cutaneous involvement by Burkitt lymphoma is exceedingly rare but must be considered occasionally. The medium-sized, monomorphic blasts are BCL2−, BCL6+, CD5−, CD10+, CD38+, CD44− with a virtually 100% proliferation index/Ki-67 labeling. The hallmark feature of the disease is an IG::MYC rearrangement.
The incidence of skin infiltration by plasma cell myeloma (PCM) is around 1%. While mature plasma cells are easy to recognize, plasmablastic PCM—which is overrepresented among cutaneous PCMs—can be a challenge, but the expression of CD138, CD38, and MUM1, in addition to light chain restriction—detected by immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization—can confirm the diagnosis FIGURE 3. Of note, some PCMs may express CD56 and/or CD117 while being negative for other myeloid markers, which might on occasion cause differential diagnostic difficulties. Plasmablastic lymphoma (PBL) harbors a very similar morphology and an overlapping immunophenotype with positive plasma cell markers (CD138, MUM1) and light chain restriction. However, PBL most often occurs in the setting of HIV infection, is regularly EBER positive (unlike plasmablastic PCM and leukemia cutis), and shows a distinct mutational profile as well as a lack of PCM characteristic structural chromosomal aberrations.
From the numerous T-cell lymphomas, only T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia (T-PLL) is discussed in this article, based on its clinical and morphologic characteristics; the other cutaneous T-cell lymphomas show pronounced epidermotropism (as opposed to the Grenz zone of leukemia cutis), appear as reddish tumorous nodules, have acral predilection, display significant anaplastic features, have an admixture of eosinophils, or involve the subcutis, which are all not characteristic of leukemia cutis. Cutaneous involvement in T-PLL is relatively common and present as dermal infiltrates without epidermotropism. The small- to medium-sized tumor cells with irregular nuclear contours and often prominent nucleoli are usually positive for CD2, CD3 (can be weak), and CD4+, with roughly equal onset of CD4+/CD8− and CD4+/CD8+ dual expressor cases, frequent expression of TCL1, and occasional expression of S100 and/or CD20. The hallmark molecular features of these lymphomas are the rearrangements involving the TCL1 gene.
Besides the abovementioned examples of mature lymphoid tumors with blastoid appearance, many B- and T-cell neoplasms can involve skin structures and be interpreted as a broader differential of leukemia cutis. These occasional diagnostic difficulties can be resolved by proper application of ancillary diagnostic tools that are beyond the scope of this review.

Blastic Plasmacytoid Dendritic Cell Neoplasm
Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) is a rare, aggressive hematopoietic neoplasm derived from plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs) and mainly affects the elderly. The skin is the most commonly involved site, but bone marrow, lymph nodes, and extranodal sites can also be affected, which is explainable by the complex interplay between the bone marrow and the skin along with tumorigenesis. Cases of BPDCN should be excluded in any hematolymphoid small round cell tumor by application of markers to detect the characteristic constellation of negativity for CD3, CD20, CD34, lysozyme, and MPO and the coexpression—along with CD43 and/or CD45—of CD4, CD56, CD68, CD123, CD303, IRF8, and TCL1 (and TdT) in various constellations FIGURE 5. In the context of BPDCN, CD123, TCL1, TCF4, and/or SOX4 (T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia has to be excluded) and particularly CD303 are considered rather specific. Although it is known that BPDCN is also positive with IRF8, the marker cannot be considered specific since in addition to being positive in mature PDCs, it has also been detected in other myeloid and even lymphoid tumors.
A, Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (H&E, ×40). Diffuse infiltration of the dermis by medium to large blastoid cells with eccentrically located convoluted nuclei; the cells surround the sebaceous gland and (B) express CD303.
In addition to the BPDCN detailed above, infiltration of mature PDCs, called mature PDC dermatosis, can also appear in the skin and typically is associated with myeloid neoplasms, especially with CMML. Separation of mature PDC dermatoses from the blastoid form is based on—besides the morphologic characteristics (lack of blastoid cells, intermingled T cells, presence of mature PDCs, small to medium size, and eccentrically located oval nucleus with mature, uniform chromatin)—immunophenotypic differences. While expressing classic PDC markers, mature plasmacytoid dendritic cells usually do not express BCL2, CD56, MYC, and/or TdT and are often TCL1 negative FIGURE 6.
A, Mature plasmacytoid dendritic cell dermatosis (Giemsa, ×40). Infiltration of the superficial dermis by small, nonblastoid plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs). The PDCs are dim positive for (B) CD303 but negative for (C) TCL1.
It is also important to mention the relationship between AML with PDC differentiation (PDC-AML) and BPDCN. Although neoplastic proliferation with the PDC phenotype is present in both cases, as well as a targetable expression of CD123, the phenotype and genetic backgrounds of the 2 entities are different. While PDC-AML is characterized by a high frequency of RUNX1 mutations, uniform positivity for CD34, and negativity for CD56 and TCL1, in BPDCN, the most frequent genetic alteration is TET2 mutation, and the tumor cells are consistently negative for CD34 and positive for CD56 and TCL1 in most cases.

Myeloid Leukemia Cutis
Having excluded lymphoid tumors and BPDCN, confirmation of the myeloid origin of the leukemia cutis is required. Therefore, markers allowing to establish CD3 and CD20 negativity in the background of positivity for CD14, CD68, CD117, CD123, IRF8, lysozyme, or MPO should be applied with the caveats that CD123 and IRF8 should not be coexpressed, a BPDCN is truly excluded, intermingled or peritumoral resident mature PDCs have been taken into consideration, and, in case of IRF8, there is no presence of a mature B-cell lymphoma. As mentioned earlier, CD19, CD79a, and/or PAX5 may be expressed in RUNX1-rearranged or mutated AML and are therefore not well suited to establish or exclude B-cell lineage in that context, and CD2 (rarely) and CD7 (more often) can be encountered on myeloid blasts and are not well suited to establish or exclude T-cell lineage, respectively.
After determining the myeloid origin of the immature infiltrate, in a last step, a WHO-5/ICC 2022 diagnosis should be established. For that purpose, additional stainings should be performed for p53 (with strong and diffuse staining suggestive of a myeloid neoplasm with mutated TP53) and NPM1 with a mutational-specific antibody FIGURE 7 (with any and especially cytoplasmically enhanced positivity suggestive of a myeloid neoplasm with mutated NPM1), along with application of selected fluorescence in situ hybridization probes and next-generation sequencing (NGS) panels for subentity-defining genetic aberrations, such as AML with inv(16) (p13;q22).
A, Leukemia cutis with NPM1 mutation (H&E, ×20). Dense infiltration of the dermis with a Grenz zone to the epidermis by medium-sized blastoid cells with convoluted nuclei and occasional nucleoli and characterized by (B) uniform, strong cytoplasmic expression of mutated NPM1.
Rarely, more mature extramedullary myeloid proliferations can be observed in the skin, raising questions about their precise classification, nomenclature, and prognosis. Cutaneous extramedullary hematopoiesis was first described in 1925 in a case of a so-called “blueberry muffin” baby, the term referring to the color of the dermal lesions. Neonatal cutaneous extramedullary hematopoiesis usually follows intrauterine rubella, parvovirus-B19, or other infection, while in adults, the main cause is an underlying MPN, most often primary myelofibrosis. This type of extramedullary hematopoiesis, also referred to as SEMHT, is usually clonally related to bone marrow disease and has a characteristic morphologic appearance with a fibrotic background and intermingled mature hematopoietic elements, often with marked megakaryocytic dysplasia. Cases of SEMHT can mimic different sarcomas (eg, sclerosing liposarcoma) or even Hodgkin lymphoma, especially in clinically contextless cases.Myelodysplasia cutis is an emerging entity with a cutaneous infiltrate of immature but nonblastic myeloid cells showing a clonal relationship with the MDS clone in the bone marrow and/or peripheral blood FIGURE 8. Cases of MDS cutis closely resemble the histiocytoid variant of Sweet syndrome, from which it cannot be distinguished based on histomorphology alone, and NGS can be useful in separating MDS cutis from the latter. As highlighted in retrospective studies and similarly to leukemia cutis, MDS cutis can also precede bone marrow disease. Although questions still need to be answered regarding this entity, from a prognostic point of view, the differentiation from leukemia cutis—which is possible based on the blastoid nature of the latter—is important, as MDS cutis shows a better survival and should not be regarded as equivalent to transformation of MDS.
A, Myelodysplasia cutis (H&E, ×40). Perivascular infiltration by a mixed population of immature but nonblastic cells with (B) moderate expression of the (among others) monoblastic marker IRF8.

Nonhematolymphoid Tumors to Be Considered in the Differential Diagnosis
If a hematolymphoid neoplasm in the setting of small blue round cell tumors involving the skin can be excluded with combinations of the abovementioned 7 markers (CD43, CD45, INSM1, lysozyme, MPO, CK, and TdT), additional examinations for CD99, CK7, CK20, Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV), NKX3.1, PAX8, SOX9, SS18-SSX, synaptophysin, S100, TTF1, and, if needed, others are required for further classification.

Neuroendocrine Carcinoma
A combination of positivity for synaptophysin and dot-like positivity for CK20 that may be substantiated by positivity for MCPyV and PAX8 will lead to the diagnosis of Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) FIGURE 9. MCC is a rare, aggressive cutaneous neuroendocrine tumor that often occurs in the head and neck area on sun-exposed skin of elderly individuals. It usually infiltrates the dermis and subcutis, and epidermotropism is rare. The tumor cells are arranged into sheets, nests, or trabeculae and have a characteristic “salt-and-pepper” nuclear chromatin pattern. Besides the abovementioned immunophenotype, it is important to know that MCC may express NOTCH1, PAX5, TdT, and occasionally TTF1.
A, Merkel cell carcinoma, with monomorphous blastoid-appearing tumor cells with salt-and-pepper chromatin that infiltrate the dermis in a nested pattern (H&E, ×20). B, The tumor cells show diffuse, in some areas typical, dot-like CK20 positivity.
A positivity of a small blue round cell tumors involving the skin for CK7, synaptophysin, and TTF1 strongly suggests metastatic small cell (neuroendocrine) lung cancer; such cases will regularly express CD56 and can be PAX5 and/or TdT positive.

Mesenchymal Tumors
Cutaneous sarcomas and primary and metastatic cases are rare, and only a minority belong to the small blue round cell tumor group.
A CD99±, CK7+/±, PAX8±, SS18-SSX+, S100± phenotype is diagnostic of synovial sarcoma, and such cases can express CD34, CD56, and CD57.
In cases that express CD99 and, in certain instances, CD30, CD56, CD117, PAX8, SOX9, and/or S100, a tumor of the primitive neuroectodermal tumors/Ewing sarcomas group should be suspected, and specific EWS fusion testing ought to be performed.
In the rare instance of the CD99+, NKX3.1+, SOX9+, S100+, CK– phenotype, a mesenchymal chondrosarcoma should be verified by additional NEY1::NCO2 fusion testing.
Other small blue round cell tumors such as neuro- and nephroblastomas, desmoplastic small round cell tumors, or rhabdomyosarcomas would hardly ever present as a contextless skin lesion.

CONCLUSIONS
Leukemia cutis is one differential diagnosis of small blue round cell tumors in the skin, and at certain ages and in certain contexts, the most probable one. A stepwise phenotypic diagnostic approach that considers weaknesses and strengths (specificities and sensitivities) of the applied markers as the one suggested here may be feasible and useful to establish a specific diagnosis in most cases FIGURE 10.
A step-by-step algorithm for the diagnosis of leukemia cutis in clinically contextless cases. See text for details. aCD10 may also be positive in cases of mature T-cell lymphomas of follicular T-helper cell origin. B-ALL/LBL, B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma; BPDCN, blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm; EWS, Ewing sarcoma; ICC, International Consensus Classification; T-ALL/LBL, T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma; WHO, World Health Organization.
Conflict of interest disclosure: The authors have nothing to disclose.

References
Leukemia cutis
Diagnostic and therapeutic considerations for extramedullary leukemia
Cutaneous manifestations in leukemia patients
Leukemia cutis in childhood acute myeloid leukemia: epidemiological, clinical, biological, and prognostic characteristics of patients included in the ELAM02 Study
NPM1 mutation is associated with leukemia cutis in acute myeloid leukemia with monocytic features
Myeloid sarcoma, chloroma, or extramedullary acute myeloid leukemia tumor: a tale of misnomers, controversy and the unresolved
Leukemia cutis-the current view on pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment
JAK2-positive cutaneous myelofibrosis presenting as sclerosing extramedullary hematopoietic tumors on the scalp: case presentation and review of the literature
Myelodysplasia cutis
Progression in myeloid neoplasms: beyond the myeloblast
First demonstration of leukemia imaging with the proliferation marker 18F-fluorodeoxythymidine
The prevalence of extramedullary acute myeloid leukemia detected by 18FDG-PET/CT: final results from the prospective PETAML trial
Molecular profiling and clinical implications of patients with acute myeloid leukemia and extramedullary manifestations
A comparative study on demographic, hematological, and cytogenetic findings and prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia with and without leukemia cutis
Use of radiation in extramedullary leukemia/chloroma: guidelines from the International Lymphoma Radiation Oncology Group
Leukemia cutis—epidemiology, clinical presentation, and differential diagnoses
Leukemia cutis for clinicians, a literature review
Immune-mediated dermatoses in patients with haematological malignancies: a comprehensive review
An updated approach to the diagnosis of myeloid leukemia cutis
Extramedullary acute myelogenous leukemia
Myeloid sarcoma: a clinicopathological study with emphasis on diagnostic difficulties
Isolated intracranial myeloid sarcoma mimicking malignant lymphoma: a diagnostic challenge and literature reviews
The 5th edition of the World Health Organization Classification of Haematolymphoid Tumours: Lymphoid Neoplasms
Myeloperoxidase immunoreactivity in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Clinical significance of isolated myeloperoxidase expression in pediatric B-lymphoblastic leukemia
CD117 expression is a sensitive but nonspecific predictor of FLT3 mutation in T acute lymphoblastic leukemia and T/myeloid acute leukemia
Immunohistochemical detection of CD79a expression in precursor T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemias
RUNX1 mutations can lead to aberrant expression of CD79a and PAX5 in acute myelogenous leukemias: a potential diagnostic pitfall
International Consensus Classification of acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
Skin involvement by hematological neoplasms with blastic morphology: lymphoblastic lymphoma, blastoid variant of mantle cell lymphoma and differential diagnoses
High incidence and clinical significance of MYC rearrangements in primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type
A unique cutaneous presentation of Burkitt lymphoma
Prevalence and clinicopathologic characteristics of multiple myeloma with cutaneous involvement: a case series from Korea
Cutaneous involvement in multiple myeloma: a multi-institutional retrospective study of 53 patients
Molecular and functional profiling identifies therapeutically targetable vulnerabilities in plasmablastic lymphoma
T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia frequently shows cutaneous involvement and is associated with gains of MYC, loss of ATM, and TCL1A rearrangement
Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN): clinical features and histopathology with a therapeutic overview
Ultraviolet radiation shapes dendritic cell leukemia transformation in the skin
Neoplasms derived from plasmacytoid dendritic cells
Plasmacytoid dendritic cells in the setting of myeloid neoplasms: diagnostic guide to challenging pathologic presentations
Expanding the immunophenotypic spectrum of neoplastic and reactive plasmacytoid dendritic cells
Cutaneous clonal mature plasmacytoid dendritic cell dermatosis in patients with myeloid neoplasms
Immunophenotypic and molecular features of acute myeloid leukemia with plasmacytoid dendritic cell differentiation are distinct from blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
IRF8 is a reliable monoblast marker for acute monocytic leukemias
Aberrant expression of T-cell markers in acute myeloid leukemia
International Consensus Classification of Myeloid Neoplasms and Acute Leukemias: integrating morphologic, clinical, and genomic data
The 5th edition of the World Health Organization Classification of Haematolymphoid Tumours: Myeloid and Histiocytic/Dendritic Neoplasms
A monoclonal antibody against mutated nucleophosmin 1 for the molecular diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemias
High NPM1 mutant allele burden at diagnosis correlates with minimal residual disease at first remission in de novo acute myeloid leukemia
Cutaneous extramedullary haematopoiesis: implications in human disease and treatment
Cutaneous involvement in PH-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms: from extramedullary hematopoiesis to myeloid metastasis with histiocytic differentiation. A systematic review of the literature
Sclerosing extramedullary hematopoietic tumor
Cutaneous sclerosing extramedullary hematopoietic tumor in chronic myelogenous leukemia
Sclerosing extramedullary hematopoietic tumor presenting as an inguinal mass in a patient with primary myelofibrosis: a diagnostic pitfall
Skin in the game: the emergence of myelodysplasia cutis
Clinical, pathological, and molecular features of myelodysplasia cutis
From histiocytoid Sweet syndrome to myelodysplasia cutis: history and perspectives
Myelodysplasia cutis versus leukemia cutis
Merkel cell carcinoma: a review
A comparison of the histopathologic growth patterns between non-Merkel cell small round blue cell tumors and Merkel cell carcinoma
Reactivity with TdT in Merkel cell carcinoma: a potential diagnostic pitfall
B-cell specific activation protein encoded by the PAX-5 gene is commonly expressed in Merkel cell carcinoma and small cell carcinomas
Cutaneous sarcoma: a review and practical approach to management
Synovial sarcoma with cutaneous metastasis
Primary cutaneous Ewing sarcoma of the scalp with metastasis to the lung: an unusual manifestation during pregnancy
A case of soft tissue mesenchymal chondrosarcoma metastatic to skin, clinically mimicking keratoacanthoma