From Burden to Enjoyment: A User‐Centered Approach to Engage Adolescents in Intensive Longitudinal Research
ABSTRACT
Introduction
Adolescent psychology is embracing intensive longitudinal methods, such as diaries and experience sampling techniques, to investigate real‐life experiences. However, participants might perceive the repetitive self‐reporting in these data collection techniques as burdensome and demotivating, resulting in decreased compliance rates. In this tutorial paper, we present a user‐centered approach aimed at making participation in experience sampling and daily diary studies a meaningful and fun experience for adolescents.
Methods
In three major research projects that took place between 2019 and 2023, more than 4,000 Dutch adolescents participated (12–25 years old). To improve the participants' user journey, adolescents were invited to codesign our studies and share their expertise in interviews (n = 459), focus groups (n = 101), design decisions (i.e., A/B tests, n = 107), pilots (n = 163), exit interviews (n = 167), and by answering user experience questionnaires (n = 2,109).
Results
Across projects, we discovered five different main intrinsic and extrinsic motives to participate in intensive longitudinal studies: (1) rewards, (2) fun and interest, (3) helping science or the greater good, (4) helping the scientist or another person, and (5) gaining self‐insight. We provide concrete examples of how we tailored our study designs to address these specific motives to optimize youth engagement.
Conclusions
The engagement of adolescents in intensive longitudinal studies can be enhanced by making it a meaningful and enjoyable experience, aligned with their own motives.

Introduction
While casually browsing her social media timeline, 16‐year‐old Sophy receives a notification prompting her to complete yet another micro‐questionnaire as part of her study participation. Sophy considers whether to answer the questionnaire or continue scrolling. From the researcher's standpoint, the answer is clear: Sophy should answer the questionnaire. But is the study sufficiently well‐designed to motivate her at this moment?
The emergence of modern technologies has empowered researchers to delve into the intricacies of adolescents' daily thoughts, behaviors, and emotions through intensive data collection methods, such as diaries and experience sampling methods (Myin‐Germeys and Kuppens ; van Roekel et al. ). However, the potential of these methods to obtain real‐time insights hinges almost entirely on adolescents' willingness to provide self‐reports over an extended period in their daily lives. How can researchers and clinicians foster and sustain the enduring interest of young participants in frequent intensive longitudinal research and clinical practice? This tutorial paper provides insights from our collaboration with over 4,000 adolescents in three research consortia. The focus is on motivating young individuals to actively participate in academic studies and effectively implementing these motives in intensive longitudinal studies.

Intensive Longitudinal Research
Intensive longitudinal research (Bolger et al. ; Bolger and Laurenceau ; Myin‐Germeys and Kuppens ) is an umbrella term for a broad range of measurement techniques, such as passing sensing (e.g., tracking GPS location), diary studies (one questionnaire per day for multiple days) or experience sampling studies (ESM, multiple questionnaires a day for multiple days; Barrett and Barrett ; Larson and Csikszentmihalyi ), also called ecological momentary assessment (EMA; Stone and Shiffman ). The focus of the current paper lies within intensive longitudinal study designs which rely on self‐reports, where participants provide frequent (often > 30 times) real‐time information about their experiences, typically through smartphone applications. These methods have a longstanding tradition in research on adolescents, spanning over four decades (Larson , , Larson et al. ), with recent years witnessing a notable surge in their popularity (Keijsers et al. ; van Roekel et al. ). This heightened adoption can be attributed, in part, to technological advancements (e.g., ESM software) and the widespread use of smartphones.
Intensive longitudinal designs offer theoretical, methodological, and practical benefits. Theoretically, intensive longitudinal studies facilitate the examination of change within individuals over time (Boele et al. ; Bolger et al. ), representing an analytical level often implied in developmental theories but only fully captured through (intensive) longitudinal data (Molenaar , ). In terms of methodology, intensive longitudinal designs allow for real‐time measurement of adolescents' experiences, minimizing recall bias (Ellison et al. ) and enhancing generalization to real‐world settings (i.e., ecological validity, Trull and Ebner‐Priemer ). In practice, ESM can also be instrumental for self‐monitoring of real‐time well‐being as an integrated part of eHealth applications (Dietvorst et al. ).
Gathering frequent assessments in adolescent samples has its advantages but also presents challenges. Designing sampling schemes that balance burden and statistical power is one challenge, as is analyzing irregularly spaced time‐series data. Recent tutorials offer guidance for optimizing designs and analyzing data with advanced statistics (Bolger and Laurenceau ; Horstmann ; Myin‐Germeys and Kuppens ; van den Heuvel et al. ; van Roekel et al. ; Walls and Schafer ). Another well‐known challenge is sustaining engagement from youth over weeks or even months to provide frequent reports on their experiences, which remains one of the most difficult ones to address. In this paper, we share insights from our adolescent participants on how to address this challenge and engage adolescents in intensive longitudinal designs.

From Compliance to Adolescent Engagement in Intensive Longitudinal Studies
Compliance (i.e., the percentage of answered questionnaires out of the total number of questionnaires) serves as a key indicator of participant engagement and stands as one of the most important quality markers for intensive longitudinal studies for two reasons (Myin‐Germeys and Kuppens ; Wen et al. ; Wrzus and Neubauer ). Firstly, low compliance can compromise the validity of results, particularly when missingness is not random. Adolescents' answers are then not fully representative of their daily lives, and meaningful experiences may be omitted. If, for instance, an adolescent reports having had a pleasant conversation with their parent in the morning but then felt too upset to report a conflict later that day, the data may present a positively biased portrayal of the parent‐adolescent relationship. Secondly, lower compliance (i.e., fewer data points) can decrease statistical power (Schultzberg and Muthén ) and bias estimates (Simsa et al. ). Hence, higher compliance not only increases the representativeness of the data, but it also raises the quality of the scientific inferences derived from analyses.
In the first decades of the century, researchers have managed, on average, to ensure that adolescents answer 74% of the ESM questionnaires (Range 52%–92%; van Roekel et al. ). Such high compliance was mainly facilitated through employing protocolized practices such as real‐time monitoring and automated reminders, monetary rewards, and reducing participant burden by, for example, shortening questionnaires (Eisele et al. ; Morren et al. ; van Roekel et al. ; Wrzus and Neubauer ). However, over the last 5 years, we questioned ourselves: Why would adolescent participants offer us their valuable time? We have shifted our perspective from this researcher‐centered approach (“What do participants have to do to meet the researchers' standards?”) to a user‐centered approach (“What do researchers need to do to meet the participants' standards?”), prioritizing participants' needs and motivations. We therefore conducted participatory research to let adolescents' perspectives shape our studies (Gibbs et al. ; Wilkinson and Wilkinson ). We asked participants what would motivate them to participate and invited them to together develop studies which addressed their motives. This shift acknowledges that compliance alone might not suffice; therefore, we adopt the broader concept of study engagement, which encompasses not only behavioral aspects, such as compliance, but also cognitive aspects (e.g., low careless responding) or affective aspects (e.g., enjoyment) (Kelders et al. ).
Shifting from a researcher‐centered view to a user‐centered view entails three major advantages. First, by inviting adolescents to codesign studies, it addresses their fundamental right to express their views on matters that concern them (Convention on the Rights of the Child , Article 12). Second, such co‐creation with adolescents also promotes open science, as the research process becomes transparent and accessible to them (European Commission ; Nosek et al. ). Third, a user‐centered approach enhances researchers' goals. When our adolescent participants were motivated to participate, we had to put less effort into the recruitment or retention of participants and possibly reached higher compliance rates than without this approach.

Youth Participation in Three Research Projects
Our experiences are grounded in three research projects (ADAPT, AWeSome, and Grow It!), where adolescents were not only invited to participate in our ESM and daily diary research but also to contribute as experts, leveraging their unique lived experiences. In such participatory research (Wilkinson and Wilkinson ), we tapped into their experience as “end‐users” throughout the research projects by employing co‐creation methods, including interviews, focus groups, A/B tests (i.e., adolescents choosing between two design options), pilots, exit interviews, and user experience questionnaires. Table 1 provides a comprehensive overview of the projects and the co‐creation methods employed. For more guidelines and detailed examples for conducting participatory research with adolescents, see for example: (Gibbs et al. ; Mack et al. ; Pavarini et al. ; Poole and Peyton ).
Overview of projects and their co‐creation methods.
Study (Reference)	Design	Sample	Youth participation (N)	 	Before	During	After	 	t per day	tmax	Age	Compli‐ance	Inter‐views	Focus group	Design: AB Test	Pilot	Data Collection	Exit interview	User experience survey	 	ADAPT ESM (Bülow et al. )	5/6	111	12–18	70%	3	65	—	30	99	—	80	 	ADAPT Diary (Bülow et al. )	1	100	12–16	89%	8	6	—	—	159	—	151	 	AWeSome ESM (Beyens et al. )	6	126	13–15	73%	—	—	—	63	387	—	320	 	AWeSome Diary (Janssen et al. )	1	100	14–18	83%	421	9	—	26	480	85	327	 	Grow It! Study 1 (Dietvorst et al. )	5	105/210	12–25	25%	27	15	107	44	2,388	82	1027	 	Grow It! Study 2 (Dietvorst et al. )	5	105	12–25	24%	—	6	—	—	484	—	204
Note: All studies were approved by an ethical committee. The table only displays the first wave of AWeSome ESM. In the second wave 300 adolescents participated in the same design and answered 58% of all questionnaires.
In the ADAPT research project, which stands for Assessing the Dynamics Between Parenting and Adaptation in Teens, we conducted two intensive longitudinal data collections 1  to unravel the dynamic associations between parenting and adolescents' well‐being. The first data collection (ADAPT ESM) involved a 21‐day ESM study with 5–6 questionnaires per day among 99 adolescents (Bülow et al. ; van der Kaap‐Deeder et al. ), while the second study (ADAPT Diary) required 159 adolescents and one of their parents to answer 100 daily questionnaires (Bülow et al. ; Bülow et al. ).
In Project AWeSome (Adolescents, Well‐being, and Social Media), our aim was to better understand how adolescent social media use is related to their well‐being in their daily lives. This goal was achieved through two successive subprojects with intensive longitudinal study designs. The first subproject (AWeSome ESM) consisted of two 21‐day ESM studies conducted 6 months apart, with six assessments per day 2  among 387 adolescents (Beyens et al. ; Verbeij et al. ). The second subproject (AWeSome Diary) included a 100‐day diary study among 479 adolescents (Bij de Vaate et al. ; Janssen et al. ).
A third project focused on developing and evaluating the Grow It! app, a real‐world eHealth application which promotes well‐being among youth. This serious game smartphone app features two main modules (Dietvorst et al. ). Firstly, it offers adolescents ESM to monitor their daily well‐being five times per day for three to six weeks. Secondly, it presents users with three daily challenges based on cognitive behavioral therapy, allowing them to choose one to complete. This eHealth application was collaboratively developed with game designers and underwent user experience evaluations in two studies (Grow It! 1 & 2) involving n = 2,388 and n = 484 adolescents, respectively (Dietvorst et al. , ; Mens et al. ). The second study (Grow It! 2) introduced a new feature: real‐time visualized feedback from personalized mood profiles generated from ESM data. Unlike the other projects discussed, Grow It! represents a real‐world application of eHealth during the COVID‐19 pandemic, featuring reduced researcher‐participant interaction (i.e., no video calls or face‐to‐face contact for motivation) and minimal financial compensation aside from the chance to win gift vouchers. Further details on the Grow It! app's development can be found in: (Dietvorst et al. ).

Five Motives to Engage in Intensive Longitudinal Studies
In each of the projects, adolescents helped us in codesigning our studies. As such, we gradually identified five main motives for adolescents to become and remain engaged in scientific studies. These conclusions stem from extensive informal conversations with our participants, with particular emphasis on our explicit inquiries into their motivation across two studies: the ADAPT Diary study and the AWeSome Diary study. First, in 2020 before the onset of the ADAPT Diary study, we conducted one focus group with six adolescents (aged 13–15 years, 5 girls, 1 boy) and interviewed 8 adolescents (aged 14–17 years, 4 girls, 4 boys) to explore their motivations to participate and sustain their engagement for 100 days. From their responses, we identified five motives. Adolescents were not only driven by (1) the (monetary) reward but also by motives such as (2) participating for fun or personal interest, (3) helping science or the greater good, (4) helping an individual scientist or others, and (5) gaining self‐insight.
In the ADAPT Diary study, we then incorporated features that address these motives (e.g., providing feedback addressing the motive of self‐insight). We asked 159 adolescent participants to complete a multiple‐choice user experience questionnaire after 84 days of data collection. In the questionnaire, 151 adolescents selected the aspect of the study that motivated them to continue participating. When matching each aspect (e.g., receiving feedback) with the corresponding underlying motive (e.g., self‐insight), we concluded that in our sample participants were motivated by all five motives (see Table 2). Furthermore, most adolescents cited multiple aspects that motivated their continued participation. Interestingly, demographic factors such as age, gender, or education level had limited associations with these motives. Only one comparison reached statistical significance: adolescents in higher educational tracks were more motivated by monetary rewards (b = 0.81, p = 0.002).
Motives participants indicated for participating in study.
Motives	ADAPT Diary (Disclosed during study)	AWeSome Diary (Disclosed before study)	 	Rewards	81%	42%	 	Fun & Interest	60%	60%	 	Help Science & Greater Good	55%	17%	 	Help Scientist & Others	66%	17%	 	Self‐Insight	39%	14%
Building on the insights from the ADAPT Diary study, in the AWeSome Diary Study conducted in 2023, adolescents participated in a qualitative online intake interview before data collection to assess their study motivation, which allowed us to gain more in‐depth qualitative insights into their motives. Among the 480 adolescents interviewed, 421 provided responses regarding why they wanted to take part in the study. In their open answers, similar categories as in the ADAPT Diary study were distinguished (see Table 2). Much like in the ADAPT study, adolescents often mentioned several motives. Many adolescents valued the monetary reward or like a 16‐year‐old boy put it: “Well, isn't it that you get 1 euro per day for each survey? Yes, look, I mean hotdogs cost one euro at our school, so you get my point.” Adolescents also indicated that it can also be fun and interesting to participate in academic research. Or like a 16‐year‐old girl put it: “I saw this [study] and thought, oh, I quite like that, and I am quite curious about how such a study works.” Adolescents also indicated they wanted to be a part of the scientific process. The topic of social media and its potential implications for society were of interest. One girl (15) indicated: “I think it is important to do research on… social media and I think it has a lot of influence on young people,” while another girl (14) said: “I would like to show people that it varies quite a bit how much young people use social media.” Next to the rather abstract goal to help science, adolescents were also more concretely willing to help the scientist as a person; an individual who needs their help to complete their study. For instance, a boy (14) said: “[It is] nice to be able to help with your research.” Finally, adolescents also indicated that it can be insightful to answer questions about themselves several times a day. For example, one boy (15) said: “I find it interesting to know what my social media use looks like.” Reflecting on changes in emotions, cognitions, and/or behavior can teach them about who they are.
In this larger study, we coded their answers (for more information see supplemental materials) and again related those motives to adolescent demographics in terms of age, gender, or education levels. Boys were more likely than girls to report being motivated by money (χ  2  = 15.83, p < 0.001). Additionally, older adolescents were more inclined to be motivated by helping the scientist and others (b = 0.38, p = 0.014), gaining self‐insight (b = 0.26, p = 0.039), and fun & interest (b = 0.22, p = 0.015).
In summary, in several participatory activities five motives resurfaced. Despite certain associations with background characteristics at the sample level, in both the ADAPT and AWeSome projects, each participant exhibited a unique blend of motives motivating their enrollment and participation in our studies.

Implementing the Five Motives in Intensive Longitudinal Designs
After identifying adolescents' motives for participation in scientific studies, our research teams faced the challenge of aligning the study experience with these motives effectively. Drawing inspiration from marketing strategies utilizing “user journeys”, which map out various interactions with a product over time (Lemon and Verhoef ), we incorporated the identified motives in our studies and present them in this work across different stages of study participation: before, during, and after. To do justice to the diverse motives, we adopted complementary designs to address all motivations concurrently throughout each phase of their journey (see Figure 1). This included multiple strategies to each address a different motive, but also strategies that address several motives simultaneously. In this section, we offer some concrete examples and visual illustrations of how we addressed each of the motives at different stages of our studies (for an overview see Figure 1). Additional visualizations are provided in the appendix.
Implementation of five participation motives in the user journey.

Motive 1: Rewards

Before Study
Before the study, we developed a reward system to address the first motive, specifically rewards. We learned from adolescents that a combination of a fixed reward per questionnaire and a bonus for high compliance (e.g., 75% answered questionnaires, a streak of 7 questionnaires in a row, etc.) worked best as it motivates both participants with low and high compliance (e.g., ADAPT Diary). Alternatively, if only high compliance was rewarded, for example when 75% of all questionnaires were answered (e.g., ADAPT ESM), it was demotivating for participants who had already answered 75% of all questionnaires or who already missed more than 25%.

During Study
During the study, participants expressed that they prefer to receive their reward as quickly as possible, which we accommodated by bank transfers every 2–4 weeks (ADAPT Diary, AWeSome ESM + Diary) and by providing participants with real‐time access to the amount they earned so far, via texting (ADAPT ESM, AWeSome Diary), via an online platform where participants could log in to see how much money they had already earned (ADAPT Diary, AWeSome ESM), or via the ESM smartphone app (AWeSome Diary).
The use of gamified elements can also address the motivation for rewards. Gamification is the process of incorporating game‐like elements into nongame contexts to engage and motivate individuals (Long et al. ; Reiners and Wood ). When applied in intensive longitudinal research, gamification can be a powerful tool to enhance engagement and collect valuable data (Dejonckheere et al. ; van Berkel et al. ). In Grow It!, we used such gamification techniques to provide nonmonetary rewards to participants in the form of points, badges, and in‐app gifts (e.g., stickers). Participants could earn points for answering ESM questionnaires together with their team, compare individual points within the team, and compete with other teams (see Figure 2). When testing these gamified features, adolescents indicated that they were motivated by them: “What I like about Grow It! is the fact that you get points and finally receive gifts for your tree. It's also fun to see the scores of the other teams.” (girl, 18) and “I was surprised about the design of the app, I have been a participant in research before, but I am used to the questionnaires being very boring. I was motivated to fill in more and more questions.” (girl, 15).
Gamification elements, motive: rewards, study: Grow It! 1 + 2, time: during data collection.

Motive 2: Fun and Interest

Before Study
The second motive for youth to engage in intensive longitudinal research was fun and interest. In our studies, we also tried to recruit participants in an appealing way for example, by using instructional videos in addition to long technical information letters (ADAPT Diary, AWeSome ESM + Diary) or emphasizing during school visits that former participants enjoyed participating and that it would become even more fun if more classmates participated (AWeSome ESM).

During Study
Answering the same questions for an extended period can easily become boring for adolescents. Therefore, we tried to make it fun in several ways. Hence, in ADAPT Diary and AWeSome Diary, we added varying fun dilemmas at the end of the questionnaires (“Would you rather … a) only be able to whisper or b) only be able to scream?”) or sent them fun facts about their participation (e.g., “You are participating for 7 days now. This is as long as it would take to listen to all Harry Potter audiobooks in a row.”) or about the topic of the study (e.g., “Did you know that the fear of not being available with your mobile phone is called nomophobia?”). We also added fun changing questions about adolescents to contrast the repetitive nature of intensive longitudinal designs (e.g., favorite pizza, favorite TV series, number of pushups they could do), shared memes (see Figure 3), or sent Thank‐God‐Its‐Friday‐GIFs to celebrate the start of the weekend. These fun elements, especially the dilemmas, were highly valued by adolescent participants. For example, one participant indicated (girl, 15, ADAPT Diary): “The dilemma of the day is a lot of fun, and because of that you do have to go through to the end [of the questionnaire]”.
Memes, motive: fun (implicit: science & rewards), study: ADAPT ESM, time: during data collection.

Motive 3: Helping Science or the Greater Good

Before Study
To address the third motive, which revolves around helping science and the greater good, we followed the approach of other scholars (van Roekel et al. ) by briefing our participants beforehand in age‐appropriate language. We explained the purpose of the study, what a scientific study entails, and the potential implications for society. It was crucial to clarify that answering the same questions repeatedly does not provide redundant information. This briefing was implemented in an introductory video, class visits, or intake session. In the AWeSome Diary study, we addressed adolescents as experts who know best about rapidly changing social media and can teach us more about why it makes some adolescents happy and others not.

During Study
During the study, we emphasized the greater good by sending thank‐you messages (e.g., “Thanks for answering our questionnaires this past week. Thanks to you, we will learn more about adolescents' well‐being.”, e.g., ADAPT Diary). We also addressed this aim in awards participants can receive in the app. In the AWeSome Diary study, participants became assistants, researchers, and experts, adding a gamification element to their scientific contribution (see Figure 4).
In‐app awards, motive: helping science, helping scientist, rewards, study: AWeSome Diary, time: during data collection.

After Study
In our ongoing commitment to disseminating scientific insights to both the public and professionals, we ensured that our adolescent participants had the option to stay informed about our findings through newsletters and provided feedback on the study results following the conclusion of the research period (e.g., ADAPT Diary). Other ways of sharing insights about the study with participants include webinars or public reports (example of a public report from AWeSome Diary: van der Wal et al. ).

Motive 4: Helping the Scientist or Others

Before Study
A fourth motive that our research identified was adolescents' desire to help the scientist or another person. Before the study started, in most studies (ADAPT ESM + Diary, AWeSome ESM + Diary), we sought to build a personal connection with our participants to address the motive of helping the scientist. Rather than “hiding” behind a project name, we chose to be visible. For instance, we added our photos to the information letter, went to schools and introduced ourselves in person, and recorded an introduction video. In several intensive longitudinal studies (ADAPT Diary, AWeSome Diary), we have had especially good experiences with one‐on‐one intake sessions to establish a personal connection with them. As self‐disclosure is a core ingredient in forming relationships (Willems et al. ), we attempted to disclose something personal during these intakes and asked about participants' perspectives.
Adolescents are also inclined to help other people, like their friends or family. We addressed that motive when we asked (former) participants or students to invite a friend to participate or asked parents and adolescents to participate together in a dyadic design (ADAPT ESM + Diary, AWeSome Diary). With such snowballing techniques, adolescents are not only participants but part of the research team facilitating recruitment.

During Study
We stayed in contact with our participants during the data collection. When technical problems or questions arose, adolescents were able to contact the researchers easily and quickly through WhatsApp, which was appreciated by our participants: “Nice you guys are so easy to reach.” (boy, 17, AWeSome Diary). In accordance with their preferences, we communicated with them via text or chat instead of phone or mail. To actively build on the participant‐researcher relationship, we proactively inquired if everything was clear and thanked them throughout the study for their effort, in an informal personal style. For instance, we messaged: “FANTASTIC! A quarter of our research is already behind us! Thank you for participating for 25 days already!!! You are my hero!!! All the best, Anne” (ADAPT Diary). This was appreciated by participants: “I think it's good that we sometimes receive messages that we are doing well. That keeps us motivated.” (girl, 14, ADAPT Diary). We learned in ADAPT Diary that having a single designated contact person per participant, who is known to participants by their first name, fosters a sense of familiarity and trust. We furthermore personalized stickers or in‐app personalized awards showing researchers (see Figure 4).
In Grow It!, we encouraged participants to participate for others by organizing them into teams. Together with 2‐6 other players, they worked towards a collaborative goal, that is their team score allowed them to level up their team tree (see Figure 2). Team members could support each other through an in‐app chat feature, where they could exchange motivating stickers (see Figure 5). The teams were appreciated by the participants: “What I liked about the app was that you could play in a team. Even on days when I wasn't feeling great, seeing my team members still actively participating and earning points motivated me to fill out a short questionnaire or take on a challenge.” (boy, 13).
Team Chat, motive: helping others, study: Grow It! 1 + 2, time: during data collection.

After Study
Although perhaps from a researcher's point of view, the participant is done after the final questionnaire, we learned that adolescents appreciate a personal goodbye and thank‐you message. This can be personalized by sending a personal gift or recording a video message.

Motive 5: Self‐Insight

Before Study
Identified as the fifth motive, many adolescents were interested in learning something about themselves, and this motive was therefore implemented at several stages of the user journey. Previous research (e.g., Bos et al. ), as well as our own studies, have shown that adolescents can gain insights about themselves simply by responding to questionnaires. During participant recruitment, we emphasized this aspect (e.g., ADAPT Diary) and informed them that they could receive personal feedback after the study (e.g., AWeSome Diary).

During Study
During participation, self‐insight was fostered by mere participation and by provided feedback. Even without feedback, seventy percent of participants reported that as a result of the ESM questionnaires they reflected more on their feelings (Grow It! 1). In a later version of the Grow It! app (Study 2), adolescents received real‐time visualizations of their well‐being. This feature was codesigned with adolescents, who taught us that graphs that seem intuitive to researchers are not clear to adolescent users. In the final feedback visualization, the size of spheres represents the intensity of emotions, and adolescents can scroll with a ruler through the different measurements and see how their emotions changed over time (see Figure 6). Even though the feedback did not significantly increase compliance, 24% of the youth indicated that they had indeed learned something new about themselves, and 38% reported reflecting more on their feelings (Grow It! 2). For instance, a 20‐year‐old girl indicated: “I learned from the mood‐profile that I've been very tired lately and that I need to change my rhythm a bit to improve it.”.
Real‐time feedback on well‐being, motive: self‐insight, study: Grow It! 2, time: during data collection. The bigger a sphere, the more present an emotion. There is a possibility to scroll throughout a specific day or week.
In addition to offering insights into responses on pertinent constructs, we also provided feedback on aspects unrelated to the study's focus, aiming to mitigate the study effect. For example, in the ADAPT Diary and AWeSome Diary, we provided feedback on the varying fun questions, dilemmas and fun facts about their participation (e.g., how many participants received the bonus in the middle of the study; see also Motive 2: Fun and Interest).

After Study
After study participation ended, we provided more feedback through various ways. Examples of these included providing participants with a diary booklet containing their responses to an open question (see Figure 7, ADAPT Diary), presenting a mood profile illustrating changes in mood over the study duration (e.g., ADAPT ESM), or conducting exit interviews wherein participants received graphical representations of their social media usage compared to that of other participants (AWeSome Diary). The latter allowed adolescents to ask questions and allowed us to explain the graphs. Such feedback was valued by participating adolescents. Like one 16‐year‐old girl indicated in the ADAPT Diary study: “The diary is definitely very good!!! I have really been looking forward to that for 100 days now hahaha”.
Diary booklet, motive: self‐insight, study: ADAPT Diary, time: after data collection.

Discussion
Intensive longitudinal research, which allows for the detailed study of adolescents' everyday lives, is on the rise across academic disciplines (van Roekel et al. ). However, it presents significant challenges, requiring adolescents to remain highly engaged over extended periods. Earlier work has established important methods to minimize the burden (Eisele et al. ; Murray and Xie ) to obtain sufficiently high compliance rates (> 70%). These tutorials (see: Horstmann ; Myin‐Germeys and Kuppens ; van Berkel and Kostakos ; van den Heuvel et al. ; van Roekel et al. ) form essential foundations in a solid study design but have mainly been based on the perspective of the researcher. Here, we suggest a user‐centered approach, drawing on practices in business and game design (Pratt and Nunes ), wherein the participants' perspective is prioritized. We therefore looked beyond burden reduction for participants and focused on factors that motivate their participation.

Five Motives for Adolescents to Engage in Intensive Longitudinal Studies
By working together with more than 4,000 adolescents, we have learned that adolescents themselves can be highly motivated to participate in intensive longitudinal research. This can be achieved if study designs are set up to address their extrinsic and intrinsic motives, namely: (1) rewards, (2) having a fun and interesting experience, (3) helping science or the greater good, (4) helping the scientist or another person, and (5) gaining self‐insight. These motives align with the developmental period of adolescence, where adolescents establish their sense of self and identity (motive: self‐insight; Branje et al. ; Erikson ), and are especially sensitive to rewards (motive: rewards; Braams et al. ). More generally, the motives also align with fundamental aspects of human functioning. For instance, the motive of helping the scientist can be linked to the basic human need for relatedness (Ryan and Deci ), or innate human tendencies towards altruistic behavior (Warneken and Tomasello ). The alignment with general human and, particularly, adolescent functioning suggests a broad applicability across adolescent populations and beyond, explaining the identification of comparable adolescent participation motives in other research (Bagnoli and Clark ; Luchtenberg et al. ; Robbins et al. ).
Our finding that most adolescents were motivated by a combination of motives underscores the significance of addressing all five motives to optimize study engagement. Each participant may come with their personal mix of motives. We assume that focusing on all five motives before, during, and after the project might have contributed to the high participant engagement in the ADAPT and AWeSome Diary study. This resulted in motivated participants and compliance rates above 80%. In contrast, within the Grow It! project, we initially concentrated on motivation primarily through gamification (related to reward and fun) and, in a later iteration of the app, through self‐insight (by feedback). However, the low compliance rate might provide anecdotal evidence that focusing on just a few motives might be insufficient to motivate all participants. Notably, the absence of the personal element of helping was absent in the unmonitored, fully digital implementation of the app during the Covid‐19 pandemic. Nevertheless, it is essential to mention that the primary objective of the Grow It! project is the development of an app that enhances adolescent mental health, which requires additional quality indicators such as app acceptability, which was rated high (Dietvorst et al. ).

How to Optimize the User Journey?
To inspire other researchers, we provided some concrete examples of how to address these different motives at different stages of data collection (see Figure 1 for a summary). Although these insights were based on three large research projects, the examples may already be outdated for teens or might be sensitive to the culture or specific needs of the target population. However, our approach to invite adolescents as co‐designers and experts may be generalizable. To optimize study engagement, we inquired about adolescents' input via interviews, focus groups, A/B tests, pilot studies, exit‐interviews, and user‐experience questionnaires. In iterative steps, we made changes to our designs and asked for adolescents' input on the improved version to come to the final study design—and such an iterative approach may benefit each project. One of our most important insights in employing such participatory research methods is that we as researchers are not always capable of assessing correctly what adolescents like, need, or understand. Adolescents' opinions are needed to guide us in this process.
Even though we perceive adolescents' input as crucial for improving the success of our studies, it is vital to acknowledge that adolescents may not always propose ready‐to‐use solutions. For instance, their suggestions might clash with research ethics or exceed budgetary or personnel constraints. Nevertheless, these suggestions could signal underlying needs or motivations that research designs can address differently. Additionally, adolescents may excel in envisioning the study experience after gaining firsthand experience, such as through participation in a pilot study.
With the growing popularity of intensive longitudinal studies in adolescent samples (van Roekel et al. ), we advocate for adolescent user experience as a standard practice in the design of such studies, alongside procedures like conducting power analyses and defining research questions. To this end, it would be beneficial to foster more open discussions and sharing regarding the integral role of study engagement in conducting intensive longitudinal studies. Researchers can enhance transparency by reporting the strategies employed to engage adolescents in their studies. When space constraints limit the inclusion in the method section, researchers could provide it in supplemental materials. By adopting such an open science approach to study engagement, it can accelerate the development of higher‐quality studies (Vazire ).

Limitations
The diverse examples provided in this tutorial are based on adolescents' advice and our own experiences. Our anecdotal evidence provides insufficient evidence that all or some strategies significantly improve engagement. Furthermore, some examples might only motivate some aspects of engagement (e.g., high compliance to earn money) while simultaneously have undesirable effects on other aspects of their study engagement (e.g., low cognitive engagement resulting in carelessly responding). Future research should experimentally test the working elements in designs and focus on activities that have the biggest positive impact on various indicators of engagement, such as behavioral (e.g., compliance), cognitive (e.g., careless responding) or emotional components (e.g., enjoyment) of study engagement (Dejonckheere et al. ; Dietvorst et al. ; Giese and König ; Ludwigs et al. ; van Berkel et al. ).

Conclusion
In three intensive longitudinal projects, we have transitioned from a researcher‐centered approach to a user‐centered approach to engage adolescents in our research. Instead of solely focusing on what participants need to do to meet researchers' standards, we prioritized understanding and meeting the standards of our participants. We invited adolescents to collaborate in creating studies that are engaging for them. We discovered that adolescents are motivated to take part in intensive longitudinal studies due to both extrinsic and intrinsic reasons, including: (1) earning rewards, (2) having a fun and interesting experience, (3) helping science or the greater good, (4) helping the scientist or another person, and (5) gaining self‐insight. We observed that adolescents possess different combination of motives. Therefore, an approach that addresses multiple motives is crucial in motivating adolescents. Our work has provided a foundation for how adolescents' user experience can guide the design of intensive longitudinal studies, paving the way for greater effectiveness and impact in future research endeavors.
And what about Sophy? Sophy interrupts her social media browsing, opens the questionnaire, realizes that her mood has changed since this morning, chuckles at the amusing dilemma at the end, feels glad for assisting the women who visited her school, feels proud to have made a positive impact on the world, and eagerly looks forward to using her participation money to buy concert tickets.

Open Science Statement
More information about the research projects are shared on OSF: Codebook ADAPT ESM ( https://osf.io/vstrn), Codebook ADAPT diary (https://osf.io/5mhgk), Project Materials AWeSome ESM (https://osf.io/uxnm8/), Design and Procedure AWeSome Diary (https://osf.io/k47ta/?view_only=c4f0fa9fb21443688d32b14e59033e5d), Codebook Grow It! https://osf.io/2at58/?view_only=b691104ecc3d45ad8b48e1bd60ad7125).

Author Contributions
Anne Bülow: conceptualization, investigation, formal analysis, writing–original draft, visualization. Loes H. C. Janssen: conceptualization, investigation, formal analysis, writing–review and editing, visualization. Evelien Dietvorst: investigation, writing–review and editing, visualization. Nadia A. J. D. Bij de Vaate: investigation, writing–review and editing. Manon H. J. Hillegers: writing–review and editing, funding acquisition. Patti M. Valkenburg: writing–review and editing, funding acquisition. Loes Keijsers: conceptualization, writing–review and editing, supervision, funding acquisition.

Ethics Statement
This study was performed in line with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Approval was granted by the Ethics Board of Tilburg University, University of Amsterdam, and Erasmus University Medical Center.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

Endnotes
Within the project one meso‐longitudinal data collection of 26 biweekly measurements was conducted. This data collection falls outside the scope of this paper. For more information see: (Boele et al. ).
Within this data collection one meso‐longitudinal data collection of 16 biweekly measurements was conducted as well as tracking participants' phone use, and big data analyses of participants' social media archives. For more information see: https://osf.io/uxnm8/ and for a detailed timeline see: https://osf.io/fb945.

Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available OSF (https://osf.io/3djqh/).

References
Focus Groups With Young People: A Participatory Approach to Research Planning
An Introduction to Computerized Experience Sampling in Psychology
Gamification of Mobile Experience Sampling Improves Data Quality and Quantity
Social Media Use and Adolescents' Well‐Being: Developing a Typology of Person‐Specific Effect Patterns
Social Media Self‐Effects on Adolescents’
Better, for Worse, or Both? Testing Environmental Sensitivity Models With Parenting at the Level of Individual Families
Over‐Time Fluctuations in Parenting and Adolescent Adaptation Within Families: A Systematic Review
Diary Methods: Capturing Life as It Is Lived
Insights of Patients and Clinicians on the Promise of the Experience Sampling Method for Psychiatric Care
Longitudinal Changes in Adolescent Risk‐Taking: A Comprehensive Study of Neural Responses to Rewards, Pubertal Development, and Risk‐Taking Behavior
Dynamics of Identity Development in Adolescence: A Decade in Review
A Matter of Timing? Effects of Parent‐Adolescent Conflict on Adolescent Ill‐Being on Six Timescales
Universal Ingredients to Parenting Teens: Parental Warmth and Autonomy Support Promote Adolescent Well‐Being in Most Families
Parent‐Adolescent Interaction Quality and Adolescent Affect—An Experience Sampling Study on Effect Heterogeneity
Real‐Time Incentivizing Survey Completion With Game‐Based Rewards in Experience Sampling Research May Increase Data Quantity, but Reduces Data Quality
A Smartphone Serious Game for Adolescents (Grow It! App): Development, Feasibility, and Acceptance Study
Real‐Time Personalized Feedback in mHealth for Adolescents
The Grow It! App‐Longitudinal Changes in Adolescent Well‐Being During the COVID‐19 Pandemic: A Proof‐of‐Concept Study
The Effects of Sampling Frequency and Questionnaire Length on Perceived Burden, Compliance, and Careless Responding in Experience Sampling Data in a Student Population
For Whom, and for What, Is Experience Sampling More Accurate Than Retrospective Report?
Tracking Infant Development With a Smartphone: A Practical Guide to the Experience Sampling Method
Parent‐Adolescent Communication in a Digital World: A 100‐day Diary Study
A Moment of Autonomy Support Brightens Adolescents' Mood: Autonomy Support, Psychological Control and Adolescent Affect in Everyday Life
Measuring Parent–Adolescent Interactions in Natural Habitats. The Potential, Status, and Challenges of Ecological Momentary Assessment
The Concept and Components of Engagement in Different Domains Applied to Ehealth: A Systematic Scoping Review
Beeping Children and Adolescents: A Method for Studying Time Use and Daily Experience
Mood Variability and the Psychosocial Adjustment of Adolescents
Experiencing Sampling Research From Its Beginnings Into the Future
Understanding Customer Experience Throughout the Customer Journey
How Games Can Make Behavioural Science Better
Young People's Experiences of Participation in Clinical Trials: Reasons for Taking Part
Can Happiness Apps Generate Nationally Representative Datasets? —A Case Study Collecting Data on People's Happiness Using the German Socio‐Economic Panel
The Adolescent Research Participant: Strategies for Productive and Ethical Interviewing
Promoting Daily Well‐Being in Adolescents Using Mhealth
A Manifesto on Psychology as Idiographic Science: Bringing the Person Back Into Scientific Psychology, This Time Forever
On the Implications of the Classical Ergodic Theorems: Analysis of Developmental Processes Has to Focus on Intra‐Individual Variation
Compliance With Momentary Pain Measurement Using Electronic Diaries: A Systematic Review
Engaging Adolescents in Contemporary Longitudinal Health Research: Strategies for Promoting Participation and Retention
The Open Handbook of Experience Sampling Methodology a Step‐by‐Step Guide To Designing, Conducting, and Analyzing ESM Studies
Promoting an Open Research Culture
Co‐Producing Research With Youth: The Neurox Young People's Advisory Group Model
Interaction Design Research With Adolescents: Methodological Challenges and Best Practices
Interactive Design: An Introduction To the Theory and Application of User‐Centered Design
You Can Help People”: Adolescents' Views on Engaging Young People in Longitudinal Research
A Review of Current Ambulatory Assessment Studies in Adolescent Samples and Practical Recommendations
Number of Subjects and Time Points Needed for Multilevel Time‐Series Analysis: A Simulation Study of Dynamic Structural Equation Modeling
Navigating Missing Data in Multilevel Autoregressive Modeling: Consequences of Missingness Mechanisms and Temporal Patterns of Missings on Estimation Performance
Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) in Behavioral Medicine
Using Experience Sampling Methods/Ecological Momentary Assessment (ESM/EMA) in Clinical Assessment and Clinical Research: Introduction to the Special Section
Implications of the Credibility Revolution for Productivity, Creativity, and Progress
The Roots of Human Altruism
Compliance With Mobile Ecological Momentary Assessment Protocols in Children and Adolescents: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
The Role of Disclosure in Relationships
Ecological Momentary Assessment: A Meta‐Analysis on Designs, Samples, and Compliance Across Research Fields