Artificial intelligence applied to ‘omics data in liver disease: towards a personalised approach for diagnosis, prognosis and treatment
Abstract
Advancements in omics technologies and artificial intelligence (AI) methodologies are fuelling our progress towards personalised diagnosis, prognosis and treatment strategies in hepatology. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the current landscape of AI methods used for analysis of omics data in liver diseases. We present an overview of the prevalence of different omics levels across various liver diseases, as well as categorise the AI methodology used across the studies. Specifically, we highlight the predominance of transcriptomic and genomic profiling and the relatively sparse exploration of other levels such as the proteome and methylome, which represent untapped potential for novel insights. Publicly available database initiatives such as The Cancer Genome Atlas and The International Cancer Genome Consortium have paved the way for advancements in the diagnosis and treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the same availability of large omics datasets remains limited for other liver diseases. Furthermore, the application of sophisticated AI methods to handle the complexities of multiomics datasets requires substantial data to train and validate the models and faces challenges in achieving bias-free results with clinical utility. Strategies to address the paucity of data and capitalise on opportunities are discussed. Given the substantial global burden of chronic liver diseases, it is imperative that multicentre collaborations be established to generate large-scale omics data for early disease recognition and intervention. Exploring advanced AI methods is also necessary to maximise the potential of these datasets and improve early detection and personalised treatment strategies.

Key messages
AI methods for extracting insights from complex omics data in liver diseases are still emerging, presenting a significant opportunity for novel developments.
Large, well-curated, and diverse public datasets are crucial for developing AI methods that generalize across populations.
Open sourcing data and code, along with standardized reporting of model performance, is essential for ensuring AI model reproducibility and reliability.
Integrating omics data with clinical, radiology, and histopathology information can significantly enhance the prediction accuracy and clinical relevance of AI models.
Explainability is key to driving the adoption of AI in early diagnosis and personalized treatment, especially for complex models.

Introduction
Technological advancements have improved our capacity to generate and analyse emerging large-scale omics modalities. This surge in data volume has necessitated the development of artificial intelligence (AI) techniques tailored for analysis of multidimensional biological datasets to help identify biomarkers and other signals.
Recent improvements in AI methods have been driven by deep learning (DL) models, themselves enabled by the development of graphics processing units. DL has led to breakthroughs in many practical applications, including in biomedicine, such as the prediction of protein folding in AlphaFold. Given the increasing availability of omics data, a similar stride forward is possible in understanding liver diseases. For example, AI methods integrating clinical and omics data offer the potential for rapid diagnosis of liver disease and severity of fibrosis.
In this paper, we provide an overview of the current landscape of AI tools applied to omics data in studying liver diseases. We focus on studies considering individual molecular level as well as the hierarchy of molecular levels on different liver diseases, along with phenotypic and clinical information. We emphasise novel AI approaches devised to address common challenges encountered in liver disease studies and highlight research trends. We discuss a range of diagnostic and prognostic models along with a few therapeutic models to cover the current landscape of this area. Diagnostic models are particularly interesting as early detection has the potential to guide personalised treatment strategies. We highlight common data analysis patterns and discuss recent breakthroughs using DL-based approaches in and beyond liver diseases. We also briefly discuss recent advancements in AI models, methods and learning paradigms in related research areas, such as medical imaging, protein structure prediction and drug discovery, which have the potential to significantly improve liver disease applications.

AI in omics data

Omics analysis: from traditional statistics to AI-driven insights
Given the central role of the liver in metabolic and immune functions, the integration of different omics modalities could provide a comprehensive understanding of the underlying regulatory mechanisms. Whereas statistical approaches were traditionally employed, data-driven AI models have now become more ubiquitous for omics data analysis. These models are adept at handling the intricate, high-dimensional and noisy omics datasets. DL models, a class of neural network-based AI models that use many layers, are particularly effective at learning complex relationships within high-dimensional data and are increasingly used for omics data. Further, integration with clinical and structural data with omics can enable the identification of molecular subtypes and patient strata, leading to more targeted and effective treatments. Current AI models are capable of learning complex functions that map omics and clinical features to outcomes. Figure 1 illustrates the emerging approach where an AI model prediction is treated as a biomarker.
Artificial intelligence (AI) model prediction as a biomarker. The left panel depicts the pressing need for non-invasive tests in diagnosing and staging liver disease (LD), emphasising the pivotal role of AI. With sufficient data, current AI models have the capacity to evaluate many features and learn complex functions that can accurately predict outcomes and recognise the degree of severity leading to end stage disease. The panel on the right contrasts this with the examining of liver tissue which remains a gold standard for many aspects of diagnosis and treatment of patients with LD. ML, machine learning.
The most common approach in the application of AI to omics data is to first use statistical methods such as differential analysis to identify a subset of relevant features, followed by AI model development to integrate prediction based on these features. Feature selection or dimensionality reduction is often necessary given the high-dimensional nature of omics data. The choice of algorithms for feature selection and modelling is typically influenced by the data’s structure and its specific characteristics, and the analysis objective. Table 1 presents some algorithm choices that align with these data nuances and problem contexts. While table 1 is not comprehensive and does not recommend using these algorithms exclusively for the conditions highlighted, it demonstrates that a variety of potential solutions are available for a given problem. For instance, when the number of samples is small, linear models, which are less prone to overfitting, serve as a good starting point. However, with appropriate data augmentation to generate synthetic samples, other alternatives, such as random forests or deep neural networks, can also be considered. Data augmentation, though, is not straightforward and requires careful consideration to ensure that the synthetic samples are realistic within the context of the domain and the problem. While this practice is common in image and natural language processing (NLP), the complexity of omics data presents a challenge that necessitates further research. Therefore, it is essential to consider the trade-offs between computational efficiency, interpretability and predictive performance when selecting algorithms. Evaluating multiple methods and validating them through techniques like cross-validation can help achieve reliable and robust models.
AI model choices based on characteristics of the dataset
Dataset property	Source	ML models that can implicitly deal with such data (not an exhaustive list)	Additional preprocessing/postprocessing needed to use other algorithms (not an exhaustive list)	 	Data	Small sample size	 Regularised linear models (eg, ridge regression, LASSO) and SVM (linear kernel) as they are less likely to overfit k-NN as it does not require explicit training.	 Use cross-validation techniques, such as k-fold cross-validation, to get robust estimates of model performance Data augmentation techniques, such as data transformation and SMOTE, can be used where appropriate Consider using transfer learning to pre-train a DNN on similar data, if available	 	Data	Sparse data	Tree-based models, such as decision trees, random forests, gradient boosting	 Use a data imputation technique to estimate the missing values. Data imputation techniques range from simple variable statistics-based imputation (such as replace by mean/median/mode) to more complex methods where a model is learnt to predict the missing values (such as k-NN or regression-based imputation) Allow model to learn patterns of missing data. This is useful when missing values are informative. Use a model that can learn with missing data, such as masked modelling.	 	Data	Categorical data type	Decision tree and by extension random forests can inherently handle categorical variables	Encode categorical variables as numerical variables using techniques such as one-hot encoding, label encoding	 	Data	High dimensionality	Deep neural networks, SVM, random forests, gradient boosting	 Use dimensionality reduction techniques (such as PCA, t-SNE, autoencoders) before modelling Use feature selection techniques (such as RFE, differential expression analysis) before modelling	 	Data	Low dimensionality	Linear models, k-NN, decision trees, SVM, shallow neural networks		 	Data	Multicollinearity of features	Neural Networks	 Use regularisation techniques such as L1 or L2 loss, sparse encoding Perform feature selection prior to modelling Use convolution or attention mechanisms with DNNs	 	Data	Batch effects	Mixed effects models	Normalisation (preprocessing) to correct for batch effects using algorithms such as ComBat	 	Problem definition	Unsupervised representation learning	Autoencoders, dimensionality reduction (PCA, t-SNE), clustering (k-means)		 	Problem definition	Interpretability of features	Tree-based models (decision trees, random forests, gradient boosting)	Use SHapley Additive exPlanations to interpret model decisions	 	Other/external constraints	Limited compute availability (for model training)	Linear Models, k-NN, SVM (linear kernel), shallow neural networks (eg, 1 hidden layerm)	Use federated learning if possible
AIartificial intelligenceDNNdeep neural networkk- NNk-nearest neighboursLASSOleast absolute shrinkage and selection operatorMLmachine learningPCAprincipal component analysisRFErecursive feature eliminationSMOTEsynthetic minority oversampling techniqueSVMsupport vector machinet- SNEt-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding
While end-to-end AI approaches that combine the feature selection and modelling steps have been proposed, statistical feature selection often infuses domain knowledge such as pathways and gene networks that are challenging to integrate without a strong prior. Statistical methods such as differential analysis consider each feature independently. Whereas AI models attempt to learn a non-linear relationship between multiple features, their combinations and the outcome. Figure 2 describes a common data analysis pipeline, where the modelling step integrates a small subset of selected features across several modalities in the molecular hierarchy. Interpretability and generalisability are two essential aspects of the AI model in clinical applications (figure 2) and are further discussed in the ‘Common pitfalls of applying AI to omics data’ section. In scenarios where model interpretability is important, preprocessing steps like feature selection or dimensionality reduction are still valuable.
Multiomics integration pipeline. Illustrates the most prevalent multiomics data analysis and integration pipeline. Most studies interrogate a subset of omics modalities from the molecular hierarchy. The data analysis is typically split into two steps: a feature selection step and a modelling step. The objective of the feature selection step is to reduce the dimensionality of the data by identifying key features relevant to the problem. Prior biological knowledge is also commonly integrated to improve feature selection. In the AI modelling step, the model learns to integrate the multimodal features selected through the statistical feature selection step and map them to outcomes. The choice of modelling algorithm hinges on the type of outcome: prognostic, diagnostic and therapeutic applications usually employ supervised learning, while molecular subtyping and biomarker discovery often use unsupervised learning. However, these distinctions are not always clearly defined, and many studies opt for a combination of both approaches. AI, artificial intelligence.
Due to the challenges and costs associated with collecting and processing patient samples, omics datasets are often smaller compared with those used in other successful AI application areas such as computer vision and NLP. Developing AI methods for such high-dimensional data with small sample sizes is challenging. Self-supervised and transfer learning approaches can address some of these challenges. Figure 3 illustrates a few of the most widely used learning paradigms that are often referred to in this paper. Some other popular paradigms, such as reinforcement learning (RL) and federated learning (FL), are not shown here. In practice, these approaches are often combined to achieve specific results. For instance, one can use unsupervised pretraining followed by supervised fine-tuning for transfer learning when a large unlabelled dataset and a small labelled dataset are available.
An overview of common machine learning paradigms used to train deep learning-based models. Illustrates the core ideas behind several machine learning paradigms frequently mentioned in this paper. (A) Supervised learning: The most successful learning approach, particularly effective when sufficient labelled training and validation data are available. (B) Unsupervised learning: In this paradigm, labels are not available for the samples. The illustration uses an autoencoder, a specific neural network architecture, to learn a compressed (latent) representation of the data. The aim of this dimensionality reduction is to capture features relevant to the ultimate task (eg, labelling or classification). Clustering algorithms such as k-means, DBSCAN, Gaussian mixture models, etc are used to group samples in the latent space. (C) Self-supervised learning: Combines ideas from supervised and unsupervised learning, with labels generated from the data itself. In this example, contrastive learning is used to implement self-supervised learning. The labels generated are ‘similar’ and ‘dissimilar’, referring to pairs of samples generated from the same or different samples, respectively. Self-supervised learning formulates the objective to more explicitly learn such latent spaces, unlike unsupervised learning. (D) Transfer learning is particularly useful when limited data is available for a task. Here, a model is first pretrained to differentiate between red squares and blue bars and then fine-tuned to classify red stars and blue circles, for which there are limited examples. The pretraining helps the model learn latent dimensions useful for the eventual task, and fine-tuning further optimises these dimensions for the specific task. DBSCAN, density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise.

Data-driven feature selection and biomarker discovery
Knowledge-driven statistical feature selection is widely popular in analysing omics data. Linear techniques such as principal component analysis and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) are commonly used to address multicollinearity. Multidimensional scaling (MDS) aims to maintain local relationships (neighbours) in a lower-dimensional space. Non-linear dimensionality techniques, such as t-distributed Stochastic Neighbour Embedding and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection, seek a balance between preserving the global shape of the data and local relationships within the data in the projected lower-dimensional space. However, the resulting projected feature spaces, whether linear or non-linear, are often less interpretable, and thus primarily used for visualisation and validation purposes.
Linear variable selection methods alongside non-linear strategies such as tree-based methods, support vector machine (SVM) and feature importance offer the advantage of preserving features and are therefore widely used as a precursor step to the modelling step.
Unsupervised DL-based autoencoders (AEs) are designed to learn a compressed, lower-dimensional representation of input data. The compressed data are then used to reconstruct the original input, ensuring that vital features necessary for reconstruction are captured by the lower-dimensional feature space. AE variants, such as variational AE (VAE), have shown promise in extracting more interpretable low-dimensional latent spaces from gene expression profiles for cancer classification. AEs are often used to pretrain DL models ultimately used for supervised, semisupervised or transfer learning.

Molecular subtyping
Supervised AI models can be trained on molecular, clinical and phenotypic data using known subtypes to classify patients into diagnostic categories. Such subtyping can aid in biomarker discovery and potentially guide personalised preventive measures. Gao et al developed a DL-based supervised cancer subtyping framework trained on established subtypes based on the consensus clustering molecular subtyping approaches.
Unsupervised AI techniques, such as clustering algorithms, are vital for identifying novel subgroups within heterogeneous datasets. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) network used unsupervised clustering methods on multiplatform data to identify molecular subtypes in breast cancer samples. Similar clustering approaches have been employed to integrate multiple omics modalities from primary tumours and paired para-tumoural tissue for the identification of three hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) subtypes with distinct clinical prognoses.

AI in liver diseases
In this section, we review AI methods for the diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of liver diseases. Liver fibrosis, a hallmark of chronic liver diseases, develops variably in different individuals in the setting of chronic liver diseases, with its severity spanning from minimal fibrosis to decompensated cirrhosis. Omics technologies could help in the detection and treatment of early-stage fibrosis to slow disease progression, reduce the risk of end-stage liver diseases, such as cancer and decrease mortality. Table 2 summarises the studies considered in this review. An extended version of this table, containing the year of publication, type of clinical model and specimen/tissue information, is available as online supplemental table 1. When choosing studies to include, we considered omics diversity, algorithmic novelty, novel biological discoveries and cohort sizes as important factors. We use the self-reported area under the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) statistic as a measure of the overall accuracy of the method. However, we note that this statistic is not the only possible measure of accuracy and is highly dependent not only on the positive but also the negative examples used in the study. For each liver disease considered, the degree of overlap in results across studies varies. Although common biomarkers are used, specific outcomes and conclusions often differ due to variations in study design, population characteristics, disease prevalence and the statistical or AI methods employed. The selected studies represent a subset of the work being carried out on this topic and are not a systematic review. Figure 4 illustrates the range of AI methods applied across various liver diseases over the last 10 years.
List of studies included in this review
Comparison groups (Ref.)	Omics	ML method	Cohort size (discovery, validation)*	AUROC	 	MASLD					 	 MASH with F3 (precirrhotic) vs MASH with F4 (cirrhotic) fibrosis	Transcriptome	Convolutional neural network	726, 318	0.77	 	 MASH vs MASLD	Lipidome	Random forest	83	0.92	 	 MASH fibrosis vs MASH fibrosis (0–1)	Proteomics	Elastic net	113, 71	0.78	 	 MASH vs MASLD vs normal liver	Lipidome	Random forest	61, 7	1	 	 Non-diabetic obese patients with >5% steatosis vs <5% steatosis	Microbiome	Boruta+limma	117	NA	 	 MASLD/MASH vs healthy controls	Transcriptome	Gradient boosting	57	0.9	 	 Incident MASLD	Microbiome, metabolome	Random forest	180, 88	0.78	 	 MASLD vs MASH vs fibrosis vs cirrhosis vs healthy controls	Microbiome	Gradient boosting	227	0.86	 	 MRI-derived ≥5% liver fat vs <5% liver fat	Genome, transcriptome, proteome, metabolome	Random forest	3029, 4617	0.84	 	 Fibrosis (0–2) vs fibrosis	Lipidome, metabolome	Random forest	627	0.78	 	 MASLD fibrosis vs MASLD fibrosis (0–2)	Metabolome	GMLVQ	275	0.92	 	 MASLD-cirrhosis vs alcohol-related cirrhosis	Metabolome	GMLVQ	108	0.83	 	 MASLD vs MASH	Transcriptome	Logistic regression	206, 175	0.86	 	 MASLD vs non-MASLD	Metabolome	Random forest	559	0.94	 	 Steatosis <5% vs 5%–33% vs 33%–66% vs >66%	Proteome, phenome, genome	Linear models†	443, 134	0.94	 	 MASLD vs MASH vs healthy controls	Lipidome, glycome	Support vector machine	80	0.98	 	 Compensated MASLD-Cirrhosis vs decompensated MASLD-Cirrhosis	Microbiome	Random forest	25, 9	0.95	 	 MASLD-Cirrhosis vs non-MASLD Controls	Microbiome, metabolome	Random forest	163	0.91	 	 MASLD-HCC vs MASLD vs alcohol or viral Hepatitis-HCC	Transcriptome, lipidome, metabolome	Support vector machine	196, 53	0.99	 	 MASLD with significant fibrosis (F≥2) vs MASLD without significant fibrosis (F<2)	Proteomics	Linear models	100, 100	0.92	 	 MASLD with fibrosis (F≥1) vs MASLD without fibrosis (F<1)	Proteomics	Linear models	100, 100	0.86	 	 MASLD vs healthy	Proteomics	Linear models	140, 145	0.97	 	 MASLD fibrosis vs MASLD fibrosis	Genome	Decision tree	4277, 488	0.79	 	Cirrhosis					 	 Cirrhosis vs healthy controls	Microbiome	Random forest	269	0.78	 	 Cirrhosis vs CKD, diabetes	Microbiome	Random forest	203	0.99	 	 Cirrhosis vs healthy controls	Metabolome	Random forest	296	0.68	 	Alcohol-associated liver disease					 	 AH vs AC vs healthy controls	Transcriptomics	Support vector machine	204, 28	0.82	 	 AH survivors (poor) (≤ 90 days) vs AH survivors (good) (≤180 days)	Transcriptome	Multivariate CoxPH	71, 48	0.86	 	 AH survivors (good) (≤180 days) vs AH survivors (poor) (≤90 days)	Transcriptome	Multivariate CoxPH	71, 48	0.83	 	 Incident ALD	Microbiome	Gradient boosting	7005	0.96	 	Any liver disease					 	 Incident liver disease	Microbiome	Gradient boosting	6965	0.83	 	Hepatocellular carcinoma					 	 HCC vs (healthy controls, chronic hepatitis B)	Lipidome	Linear models	144	0.99	 	 HCC vs healthy	Methylome	Random forest	559, 234	0.99	 	 HCC vs non-HCC	Transcriptome	Decision tree	55	0.95	 	 Neutrophils-associated molecular subgroups in HCC	Transcriptome	CoxBoost+random survival forest		0.67	 	 High-risk and low-risk subgroups in HCC based on 9 gene signatures	Transcriptome	Consensus clustering+LASSO	424, 461	0.9	 	 HCC vs normal samples	Transcriptome	Linear models	350	0.75	 	 HCC vs normal samples	Transcriptome	NMF+LASSO	350, 66	0.67	 	 HCC vs normal samples	Genome, transcriptome	Linear models	350, 231	0.76	 	 Survival-based molecular subgroups in HCC	Transcriptome, microRNA, methylome	Autoencoder+univariate CoxPH	350, 230	0.8	 	 HCC tumour vs non-tumour samples	Transcriptome	Random forest	33, 8	0.9	 	 HCC vs healthy controls, cirrhosis	Metabolome	Random forest	110	0.9	 	 Survival-based subgroups in HCC	Transcriptome	Word2Vec		0.69	 	 Survival-based molecular subgroups in HCC	Transcriptome, microRNA, Methylome	Autoencoder+univariate CoxPH	360, 230	0.75	 	Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma					 	 Cancer tissue vs adjacent non-tumour tissues	Metabolome	Convolutional neural network	192, 48	0.97	 	 HCC vs ICCA	Genome, spatial transcriptomics	Self-supervised pretraining+attention	591, 360	0.94	 	 Malignant cells vs non-malignant cells	Transcriptome	Consensus clustering	46, 765		 	Primary sclerosing cholangitis					 	 PSC vs controls	Bile acid	Univariate CoxPH+gradient boosting	702, 108	0.86	 	 Paediatric-onset PSC vs healthy controls	Microbiome	Random forest	48	0.74	 	 Paediatric-onset PSC vs ulcerative colitis (UC)	Microbiome	Random forest	40	0.88	 	Acute liver failure					 	 ALF survivors vs ALF non-survivors	Metabolome	Linear discriminant analysis	225, 160	0.98	 	Acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF)					 	 Pre-ACLF vs non-ACLF	Metabolome	Random forest	512, 512	0.88	 	 ACLF vs non-ACLF	Metabolome	Random forest	512, 512	0.83
Blanks in discovery and validation cohorts indicate sizes not specified. Studies that have more than one validation cohorts, only size of the first cohort is reported. Studies without a separate validation cohort often use k-fold cross- validation and/or random train-test splits of the discovery cohort to evaluate the algorithms. AUROC column reports the accuracy or C-statistic for studies where AUROC was not available. The AUROC, where available, was reported on the validation dataset.
LASSO penalised Cox regression, limma, LASSO regression, L1-regularizedregularised logistic regression were grouped under linear models.
ACalcohol-associated cirrhosisAHalcoholic hepatitisAUROCarea under the receiver operating characteristic curveCKDchronic kidney diseaseHCChepatocellular carcinomaICCAintrahepatic cholangiocarcinomaLASSOleast absolute shrinkage and selection operatorMASHmetabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitisMASLDmetabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver diseaseMLmachine learningNMFnon-negative matrix factorisationPSCprimary sclerosing cholangitis
Artificial intelligence (AI) methods in liver diseases. Illustrates the range of AI methodologies applied across various liver diseases, with dot sizes representing study impact scores based on validation cohort size and achieved accuracy or area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC). More precisely, the impact score  is calculated as:  where  is the accuracy or AUROC and  is the size of the validation cohort. This formula scales the model’s AUROC by a value in the range (1.0–1.5) based on the validation cohort size. For years where there are multiple studies using the same AI method, the bubbles are jittered to ensure all studies are visible. For instance, in 2023, there were six studies that used linear models. Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD)-related diseases are grouped together as MASLD+which includes MASLD, MASLD-HCC, MASLD-Cirrhosis and MASH. Random forests and linear models are the most widely used, primarily due to their interpretable nature, however, with modest impact scores. Recently, DL-based techniques have gained popularity, particularly using histopathology images along with omics modalities. While these studies do not directly use AI to investigate omics modalities, they integrate and validate the features learnt by the model from histopathology images with omics modalities. Studies on HCC and ACLF demonstrate high accuracies on large datasets. Most studies still separate feature extraction and modelling stages. DL excels in handling high-dimensional, correlated features, suggesting the potential of end-to-end models to capture complex associations across extensive feature sets. ACLF, acute-on-chronic liver failure; DL, deep learning; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; MASH, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis.

Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), in which fat accumulates in the liver, is one of the most prevalent liver diseases worldwide. In recent years, metabolite and serum lipid profiling have emerged as important tools to diagnose metabolic dysfunction and assess disease severity in MASLD, including conditions such as active inflammation seen in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) and fibrosis.
Machine learning methodologies have been used to investigate metabolomics and pathophysiology of MASLD. McGlinchey et al used Gaussian mixture model-based clustering to group lipids and investigated their association with metabolites and clinical variables using a correlation network. Using their network, they identified unique metabolites linked to steatosis, MASH and fibrosis. They developed RF binary classifiers to model fibrosis progression, distinguishing between early and advanced stages, with a median AUROC of 0.77 for F0–F1 vs F2–F4 task and a median AUROC of 0.78 for F0–F2 vs F3–F4 task. Their findings highlighted a critical metabolic transition from stages F2 to F3 in MASLD pathogenesis, emphasising the significance of oxidative stress.
Quesada-Vázquez et al employed the Boruta algorithm, a supervised feature selection method based on RF, to identify metabolomic signatures of steatosis and used the limma linear regression model for transcriptomic analysis. Through SHAPley additive explanation (SHAP) analysis, they found plasma histidine strongly inversely associated with steatosis (SHAP mean value=0.777) and linked it to a hepatic transcriptomic signature involving insulin signalling, inflammation and trace amine-associated receptor 1.
Perakakis et al developed non-invasive diagnostic models that integrate lipids, glycans and hormones to diagnose MASH using SVM with recursive feature elimination. They identified a combination of lipids that could accurately diagnose the presence of liver fibrosis with 98% accuracy. Chiappini et al also developed an RF model to differentiate MASH from various MASLD stages using lipid profiling. They highlighted dysregulation in the fatty acid synthesis metabolic pathway as a diagnostic of MASH.
In a paediatric study, Khusial et al combined the plasma metabolome with clinical variables with an RF model, identifying a panel of amino acids consisting of serine, leucine/isoleucine and tryptophan to screen for MASLD in youth (AUROC=0.94). Apart from plasma metabolome, recent studies have systematically compared lipidomic profiles from urinary extracellular vesicles (EV), identifying lipid signatures diagnostic of MASH. Moolla et al also differentiated early (F0–F2) from advanced (F3–F4) fibrosis using a generalised matrix learning vector quantisation analysis on urinary metabolomic data (AUROC=0.92).
The association between the human gut microbiota and its contribution to the pathogenesis of MASLD has also been explored through machine learning methodologies. In a study by Wang et al, predictive taxonomic and functional signatures were identified from publicly available MASLD shotgun metagenomic datasets to elucidate links to MASH progression. To further investigate the diagnostic accuracy of their microbiome signature, stochastic gradient-boosting machine (GBM) learning models were trained to identify the severity of MASH, achieving performance ranging from AUROC of 0.7 to 0.94. Oh et al identified a gut microbiome-derived signature, combined with patient age, accurately detecting cirrhosis in a diverse MASH-cirrhosis population compared with non-MASH controls. Their RF model, trained on shotgun metagenomic and untargeted metabolomic profiles, achieved an AUROC of 0.91.
Using RF modelling, Sharpton et al identified a stool metagenomic signature comprising 13 discriminatory species to detect decompensated MASH cirrhosis. In their study, Saboo et al analysed stool and saliva microbiomes of cirrhosis patients, highlighting the superior predictive value of stool microbiota for cirrhosis progression over saliva microbiota. Their RF-based classification model based on stool microbiota achieved the highest AUROC of 0.78 in distinguishing patients with cirrhosis from controls.
The gut microbiome has also been investigated in a prognostic model to understand MASH development. Leung et al examined serum and stool samples and characterised both metagenomic and metabolomic changes during MASH progression in a community-based cohort. They developed interpretable models using RF, with AUROCs of 0.72–0.80, integrating baseline microbial signatures to identify patients at risk of developing MASLD 4 years after baseline.
Other omics modalities have emerged in recent literature as potential diagnostic and prognostic markers in MASLD. Eslam et al combined routinely available clinical and laboratory data with IFNL genotype for fibrosis prediction using decision trees. Govaere et al used logistic regression (LR) to model the progression of MASH, discriminating mild from advanced disease (MASH F0/F1 vs MASH F≥2) with an AUROC of 0.86. Baboota et al identified GREM1 as a strong predictor of fibrosis using conditional RF and gradient boosting, highlighting senescence markers as crucial drivers of MASH in humans.
In proteomic-based studies, Feng et al used LASSO regression with a 10-fold cross-validation to pinpoint urinary proteins associated with MASH and fibrosis stages. Their model distinguished advanced fibrosis with a better AUROC of 0.92 compared with early fibrosis stages with AUROC of 0.86. Luo et al achieved an AUROC of 0.78 using an elastic-net algorithm based on a 4-protein or 12-protein panel to distinguish advanced fibrosis among MASH patients.
An increasing number of studies have combined multiomics technologies to find diagnostic markers of MASLD. Atabaki-Pasdar et al applied machine learning methods, on patients with or without type 2 diabetes from the Innovative Medicines Initiative diabetes research on patient stratification Consortium cohort, to devise an early diagnostic model for MASLD. A Pearson correlation matrix, with a pairwise correlation threshold of r>0.8, was used for the feature selection of clinical variables while LASSO-based feature selection was performed for dimension reduction at each of the omics levels. An RF model developed using the preselected features, which consisted of both clinical and omics variables, achieved an AUROC of 0.84. Wood et al further assessed the performance of steatosis classifier models in the setting of obesity using LR on each omics domain alone and found that proteomics achieved the highest AUROC of 0.913 followed by phenomic data of 0.892 and PNPLA3 genotyping data of only 0.596. Combining all markers selected from each individual data domain achieved an AUROC of 0.935 for the diagnosis of hepatic steatosis.
Overall, AI algorithms integrating omics and clinical data show significant potential to inform personalised diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic strategies in MASH.

Alcohol-associated liver disease
Alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD) encompasses a range of liver injuries due to alcohol consumption, spanning from hepatic steatosis to advanced stages like alcoholic hepatitis (AH), alcohol-associated cirrhosis (AC) leading to acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF). Despite advances, the molecular pathophysiology of ALD remains incompletely understood, highlighting the necessity for non-invasive diagnostic methods to screen individuals at risk, notably those with a history of alcohol misuse. Omics data and machine learning methodologies have been explored as potential diagnostic markers in ALD.
In a cohort of 7115 individuals over ~15 years, Liu et al explored the use of microbiome-augmented gradient boosting algorithms to predict liver disease incidence, particularly ALD. Gut microbial composition was assessed across various taxonomic levels. Prediction models for incident ALD were developed, using microbial features down to the species level, achieving an AUROC of 0.895.
Niu et al used plasma proteomic profiling through mass spectrometry to develop a diagnostic test for early fibrosis detection in patients with ALD. Their LR models, trained on a subset of 22 proteins, achieved better performance than 15 standard clinical tests in predicting significant fibrosis, mild inflammatory activity and any liver steatosis, achieving a mean AUROC of 0.90.
In their study, Listopad et al applied multiple machine learning models, such as LR, SVM and k-nearest neighbours (k-NN) to transcriptomic and proteomic data from liver tissue and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) to differentiate AH, AC and healthy controls. Integrating transcriptomic and proteomic data yielded superior performance in both liver tissue and PBMCs compared with individual omics-based classification methods. In PBMCs, the combined model achieved an AUROC of 0.96, outperforming the AUROCs of 0.89 for each individual omics-based classification.
Trépo et al developed gene-signature Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (gs-MELD), a scoring system combining baseline liver gene expression patterns of 123 genes with the MELD score to differentiate severe AH patients based on survival risk. The gs-MELD score was crafted using regression coefficients obtained from a multivariable Cox regression model.

Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a rare cholestatic liver disease with a poorly understood pathogenesis and limited therapeutic options. It is characterised by bile stasis and progresses to fibrosis, cirrhosis, at times culminating in hepatic insufficiency.
Iwasawa et al investigated the salivary microbiota to distinguish salivary microbial communities of paediatric-onset PSC patients from healthy controls. For the classification problem, a combination of genera and species was used in RF models to distinguish the PSC group with an AUROC of 0.74.
Altered bile acids play a pivotal role in nutrient absorption and act as crucial signalling molecules, regulating hepatic metabolism and modulating immune responses. While altered BA homeostasis is an intrinsic facet of cholestatic liver diseases, the clinical utility of plasma BA assessment in PSC remains understudied.
Mousa et al used a combination of univariate Cox proportional hazard and multivariable gradient boosting machine models to evaluate whether plasma BA was an effective predictor of hepatic decompensation in PSC patients. Their model achieved a high concordance statistic (C-statistic) of 0.86 on a validation cohort.

Hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus
Although viral hepatitis incidence has decreased due to curative treatments and vaccines for hepatitis C virus (HCV) and hepatitis B virus (HBV), respectively, they remain the leading causes of chronic liver diseases. Viral hepatitis progresses rapidly, often culminating in cirrhosis, HCC and end-stage liver disease.
Treatment for chronic HCV infection has improved rapidly since the introduction of all-oral, interferon-free direct-acting antiviral (DAA) regimens. DAAs have significantly high cure rates (sustained virological response, SVR) compared with previous interferon-based therapies. Cure rates with DAAs exceed 90%–95% across different HCV genotypes and patient populations, including those with cirrhosis and other comorbidities. However, patient-specific comorbidities burden, prior treatment exposures and challenges with adherence, which can affect the effectiveness of DAAs. Park et al evaluated multiple machine learning approaches and found GBM the most effective in generating prediction risk scores for identifying patients with chronic hepatitis C infection at high risk of DAA treatment failure and to determine predictors associated with DAA treatment failure. Feldman et al present a machine-learning-based approach to predict patient characteristics associated with the need for extended duration for DAA therapy given a particular DAA regimen. Their optimal predictive model using XGBoost had an AUC of 0.745.
In recent times, AI-assisted drug discovery has streamlined and enhanced the drug discovery process. Particularly, AI has been used to identify new uses for existing drugs. One such study by Kamboj et al used SVM, RF, k-NN and artificial neural network and quantitative structure–activity relationship approaches to predict repurposed drugs targeting HCV non-structural proteins.
Wu et al implemented an attention-based DL model to predict HBV genomic integration sites, unveiling novel insights into HBV-induced cancer. Their binary classifier, incorporating convolutional layers and attention modules, effectively predicted HBV integration sites by identifying key genomic regions crucial for classification.
In a proteomic study by Estevez et al, an RF model analysed patterns in 51 common cytokines. Their findings revealed distinct cytokine profiles in patients with HBV or HCV infection, particularly in the context of the presence of HCC.

HCC and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
While the burden of HBV and HCV-associated HCC has been declining with effective antiviral therapy, HCC incidence related to metabolic syndrome is expected to rise due to the dramatic increase in the prevalence of MASH in the general population.
Omics data and machine learning methodologies are a growing field of study in primary liver malignancies and their potential application in translational research is broad, from screening, to diagnostics, to prognostic clinical tests.
Hershberger et al identified machine-learning-derived salivary metabolite combinations as promising biomarkers for HCC detection, highlighting saliva analysis as a potential diagnostic tool for liver diseases. Furthermore, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in patient breath offer valuable insights into disease processes, capable of distinguishing disease status. Leveraging machine learning with breath VOCs holds the potential for developing improved, non-invasive screening tools for chronic liver disease and primary and secondary liver tumours.
Lewinska et al employed multivariate analysis to evaluate the diagnostic potential of altered serum lipidome in MASLD-associated HCC, revealing depleted unsaturated fatty acids and elevated triglycerides as indicative of deregulated metabolic networks in MASLD-HCC. Wu et al enhanced serum lipid profiling accuracy with graphitised carbon matrix, offering superior diagnostic utility for liver cancer compared with conventional matrices.
The primary factors behind HCC are genetic and epigenetic changes. Lu et al integrated clinical features and genetic biomarkers to establish a decision tree-based model for HCC detection postviral eradication. Their prospective study included 55 HCV patients with advanced fibrosis achieving sustained virological response. The model achieved 95.7% accuracy in HCC detection, identifying TAS1R3, FOSL1 and ABCA3 as key predictors. The transcriptome serves as a pivotal link between cellular phenotype and genetic tumour biology, containing RNA-encoded information transcribed from DNA. Unlike the relatively stable genome, the transcriptome is dynamic, responding actively to physiological or pathological conditions. Choi et al introduced a network-based DL model, adapted from the Word2Vec framework, to analyse gene expression data sourced from TCGA. This approach identified distinct gene modules significantly linked to HCC prognosis. Along with transcriptomic data, Chaudhary et al used microRNA and methylation data in an AE-based DL framework to identify two HCC subpopulations with differential survival. Their results consistently linked the more aggressive subtype with higher TP53 inactivation mutation frequencies while the moderate subtype exhibited activated metabolism-related pathways, including drug metabolism, amino acid and fatty acid metabolism.
Recent single-cell transcriptomic studies have enabled in-depth analysis of the immune landscape. LASSO regression was used to identify T-cell exhaustion signatures, characterising the immune landscape and predicting HCC prognosis. Gong et al uncovered the critical role of neutrophils in the HCC tumour microenvironment. They developed a neutrophil-derived signature via the partition around medoids algorithm), followed by Cox analysis, integrating them by fitting 101 models using the leave-one-out cross-validation framework.
As ageing-related genes are closely related to the occurrence and development of cancer, building prognostic models with them is gaining popularity. Zhang et al using gene expression data developed an HCC senescence score model for prognostic prediction. Using a combination of feature selection methods and a LASSO penalised Cox regression model, the genes, CDCA8, CENPA, SPC25 and TTK, associated with HCC progression. In another study, LASSO regression was used to develop a prognostic model consisting of three ageing-related genes, TFDP1, NDRG1 and FXR1.
Liu et al identified a set of nine efferocytosis-related genes and their regulatory influence on HCC immunotherapy to construct a prognostic model for HCC. Ma et al developed a consensus clustering approach to identify the impact of tumour cell state heterogeneity and functional clonality on HCC and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA) patient prognosis.
Data-driven omics-based biomarkers have the potential to guide personalised therapeutic strategies in oncology. Genomic predictors could be used to tailor chemotherapy, immunotherapy and combined treatments for more effective therapeutic response. Retrospective studies have shown that gene expression profiles and other molecular signatures derived from omics data can predict patient response to therapies like anti-PD1 and anti-CTLA-4, which are used in immunotherapy. Hectors et al found that the expression of the immunotherapy target PD-L1 at the protein level, as well as PD-1 and CTLA4 at the mRNA level, correlated with radiomic features of HCC. Chen et al evaluated the stemness index based on transcriptome data to find subtypes within patients with HCC. Their LR-based classifier achieved an AUC of 0.918 to identify patients who are more probable to have a sensitive response to immunotherapy based on stemness features. These AI tools would need to be further validated to permit deployment into clinical practice, but nonetheless show the promise of integrating clinical and ‘omics data using AI to guide a personalised therapeutic approach. Although not using omics, DL architectures, such as transformers, have been used to study HCC. Sato et al used a transformer model to predict overall survival in patients with HCC treated by radiofrequency ablation (RFA). Wang et al used a transformer to study associations between MRI and microvascular invasion in patients with solitary HCC. Further, combining different treatment modalities, such as systemic therapies with local treatments like RFA or transarterial chemoembolisation (TACE), is an emerging strategy aimed at improving therapeutic outcomes and overcoming resistance mechanisms in HCC and is discussed in the ‘Omics data integration with biomedical images’ section.

Acute liver failure
Acute liver failure (ALF) is a rare clinical manifestation of rapid and severe liver dysfunction in patients without pre-existing liver disease. Challenges associated with building AI tools for ALF include its sudden onset which limits the availability of comprehensive molecular profiles of affected patients. AI tools for ALF must address the need for short-term risk prediction, patient stratification and evaluation of therapeutic responses to improve patient outcomes.
Sharma et al identified the top five metabolites through multiomics analysis and assessed their potential in predicting early mortality or the need for emergency liver transplantation in patients with ALF. Five machine learning algorithms RF, k-NN, SVM, classification and regression trees and LDA were evaluated for classification based on metabolite expression levels. While models trained on individual metabolites exhibited significant variation, the combined model utilising all five metabolites achieved the highest AUC of 0.933 on the validation set.
Drug-induced hepatotoxicity, also a leading cause of ALF, is categorised as acute or chronic depending on the duration of injury and histological damage location. Jin et al developed an interpretable XGBoost-SHAP model integrating rat liver gene expression profiles, drug labels and clinical reports to evaluate and predict drug-induced liver injury (DILI). Moore et al investigated SNP impact on DILI susceptibility using linear models such as multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS), multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) and LR. They found that SNP–SNP interactions significantly predicted DILI chronicity.

Acute-on-chronic liver failure
ACLF is characterised by rapid clinical deterioration in patients with chronic liver disease. While omics-based studies have increased, the rapidly evolving clinical course of ACLF poses challenges in identifying its pathophysiological process and developing prognostic models.
A study by Zhang et al used an RF model in conjunction with differential analysis (t-test followed by false discovery rate-based sorting) to prioritise metabolite biomarkers that are found relevant in both approaches. For diagnosing pre-ACLF patients, they combined two metabolites, pipecolate and gamma-carboxyethyl hydroxychroman (γ-CEHC), with clinical parameters using an LR model. Their combined diagnostic model achieved an AUROC of 0.88 on a validation dataset.
Further, they developed a prognostic model, with metabolites comprising ureidopropionate, N-acetyl-aspartyl-glutamate and pipecolate, to predict 90-day mortality in patients with ACLF, achieved an AUROC of 0.83 on a validation dataset.

Acute cellular rejection
There is a growing body of studies focusing on molecular profiling of liver allografts for early diagnosis of outcomes, such as acute cellular rejection (ACR). ACR commonly occurs within the initial 90 days postliver transplantation, marked by cytotoxic T cell infiltration into the transplanted liver tissue. In a paediatric study, Ningappa et al applied an integrative machine learning method merging transcriptomics data with the human protein interactome. Through a LASSO-based feature selection approach, they pinpointed network module signatures linked to rejection in paediatric liver transplantation with a median AUROC of 0.7. Their comparison of network-based signatures to gene-based signatures obtained through the differential expression of genes (DEGs) demonstrates how these network modules may be more suitable for targeting with antirejection drugs.

Omics data integration with multiple modalities
Recent studies have emphasised the significance of integrating omics data with additional modalities like clinical variables, as well as radiology and histopathology images. These studies demonstrate the consequential enhancements in prediction accuracy and clinical relevance, affirming the superiority of the integrated approach.

Omics data integration with clinical variables
Integration of clinical variables with omics data has been shown to significantly improve accuracy in liver disease characterisation and diagnosis across various studies. By combining information from both clinical assessments and omics profiling, researchers have achieved enhanced predictive performance, allowing for more accurate diagnosis and prognosis evaluation.
The RF model, analysing gut microbiome changes during MASLD progression alongside integrated microbial and clinical features (body mass index, age, High-Density Lipoprotein, fasting insulin), demonstrated an improved AUROC of 0.8 compared with both clinical prognostic models (AUROCs of 0.58–0.60) and models relying solely on microbial signatures (AUROC of 0.72). Similar improvements were demonstrated with lipids and polar metabolite integration in MASLD and microbiome data integration in ALD, Oh et al combined gut microbiome-derived metagenomic signature with patient age and serum albumin levels to detect cirrhosis. They found that addition of serum aspartate aminotransferase levels enabled discrimination of cirrhosis from earlier fibrosis stages.
In their multiomics study, Atabaki-Pasdar et al found that integrating genetic, transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic with clinical variables yielded better performance (AUROC 0.84) compared with using clinical variables alone (AUROC 0.82) in predicting liver fat quantity.

Omics data integration with biomedical images
Histopathology plays a vital role in LD diagnosis and characterisation. DL-based histopathology image analysis studies often leverage omics data for validation. Huang et al used a VGG-16 network-based CNN and Raman spectroscopy to distinguish between HCC and iCCA and leveraged tissue metabolomics for validation. Calderaro et al developed an attention-based DL model to reclassify combined HCC-iCCA as either HCC or iCCA using whole slide images. Clinical and biological relevance of the predictions were validated using survival prognosis and spatial transcriptomic analysis. Conway et al used a pretrained deep CNN model to extract human interpretable features from histopathology images and correlated them with transcriptomic profiles to reveal a five-gene signature that distinguishes stage F3 from F4 fibrosis.
Radiogenomics, a promising field that correlates radiomics features with other omics modalities, has gained significant attention. Several studies have successfully used radiogenomics to decode the molecular profile of HCC. In a recent study, applied radiogenomics to predict mutations in the PI3K signalling pathway.
While surgical resection and liver transplantation remain the primary curative treatments for HCC, radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is a cornerstone for image-guided ablation in non-surgical early-stage HCC. For intermediate-stage HCC, TACE is the most widely used treatment. Boldanova et al integrated clinical observations with genetic and radiological insights to forecast patient responses to TACE. They used RF to identify potent features, such as tumour morphology and genetic markers, for predicting TACE response.
For those who cannot undergo the above treatments for HCC, targeted therapies, immunotherapy and other systemic treatment options have become invaluable, particularly for treating advanced stages of HCC. Tian et al combined 14 features—9 selected from a three-dimensional CNN trained on MRI images, and 5 radiomic features—to predict PD-L1 levels using an SVM classifier. Their combined model performed the best with an AUC of 0.897 while the DL-based feature selection model alone and the radiomics-based feature selection model alone had AUCs of 0.852 and 0.794, respectively.

Common pitfalls of applying AI to omics data
Depending on the question and AI approach, careful design of training and validation datasets and pipelines is crucial. In clinical contexts, factors, such as data stratification, randomisation, cross-validation strategy and preventing preprocessing leaks, are especially important.
Whalen et al identify key challenges in applying AI in genomics, highlighting the importance of addressing distributional differences, such as batch effects, to prevent model overperformance on testing data and ensure model generalisability. Harmonising data distributions becomes crucial when integrating multiple omics modalities.
Functional interdependencies between genes and proteins and confounding factors like age are common in omics data. Addressing confounders necessitates precise data stratification while correlated features are managed through selection or grouping. Ensemble methods like RF and DL are inherently adept at learning from correlated features.
Missing data are a significant challenge in omics analysis, stemming from technical limitations, experimental constraints and sample variability. In single-cell RNA-seq, a missing transcript may indicate the cell’s state or result from technical issues like low sequencing depth or library preparation issues. Strategies for addressing missing data range from basic imputation methods like mean or median to more advanced techniques such as k-NN and iterative imputation. Emerging approaches include transfer learning-based neural networks and deep neural network tensor factorisation for imputation, offering promising solutions for omics data analysis.
Class imbalance is a common challenge in omics due to the rarity of certain conditions, which can bias models. Strategies to address this include sample weighting, oversampling or undersampling and data augmentation. Specifically, data augmentation involves generating synthetic data to supplement existing datasets using generative models, such as generative adversarial networks or VAEs. Lee et al used a generative neural network to differentiate common differentially expressed genes from context-specific transcriptional patterns. While generative models can help address limited samples or missing data, the augmented data must undergo careful validation to ensure its biological relevance.
The explainability of AI models is crucial in the context of healthcare applications, particularly for black-box models. Understanding how an AI model reaches its decisions is essential for gaining confidence in it, justifying AI-augmented decision-making and to understand its biases. This is also a key step in improving our mechanistic understanding of omics data analysis, where biological processes are inherently complex. Tree-based methods like gradient boosting and decision trees offer inherent mechanisms for assessing feature importance, making them valuable not only for prediction but also for interpretability tasks. Techniques such as partial dependence plots further aid in visualising the relationships modelled by these methods.
For explaining the output of any AI model in a model-agnostic manner, SHAP is widely applicable, generating both global and sample-level explanations. Variants of SHAP, including DeepSHAP and DeepLIFT, have been used for studying molecular features. Attention-based mechanisms, which are inherently explainable, have found applications in DNA sequence and multiomics data analysis. In the context of omics data integration, there is an opportunity to further develop DL-based approaches that are intrinsically self-explanatory or can rationalise their decisions.

AI beyond liver diseases
The rapid development of AI methods has created opportunities to tackle the unique challenges in biological data analysis, offering innovative approaches to overcome them. In this section, we discuss some of these advances and highlight their potential in liver disease diagnosis and treatment.
In scenarios with limited training data, transfer learning has emerged as a powerful approach as demonstrated by Lu et al using whole slide images. Pretraining on large-scale data allows a model to learn general knowledge, which is then fine-tuned for specific tasks. This approach generalises well to unseen data and reduces the need for extensive data labelling. While image data are abundant, similar strategies are being explored for omics data using large datasets like TCGA. For instance, Wang et al demonstrated a pretrained multiomics network using gene expression, DNA methylation, gene mutation and copy number variation data from 32 pan-cancers in the TCGA database. This network could be fine-tuned for downstream tasks in oncology, even with incomplete data modalities. Developing open-source, pretrained models for omics data will allow researchers to use DL techniques, even with limited liver disease-specific data.
The pretraining phase in transfer learning often employs supervised learning with labels. However, obtaining and annotating labelled data can be resource-intensive and time-consuming. Moreover, labels already available in general datasets may not be well suited for the ultimate learning objective. In such cases, self-supervised learning, a form of unsupervised learning that generates training labels from unlabelled data to learn representations, can be used. Zhou et al, for instance, pretrained a foundation model on 1.6 million unlabelled retinal images through self-supervision before adapting the model for various disease detection, from sight-threatening eye diseases to complex systemic disorders such as heart failure and myocardial infarction. Similar approaches can be adopted for omics data on conditions, such as ALF, where samples are rare and limited. The inherent characteristics of an omics modality can be learnt from unannotated data and then fine-tuned on annotated samples.
The main challenge in self-supervised learning lies in developing methods to create labels from unlabelled data. One technique to achieve this is contrastive learning, which involves using pairs of positive (similar) and negative (dissimilar) samples derived from the unlabelled data to learn representations. This method ensures that similar objects are mapped closer together in the learnt latent space than dissimilar ones. Tian et al leverage contrastive learning for predicting the origins of primary tumours in cancers, using cytological images. Yang et al used a scalable contrastive learning framework to analyse single-cell multimodal data at a 10 million cell scale, applying it to a COVID-19 immune cell dataset and by comparing it to a reference atlas of healthy and infected samples.
Transformers, a type of model architecture foundational in NLP and computer vision, are now being adapted for use in omics and clinical applications. The attention mechanism in transformers allows the model to assess different data segments, capturing relationships among tokens throughout the sequence, regardless of their distance from each other. These models can capture (learn) spatial relationships, such as between image regions or among molecules in omics profiles and temporal patterns in longitudinal data. Liu et al developed a transformer model that integrates multiomics data with a criss-cross attention mechanism to capture interactions between biological pathways and data types, showing potential for cancer screening.
Translation approaches, developed for translating text or data from one form to another, such as from text to speech, have also proven valuable in biological data analysis. Schmauch et al employed a DL model to predict transcriptome profiles from histology images. Their model effectively correlates specific molecular signatures with morphological patterns. In medicine, translation models offer significant advantages in multimodal analysis. First, they facilitate the integration of diverse data types like omics, clinical measurements and imaging data, uncovering intricate relationships that enhance our understanding of diseases. Second, they address a common challenge in multimodal data analysis: the presence of misaligned datasets where certain measurements or modalities are missing for many patients. Translation models can effectively impute missing modalities, thereby enriching the dataset and improving diagnostic and prognostic capabilities.
RL is a learning paradigm that has shown success in tasks requiring decision-making over multiple steps. In RL, an agent learns to make decisions by interacting with its environment. At each step, the agent seeks to maximise its cumulative future rewards by exploring various decisions and assessing their long-term consequences. RL has achieved notable successes, such as surpassing human performance in complex games like AlphaGo. In the medical field, Barata et al applied RL to the diagnosis of skin cancer. They conceptualised diagnosis as a series of decisions, where each decision, whether correct or incorrect, carries a reward or penalty based on expert judgments. Through interactions with the environment, the RL agent learns optimal decision-making strategies for different diagnostic scenarios.
Typically, AI has addressed generalisability issues through a centralised approach by aggregating and data from multiple sources. However, this centralised approach is not always feasible and raises data privacy concerns. FL offers a solution by sharing model updates instead of raw data. This approach enables AI models to learn from diverse datasets that may otherwise be inaccessible, which is particularly advantageous in clinical medicine. FL shows potential in addressing health disparities, supporting underserved populations and advancing research on rare diseases. Importantly, FL enhances patient privacy by minimising the need to transfer or duplicate sensitive data. For instance, Pati et al illustrate how AI models can perform brain tumour segmentation and diagnosis by leveraging patient data across 71 sites worldwide, employing FL to protect patient confidentiality without sharing personal data.
Generative AI is a family of models that are capable of synthesising previously unseen data. Transformers, for instance, are a commonly used architecture to develop generative models. Cui et al demonstrate a generative pretraining workflow, trained on over 33 million cells, specifically for single-cell omics data, adapting the transformer architecture to simultaneously learn cell and gene representations. One natural application of these methods is to augment training datasets, thereby improving the robustness and generalisation of other AI models. Generative AI, however, has applications that go much further. In particular, their ability to generate novel hypotheses has tremendous potential in drug discovery and molecule design. AlphaFold, the current state-of-the-art in protein structure prediction, uses a class of generative AI called diffusion models.

Discussion and conclusions
This review focused on a wide range of omics modalities that are being studied across liver diseases to improve our understanding of the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. However, most individual studies explore a few omics modalities. Figure 5 shows that transcriptomics is the most extensively studied, followed by metabolomics and lipidomics. Practical challenges include high costs, limited long-term follow-up data, missing data limit the exploration to a few omics layers. Given the nature of existing omics datasets, there is a growing need for AI techniques capable of distilling knowledge from disparate and sparse datasets. AI methods such as transfer learning, which use large datasets for pretraining before adaptation to a different domain, could be useful in situations with limited sample sizes. The success of models built on benchmark datasets like TCGA underscores the need for creating and expanding public curated datasets.
Omics modalities across liver diseases. Illustrates the association between omics modalities and liver diseases investigated by the studies reviewed. While a large gamut of omics modalities are being investigated, unsurprisingly, transcriptomics is the most widely studied modality, followed by metabolomics and lipidomics. Particularly for MASLD-related diseases (MASLD+includes MASLD, MASLD-HCC, MASLD-Cirrhosis and MASH), metabolomics is the most widely studied domain. Whereas for HCC, transcriptomics is the most widely studied modality. HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; MASH, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease.
While our review has primarily focused on the scientific advancements, it is essential to establish protocols, ethical assessments and regulatory oversight for using AI in clinical settings. AI holds great promise for improving outcomes in liver diseases, but it is not yet commonly used in clinical settings. Several challenges have limited their applicability outside their training domain and cohort, including their generalisability. Patient populations vary widely across demographics. If the training data are not representative of the broader population, it significantly degrades model’s generalisability in a real-world setting.
Most studies rely on external validation cohorts for benchmarking. Studies without a separate validation cohort often perform a k-fold cross-validation and/or random split of the discovery cohort into training and test sets. While this is an essential first step, most of these cohorts are still relatively small (<500 patients) and do not reflect the diversity in the global population. Ensuring models are validated on large and diverse datasets that match the conditions expected during the clinical deployment of the model, also known as data stratification, is essential. The performance of most current models is likely to diminish when assessed prospectively using ‘real-world’ data. Further, most current AI models treat health as a single time point event, whereas diagnosis requires consideration of a patient’s history. Therefore, more large-scale multicentre prospective studies with standardised omics data acquisition techniques are needed to ensure further development of AI methods in liver diseases. The development of extensive, well-curated and well-phenotyped datasets is essential for creating multimodal AI models. This is crucial because no level of technical sophistication can extract information that is absent from the data. Standardised validation datasets are also necessary to effectively assess model performances in real-world settings and to compare algorithms.
While efforts are underway to ensure data availability, model and code availability is lagging in healthcare. To improve confidence in these models, results reported in manuscripts should be easily reproducible, which requires that the source code, trained models, and training and validation datasets be open sourced.
Given the large variations in how results are reported, we choose AUROC as it is the most consistently reported metric in most studies. We also used a combination of AUROC and the size of the validation cohort to consider the strength of the study—a high AUROC on a small dataset is not guaranteed to translate to equivalent results in real-world settings. Model performance measures, such as AUROC or concordance index, are useful in evaluating the ability of the model to discriminate between classes, however, relying on it as the sole performance measure can be limiting. Metrics such as the net benefit, decision curve analysis and cost-effectiveness analysis also provide valuable insights into the clinical utility and impact of the model. This underscores the necessity of developing standardised problem-specific reporting standards. Such practices are well established in fields like computer vision for tasks such as object detection and segmentation.
Regulatory and ethical challenges such as privacy, susceptibility to misinterpretation and fairness are critical concerns when deploying AI systems in a clinic. Further research from the machine learning community is required to address concerns such as amplification of biases. It is important for these models to be able to identify and report their own deficiencies and accurately estimate their confidence in decisions. The safe integration of clinical AI ultimately relies on well-informed clinician-users, who play a crucial role in identifying and reporting emerging issues and ensuring the safe usage of deployed models. Finally, a practical barrier to deploying AI models in clinical settings is the differences in standards and systems for data collection and treatment across institutions. Effectively integrating AI models in the clinical workflow of an institution requires specially trained individuals.
There are common biomarkers, such as alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, albumin and bilirubin, which are frequently used across different studies on liver diseases. However, differences in study design, population characteristics, prevalence of the disease in the studied population and the statistical or AI methods employed, contribute to large variations in results and conclusions. To decipher consistent trends from these studies, further systematic reviews and meta-analyses studies are needed.
A critical advancement in the field will be the development of frameworks that enable integration of pretrained models from routinely measured parameters such as clinical data and imaging data with more specialised modalities such as omics. Such cross-disciplinary frameworks are essential for holistically capturing the signatures of a disease propagating across the system
Overall, there has been significant progress in the development of AI methods applied to omics data. The next generation of AI models integrating clinical, omics and other types of data, all provide a tremendous opportunity to personalise the care of liver patients and identify individualised strategies to improve their health trajectories. As these AI paradigms continue to evolve, their integration into liver disease research and clinical practice holds great promise for improving diagnosis, treatment and patient outcomes, paving the way for more personalised and effective care.

supplementary material
Funding: This work was supported by the University of Toronto’s Eric and Wendy Schmidt AI in Science Postdoctoral Fellowship, a programme of Schmidt Futures, granted to Soumita Ghosh. MBr is a CIFAR Chair in Artificial Intelligence.
Provenance and peer review: Commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Patient consent for publication: Not applicable.

References
Artificial intelligence in healthcare
Omics profiling in precision oncology
The transformational role of GPU computing and deep learning in drug discovery
Highly accurate protein structure prediction with alphafold
Artificial intelligence in omics
Artificial intelligence applied to omics data in liver diseases: enhancing clinical predictions
Multidimensional scaling
Initialization is critical for preserving global data structure in both t-SNE and UMAP
Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso
Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net
Gene selection for cancer classification using support vector machines
XOmiVAE: an interpretable deep learning model for cancer classification using high-dimensional omics data
Evaluation of colorectal cancer subtypes and cell lines using deep learning
DeepProg: an ensemble of deep-learning and machine-learning models for prognosis prediction using multi-omics data
Integrated omics landscape of hepatocellular carcinoma suggests proteomic subtypes for precision therapy
DeepCC: a novel deep learning-based framework for cancer molecular subtype classification
Integrative clustering of multiple genomic data types using a joint latent variable model with application to breast and lung cancer subtype analysis
Similarity network fusion for aggregating data types on a genomic scale
Multi-omics factor analysis-a framework for unsupervised integration of multi-omics data sets
MUON: multimodal omics analysis framework
Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours
Metabolic signatures across the full spectrum of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Potential therapeutic implications of histidine catabolism by the gut microbiota in NAFLD patients with morbid obesity
Non-invasive diagnosis of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis and fibrosis with the use of omics and supervised learning: a proof of concept study
Metabolism dysregulation induces a specific lipid signature of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in patients
Development of a plasma screening panel for pediatric nonalcoholic fatty liver disease using metabolomics
Lipidomic identification of urinary extracellular vesicles for non-alcoholic steatohepatitis diagnosis
Accurate non-invasive diagnosis and staging of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease using the urinary steroid metabolome
Disentangling the progression of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in the human gut microbiota
A universal gut-microbiome-derived signature predicts cirrhosis
Gut metagenome‐derived signature predicts hepatic decompensation and mortality in NAFLD‐related cirrhosis
Stool microbiota are superior to saliva in distinguishing cirrhosis and hepatic encephalopathy using machine learning
Risk assessment with gut microbiome and metabolite markers in NAFLD development
FibroGENE: a gene-based model for staging liver fibrosis
Transcriptomic profiling across the nonalcoholic fatty liver disease spectrum reveals gene signatures for steatohepatitis and fibrosis
BMP4 and gremlin 1 regulate hepatic cell senescence during clinical progression of NAFLD/NASH
Novel urinary protein panels for the non-invasive diagnosis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and fibrosis stages
SOMAscan proteomics identifies serum biomarkers associated with liver fibrosis in patients with NASH
Predicting and elucidating the etiology of fatty liver disease: a machine learning modeling and validation study in the IMI DIRECT cohorts
A multi-component classifier for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) based on genomic, proteomic, and phenomic data domains
Discovery of biomarkers for glycaemic deterioration before and after the onset of type 2 diabetes: rationale and design of the epidemiological studies within the IMI DIRECT consortium
Early prediction of incident liver disease using conventional risk factors and gut-microbiome-augmented gradient boosting
Noninvasive proteomic biomarkers for alcohol-related liver disease
Identification of integrated proteomics and transcriptomics signature of alcohol-associated liver disease using machine learning
Combination of gene expression signature and model for end-stage liver disease score predicts survival of patients withsevere alcoholic hepatitis
Dysbiosis of the salivary microbiota in pediatric-onset primary sclerosing cholangitis and its potential as a biomarker
Bile acid profiles in primary sclerosing cholangitis and their ability to predict hepatic decompensation
Machine learning algorithms for predicting direct-acting antiviral treatment failure in chronic hepatitis C: An HCV-TARGET analysis
Machine-learning-based predictions of direct-acting antiviral therapy duration for patients with hepatitis C
Targeting non-structural proteins of hepatitis C virus for predicting repurposed drugs using QSAR and machine learning approaches
DeepHBV: a deep learning model to predict hepatitis B virus (HBV) integration sites
Differential serum cytokine profiles in patients with chronic hepatitis B, C, and hepatocellular carcinoma
Global epidemiology of NAFLD-related HCC: trends, predictions, risk factors and prevention
Salivary metabolites are promising non-invasive biomarkers of hepatocellular carcinoma and chronic liver disease
Supervised learning based on tumor imaging and biopsy transcriptomics predicts response of hepatocellular carcinoma to transarterial chemoembolization
The altered serum lipidome and its diagnostic potential for Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver (NAFL)-associated hepatocellular carcinoma
Serum lipidomic profiling for liver cancer screening using surface-assisted laser desorption ionization MS and machine learning
Decision tree algorithm predicts hepatocellular carcinoma among chronic hepatitis C patients following viral eradication
G2Vec: distributed gene representations for identification of cancer prognostic genes
Deep learning-based multi-omics integration robustly predicts survival in liver cancer
T-cell exhaustion signatures characterize the immune landscape and predict HCC prognosis via integrating single-cell RNA-seq and bulk RNA-sequencing
Machine learning-based integration develops a neutrophil-derived signature for improving outcomes in hepatocellular carcinoma
Cellular senescence-related gene signature as a valuable predictor of prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma
The integration of machine learning and multi-omics analysis provides a powerful approach to screen aging-related genes and predict prognosis and immunotherapy efficacy in hepatocellular carcinoma
Unveiling efferocytosis-related signatures through the integration of single-cell analysis and machine learning: a predictive framework for prognosis and immunotherapy response in hepatocellular carcinoma
Single-cell atlas of tumor cell evolution in response to therapy in hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
MRI radiomics features predict immuno-oncological characteristics of hepatocellular carcinoma
Integrated machine learning and bioinformatic analyses constructed a novel stemness-related classifier to predict prognosis and immunotherapy responses for hepatocellular carcinoma patients
Development of a transformer model for predicting the prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma after radiofrequency ablation
A Transformer-based microvascular invasion classifier enhances prognostic stratification in HCC following radiofrequency ablation
Biomolecular map of albumin identifies signatures of severity and early mortality in acute liver failure
An entropy weight method to integrate big omics and mechanistically evaluate DILI
Machine learning to identify interaction of single-nucleotide polymorphisms as a risk factor for chronic drug-induced liver injury
Omics in acute-on-chronic liver failure
Metabolic biomarkers significantly enhance the prediction of HBV-related ACLF occurrence and outcomes
A network-based approach to identify expression modules underlying rejection in pediatric liver transplantation
Rapid, label-free histopathological diagnosis of liver cancer based on Raman spectroscopy and deep learning
Deep learning-based phenotyping reclassifies combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma
Integration of deep learning-based histopathology and transcriptomics reveals key genes associated with fibrogenesis in patients with advanced NASH
Decoding global gene expression programs in liver cancer by noninvasive imaging
OATP1B3 expression is strongly associated with Wnt/β-catenin signalling and represents the transporter of gadoxetic acid in hepatocellular carcinoma
Prediction of sorafenib treatment-related gene expression for hepatocellular carcinoma: preoperative MRI and histopathological correlation
Predicting genomic alterations of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma: a radiogenomics study based on next-generation sequencing and contrast-enhanced CT
Assessing PD-L1 expression level via preoperative MRI in HCC based on integrating deep learning and radiomics features
Navigating the pitfalls of applying machine learning in genomics
Challenges in unsupervised clustering of single-cell RNA-seq data
Imputing missing RNA-sequencing data from DNA methylation by using a transfer learning-based neural network
Avocado: a multi-scale deep tensor factorization method learns a latent representation of the human epigenome
SOPHIE: generative neural networks separate common and specific transcriptional responses
Random forests
Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine
A unified approach to interpreting model predictions
Learning important features through propagating activation differences
Transformer architecture and attention mechanisms in genome data analysis: a comprehensive review
AI-based pathology predicts origins for cancers of unknown primary
TMO-Net: an explainable pretrained multi-omics model for multi-task learning in oncology
A foundation model for generalizable disease detection from retinal images
Prediction of tumor origin in cancers of unknown primary origin with cytology-based deep learning
Contrastive learning enables rapid mapping to multimodal single-cell atlas of multimillion scale
Transfer learning enables predictions in network biology
Pathformer: a biological pathway informed transformer for disease diagnosis and prognosis using multi-omics data
A deep learning model to predict RNA-Seq expression of tumours from whole slide images
Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search
A reinforcement learning model for AI-based decision support in skin cancer
Federated learning enables big data for rare cancer boundary detection
scGPT: toward building a foundation model for single-cell multi-omics using generative AI
Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with alphafold 3
Microsoft coco: common objects in context
The clinician and dataset shift in artificial intelligence
Impact of antibiotic resistance genes in gut microbiome of patients with cirrhosis
Breath metabolomics provides an accurate and noninvasive approach for screening cirrhosis, primary, and secondary liver tumors
A circulating cell-free DNA methylation signature for the detection of hepatocellular carcinoma