A Framework for Evaluation of New Processing Technologies in Human Milk Banking
ABSTRACT
The purpose of this review was to devise a framework for validation studies to test new processing technologies in human milk banking. Human milk banks are an expanding service globally. They provide donor human milk to predominantly preterm and low‐birth‐weight infants, who represent a vulnerable population. The most common method used by milk banks to ensure the safety of human milk is Holder pasteurization. There has been significant interest in recent years in alternative pathogen inactivation techniques for human milk banking, which may better preserve nutritional content while maintaining an appropriate safety profile. At present, there is no global standard for evaluating and validating new processing technologies for human milk. A major difficulty in developing a standard to evaluate novel processing methods for human milk is that it is not fully established which components of human milk, beyond macronutrient content, contribute to better clinical outcomes in preterm infants. A validation study should ideally address both the safety and nutritional impact of a new technology for human milk. For food safety, the main goal remains to achieve complete inactivation of relevant pathogenic bacteria and viruses. The secondary goal is to ensure adequate nutritional quality of the final product, so that infants receive nutrition that is as close as possible to mother's own milk. We have done a comprehensive narrative review of the key safety parameters, and nutritional and immune components of human milk, to suggest a novel framework for process validation studies in human milk banking, including suggestions for sample size where appropriate.

Introduction
There are now more than 700 human milk banks operating worldwide, providing donor human milk (DHM) to more than 800,000 infants each year who do not have access to sufficient maternal milk (Shenker et al.). The majority of infants receiving DHM from milk banks are preterm and low birth weight, as these infants are known to be at higher risk of necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) when they receive bovine‐derived infant formula (compared with human milk) (Hartmann; Quigley et al.). DHM is recommended as a better alternative to infant formula (DeMarchis et al.) by the World Health Organization (WHO) and many other respected associations (Australian Breastfeeding Association; Eidelman). Recent years have also seen an increase in availability of other human milk‐derived products, such as lyophilized human milk and multinutrient concentrated human milk fortifiers (Rusi et al.).
As preterm infants are a vulnerable population, safety is a key focus in managing DHM. Milk banks mitigate safety risks through donor screening, careful food handling, pathogen inactivation techniques, and process control under quality management frameworks such as Hazards Analysis Critical Control Points (HACCP). Although some milk banks in Norway, Germany, and New Zealand provide untreated DHM to infants after donor screening, the majority of milk banks globally use Holder pasteurization (HoP; heating and holding milk at 62.5°C for 30 min) to reduce the risk of pathogenic organisms being transmitted via DHM to recipient infants (Clifford et al.). It is known, however, that pasteurized donor human milk (PDHM) does not confer the same extent of benefits for preterm infants as mother's own milk (MOM), likely because many of the complex nutritional and bioactive properties of human milk are damaged or destroyed by DHM processing (Meier et al.). There is, therefore, a strong incentive to find better ways to process human milk to ensure safety and better preserve nutritional content (Picaud and Buffin).
Alternative pathogen inactivation techniques for human milk banking include high‐temperature short‐time (HTST) pasteurization (72°C for 15 s) (Moro et al.), high‐pressure processing (HPP), ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, pulsed electric field (PEF), and ultrasonic processing (Table 1). Some of these technologies have disadvantages in terms of scalability, cost, and infrastructure demands compared with HoP, which is a relatively low‐complexity processing method. Therefore, additional benefits (in terms of improved bioactivity and ideally better clinical outcomes) need to be demonstrated to support transition to a new processing technology.
Examples of alternative milk treatment techniques.
Technique	Description	Cost and complexity	 	High‐temperature short‐time (HTST) pasteurization (Escuder‐Vieco et al.)	A thin layer of milk is heated rapidly to 72°C, held for 15 s, and immediately cooled.	Commercial equipment at milk banking scale is available in Europe but import costs and lack of local support may impede adoption in other markets.	 	High‐pressure processing (HPP) (Pitino et al.)	A nonthermal processing method to make solid and liquid foods microbiologically safe. Hydrostatic pressure (350–800 MPa) is applied to the milk for a short‐term treatment (5–10 min), which also usually results in a moderate temperature increase (10°C–40°C). Pressurization induces changes in bacterial cells: enzyme and protein inhibition, cell membrane alteration, and disruption of genetic mechanisms.	Equipment not currently commercially available at milk banking scale.Current large‐scale technology may be too large for low‐volume processing in milk banks. Practical problem of scaling down.High investment and operating costs.	 	Pulsed electric field processing (PEF) (Zhang, Ghasemi, et al.)	Milk is treated in a treatment chamber where high‐voltage electric fields (kV/cm) are applied in short pulses (µs) to minimize heating of the product. This leads to microbial inactivation through electroporation or electropermeabilization.	Laboratory‐scale testing only at this stage.	 	Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation (Christen et al.)	UV is deployed (200–280 nm wavelength) using a UV stick placed within a liquid sample. UV has a high germicidal effect, but its efficacy may be limited by low penetration capacity for liquid foods and flat surfaces.	Laboratory‐scale testing only at this stage.	 	Microwave‐assisted heating (MWH) (Leite et al.)	Milk is exposed to microwaves (e.g., 2450 MHz, 800 W) while the temperature is monitored and kept below a temperature limit for a set period of time. MWH is based on a changing electromagnetic field leading to heating due to water molecules (dipoles) changing direction according to the electromagnetic field. This movement of water molecules results in friction and thus heat generation.	Laboratory‐scale testing only.Small volumes can be handled.	 	Gamma irradiation (Blackshaw, Wu, et al.)	Exposure of freeze‐dried milk to gamma rays from radionucleotides, which results in microbial inactivation without heating.	High initial and operating costs. Staff must be highly trained and facilities must be appropriately built and compliant with relevant local regulations to ensure safety.
Alternative human milk processing methods may have less impact on milk constituents than HoP; however, for most of these processes, further evaluation is required (Picaud and Buffin). Wesolowska et al. recently reviewed published studies evaluating alternative human milk processing technologies in terms of their impact on safety and nutritional components of human milk. It is clear from this review that alternative technologies have not been consistently evaluated against a standard set of safety and quality criteria.
At present, there is no global standard for evaluating and validating new processing technologies for human milk. A major difficulty in developing a standard to evaluate novel processing methods for human milk is that it is not fully established which components of human milk (beyond its macronutrient content) contribute the most benefit to clinical outcomes in preterm infants, which makes it difficult to choose which milk components are most important to measure and retain under alternative processing techniques. These questions may be addressed in the future by research innovations using animal models such as pup‐in‐a‐cup (Wang et al.), enabling biological consequences to be attributed to the administration of selected components, or by novel, well‐designed clinical studies in vulnerable infant populations.
We have done a comprehensive narrative review of key safety parameters and nutritional and immune components of human milk to devise a framework for the evaluation of new pathogen inactivation technologies in milk banking.
We present the discussion in two sections: the first focuses on microbial safety and the second on DHM quality. It should be noted that microbial safety must be the primary focus in validation studies, but this should be balanced against both the vulnerability of intended recipients (e.g., very‐preterm vs. term infants) and the need to retain important bioactive factors. In each section, we briefly discuss the effect of the current standard human milk processing technique, HoP, on each element and make a recommendation regarding whether a validation study should be required to demonstrate equivalent activity against each parameter. We aim to devise a structured framework that identifies components that should be essential in validation testing (dependent on processing method and context) and to suggest other components that would be desirable in certain circumstances or would only be appropriate for testing in a research context, given the current state of knowledge.

Classification of Donor Human Milk
To devise an appropriate framework for evaluating new technologies in milk banking, it is important to consider the varying regulatory environments in which human milk banks operate internationally. Some jurisdictions do not formally regulate human milk exchange at all. Under some regulatory systems, DHM is regarded as a human tissue and treated under the same laws and regulations that apply to blood and organ donation. In many jurisdictions, however, DHM is regarded as a medical/functional food and subject to food safety regulations.
Human milk does not sit neatly in either category. In some cases, DHM is being provided as a food (i.e., primarily for its macronutrient content) to enable infants to gain weight appropriately. In other circumstances, it is being used as a medical treatment—for example, when it is provided to extremely preterm infants with the aim of reducing the risk of NEC. For this reason, the WHO considers human milk in a third category: as a medical product of human origin (Tyebally Fang et al.), and the European Union has recently regulated DHM as a Substance of Human Origin, with regulations expected to take effect in 2027 (European Union).
In our opinion, human milk is a lower risk product than many other human tissues or fluids. Pathogen transmission risks are a major reason for strict regulation of blood and tissue donation; however, these risks are generally lower (but not negligible) in DHM.
In deciding upon regulatory requirements for processed human milk, further guidance is needed that addresses the specific risks and benefits of human milk. Human milk differs from bovine milk both in its nutritional constitution and the potential pathogens that may transmit.

Ensuring Donor Milk Safety and Quality With New Technologies
There are generally three steps in establishing and ensuring the ongoing safety of a food product. In this section, we will briefly summarize the purpose of validation studies (which may include challenge studies), local verification, and ongoing process control to provide context for our recommendations for how these studies should be used to evaluate new milk banking technologies.

Validation Studies
Validation studies are required to establish that processes within food manufacturing are safe and do not significantly impact the quality of the resulting product. They provide evidence that a process can consistently result in a product that meets predetermined specifications. Validation helps determine whether control measures can achieve their specified purpose in terms of hazard control (FAO and WHO). In the case of a food, it should demonstrate that the food remains safe to consume—for example, it should not cause food poisoning because of the growth of pathogenic bacteria or the production of toxins (bacterial and fungal) in the food; has not deteriorated in quality or spoiled in any way that the consumer would find unacceptable; and has not lost significant amounts of any nutrients listed on the label (New Zealand Government Ministry for Primary Industries). Validation studies would generally be done by the manufacturer of commercial equipment for the purpose of receiving a license from the relevant authority to supply or sell the equipment.
Regulators rarely specify the required size of a food safety validation study, beyond suggesting that the study should be large enough to generate statistically significant results. The statistical power of a study is generally increased with the number of samples collected and is also affected by the volume of each sample tested, as this affects the limit of detection of the testing method. Further detailed guidance around adequate sample size may support the conduct of robust validation studies in the future, and we have attempted to offer suggested guidance on sample size as part of this review.
Once a validation study is completed, it should not be necessary for small milk bank operators to repeat validation work for commercial equipment. Rather, individual operators should perform a smaller verification study to ensure that the equipment performs as described by the manufacturer in a local setting.

Challenge Studies
Challenge studies may be needed as part of a validation study. In challenge studies, the food is inoculated with a high number of microorganisms that are of particular concern for the safety of the product. The inactivation of the microorganism, expressed as a log reduction in organism count, is measured after the application of the new processing technology and compared to a standard processing technology (e.g., HoP). Surrogate pathogenic organisms are sometimes chosen for a challenge study. A challenge study should prioritize organisms and substances that are likely to lead to adverse health effects, based on historical experience. Kontopodi et al. have recently summarized considerations for challenge studies for bacteria and viruses in human milk, including options for challenge tests.
Detection of potentially pathogenic organisms in human milk is highly dependent upon the quality of the test method (Rigourd et al.) including volume of sample inoculated, choice of test media (whether media is enriched to enhance growth of fastidious organisms, whether selective media to identify particular organisms such as Bacillus cereus is used), incubation conditions (aerobic/anaerobic testing), and detection methods.
It is desirable that bacterial challenge studies are done in raw milk with low levels of microbial flora (Kontopodi et al.), rather than using pasteurized milk, as pasteurization may impact antimicrobial components of human milk.
Testing for viral pathogens in human milk is usually best done by cell culture methods (usually plaque reduction and endpoint titration assays [TCID50]), rather than molecular methods. In most cases, molecular methods will detect viral fragments present in milk but frequently cannot discriminate between live replicative virus and inactivated virus (Hamprecht et al.). Definitions of viral inactivation vary depending on organism and conditions, but inactivation is generally regarded as >5‐log reduction in viral load under culture conditions (European Medicines Agency); the WHO has provided detailed recommendations on the conduct of studies to demonstrate viral inactivation in blood products (WHO), which may also be useful for the conduct of viral inactivation studies in human milk.
Results from validation studies (including challenge testing) would usually be provided by the equipment manufacturer to the local licensing authority for approval of new equipment and platforms. Validation studies can be burdensome and expensive, so it is important that validation is done correctly the first time, so that complex testing does not need to be repeated by each user, particularly in low‐resource settings.

Initial Verification
Verification of equipment is generally done by the purchaser to ensure that a validated platform performs as expected in the user's hands. Verification is usually less extensive in nature than the initial validation study. For example, in milk banking, this might include temperature mapping and testing for common bacterial pathogens prior to the implementation of new equipment at a site. Verification studies would usually be appropriate for local milk bank implementation of validated commercial equipment and would be significantly less expensive than validation studies. This process (validation by the manufacturer, followed by a smaller verification study) would also facilitate introduction of validated new technologies in lower resource settings.

Process Control
Ongoing process verification for milk banking remains essential. This is for ongoing quality assurance and to manage the risk of spore‐forming organisms in human milk (which generally survive pasteurization).
Process verification generally involves microbial testing of each batch of human milk. Some organizations recommend both pre‐ and post‐pasteurization testing of each milk batch (UK NICE; Department of Health and Aged Care; Weaver et al.), and others recommend only post‐pasteurization testing (HMBANA), with variable frequency. These practices have been previously summarized (Clifford et al.). In our opinion, a standard plate count done post‐pasteurization for each batch would be sufficient process control for microbial contamination in liquid milk. Acceptable post‐pasteurization CFU/mL cutoffs will depend on the post‐pasteurization storage and management of DHM. Detection of spore‐forming organisms that are not inactivated by processing is particularly important in the production of shelf‐stable human milk products (products stored at room temperature) that are more likely to provide conditions that enable the growth of organisms that survive pasteurization, such as B. cereus. Spore‐forming organisms may also contaminate frozen milk products and replicate once the product is warmed for infant feeding.
Further discussion of ongoing process control is beyond the scope of this article. The discussion below focuses on the desirable requirements for an initial validation study, balancing microbiological safety and retention of milk quality.

Microbiological Safety Parameters for Donor Human Milk
The primary purpose of a validation study for a new milk banking technology is to evaluate whether the technology successfully inactivates known human milk‐transmitted pathogens. Direct application of microbiological cutoffs from the dairy industry standards may not be appropriate for determining human milk safety, as the microorganisms present in human milk are not the same as in bovine milk.
The following sections summarize known risks associated with microorganisms that can be found in human milk, aiming to identify “essential” and “desirable” organisms that should be included in a validation study of a new processing technology. Specifically, we outline how common and potentially concerning the presence of certain microorganisms in DHM is; how they are impacted by standard and novel processing techniques; and which type of study is most appropriate to test their inactivation in DHM (Table 2). Importantly, safety assessment will depend on assessment of microbiological risk in the final product. For example, lyophilized milk is at a higher risk of contamination with environmental organisms (e.g., Cronobacter sakazakii) than milk that is heat‐treated in liquid form (Jarzynka et al.). The current literature on microbial inactivation using current and emerging processing technologies is summarized in Table S1.
Suggested microbial testing for validation of a new human milk banking technology. Essential organisms are highlighted in beige.
Microorganism	Pathogen example	Likely to be present in human milk?	Known transmission risk via human milk?	Capable of causing disease in preterm infants?	Include in validation study?	Suggested acceptance criteria	 	Bacteria	Standard plate count after pasteurization	Yes (Murphy et al.)	N/A	Yes	Essential	1 CFU/mL	 		Bacillus cereus	Yes (Adjidé et al.)	Yes (Liao and Tsai)	Yes	Conditional (essential: shelf stable products; not required: frozen products)	For shelf stable product: <1 CFU/mL	 		Listeria monocytogenes	Yes (rare) (Sarr et al.)	Yes (Svabić‐Vlahović et al.)	Yes	Essential	<1 CFU/mL	 		Staphylococcus aureus	Yes (Almutawif et al.)	Yes (FSANZ)	Yes	Essential (enterotoxin testing desirable)	<1 CFU/mL	 		Streptococcus agalactiae (GBS)	Yes (Schwab et al.)	Yes (Tavares et al.)	Yes	Desirable	<1 CFU/mL	 		Cronobacter sakazakii	Yes (Jacobs et al.)	Yes (Drudy et al.)	Yes	Conditional (essential: powdered products; desirable: liquid products)	<1 CFU/g	 		Salmonella spp.a	Yes (rare) (Keim et al.)	Yes (Mukerji et al.)	Yes	Essential	<1 CFU/mL	 		Nonfermenting Gram negatives, e.g., Acinetobacter baumannii	Yes (Almutawif et al.)	Yes (Gras‐Le Guen et al.)	Yes	Desirable	<1 CFU/mL	 		Mycobacterium tuberculosis	Yes (rare) (McGuire et al.)	Rare (Gupta et al.)	Yes	Not required	N/A	 	Viruses	HIV	Yes (Abuogi et al.)	Yes (Abuogi et al.)	Yes	Essential	Complete inactivation (>5‐log reduction)	 		HTLV	Yes (Legrand et al.)	Yes (Legrand et al.)	Yes	Desirable	Complete inactivation (>5‐log reduction)	 		Hepatitis B	Yes (de Oliveira et al.)	No	Yes	Desirable	Inactivation	 		CMV	Yes (Hamprecht et al.)	Yes (Hamprecht et al.)	Yes	Essential	>5‐log reduction	 		Respiratory virus, e.g., SARS‐CoV‐2	Yes (Kumar et al.)	No	Yes	Desirable	>5‐log reduction	 		Nonenveloped viruses, e.g., picornavirus	Yes (Welsh et al.)	No	Yes	Desirable	>5‐log reduction	 		Herpes simplex virus	Yes (Sullivan et al.)	Yes	Yes	Desirable	>5‐log reduction	 	Fungi	Candida albicans	Yes (Moossavi et al.)	Yes (Amir et al.)	Yes	Desirable	<1 CFU/mL
Although rare in human milk, Salmonella enteritidis is included as a representative of Enterobacteriaceae family. An alternative organism such as E. coli could be used if Salmonella spp. testing is not required under local food legislation.

Bacteria in Human Milk
Human milk contains a wide variety of microorganisms, including bacteria, viruses, and fungi (Boix‐Amorós et al.). The human milk microbiota is complex and highly diverse, but its composition has been found to be relatively similar between individuals (Biagi et al.). Human milk contains skin microorganisms, oral flora, and intestinal bacteria (Rigourd et al.; Toscano et al.). Proteobacteria and Firmicutes are the dominant phyla present in human milk, with Streptococcus a dominant genus (Biagi et al.) in addition to Staphylococcus spp, Pseudomonas spp. (Murphy et al.; Urbaniak et al.), and Bifidobacterium spp. (Martín et al.). Potential neonatal pathogens that may be present in human milk include Gram‐positive organisms (B. cereus, Group B streptococcus [GBS], Listeria monocytogenes [rare]) and Gram‐negative pathogens (Enterobacterales and other environmental Gram‐negatives such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter spp.). The Gram‐negative organisms are thought to reach human milk from the maternal gut via an entero‐mammary pathway. Expressed human milk may also be contaminated by environmental and skin bacteria during the process of milk expression and storage.
Most microorganisms present in human milk are harmless, or even beneficial, for the recipient infant; however, human milk may also transmit pathogens (Blackshaw, Valtchev, et al.; Clifford et al.). As many pathogenic microorganisms are not consistently present in human milk, it is important that any validation work should include challenge studies for these rare microorganisms.

Standard Plate Count
Skin‐derived bacteria such as coagulase negative staphylococci and corynebacteria, and gut‐derived organisms such as Bifidobacterium spp., Lactobacillus spp., and alpha‐hemolytic streptococci, are commonly present in DHM (Almutawif et al.). These are generally low‐virulence organisms, although they can be occasionally pathogenic in preterm infants. Most human milk that is provided to milk banks is collected via a breast pump, which is susceptible to contamination by both the native flora of breast milk and skin and environmental bacteria. In dairy processing, a standard aerobic plate count is usually done as a marker of adequate hygiene during the milk collection process (FSANZ). For human milk, a pre‐ and posttreatment standard plate count is “essential” in validation studies of a new processing technology.

Spore‐Forming Bacteria Including Bacillus cereus
Spore‐forming bacteria (e.g., Bacillus spp. and Clostridium spp.) are highly heat resistant and not inactivated by HoP. The most common organism of concern in milk banking is B. cereus, which is ubiquitous in the environment and colonizes human skin (Mandic‐Mulec et al.). Its ability to form spores means that it survives in soil, survives on surfaces and equipment, and withstands many cleaning agents. The proportion of expressed milk containing B. cereus varies significantly around the world. The proportion of milk contaminated with B. cereus at milk banks has been reported as anywhere from 3% to 37% of milk batches (Adjidé et al.; Froh et al.; Jandová et al.).
In the neonatal intensive care population, there have been several reported outbreaks of B. cereus bacteremia, occasionally traced back to human milk consumption (Liao and Tsai), although no outbreak has been traced back to PDHM sourced from a milk bank (Lewin et al.).
Although rare, anaerobic spore‐forming bacteria such as Clostridium spp. can also be pathogenic to vulnerable preterm infants (i.e., vomiting, NEC, neonatal sepsis) (Kiu et al.; Nicolau et al.). A recent case report from a Chinese milk bank highlighted the detection of Clostridium perfringens in PDHM due to contamination of the breast pump, marking the first reported case in a human milk bank worldwide (Liu et al.).
Current standard milk banking processes (i.e., HoP) do not inactivate B. cereus and C. perfringens. These organisms may contaminate frozen milk products and replicate once the product is warmed for infant feeding. This means that additional testing (process control) is required at the time of batch processing: most milk banks conduct post‐pasteurization microbial testing on samples from each batch with the primary aim of detecting spore‐forming bacteria.
Inclusion of spore‐forming organisms in a validation study should be “conditional” depending on the intended postprocessing storage conditions. If milk is tested after treatment (process control) and stored frozen as for HoP milk, then it would not be required to include spore‐forming organisms in a validation study. If milk is intended to be shelf stable (i.e., stored at room temperature after treatment, e.g., with retort processing or lyophilization), then it would be essential for validation studies to include challenge tests with spore‐forming organisms such as B. cereus.

Listeria monocytogenes
Listeria monocytogenes is a serious but rare neonatal pathogen, which is predominantly transmitted before or during birth from infected mother to infant. Although its presence in milk is theoretically probable (Poulsen et al.), only a single possible case of L. monocytogenes transmission by human milk has been reported (Svabić‐Vlahović et al.). More recently, there have been two publications suggesting it can be detected in the milk of very malnourished women in Africa (Sarr et al.; Togo et al.) by 16S culture‐independent genome sequencing. It was not detected in the milk of healthy French women, using the same method (Togo et al.). There have also been a few reports of nosocomial transmission attributed to contaminated material or patient‐to‐patient transmission via healthcare workers. Therefore, transmission by human milk appears to be rare, if it occurs at all.
In food processing facilities, L. monocytogenes may be accidentally introduced after pasteurization. As it is capable of growth at refrigerated temperatures (∼4°C) and is a significant neonatal pathogen, it would be “essential” to include it as a test organism in validation studies. L. monocytogenes is known to be inactivated by HoP. As it is rarely present in human milk, validation of its inactivation under a processing technique would need to be done through spiking studies. A challenge study of L. monocytogenes using a high inoculum of bacteria (at least 105 CFU/mL) (Spanu et al.) should demonstrate that it is undetectable (<1 CFU/mL) after application of the technology.

Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram‐positive organism that has the potential to cause serious disease (sepsis, osteomyelitis, endocarditis) in infants. S. aureus is an organism that resides on the skin and is commonly present in expressed human milk. It may produce enterotoxins that are heat stable. High quantities of S. aureus may indicate inappropriate handling and storage of milk, which have allowed the organism to proliferate.
S. aureus is inactivated by HoP (FSANZ), and novel technologies should be demonstrated to be at least as effective. A validation study should include as “essential” a challenge study with S. aureus and demonstrate that it is undetectable after application of the technology.
When S. aureus is present in milk under uncontrolled conditions (e.g., holding at room temperature), it may proliferate and produce enterotoxins. Some S. aureus enterotoxins are not inactivated by pasteurization (Hartmann). Many milk banks do pre‐pasteurization microbial testing to detect bacteria capable of producing heat‐stable toxins, although the necessity for this testing is unproven (Clifford et al.), and recent studies have demonstrated that significant quantities of enterotoxin are not produced in pre‐pasteurized human milk, even under challenge conditions (Almutawif et al.). It would be “desirable” for a validation study to establish whether enterotoxin is present after processing under challenge conditions; however, given this is only a theoretical concern, such testing should not be considered essential.

Streptococcus agalactiae
Streptococcus agalactiae (Group B streptococcus) is one of the more common bacterial pathogens in infants and one of the most common causes of early‐ and late‐onset neonatal sepsis, frequently associated with meningitis (Tavares et al.). The role of breastfeeding in transmitting Group B streptococcus (GBS) to infants with late‐onset GBS disease remains unclear (Zimmermann et al.). GBS is known to be frequently present in human milk. One study measured GBS in 10% of DHM (Kvist et al.).
While GBS is highly likely to be inactivated by HoP, there have only been a few studies assessing the effect of HoP on inactivation of this common organism in human milk (Jones et al.). Given that GBS is a known pathogen in the neonatal period and is frequently present in human milk, it would be a “desirable” challenge organism to include in a validation study.

Enterobacterales
Enterobacterales are an order of Gram‐negative organisms that may be present in human milk, likely transferred via the entero‐mammary pathway; however, Enterobacterales are seen far more commonly when milk has been expressed using a breast pump (possibly introduced due to formation of biofilm within the breast pump). One of the most common Enterobacterales detected in DHM was Klebsiella oxytoca in an Australian study (Almutawif et al.).
In many food safety standards relating to dairy products, C. sakazakii and Salmonella spp. are recommended as appropriate representative test organisms for the Enterobacterales order. The FAO/WHO Expert Consultation for the Codex Alimentarius Commission (Codex Alimentarius Commission) determined that Salmonella spp. and Cronobacter spp. were “microorganisms with a clear evidence of causality in illness” (category A) (Nishida et al.) and recommended stringent sampling and limits for both organisms.

Cronobacter sakazakii
Cronobacter sakazakii (formerly Enterobacter sakazakii) is part of the Enterobacterales order. It is a rare, but life‐threatening, cause of meningitis (Bar‐Oz et al.; Biering et al.), NEC (Van Acker et al.) and sepsis in preterm and full‐term infants (Drudy et al.).
It has been implicated in outbreaks of bacterial infection among neonates receiving powdered bovine‐derived infant formula. The primary reservoirs for contamination of powdered infant formula with Cronobacter remain undefined due to the ubiquitous nature of these organisms in the environment (El‐Sharoud et al.). Cronobacter sakazakii has been found to be widespread in manufacturing plants, including in air filters and on surfaces (Mullane et al.) and in the spray‐drying areas, textile filters, and roller dryers (Jacobs et al.). A 2010 Australian study reported that C. sakazakii was isolated from 32% of 298 environmental samples collected at five milk powder factories (Craven et al.). C. sakazakii has a very high tolerance to drying (Walsh et al.) and can survive in low‐moisture food and during processing from decontamination to the dried state (Lang et al.). C. sakazakii has been shown to survive for long periods in powdered infant formula, up to 12 months or longer (Osaili et al.). Heat shock may enhance the survival of C. sakazakii after freeze‐drying or spray‐drying (Wan‐Ling et al.; Arroyo et al.; Jiao et al.).
C. sakazakii is considered susceptible to HoP (Osaili et al.). We recommend that it would be “desirable” to include C. sakazakii in a challenge study and make a “conditional” recommendation that it should be an “essential” challenge organism in validation studies of lyophilized human milk products.

Salmonella spp
Salmonella spp. testing of dairy products is mandated in many dairy industry standards. It has been implicated in many neonatal outbreaks and is largely associated with bovine‐derived powdered infant formula (Blackshaw, Valtchev, et al.).
Salmonella spp. are primarily animal pathogens (harbored in the vertebrate gut) but they have occasionally been reported in human milk from mothers infected with Salmonella spp. (Chen et al.; Cooke et al.; Mukerji et al.; Qutaishat et al.). Salmonella may rarely transmit via milk from an infected mother, but it is an uncommon infection in high‐resource settings. A small study from the United States reported detection of Salmonella spp. in 3% of internet‐purchased human milk samples (n = 101) but did not detect Salmonella spp. in unpasteurized human milk samples from a milk bank (n = 20) (Keim et al.). This difference is likely due to the different donor selection and milk handling processes in formal milk banking, compared to community milk sharing.
Salmonella spp. are not heat resistant and can be near‐completely inactivated by HoP (Gabriel et al.). As Salmonella spp. is an important pathogen but rarely present in human milk, it should be included as an “essential” challenge organism as part of validation testing. Salmonella spp. is recommended as a representative organism (for Enterobacteriaceae) primarily because it is commonly required in validation studies under food standards. In countries where food standards do not apply to human milk, researchers evaluating a new technology might choose an alternative organism from the Enterobacteriaceae family such as Escherichia coli, a common cause of sepsis and meningitis in neonates.

Nonfermenting Gram Negatives
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter spp. are environmental Gram‐negative organisms that may be present in human milk and/or be introduced from a contaminated environment, such as inadequately cleaned breast milk pumps or pasteurizer equipment. An Australian milk bank reported that Acinetobacter spp. was found in 8.1% of DHM batches pre‐pasteurization (Almutawif et al.).
These organisms have been implicated in neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) outbreaks. A French milk bank published a report of post‐pasteurization contamination of DHM bottles that caused an outbreak of P. aeruginosa bacteremia in the NICU (Gras‐Le Guen et al.). In this case, the pasteurizer was inappropriately being used to defrost frozen PDHM. There are other subsequent unpublished reports from milk banks of post‐pasteurization contamination of milk bottles with P. aeruginosa, causing disease in neonates (Ortiz).
Pseudomonas spp. and Acinetobacter spp. are generally heat labile. A representative nonfermenting organism would be “desirable” to include in challenge studies as part of the validation process.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an aerobic Gram‐positive, non‐spore‐forming rod, which globally is the second‐leading cause of infectious disease mortality, responsible for 214,000 child deaths in 2022 (WHO). It is a rare infection in high‐resource settings. Mycobacterium tuberculosis is generally transmitted via the aerosol route from persons with pulmonary tuberculosis. It is rarely present in human milk unless the mother has tuberculous mastitis, which is a rare complication of TB.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is generally heat labile and is inactivated by HoP (Harrington and Karlson).
As it is a rare pathogen in human milk and would be expected to be detected by other milk banking mitigations (e.g., donor interview and deferral), inclusion of M. tuberculosis in a validation study is “not required.”

Viruses in Human Milk
Many viruses and viral fragments have been detected in human milk (and equally many antibodies against common viral pathogens), but most of these viruses do not transmit to the infant via breastfeeding. Important viral pathogens that may transmit via human milk include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), human T‐lymphotropic virus (HTLV) (Demazeau et al.), and cytomegalovirus (CMV). The impact of thermal pasteurization on viruses in human milk has been comprehensively summarized by Pitino et al..
Validation and challenge studies that address inactivation of viruses in DHM should use functional assays and assays that can differentiate between replication‐competent and noncompetent viruses. As discussed in Section 3.1.1, the WHO has provided useful detailed guidance on the conduct of virus inactivation studies in blood products, which can be usefully applied to similar studies in human milk (WHO).

HIV
HIV is a significant pathogen transmitted via human milk (Moseholm and Weis). Cell‐free and cell‐associated HIV‐1 can be detected in the milk of HIV‐infected women. The risk of mother‐to‐infant transmission via breastfeeding is dependent on several factors, including the maternal viral load, CD4+ cell count, and duration of breastfeeding. The reported risk of HIV‐1 transmission via breastfeeding varies between approximately 4% and as high as 40% (Abuogi et al.).
Many milk banks shut down in the 1980s with the emergence of HIV because of the risk of transmission from DHM to the recipient infant (Corpeleijn et al.). This led to introduction of pathogen inactivation processes in milk banking, primarily HoP.
HIV‐1 is effectively inactivated by HoP (Pitino et al.), and HIV inactivation would be “essential” to demonstrate in challenge studies for alternative processing techniques. As HIV is a risk group 3 pathogen when cultured, this would require challenge studies done in reference laboratories.

HTLV
HTLV is an oncogenic retrovirus, which causes adult T‐cell leukemia. Transmission of HTLV‐1 from infected mothers to nursing infants by breastfeeding is an important mode of transmission, with reported transmission rates associated with breastfeeding varying from approximately 10% to 46% (Legrand et al.). Although the cellular mechanism of HTLV‐1 transmission by breastfeeding has not been defined, risk factors include duration of breastfeeding (>6 months) and maternal viral load in plasma and milk.
Prevalence of HTLV infection varies widely in different communities, so the risk that it will be present in DHM also varies significantly.
HTLV inactivation has not been specifically demonstrated under HoP conditions, but as it is similar to other retroviruses such as HIV, it is highly likely to be inactivated if HIV is demonstrated to be inactivated. HTLV would be a “desirable” organism to include in challenge studies for alternative processing techniques but should not be considered essential.

CMV
CMV is also commonly transmitted to infants via maternal milk. It is very common for postpartum women with latent CMV infection to excrete CMV in their milk (Hayashi et al.). Viral loads in milk usually peak 1–2 months after delivery (Hamprecht et al.; Hayashi et al.). CMV may transmit to the breast milk feeding infant but rarely causes serious infection (Hayashi et al.), except in preterm infants, who may sometimes become seriously unwell (with an associated mortality) (Chiavarini et al.). In some countries, NICUs do not allow extremely low‐birth‐weight infants to receive raw maternal milk due to the risk of postnatally acquired CMV infection. As milk banks primarily provide DHM to at‐risk very‐low‐birth‐weight preterm infants, CMV is of particular concern.
A study done in China reported that 46.4% of the donated milk samples were positive for CMV by nucleic acid testing. The estimated viral load in DHM was 103–104 copies/mL. Of interest, estimated viral loads were higher in milk from mothers of preterm infants (Min et al.).
Most milk banks do not routinely test for CMV, relying on heat treatment (usually HoP) to inactivate CMV in milk, although this is not universal (Jang et al.).
As it is a common virus with significant pathogenic potential in preterm infants, CMV inactivation is “essential” to demonstrate in a validation study of alternative processing techniques, especially when donor milk is intended to feed preterm infants.

Respiratory Viruses
Although respiratory virus fragments (influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, SARS‐CoV‐2) have frequently been detected in human milk, there is no evidence to suggest that human milk is a primary mechanism of transmission. DHM may become externally contaminated during collection or processing with such viruses, so including a representative RNA virus in a challenge study would be “desirable.” SARS‐CoV‐2 has been shown to be inactivated in human milk by HoP, and other viruses (influenza, parainfluenza, respiratory syncytial virus) appear to be similarly heat sensitive (Pitino et al.). There are some nonenveloped positive‐sense single‐stranded RNA (ssRNA) viruses (such as enteroviruses and parechoviruses) and DNA viruses (e.g., human erythrovirus B19) that are not consistently inactivated by current processes such as HoP (Nissen et al.). Inclusion of a picornavirus (e.g., hepatitis A, enterovirus) in a validation study of alternative milk processing techniques would be “desirable,” particularly if the study is aiming to demonstrate superiority over current practice (HoP), but should not be essential.

Hepatitis Viruses
Hepatitis B virus is commonly detected in breast milk from infected mothers and may not be fully inactivated by HoP (de Oliveira et al.); however, it is unlikely that breastfeeding is a mode of transmission for hepatitis B (vertical transmission via blood is generally more common) (Shi et al.), and hepatitis B‐infected mothers are generally encouraged to continue breastfeeding. Hepatitis C is also frequently present in the breast milk of infected mothers, but it is unlikely that breastfeeding is a significant mode of transmission for hepatitis C (Polywka et al.). Hepatitis C is likely inactivated by HoP (FSANZ).
Many human milk banks require donor screening (via serology ± nucleic acid testing) for hepatitis B and C and defer prospective donors with either infection. Given the existing risk mitigations in place (donor selection, serological testing), and the low likelihood that either virus transmits via breast milk, we would suggest that a validation study is “desirable” to demonstrate inactivation of hepatitis B or hepatitis C, particularly if the milk bank is not using other risk mitigations listed above.
Hepatitis A virus is similarly detectable in breast milk from mothers with acute infection but is not thought to be a primary mode of transmission. Hepatitis A is a nonenveloped virus in the picornavirus family and more heat resistant than many other viruses. It is not fully inactivated under HoP (Pitino et al.). As suggested above, inclusion of a picornavirus in a validation study of alternative milk processing techniques would be “desirable,” particularly if the study is aiming to demonstrate superiority over current practice (HoP) but should not be essential.

Other DNA Viruses
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) is a human herpes virus (like CMV) that may be shed in breast milk, particularly in mothers with primary infection. Herpes simplex may cause serious neonatal disease including encephalitis with long‐term neurological sequelae.
It is unlikely that a mother would be donating milk at the time of a primary HSV infection due to the presence of symptoms incompatible with donation. HSV is relatively heat resistant and not inactivated by HoP (Pitino et al.). If a study is being developed to demonstrate the superiority of a new treatment process over HoP, we suggest it is “desirable” to include HSV in the validation study because of its potentially serious adverse consequences for neonates.
Parvovirus is another relatively heat‐resistant DNA virus; however, it has not previously been demonstrated to be present in breast milk. Other herpes viruses, such as Epstein–Barr virus, varicella–zoster virus, and human herpesvirus 7, have also been detected in human milk, but transmission to the neonate has not been demonstrated.
Inclusion of herpes viruses (other than CMV) in a validation study is “not required,” but if the processing technology is intended to provide improved safety over HoP, then HSV and parvovirus should be considered “desirable” for inclusion in a challenge study.

Fungi
Recent studies have confirmed that fungi are commonly present in human milk and likely contribute to the development of the infant gut microbiome. A recent study reported that fungi were detectable in 21% of human milk samples (Moossavi et al.). Some researchers have reported Candida, Alternaria, and Rhodotorula as the most common isolates from human milk, and others have reported Malassezia spp., Davidiella spp., Sistotrema spp., and Penicillium spp. In the presence of nipple thrush, Candida spp. may enter milk in larger quantities (Amir et al.); however, most milk banks have a questionnaire to identify nipple thrush in donors.
There is no available evidence showing the impact of HoP on the inactivation of Candida spp. As very‐preterm infants are at risk of invasive candidiasis and other fungal infections, it would be “desirable” to include Candida spp. as a test organism in a validation study.

Summary
In this section, we have reviewed common and uncommon microbiological pathogens of relevance to human milk safety, in order to make recommendations about organisms that are considered “essential” or “desirable” for inclusion in validation studies (see Table 3). Based on our review, we recommend it is essential that all new processing technologies are validated, using challenge studies, against key bacteria (Listeria spp., Salmonella spp., S. aureus) and viruses (HIV, CMV). Listeria spp. and Salmonella spp. have been chosen as representative organisms for Gram‐positive and Gram‐negative bacteria, respectively, primarily because they are often required organisms in food safety validation studies. In countries where testing is not required to meet specific food standards legislation, alternative organisms of relevance to neonatal health (e.g., GBS, E. coli) could be chosen for use in challenge studies. Additional microorganisms may be desirable to include in some specialist validation studies, particularly to address risks associated with specific product format (e.g., liquid vs. powder) or to demonstrate superiority over current practice.
Suggested nutritional analysis for validation of a new milk banking technology. Essential nutrients are highlighted in beige.
Components	Any studies to indicate that this component impacts infant clinical outcomes?	Likely to be impacted by processing based on historical experience?	Is testing required for a validation study	Suggested acceptance criteria	 	Macronutrients					 	Lipid	Yes (Belfort et al.)	Likely, but can be minimizeda (Pitino et al.)	Essential	<10% reduction	 	Protein	Yes (Belfort et al.)	Unlikely (<10% difference) (Pitino et al.)	Essential	<5% reduction	 	Carbohydrate	No (Belfort et al.)	Unlikely (Pitino et al.)	Essential	<5% reduction	 	Fatty acids	Yes (Gould et al.)	Unlikely (Romeu‐Nadal et al.)	Desirable	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	 	Vitamins					 	Vitamin C	No	Decreased (Pitino et al.)	Desirable	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	 	Bioactive components					 	Lactoferrin	Yes (Atayde et al.; Pammi and Gautham)	Decreased (Zhang, Duley, et al.)	Essential	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	 	IgA	Lack of direct evidence (Rosen‐Carole et al.)	Decreased (Zhang, Duley, et al.)	Desirable	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	 	Enzymes					 	Bile salt‐stimulated lipase	Yes (Andersson et al.)	Decreased (Zhang, Lee, et al.)	Essential	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	 	Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)	Lack of direct evidence in human studies	Decreased (Escuder‐Vieco et al.)	Desirable	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	 	XO/LPO	Lack of direct evidence in human studies (Al‐Shehri et al.)	Decreased (Zhang, Duley, et al.)	Desirable	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	 	Lysozyme	Yes (Coutinho et al.)	Likely (Zhang, Duley, et al.)	Desirable	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP
Lipid losses likely during handling, processing and storage.

Quality Parameters for Donor Milk
Food safety remains the primary concern for milk banking and is the reason why most milk banks apply some form of thermal processing. However, processing and storage in milk banking contribute to significant losses in some nutrients, leading to reduced DHM quality compared to MOM. It remains largely unknown which nutrients and bioactive components, or combination thereof, are responsible for the improved clinical outcomes of premature and low‐birth‐weight infants who are fed MOM compared to those receiving PDHM (Parker et al.). Improvements in nutrient and bioactive compound retention in DHM achieved through novel processing techniques could potentially lead to improved clinical outcomes for premature infants, reducing the gap between those who receive MOM and PDHM.
The following sections summarize the current literature on quality parameters for DHM, with particular focus on their clinical relevance when using DHM for preterm infants. Based on their clinical relevance, we offer an assessment of their relevance for inclusion in validation studies of new processing techniques in milk banking (Table 3). The impact of a variety of standard and alternative processing techniques on common nutrients is summarized in Table S2. It is important to note that many studies simply measure macronutrient and bioactive component concentrations before and after processing. Measurement of milk components post‐processing may not fully reveal the changes in the macromolecular structure of milk and its many components, especially bioactive proteins, which may be digested differently after processing. Digestion models are necessary to further understand these impacts (Pitino et al.).

Nutrients in Human Milk
The purpose of this section is to describe the reported clinical impact of human milk macronutrients, micronutrients, and bioactive factors on infant outcomes, in order to assist in determining whether it is “desirable” or “essential” to measure these components in validation studies for new processing technologies for milk banks.

Macronutrients
Macronutrients in maternal milk are known to significantly impact infant growth and clinical outcomes. Adequate early growth in preterm infants is key to neurodevelopmental outcomes (Castanys‐Muñoz et al.). Infants receiving DHM have been reported to grow more slowly than those receiving MOM (Parker et al.); this may be due to a mismatch between the macronutrient composition of DHM and that of early lactational MOM (which is higher in protein in particular).
It should also be noted that many external factors impact the macronutrient profile in human milk, particularly lactational stage (Valentine et al.). However, variation in macronutrients between individual donors to a milk bank is significant and can outweigh the impact of stage of lactation (John et al.; Walter et al.). Many milk banks around the world choose to pool human milk from multiple donors to improve standardization of macronutrient content in DHM (Tabasso et al.).
There are conflicting reports in the published literature regarding the impact of processing and storage on human milk macronutrient content. Some studies have shown that macronutrient content is largely unaffected by storage and handling of human milk (Gao et al.) and is also not significantly impacted by thermal processing (e.g., HoP, flash heating) and nonthermal techniques (HPP and UVC) (Pitino et al.; Romeu‐Nadal et al.).
However, other researchers have reported reductions in lipid and protein content during HoP, with reported losses in total lipid content of up to 25% and in total protein content of up to 16% (Adhisivam et al.; Kim et al.). This is important because lipids make up the largest proportion (50%) of the daily energy intake in infants. Lipids can also be reduced during frozen storage of pasteurized milk (Kim et al.), including during repeated freeze–thaw cycles (John et al.). Reduced lipid content after processing or freezing can be attributed to disruption of the milk fat globule membrane (MFGM), which protects triacylglycerols in the core of the milk fat globules from enzymatic degradation and oxidation (Wiking et al.). Further losses in lipid content may occur during handling, due to adherence of lipids to plastic storage containers and feeding tubes (Meier et al.). The overall lipid profile on a lipid class level can also be altered by processing, and the way individual lipid classes are impacted depends on the type of processing technology that is applied (Tran et al.). It is also important to note that even if total lipid content remains the same in human milk after heat treatment, the bioavailability to the infant receiving PDHM may be reduced, as early studies have shown that the bioavailability of fat for preterm low‐birth‐weight infants was reduced due to heat treatment, probably as a result of the inactivation of lipases (Williamson et al.).
As macronutrient content of milk is known to impact clinical outcomes in infants, it would be “essential” for validation studies of new human milk processing technologies to include total lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates.

Fatty Acids (FAs)
FAs are a subset of lipids and play a significant role in human health. They are individual molecules consisting of a long chain of carbon atoms bonded to hydrogen atoms, with a carboxyl group at the end. FAs may be saturated or unsaturated (mono‐ or polyunsaturated). Saturated and monounsaturated FAs (SFA and MUFA) are the most abundant groups of FAs in human milk, each making up more than one third of the total FAs (Floris et al.).
Some individual FAs are known to have specific roles in human development. For example, arachidonic acid (ARA), an omega‐6 FA, is the most abundant long‐chain polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) in human milk and is known to be important for growth, as well as brain and neurological development (Salem and Van Dael). Another relevant long‐chain PUFA is docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), an omega‐3 FA, which is important for retina function and brain development (Gould et al.; Hoffman et al.; Uauy et al.). A large multicenter randomized clinical trial of DHA supplementation until 36 weeks postmenstrual age in preterm infants born before 29 weeks’ gestation found no difference in bronchopulmonary dysplasia (the primary outcome) (Collins et al.) but was associated with modestly (though statistically significantly) higher full‐scale intelligence quotient (FSIQ) scores at 5 years of age compared with control feeding (Gould et al.).
As lipids are known to be the most variable macronutrient in human milk, considerable variation in FA profiles is also expected between human milk donors. FA composition is influenced by many factors including diet, genetics, environment, ethnicity, prepregnancy body mass index, and lactation stage (Miliku et al.).
A study comparing the FA profiles of milk from several milk banks in the United States found that levels of DHA in milk were significantly lower than intrauterine third‐trimester accretion levels (Valentine et al.). This is of particular importance when DHM is used to feed preterm infants who have acquired less FAs in utero due to the absence of third‐trimester exposure (Collins et al.). A Spanish study also reported that DHA was found to be significantly lower in DHM samples compared with MOM samples (Castillo et al.), recommending DHA supplementation for infants receiving primarily DHM. The observed differences in FA profiles between DHM and MOM are likely due to differences in lactational stage and gestational age of the infants at birth rather than losses due to processing. In the study by Castillo et al., donor characteristics were unknown; however, the donor milk likely came from mothers in later stages of lactation, including donors with term babies, compared to the MOM group, where the majority of samples were obtained in the first 28 days of lactation after preterm birth.
Given the importance of FAs (and particularly DHA) for preterm infant outcomes, it would be “desirable” for a validation study looking at improving milk quality with new technologies to measure its effect on essential FA concentration (e.g., linoleic acid and alpha‐linolenic acid) and long‐chain PUFAs (e.g., ARA and DHA).

Milk Fat Globule Membrane (MFGM)
Milk fat (lipid) is provided to the infant in a unique and complex spherical structure called the milk fat globule. The milk fat globule core contains neutral lipids, mainly triacylglycerols (98%). Surrounding the neutral lipid core is a three‐layer membrane called the MFGM, which originates from the endoplasmic reticulum (innermost single layer) and the apical plasma membrane (outer bilayer) of the secretory luminal mammary epithelial cell. The MFGM is a complex mixture of polar lipids and membrane proteins, such as glycerophospholipids, glycosphingolipids, cholesterol, and ceramides. Moreover, the MFGM harbors a large proportion (15%–20%) of long‐chain PUFAs in milk (Harzer et al.).
The MFGM is thought to contribute to infant development, including intestinal development, intestinal immune maturation, development of the gut microbiome (Lee et al.), as well as neurodevelopment and metabolic health (Brink and Lönnerdal). Structural properties, such as milk fat globule size, are also important for the suggested functions in infant health and development, providing, for example, protection of bioactive substances during digestion (Lee et al.).
As most bovine‐derived infant formula has traditionally contained low levels of MFGM (due to replacement of milk fats with vegetable oils), there has been interest in recent years to supplement infant formula with bovine‐derived MFGM. MFGM‐supplemented formulas have been reported as safe and may result in improved neurocognitive outcomes in formula‐fed term infants (Colombo et al.).
In the context of human milk banking, this is important because processing, storage, and handling of milk can impact the integrity of the MFGM. Reduced structural integrity can lead to fat agglomeration (Wei et al.) and could lead to increased losses of fat content due to adherence to plastic surfaces. The clinical relevance of damage to the MFGM in human milk processing has not been fully elucidated. Lack of established clinical significance means that measurement of changes in the human milk MFGM under alternative processing technologies is “not required” in a validation study, but its relevance should continue to be addressed in research studies.

Vitamins
Human milk contains fat‐soluble (A, D, E, and K) and water‐soluble (B1, B2, B3, B5, B6, B7, B9, B12, and C) vitamins. Typical vitamin concentrations in human milk are summarized in Table S3.
Some vitamins in human milk are susceptible to heat. Reported retention rates for fat‐soluble vitamins after thermal processing vary. For example, some studies showed no impact of HoP on vitamin A and E content (Moltó‐Puigmartí et al.; Van Zoeren‐Grobben et al.), while others reported losses of vitamin E (Delgado et al.; Romeu‐Nadal et al.) and vitamin A (Ribeiro et al.) following HoP. Overall, most water‐ and fat‐soluble vitamins seem to be retained at high rates (mostly >70% retention [Table S2]), except for vitamin C, which tends to be lost to a greater extent. Some of the reported differences could potentially be explained by exposure of the milk to light and oxygen during processing and storage. Importantly, some studies that reported high retention of major vitamins in human milk took measures to minimize losses due to light exposure during handling and processing (Delgado et al.; Romeu‐Nadal et al.; Moltó‐Puigmartí et al.). Most B vitamins are retained at high levels during HoP, except for Folate (vitamin B9) and vitamin B6, for which some losses were reported, although retention was >60% (see Table S2).
In the first 6 months of life, infants that are exclusively breastfed rely on breast milk for an adequate supply of vitamins. Preterm infants, in particular, may have reduced body stores or impaired absorption of fat‐soluble vitamins at birth (Gerasimidis and Haiden).
Preterm infants are generally recommended to receive micronutrient supplementation (Embleton et al.), so it is not considered essential to measure changes in vitamin concentrations in the evaluation of new processing technologies. It would be “desirable” to demonstrate that vitamin retention is similar to or better than the current standard (HoP) through measurement of vitamin C as an indicator of processing impact, as vitamin C is the most heat‐sensitive vitamin. Vitamin C, which is also light sensitive, might also be useful to measure when evaluating techniques that expose milk to UV radiation or lead to increased oxygen exposure (e.g., spray drying). When vitamins are included in the evaluation of new processing technologies, official standardized methods should be used as specified in the AOAC Official Methods of Analysis, Chapter 50 (Latimer).

Minerals
Human milk contains essential macrominerals and microminerals or trace elements. Macrominerals are found in higher concentrations (mg/L) and include calcium, potassium, and magnesium (Mandiá et al.). Microminerals or trace elements are found in lower concentrations and include, for example, iron, copper, iodine, sodium, manganese, zinc, and selenium. Potassium is the most highly concentrated mineral, followed by calcium, sodium, phosphorus, magnesium, zinc, iron, copper, iodine, and selenium (Sabatier et al.).
The concentrations of the major minerals in human milk, their functions in infant health and development, and the major factors related to their variability have been reviewed in detail elsewhere (Dror and Allen). Most minerals are highest in concentration in breast milk in the first week postpartum and decrease with ongoing lactation (Sabatier et al.). Only iodine, iron, and magnesium tend to have more stable concentrations throughout lactation (Sabatier et al.).
Minerals in milk can be found solubilized in the aqueous phase or as colloidal particles associated with casein micelles. Heat treatment is expected to change the fraction in which the minerals are found (Kilic‐Akyilmaz et al.). However, this is not expected to affect bioavailability of the minerals for infants receiving DHM, as pasteurization or boiling of human milk did not change the uptake of calcium phosphorus and sodium in low‐birth‐weight preterm infants (Williamson et al.). Another more recent study showed that HoP also did not impact the concentration of trace elements (Peixoto et al.).
It is widely accepted that mineral concentrations in breast milk (whether MOM or DHM) are generally inadequate to support the nutritional needs of the very‐preterm infant. Therefore, according to the WHO, mineral fortification of DHM should be considered for very‐preterm (<32 weeks of gestation) and very‐low‐birth‐weight infants (<1.5 kg). In most neonatal units, infants routinely receive iron supplementation and are monitored and supplemented with calcium phosphate, zinc, and sodium as needed (Embleton et al.).
As recipients of DHM are generally preterm infants who are already receiving micronutrient supplementation, it is “not required” to measure changes in mineral concentration in the evaluation of new processing technologies.

Bioactive Components of Human Milk

Antimicrobial Activity in Human Milk
Human milk contains antibodies and a large array of substances, such as lysozyme, lactoferrin, human milk oligosaccharides, immunoglobulin A (IgA), xanthine oxidase (XO), and lactoperoxidase (LPO), that together contribute to its antimicrobial activity (Bansal and Zhang; Lönnerdal; Sánchez et al.; Tran et al.). These substances are discussed individually in more detail below. These protective components not only work individually but also additively and synergistically in providing antimicrobial effects (Isaacs). For babies receiving MOM, these substances are thought to protect infants against viruses and pathogens that may be present in human milk or encountered in their environment. The antimicrobial components in human milk are likely to contribute to the reduction in infection seen in breast‐fed, compared to formula‐fed, infants in the first few years of life (R. Li et al.).
It has been relatively common in research studies to assess the antimicrobial activity of human milk as a surrogate measure of the function of these enzymes and antibodies in combination. Studies conducted using various bacteria (e.g., E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, Candida albicans, Salmonella typhimurium) have reported inhibitory effects of human milk on the growth of bacteria as compared to the control media (Blackshaw, Valtchev, et al.; Cetinkaya et al.; Van Gysel et al.), and human milk also has demonstrated significant antiviral activity (Francese et al.). The assays used to determine antimicrobial activity in human milk are not standardized internationally at present, and this would be crucial for consistency and accuracy in such evaluations. This is important because some published studies about antimicrobial properties of milk have methodological issues, such as measuring activity at a single time point, while others have measured antiviral activity over time (Kothari et al.).
HoP adversely affects the antibacterial properties of human milk, and some studies suggest that antiviral activity in human milk may also be significantly impacted (Donalisio et al.).
Given the numerous studies reporting significant inhibitory effects of human milk on bacterial growth, and the apparent clinical importance of antimicrobial activity, it would be of significant clinical interest to assess the antimicrobial activity of processed human milk. Ideally, a validation study would demonstrate equivalent or less effect on the antimicrobial activity of human milk than HoP. However, as the assays for antimicrobial activity are not standardized at present, such work is “not required”, in a validation study until the further research work needed to develop a standardized test has been completed.

Lactoferrin
Lactoferrin is a major whey protein in human milk and a key component of the mammalian innate response to infection, with anti‐infective and anti‐inflammatory properties (Griffiths et al.). Lactoferrin at least partially survives the passage through the infant's gastrointestinal tract (Davidson and Lönnerdal; Lönnerdal et al.) and therefore could protect against pathogens present in the gut (Albenzio et al.; Czosnykowska‐Łukacka et al.; Rai et al.; Ronayne de Ferrer et al.; Trend et al.).
Bovine lactoferrin supplementation has been associated with reduced incidence of late‐onset sepsis and NEC in preterm infants (He et al.; Manzoni et al.). However, the available evidence on the impact of bovine lactoferrin supplementation in preterm infants is conflicting, with a Cochrane review suggesting benefits on clinical outcomes (Pammi and Gautham), while a high‐quality large, randomized control trials found no impact on late‐onset infection (Griffiths et al.) and other clinical outcomes (Tarnow‐Mordi et al.; ELFIN trail investigators group).
Recently, higher lactoferrin intake from maternal milk was associated with larger brain volumes in preterm infants even when the data were adjusted for total protein intake (Atayde et al.).
Lactoferrin is affected by several factors involved in PDHM production, including freezing, storage, and HoP (Meier et al.).
With regard to thermal pasteurization technologies, Czank et al. showed that for the retention of immunological proteins, including lactoferrin, treatment temperature is more important than holding time. For example, a reduction in temperature to 57°C for 30 min was able to retain more than 90% of the tested immunological proteins (secretory IgA [sIgA], lactoferrin, and lysozyme), while inactivating 99.9% of the inoculated bacterial strains. In comparison, conventional HoP at 62.5°C for 30 min retained only 21% of lactoferrin (Czank et al.).
However, reported retention rates in milk pasteurized with HoP vary from complete inactivation to full retention (Table S2). Given the available evidence on the potential benefit of bovine lactoferrin supplementation for clinical outcomes (Pammi and Gautham), along with mounting evidence related to lactoferrin concentrations in human milk and their effects on clinical outcomes in preterm infants (Atayde et al.), we suggest that lactoferrin retention under novel processing techniques should be “essential”, in order to demonstrate equivalent or better retention than HoP.

Enzymes in Human Milk

Lipases
Human milk generally contains two types of lipases, named bile salt‐stimulated lipase (BSSL) and lipoprotein lipase (LPL) (Neville et al.). BSSL has the capacity to hydrolyze numerous substrates including triglyceride and is a major enzyme that aids the digestion of dietary fat during infancy, compensating for their immature digestive system (Lindquist and Hernell; Nessel et al.). The specific function of LPL within human milk remains poorly elucidated but is known to provide the long‐chain FAs required for milk fat synthesis in the mammary gland (Freed et al.).
Noticeably, there are clinical studies reporting lower fat absorption and growth rates in preterm infants who were being fed PDHM as compared to preterm infants who consumed raw milk (Andersson et al.; Christen et al.; Williamson et al.).
The enzymatic activity of the heat‐labile enzyme BSSL has been extensively studied, with numerous reports indicating significant alterations or complete inactivation after heat treatment, and the absence of BSSL can result in a substantial one‐third reduction in fat absorption among preterm infants (Baro et al.; Binte Abu Bakar et al.; Escuder‐Vieco et al.; Goldblum et al.; Henderson et al.; Koh et al.; Pitino et al.; Williamson et al.; Zhang, Duley, et al.). Similar results were observed for LPL, which is also a heat‐sensitive enzyme. Complete or near‐complete inactivation of LPL was also recorded following HoP (Henderson et al.; Zhang, Duley, et al.; Zhang, Lee, et al.).
Given that lipids present in human milk serve as both a primary energy source and play crucial roles in various essential functions for newborns, BSSL activity should be “essential” in a validation study, noting that it is almost completely inactivated by HoP. A new technology would ideally preserve more BSSL and LPL than HoP (Nessel et al.; Wesolowska et al.).

Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP)
ALP is another essential enzyme present in human milk, and it has been implicated as an important anti‐inflammatory factor within the infant intestine (Yang et al.). Its role involves reducing lipopolysaccharide‐mediated inflammation and upregulating the expression of tight junction proteins, potentially making it a pivotal component in inhibiting NEC (Chatterton et al.; Heath et al.; Wu et al.; Yang et al.).
ALP is expected to be completely inactivated under heat treatment (e.g., HoP or HTST conditions) (Escuder‐Vieco et al.; Y. Li et al.). In fact, ALP is widely used in the dairy industry as a biomarker to assess the efficacy of the milk pasteurization process.
Given the apparent importance of ALP in preterm neonatal gut health, it is “desirable” to include ALP in a validation study for new processing methods for DHM, noting that current standard treatment (HoP) does not preserve ALP.

Xanthine oxidase (XO) and Lactoperoxidase (LPO)
XO is a cellular redox enzyme highly expressed in mammary epithelial cells. It can generate microbiocidal superoxide and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), contributing to the antimicrobial protection of infants (Bansal and Zhang; Stevens et al.). LPO is an antimicrobial oxidoreductase enzyme that functions together with XO by utilizing it as a source of H2O2 (Marnila and Korhonen; Ozturk et al.). The XO–LPO oxidative enzyme system plays a critical role in the development of early innate immunity (Al‐Shehri et al.; Bansal and Zhang; Björck and Claesson; Naidu).
A recent study led by Al‐Shehri et al. showed that when infant saliva gets mixed with human milk, milk XO becomes activated in response to salivary hypoxanthine and xanthine, leading to the production of H2O2. Subsequently, the LPO system is activated to generate antibacterial reactive oxygen species, which effectively inhibits pathogenic bacteria such as Sta. aureus (Al‐Shehri et al.; Bansal and Zhang; Vorbach et al.).
Consistent with findings from various studies, XO is a heat‐sensitive enzyme and its activity in human milk was found to be significantly reduced or undetectable following heat treatment (Al‐Shehri et al.; Zhang, Duley, et al.; Zhang, Lee, et al.). Only limited residual activities of LPO were recorded in human milk following heat pasteurization (Akinbi et al.; Zhang, Duley, et al.; Zhang, Lee, et al.).
Given the role of XO and LPO in antimicrobial and immunity development functions, it would be “desirable” to include these enzymes in a validation study for new processing methods for DHM, noting that current standard treatment (HoP) does not preserve XO or LPO.

Lysozyme
Lysozyme is an antimicrobial enzyme (polypeptide) found in several human tissues including human milk, with a typical concentration of around 200–400 µg/mL in human milk (Chandan et al.). It can hydrolyze the bacterial cell wall of Gram‐positive organisms and some Gram‐negative organisms and is thought to protect infants against bacterial infection (Ferraboschi et al.). Additionally, lysozyme has also been found to enhance the production of IgA, neutralize endotoxins, and induce the activation of macrophages (Mayayo et al.). Low levels of lysozyme have been found in the intestinal cells of infants with NEC (Coutinho et al.). The precise relevance of lysozyme in DHM has not been fully established.
Research investigating the effects of thermal treatments on lysozyme activity in human milk has obtained inconsistent results (Table S2), likely due to methodological inconsistencies such as differences in lysozyme assay methods or the rate of heating and cooling during the thermal treatment. Overall, nonthermal processing methods showed promising results for preserving lysozyme activity in human milk compared to thermal treatments. The generally high resistance of lysozyme activity to technological treatments as compared to other enzymes is likely due to its stable structure maintained by disulfide bonds (Mayayo et al.). Given the apparent importance of lysozyme in preterm neonatal gut health, it is “desirable” that new processing methods for DHM include lysozyme in a validation study, in order to ensure equivalent or better retention compared to HoP.

Other Bioactive Milk Components

Immunoglobulins
Immunoglobulins, including sIgA, secretory IgM (sIgM), and IgG, are antibodies transmitted through breast milk that are thought to play a crucial role in neonatal mucosal immunity. The concentration of immunoglobulins in human milk varies across different stages of lactation, with the highest levels detected in colostrum, followed by lower concentrations in transitional and mature milk (Akhter et al.). These immunoglobulins provide passive immune protection to the neonate, protecting them while their own immune system is maturing. Among the immunoglobulins, sIgA is the most abundant in milk at all stages of lactation (Atyeo and Alter), and it is particularly effective in protecting neonates and infants against respiratory and gastrointestinal infections (Hanson). Moreover, studies have shown that exclusively breastfed infants have significantly higher serum sIgA levels during acute respiratory infections (Fatimah et al.). Additionally, sIgA plays a critical role in establishing the infant microbiome and influencing immune cell development, promoting healthier host–microbe interactions within the infant gut (Donald et al.).
The processing of DHM alters both the concentration and the bioactivity of immunoglobulins. Numerous studies have reported a reduction in sIgA levels following pasteurization, although the extent of this reduction is not always statistically significant when compared to untreated milk (Christen et al.; Czank et al.; Hamprecht et al.). Similarly, the concentration of sIgM decreases (Goldsmith et al.; Contador et al.), and in some cases, it is completely degraded after HoP (Table S2) (Ford et al.). This reduction is likely attributable to the complex structure of these molecules, which is challenging to maintain during heat treatment (Peila et al.).
As sIgA is the most abundant immunoglobulin in human milk and has an established protective role in infant health, it would be “desirable” to include it in validation studies.

microRNAs
MicroRNAs are small noncoding strings of nucleotides that are transmitted via milk in protective vesicles and may have a role in shaping infant metabolic and immune function (Tingö et al.). Human milk contains high quantities of noncoding ribonucleic acids, including microRNA, which collectively regulate steps between transcription and translation through epigenetic modification of DNA (Tingö et al.). As their precise function in human milk remains unknown, measurement of microRNAs is “not required” in a validation study at present.

Summary
Based on our review of nutritional and bioactive components in human milk, we recommend that BSSL and lactoferrin are essential bioactive factors for measurement in validation studies—BSSL is particularly recommended because it has direct impact on lipid digestion and therefore energy intake of the preterm infant. Other important components such as IgA are highly recommended but not considered essential. It should be noted that recent guidelines of the French “Agence nationale de la securite du medicament et de produits de sante” recommended that all three components (BSSL, lactoferrin, and sIgA) should be essential in a validation study (Agence nationale de la securite du medicament et de produits de sante).

Conclusions: A Suggested Framework for the Evaluation of New Processing Technologies
In this article, we have reviewed key components of human milk, specifically regarding their known relevance to infant health, to suggest a framework for evaluating new pathogen inactivation technologies in human milk banking (Figure 1). A validation study should address both the safety and the nutritional impact of a new technology for human milk. For food safety, the main goal remains to achieve complete inactivation of relevant pathogenic bacteria and viruses. The secondary goal is to ensure adequate nutritional quality of the final product, so that infants receive nutrition that is as close as possible to MOM.
Suggested framework for the evaluation of new processing technologies, including minimum requirements and essential parameters to be tested. Decisions around implementation of a new technology will balance improved retention of bioactive factors against processing costs and complexity. All new technologies should meet a minimum acceptable level of microbiological safety, which may vary depending on the vulnerability of the intended recipient population. Figure produced with Biorender.com.
Therefore, new processing technologies can be deemed acceptable for human milk banking if they achieve the same or greater microbial inactivation levels as HoP (see recommendation summary in Table 2). This is particularly relevant when donated milk is intended to feed very‐preterm infants. Studies assessing the safety of novel processing technologies should include pathogens relevant to human milk and should not simply be adapted from studies in bovine milk.
In the case of milk quality parameters, the evaluation of novel technologies is more complex. For these parameters, retention of macronutrients and bioactive components with demonstrated benefits should be the main goal, and retention should be comparable or improved compared to HoP. Table 3 summarizes the nutrients that we suggest should desirably be evaluated in validation studies and the minimum nutrient retention necessary to consider implementing a novel processing technique in milk banking. Noting that validation studies should be designed with appropriate statistical power to measure an estimated clinically relevant improvement in the retention of nutrients, we provide an estimate of appropriate sample sizes for testing each parameter, based on estimated clinically relevant differences for important quality parameters (Table 4).
Suggested sample sizes for validation studies assessing quality parameters in human milk processed with new milk banking technologies.
Components	Recommendation for inclusion in a validation study	Suggested acceptance criteria	Assumed minimum clinically important difference (in %)	Estimated standard deviation (in %)	Reference for estimated standard deviation	Suggested sample sizea	 	Macronutrients							 	Lipid	Essential	<10% loss	10	25	John et al.; Walter et al. 	98	 	Protein	Essential	<5% loss	10	20	John et al.; Walter et al. 	63	 	Carbohydrate	Essential	<5% loss	10	3	John et al.; Walter et al. 	2b	 	Other proteins							 	Lactoferrin	Essential	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	20	35–55	Czosnykowska‐Łukacka et al.; Rai et al. 	48–118	 	IgA	Desirable	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	20	43–57	Koenig et al. 	73–128	 	Vitamins							 	Vitamin C	Desirable, as indicator for impact on heat labile substances	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	40%	11–22	Ahmed et al.; Martysiak‐Żurowska et al. 	2–5	 	Enzymes							 	Bile salt‐stimulated lipase	Essential	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	50%	53–79	Sha et al.; Freed et al.; Zhang, Duley, et al.; Koh et al.; Wardell et al. 	18–40	 	Lysozyme	Desirable	Comparable or increased retention compared to HoP	50%	79–120	Koenig et al. 	39–90
Sample size is calculated using the following estimates. For example, with α = 0.05 and a power of 80%, we estimate that a variation of 10% in nutrient content (effect size 0.10), especially in protein and fat, would be deemed clinically significant. Therefore, if an alternative processing technology that is being investigated using our suggested framework resulted in a reduced or increased average fat or protein content of 10%, we believe that this would significantly impact a decision on whether or not a new technology should be implemented. Standard deviations for the respective nutrients are based on the available literature. Where possible, data for mature milk in the first 12 months of lactation were used. Based on these assumptions, we calculate the necessary minimum sample size for each of the suggested nutrients to be tested in a validation study, as follows:
.
where n is the estimated sample size; α is the level of significance (0.05); 1 – β represents the power (80%); Δ is the estimated effect size or minimal clinically important difference; SD is the estimated standard deviation of the respective macronutrient; Zα
 is the constant based on a 0.05 significance level (1.96); and Z
1 – 

β
 is the constant based on a power of 80% (0.8416).
Small sample size suggestion is due to the small standard deviation for carbohydrates in human milk. Carbohydrates are generally measured in combination with the other macronutrients, and we suggest using the same larger recommended sample size for macronutrient studies to account for the large variation in fat and protein.
Although several bioactive factors are listed as desirable parameters in a validation study, only two bioactive components (BSSL and lactoferrin) are currently included as essential in Table 3, as the clinical impact of altering many bioactive components of human milk remains unknown or poorly elucidated. BSSL is essential as it is important for total energy intake (fat digestion), that is, it contributes to macronutrient benefits derived from DHM. Potential clinical impacts of better retention of other bioactive factors in DHM intended for preterm infants might include improved growth, better long‐term metabolic and neurodevelopmental outcomes, and reduced infection rates; however, at this time, these remain speculative. Therefore, we advocate for better clinical outcome studies to increase our understanding of the clinical impact of processing technologies on these components of human milk.
The scope of a validation study may also depend on the intended recipient cohort for DHM. Currently, most DHM globally is used to feed very‐preterm and low‐birth‐weight infants. Validation parameters may shift as we learn more about the properties of some of these components. If indications for DHM use are broadened through determination of clinical efficacy in clinical trials to include late preterm and term infants, suggested pertinent quality and safety parameters may need to be revisited.

Nomenclature
ALP
alkaline phosphatase
ARA
arachidonic acid
BSSL
bile salt‐stimulated lipase
CMV
cytomegalovirus
DHA
docosahexaenoic acid
DHM
donor human milk
FA
fatty acid
FSIQ
full‐scale intelligence quotient
GBS
group B streptococcus
H2O2
hydrogen peroxide
HACCP
hazard analysis and critical control point
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
HoP
Holder pasteurization
HPP
high‐pressure processing
HSV
herpes simplex virus
HTLV
human T‐lymphotropic virus
HTST
high‐temperature short‐time
IgA
immunoglobulin A
IgG
immunoglobulin G
IgM
immunoglobulin M
LPL
lipoprotein lipase
LPO
lactoperoxidase
MFGM
milk fat globule membrane
MOM
mother's own milk
MUFA
monounsaturated fatty acid
NEC
necrotizing enterocolitis
NICU
neonatal intensive care unit
PDHM
pasteurized donor human milk
PEF
pulsed electric field
PUFA
polyunsaturated fatty acid
SFA
saturated fatty acid
sIgA
secretory immunoglobulin A
sIgM
secretory immunoglobulin M
ssRNA
single‐stranded RNA
UV
ultraviolet
WHO
World Health Organization
XO
xanthine oxidase

Author Contributions
Vanessa Clifford: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, methodology, supervision, project administration, writing – review and editing, writing – original draft, investigation. Leonie Walter: formal analysis, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing, data curation, project administration. Laura D. Klein: project administration, supervision, writing – original draft, conceptualization, funding acquisition, resources, writing – review & editing. Tong Wu: methodology, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing, visualization, data curation. Yiting Wang: writing – review and editing, writing – original draft. Nidhi Bansal: conceptualization, writing – review and editing, supervision, funding acquisition, resources.

Conflicts of Interest
V.C., L.W., T.W., and L.D.K. are employees of Australian Red Cross Lifeblood, a not‐for‐profit organization that provides pasteurized donor human milk from voluntary, nonremunerated donors to hospitals in Australia. N.B. is a member of the Lifeblood Milk Advisory Board.

Supporting information

References
Infant Feeding for Persons Living With and at Risk for HIV in the United States: Clinical Report
Effect of Holder Pasteurization on Macronutrients and Immunoglobulin Profile of Pooled Donor Human Milk
Bacillus cereus Contamination of Pasteurized Human Milk Donations: Frequency, Origin, Seasonal Distribution, Molecular Typing of Strains and Proposed Corrective/Preventive Actions
Vitamin C Content in Human Milk (Colostrum, Transitional and Mature) and Serum of a Sample of Bangladeshi Mothers
Immunoglobulins Content in Colostrum, Transitional and Mature Milk of Bangladeshi Mothers: Influence of Parity and Sociodemographic Characteristics
Alterations in the Host Defense Properties of Human Milk Following Prolonged Storage or Pasteurization
Lactoferrin Levels in Human Milk After Preterm and Term Delivery
A Retrospective Audit of Bacterial Culture Results of Donated Human Milk in Perth, Western Australia
Staphylococcus aureus Enterotoxin Production in Raw, Holder‐Pasteurized, and Ultraviolet‐C‐Treated Donated Human Milk
Xanthine Oxidase‐Lactoperoxidase System and Innate Immunity: Biochemical Actions and Physiological Roles
Breastmilk‐Saliva Interactions Boost Innate Immunity by Regulating the Oral Microbiome in Early Infancy
Does Candida and/or Staphylococcus Play a Role in Nipple and Breast Pain in Lactation? A Cohort Study in Melbourne, Australia
Pasteurization of Mother's Own Milk Reduces Fat Absorption and Growth in Preterm Infants
Environmental Factors Influencing the Inactivation of Cronobacter sakazakii by High Hydrostatic Pressure
Lactoferrin Intake From Maternal Milk During the Neonatal Hospitalization and Early Brain Development Among Preterm Infants
The Multifaceted Roles of Breast Milk Antibodies
Position Statement on Donor Milk
Effect of Two Pasteurization Methods on the Protein Content of Human Milk
Enterobacter sakazakii Infection in the Newborn
Macronutrient Intake From Human Milk, Infant Growth, and Body Composition at Term Equivalent Age: A Longitudinal Study of Hospitalized Very Preterm Infants
The Bacterial Ecosystem of Mother's Milk and Infant's Mouth and Gut
Three Cases of Neonatal Meningitis Caused by Enterobacter sakazakii in Powdered Milk
Human Milk Composition and the Effects of Pasteurisation on the Activity of Its Components
Xanthine Oxidase as a Source of Hydrogen Peroxide for the Lactoperoxidase System in Milk
The Risk of Infectious Pathogens in Breast‐Feeding, Donated Human Milk and Breast Milk Substitutes
The Effects of Thermal Pasteurisation, Freeze‐Drying, and Gamma‐Irradiation on the Antibacterial Properties of Donor Human Milk
Multiple Approaches Detect the Presence of Fungi in Human Breastmilk Samples From Healthy Mothers
Milk Fat Globule Membrane: The Role of Its Various Components in Infant Health and Development
Systematic Review Indicates Postnatal Growth in Term Infants Born Small‐for‐Gestational‐Age Being Associated With Later Neurocognitive and Metabolic Outcomes
Inadequate Content of Docosahexaenoic Acid (DHA) of Donor Human Milk for Feeding Preterm Infants: A Comparison With Mother's Own Milk at Different Stages of Lactation
Effects of Human Milk Fortifier on the Antimicrobial Properties of Human Milk
Lysozyme Content of Human Milk
Anti‐Inflammatory Mechanisms of Bioactive Milk Proteins in the Intestine of Newborns
First Report of Salmonella enterica Serotype Panama Meningitis Associated With Consumption of Contaminated Breast Milk by a Neonate
Breastfeeding and Transmission of Cytomegalovirus to Preterm Infants. Case Report and Kinetic of CMV‐DNA in Breast Milk
The Effect of UV‐C Pasteurization on Bacteriostatic Properties and Immunological Proteins of Donor Human Milk
Ultraviolet‐C Irradiation: A Novel Pasteurization Method for Donor Human Milk
Donor and Recipient Safety in Human Milk Banking
What Are Optimal Bacteriological Screening Test Cut‐Offs for Pasteurized Donor Human Milk Intended for Feeding Preterm Infants?
Principles and Guidelines for the Conduct of Microbiological Risk Management
The Role of Long Chain Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Perinatal Nutrition
Docosahexaenoic Acid and Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia in Preterm Infants
Improved Neurodevelopmental Outcomes at 5.5 Years of Age in Children Who Received Bovine Milk Fat Globule Membrane and Lactoferrin in Infant Formula Through 12 Months: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Effect of Thermal Pasteurisation or High Pressure Processing on Immunoglobulin and Leukocyte Contents of Human Milk
Report of Neonatal Meningitis Due to Salmonella enterica Serotype Agona and Review of Breast Milk‐Associated Neonatal Salmonella Infections
Human Milk Banking‐Facts and Issues to Resolve
Absence of Lysozyme (Muramidase) in the Intestinal Paneth Cells of Newborn Infants With Necrotising Enterocolitis
Distribution, Prevalence and Persistence of Cronobacter (Enterobacter sakazakii) in the Nonprocessing and Processing Environments of Five Milk Powder Factories
Retention of the Immunological Proteins of Pasteurized Human Milk in Relation to Pasteurizer Design and Practice
Lactoferrin in Human Milk of Prolonged Lactation
Persistence of Human Milk Proteins in the Breast‐Fed Infant
Tocopherols, Fatty Acids and Cytokines Content of Holder Pasteurised and High‐Pressure Processed Human Milk
Establishing an Integrated Human Milk Banking Approach to Strengthen Newborn Care
A New High Hydrostatic Pressure Process to Assure the Microbial Safety of Human Milk While Preserving the Biological Activity of Its Main Components
Hepatitis B Viral Markers in Banked Human Milk Before and After Holder Pasteurization
Operational Guidelines for Milk Banks in Australia and New Zealand
Secretory IgA: Linking Microbes, Maternal Health, and Infant Health Through Human Milk
High Temperature‐Short Time Pasteurization Has a Lower Impact on the Antiviral Properties of Human Milk Than Holder Pasteurization
Overview of Nutrients in Human Milk
Enterobacter sakazakii: An Emerging Pathogen in Powdered Infant Formula
Breastfeeding and the Use of Human Milk: An Analysis of the American Academy of Pediatrics 2012 Breastfeeding Policy Statement
Enteral Lactoferrin Supplementation for Very Preterm Infants: A Randomised Placebo‐Controlled Trial
Characterization of Cronobacter Recovered From Dried Milk and Related Products
Enteral Nutrition in Preterm Infants (2022): A Position Paper From the ESPGHAN Committee on Nutrition and Invited Experts
High‐Temperature Short‐Time Pasteurization System for Donor Milk in a Human Milk Bank Setting
Note for Guidance on Virus Validation Studies: The Design, Contribution and Interpretation of Studies Validating the Inactivation and Removal of Viruses
Regulation (EU) 2024/1938 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 on Standards of Quality and Safety for Substances of Human Origin Intended for Human Application
Codex Alimentarius: Milk and Milk Products
The Role of Exclusive Breastfeeding on sIgA and Lactoferrin Levels in Toddlers Suffering From Acute Respiratory Infection: A Cross‐Sectional Study
Applications of Lysozyme, an Innate Immune Defense Factor, as an Alternative Antibiotic
Human Milk Fatty Acid Profile Across Lactational Stages After Term and Preterm Delivery: A Pooled Data Analysis
Imported Food Risk Advice
Compendium of Microbiological Criteria for Food
Influence of the Heat Treatment of Human Milk on Some of Its Protective Constituents
Viruses and Human Milk: Transmission or Protection?
Lipases in Human Milk: Effect of Gestational Age and Length of Lactation on Enzyme Activity
Bile Salt‐Stimulated Lipase in Non‐Primate Milk: Longitudinal Variation and Lipase Characteristics in Cat and Dog Milk
Best Practices to Limit Contamination of Donor Milk in a Milk Bank
Fates of Pathogenic Bacteria in Time‐Temperature‐Abused and Holder‐Pasteurized Human Donor‐, Infant Formula‐, and Full Cream Cow's Milk
Changes to Breast Milk Fatty Acid Composition During Storage, Handling and Processing: A Systematic Review
Vitamin Requirements for Preterm Infants
Rapid High‐Temperature Treatment of Human Milk
IgA, IgG, IgM and Lactoferrin Contents of Human Milk During Early Lactation and the Effect of Processing and Storage
Neonatal Docosahexaenoic Acid in Preterm Infants and Intelligence at 5 Years
Contamination of a Milk Bank Pasteuriser Causing a Pseudomonas aeruginosa Outbreak in a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
Enteral Lactoferrin to Prevent Infection for Very Preterm Infants: The ELFIN RCT
Tubercular Mastitis
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Inactivation in Breast Milk: Reassessment of Pasteurization and Freeze‐Thawing
The Mammary Gland as an Immunological Organ
Destruction of Various Kinds of Mycobacteria in Milk by Pasteurization
Ensuring Safety in Donor Human Milk Banking in Neonatal Intensive Care
Changing Patterns of Human Milk Lipids in the Course of the Lactation and During the Day
Transmission of Cytomegalovirus via Breast Milk in Extremely Premature Infants
Prophylactic Lactoferrin for Preventing Late‐Onset Sepsis and Necrotizing Enterocolitis in Preterm Infants: A PRISMA‐Compliant Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Association of Intestinal Alkaline Phosphatase With Necrotizing Enterocolitis Among Premature Infants
Effect of Pasteurization on Long Chain Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid Levels and Enzyme Activities of Human Milk
Guidelines for the Establishment and Operation of a Donor Human Milk Bank
Toward Optimizing Vision and Cognition in Term Infants by Dietary Docosahexaenoic and Arachidonic Acid Supplementation: A Review of Randomized Controlled Trials
Human Milk Inactivates Pathogens Individually, Additively, and Synergistically
Reservoir and Routes of Transmission of Enterobacter sakazakii (Cronobacter spp.) in a Milk Powder‐Producing Plant
Bacillus cereus as a Major Cause of Discarded Pasteurized Human Banked Milk: A Single Human Milk Bank Experience
The Experience of Human Milk Banking for 8 Years: Korean Perspective
Combination of High‐Pressure Processing and Freeze‐Drying as the Most Effective Techniques in Maintaining Biological Values and Microbiological Safety of Donor Milk
Short Communication: Effects of Vacuum Freeze‐Drying on Inactivation of Cronobacter sakazakii ATCC29544 in Liquid Media With Different Initial Inoculum Levels
Macronutrient Variability in Human Milk From Donors to a Milk Bank: Implications for Feeding Preterm Infants
Bacterial Contamination of Expressed Breast Milk
Microbial Contamination of Human Milk Purchased via the Internet
Effect of Heat Treatment on Micronutrients, Fatty Acids and Some Bioactive Components of Milk
The Effect of Holder Pasteurization and Storage on Macronutrients in Donor Human Milk
Particular Genomic and Virulence Traits Associated With Preterm Infant‐Derived Toxigenic Clostridium Perfringens Strains
Immunologic Factors in Human Milk: The Effects of Gestational Age and Pasteurization
Bile Salt‐Stimulated Lipase Activity in Donor Breast Milk Influenced by Pasteurization Techniques
Testing the Effects of Processing on Donor Human Milk: Analytical Methods
Preservation of Anti‐Cytomegalovirus Activity in Human Milk Following High‐Pressure Processing Compared to Holder Pasteurization
SARS‐CoV‐2 Detection in Human Milk: A Systematic Review
The Role of Bacteria in Lactational Mastitis and Some Considerations of the Use of Antibiotic Treatment
Drying Parameters Greatly Affect the Destruction of Cronobacter sakazakii and Salmonella Typhimurium in Standard Buffer and Milk
Compositional Dynamics of the Milk Fat Globule and Its Role in Infant Development
Clinical and Public Health Implications of Human T‐Lymphotropic Virus Type 1 Infection
Pasteurization Efficiency of Donor Human Milk Processed by Microwave Heating
Bacillus cereus Infection in Neonates and the Absence of Evidence for the Role of Banked Human Milk: Case Reports and Literature Review
Breastfeeding and Risk of Infections at 6 Years
Pasteurization Procedures for Donor Human Milk Affect Body Growth, Intestinal Structure, and Resistance Against Bacterial Infections in Preterm Pigs
Bacillus cereus Bacteremia in a Preterm Infant Caused by Consumption of Contaminated Breastmilk
Lipid Digestion and Absorption in Early Life: An Update
Detection of Clostridium perfringens in Donor Milk at a Human Breast Milk Bank: A Case Report
Biological Activities of Commercial Bovine Lactoferrin Sources
Human Milk Proteins: Key Components for the Biological Activity of Human Milk
Human Milk Concentrations of Minerals, Essential and Toxic Trace Elements and Association With Selective Medical, Social, Demographic and Environmental Factors
Ecology of Bacillaceae
Bovine Lactoferrin Supplementation for Prevention of Necrotizing Enterocolitis in Very‐Low‐Birth‐Weight Neonates: A Randomized Clinical Trial
Lactobacillus salivarius CECT 5713, a Potential Probiotic Strain Isolated From Infant Feces and Breast Milk of a Mother–Child Pair
Human Milk Is a Source of Lactic Acid Bacteria for the Infant Gut
The Effect of UV‐C Irradiation on Lipids and Selected Biologically Active Compounds in Human Milk
Effect of High Pressure and Heat Treatments on IgA Immunoreactivity and Lysozyme Activity in Human Milk
Breast Tuberculosis in East London: A 13‐Year Retrospective Observational Study
Donor Human Milk Update: Evidence, Mechanisms, and Priorities for Research and Practice
Human Milk Fatty Acid Composition Is Associated With Dietary, Genetic, Sociodemographic, and Environmental Factors in the CHILD Cohort Study
The Nucleic Acid Positive Rate and Genotype Distribution of Human Cytomegalovirus in Human Milk Banks in China
Effects of Pasteurisation and High‐Pressure Processing on Vitamin C, Tocopherols and Fatty Acids in Mature Human Milk
Human Milk Fungi: Environmental Determinants and Inter‐Kingdom Associations With Milk Bacteria in the CHILD Cohort Study
New Alternatives to Holder Pasteurization in Processing Donor Milk in Human Milk Banks
Women Living With HIV in High‐Income Settings and Breastfeeding
Salmonella Poona Meningitis and Mastitis Causing Neonatal Meningitis
Dissemination of Cronobacter spp. (Enterobacter sakazakii) in a Powdered Milk Protein Manufacturing Facility
The Composition of Human Milk and Infant Faecal Microbiota Over the First Three Months of Life: A Pilot Study
The Effects of Storage Conditions on Long‐Chain Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids, Lipid Mediators, and Antioxidants in Donor Human Milk—A Review
Lipoprotein Lipase in Human Milk: Compartmentalization and Effect of Fasting, Insulin, and Glucose
Massive Pneumatosis Without Necrosis: A Case Report of Clostridium perfringens Sepsis in an Extremely Low Birth Weight Infant
The Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation on Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases: Process, Product and Policy Implications
Inactivation of Hepatitis A and Other Enteroviruses During Heat Treatment (Pasteurization)
Deaths of 3 Infants Traced to Contaminated Equipment, Hospital Says
Effects of Extended Dry Storage of Powdered Infant Milk Formula on Susceptibility of Enterobacter sakazakii to Hot Water and Ionizing Radiation
The Antimicrobial Activity of Bovine Milk Xanthine Oxidase
Enteral Lactoferrin Supplementation for Prevention of Sepsis and Necrotizing Enterocolitis in Preterm Infants
Mother's Own Milk Versus Donor Human Milk: What's the Difference?
The Effect of Holder Pasteurization on Nutrients and Biologically‐Active Components in Donor Human Milk: A Review
Trace Mineral Composition of Human Breast Milk From Brazilian Mothers
Human Milk‐Treatment and Quality of Banked Human Milk
Donor Human Milk Processing and Its Impact on Infant Digestion: A Systematic Scoping Review of In Vitro and In Vivo Studies
The Impact of Thermal Pasteurization on Viral Load and Detectable Live Viruses in Human Milk and Other Matrices: A Rapid Review
High Hydrostatic Pressure Processing Better Preserves the Nutrient and Bioactive Compound Composition of Human Donor Milk
Low Risk of Vertical Transmission of Hepatitis C Virus by Breast Milk
Post‐Parturient Shedding of Listeria monocytogenes in Breast Milk of Infected Mice
Donor Human Milk for Preventing Necrotising Enterocolitis in Very Preterm or Very Low‐Birthweight Infants
Transmission of Salmonella enterica Serotype Typhimurium DT104 to Infants Through Mother's Breast Milk
Longitudinal Changes in Lactoferrin Concentrations in Human Milk: A Global Systematic Review
The Effect of Processing on the Vitamin A Content of Human Milk
Recent Actuality About Bacillus cereus and Human Milk Bank: A New Sensitive Method for Microbiological Analysis of Pasteurized Milk
Effect of Pasteurisation on Ascorbic Acid, Dehydroascorbic Acid, Tocopherols and Fatty Acids in Pooled Mature Human Milk
Lactoferrin Levels in Term and Preterm Milk
Association Between Maternal Stress and Premature Milk Cortisol, Milk IgA, and Infant Health: A Cohort Study
Conceptualizing the Commercialization of Human Milk: A Concept Analysis
Longitudinal Changes of Mineral Concentrations in Preterm and Term Human Milk From Lactating Swiss Women
Arachidonic Acid in Human Milk
Breast Milk: A Source of Functional Compounds With Potential Application in Nutrition and Therapy
A Listeria monocytogenes Clone in Human Breast Milk Associated With Severe Acute Malnutrition in West Africa: A Multicentric Case‐Controlled Study
Characterization of the Cultivable Microbiota in Fresh and Stored Mature Human Breast Milk
The Level of Bile Salt‐Stimulated Lipase in the Milk of Chinese Women and Its Association With Maternal BMI
Maintaining Human Milk Bank Services Throughout the COVID‐19 Pandemic: A Global Response
Breastfeeding of Newborns by Mothers Carrying Hepatitis B Virus: A Meta‐Analysis and Systematic Review
Microbiological Challenge Testing for Listeria monocytogenes in Ready‐to‐Eat Food: A Practical Approach
Antibacterial Properties of Xanthine Oxidase in Human Milk
Thermal Resistance of Certain Oncogenic Viruses Suspended in Milk and Milk Products
Transmission of Listeria monocytogenes From Mother's Milk to Her Baby and to Puppies
Pooling Strategies to Modify Macronutrient Content of Pasteurized Donor Human Milk
The Effect of Lactoferrin Supplementation on Death or Major Morbidity in Very Low Birthweight Infants (LIFT): A Multicentre, Double‐Blind, Randomised Controlled Trial
Group B Streptococcal Neonatal Meningitis
Non‐Coding RNAs in Human Breast Milk: A Systematic Review
Listeria monocytogenes in Human Milk in Mali: A Potential Health Emergency
Role of the Human Breast Milk‐Associated Microbiota on the Newborns' Immune System: A Mini Review
The Metabolome of Human Milk Is Altered Differentially by Holder Pasteurization and High Hydrostatic Pressure Processing
High Hydrostatic Pressure Is Similar to Holder Pasteurization in Preserving Donor Milk Antimicrobial Activity
Levels of Innate Immune Factors in Preterm and Term Mothers' Breast Milk During the 1st Month Postpartum
Human Milk Banks: A Need for Further Evidence and Guidance
Effect of Dietary Omega‐3 Fatty Acids on Retinal Function of Very‐Low‐Birth‐Weight Neonates
Donor Milk Banks: Service Operation
Human Milk Microbiota Profiles in Relation to Birthing Method, Gestation and Infant Gender
Lactational Stage of Pasteurized Human Donor Milk Contributes to Nutrient Limitations for Infants
Outbreak of Necrotizing Enterocolitis Associated With Enterobacter sakazakii in Powdered Milk Formula
Impact of Pasteurization on the Antibacterial Properties of Human Milk
Human Milk Vitamin Content After Pasteurisation, Storage, or Tube Feeding
Xanthine Oxidoreductase Is Central to the Evolution and Function of the Innate Immune System
Survival Characteristics of Environmental and Clinically Derived Strains of Cronobacter sakazakii in Infant Milk Formula (IMF) and Ingredients: Survival Characteristics of Cronobacter spp
Macronutrient Content of Pasteurised Donor Human Milk: Variability Between Batches From Single‐Donor Pools at an Australian Milk Bank
Protocol for Nutritional Intervention in Neonatal Rats Using the “Pup‐in‐a‐Cup” Artificial Rearing System
Heat Shock Effects on the Viability of Cronobacter sakazakii During the Dehydration, Fermentation, and Storage of Lactic Cultured Milk Products
Bile Salt‐Stimulated Lipase and Esterase Activity in Human Milk After Collection, Storage, and Heating: Nutritional Implications
Recommendations for the Establishment and Operation of Human Milk Banks in Europe: A Consensus Statement from the European Milk Bank Association (EMBA)
Phospholipid Composition and Fat Globule Structure Change During Low Temperature Storage of Human Milk
Effect of Antiviral Lipids, Heat, and Freezing on the Activity of Viruses in Human Milk
Lipid Profile, Lipase Bioactivity, and Lipophilic Antioxidant Content in High Pressure Processed Donor Human Milk
Global Tuberculosis Report 2023
Heat‐Induced Changes in Milk Fat and Milk Fat Globules and Its Derived Effects on Acid Dairy Gelation—A Review
Effect of Heat Treatment of Human Milk on Absorption of Nitrogen, Fat, Sodium, Calcium, and Phosphorus by Preterm Infants
Guidelines on Viral Inactivation and Removal Procedures Intended to Assure the Viral Safety of Human Blood Plasma Products
Every Newborn: An Action Plan to End Preventable Deaths
WHO Recommendations for Care of the Preterm or Low‐Birth‐Weight Infant
Protective Effect of Alkaline Phosphatase Supplementation on Infant Health
Ontogeny of Alkaline Phosphatase Activity in Infant Intestines and Breast Milk
The Results of Different Heating Temperatures on Activities of Bioactive Proteins in Human Milk
Adaption of a Commercial Lipase Kit to Measure Bile Salt‐Stimulated Lipase in Human Milk
Nanosecond Pulsed Electric Field Treatment of Human Milk: Effects on Microbiological Inactivation, Whey Proteome and Bioactive Protein
Comparing the Effects of Hydrostatic High‐Pressure Processing vs Holder Pasteurisation on the Microbial, Biochemical and Digestion Properties of Donor Human Milk
The Controversial Role of Breast Milk in GBS Late‐Onset Disease