Risk Stratification Tools to Guide a Personalized Approach for Cardiac Monitoring in Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source
ABSTRACT
Current recommendations support a personalized sequential approach for cardiac rhythm monitoring to detect atrial fibrillation after embolic stroke of undetermined source. Several risk stratification scores have been proposed to predict the likelihood of atrial fibrillation after embolic stroke of undetermined source. This systematic review aimed to provide a comprehensive overview of the field by identifying risk scores proposed for this purpose, assessing their characteristics and the cohorts in which they were developed and validated, and scrutinizing their predictive performance. We identified 11 risk scores, of which 4 were externally validated. The most frequent variables included were echocardiographic markers and demographics. The areas under the curve ranged between 0.70 and 0.94. The 3 scores with the highest area under the curve were the Decryptoring (0.94 [95% CI, 0.88–1.00]), newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation (0.87 [95% CI, 0.79–0.94]), and AF‐ESUS (Atrial Fibrillation in Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source) (0.85 [95% CI, 0.80–0.87]), of which only the latter was externally validated. Risk stratification scores can guide a personalized approach for cardiac rhythm monitoring after embolic stroke of undetermined source.

Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms
AF‐ESUS
Atrial Fibrillation in Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source
ASSERT
Subclinical Atrial Fibrillation and the Risk of Stroke
AVERROES
Apixaban Versus Acetylsalicylic Acid to Prevent Stroke in Atrial Fibrillation Patients Who Have Failed or Are Unsuitable for Vitamin K Antagonist Treatment
ESUS
embolic stroke of undetermined source
NAVIGATE ESUS
Rivaroxaban for Stroke Prevention After Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source
NDAF
newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation
RE‐SPECT ESUS
Randomized, Double‐Blind, Evaluation in Secondary Stroke Prevention Comparing the Efficacy and Safety of the Oral Thrombin Inhibitor Dabigatran Etexilate Versus Acetylsalicylic Acid in Patients With Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source
TRENDS
The Relationship Between Daily Atrial Tachyarrhythmia Burden From Implantable Device Diagnostics and Stroke Risk
Ιn about 17% of all patients with ischemic stroke, no cause is identified despite the recommended diagnostic workup. These strokes are classified as embolic strokes of undetermined source (ESUS), a term that is not synonymous with the broader term cryptogenic stroke, because the latter also includes patients with incomplete diagnostic workup, as well as those who have multiple potential causes. The potential causes of stroke in a patient with ESUS may include supracardiac atherosclerosis, left atrial disease, left ventricular disease, right‐to‐left shunt, cardiac valvular disease, and others.
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a frequently detected finding during the diagnostic workup of ESUS, with incidence ranging between 2% at 1 week after stroke and up to 30% at 3 years. Although AF was initially considered as the main underlying mechanism of ESUS, accumulating evidence shows that this causal association is weaker than was previously hypothesized. Current recommendations support a personalized, sequential, and stratified approach for cardiac rhythm monitoring for AF detection in patients with ESUS. Specifically, after the initial cardiac rhythm monitoring for 24 to 72 hours, patients are selected for prolonged cardiac rhythm monitoring based on the likelihood of covert AF. In this context, several risk scores have been proposed to stratify the risk of covert AF and thereby assist individualization of the diagnostic workup of ESUS and guide clinical decisions about cardiac rhythm monitoring in this patient population.
This systematic review aimed to provide a comprehensive overview of the field. We sought to identify all published risk scores through a systematic review, assess their characteristics and the cohorts in which they were developed and validated, and scrutinize their predictive performance. The information summarized in this review can be useful to treating physicians in selecting the optimal tool for individualization of clinical practice decisions pertinent to cardiac rhythm monitoring in patients with ESUS.

Methods
The data that support the findings of this study are available in the supplementary material of this article.

Registration and Search Strategy
This systematic review is registered at PROSPERO (International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews; unique identifier: CRD42022381886).
We systematically reviewed the literature for published scores proposed for the identification of AF in patients with ESUS. We searched MEDLINE, Scopus, Cochrane Library, Google Scholar, and the ClinicalTrials registry from inception until October 2022. The detailed search strategy that we followed for each individual database is available in Table S1, and individual studies were screened using the predetermined inclusion criteria. The search was conducted by 2 independent reviewers (A.M.L., K.P.), blinded to each other, and any disagreements were resolved by discussion with a third reviewer (G.N.) and consensus.

Eligibility Criteria
We included both prospective and retrospective studies that described either the derivation of an original risk score or the external validation of a previously published risk score. For a study to be included, the performance of the risk score assessed in the form of diagnostic accuracy, specificity, and sensitivity should have been reported. We excluded studies that reported only predictors of AF rather than a structured risk score, or were not reported in the English language, or were not published as full texts. Studies were screened for eligibility using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses guidelines (flow diagram outlining the screening process [Figure S1] and checklist are presented in Table S1). Reference lists of eligible studies were reviewed to screen for additional relevant observational or randomized studies.

Data Extraction
Data were extracted independently by 2 investigators (A.M.L., K.P.) and cross‐checked blindly with each other. Disagreements were reviewed by 2 other reviewers (A.T.A., S.N.) and resolved by discussion and consensus. From the eligible studies that met inclusion criteria, we extracted data about (1) study characteristics, (2) population characteristics, (3) the components of the individual clinical risk scores, and (4) the performance indices of the scores. The study characteristics abstracted included author/study group name, name of the clinical risk score assessed, year of publication, study size, study duration including follow‐up, study type, stroke type, definition of AF and its onset, and mode of ECG monitoring used. Population characteristics extracted included mean age, sex, mean National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale at baseline, mean modified Rankin Scale at baseline, comorbidities, and mean left atrial diameter visualized on echocardiography. Population characteristics were extracted from both the original derivation cohort and internal and external validation cohorts.
Descriptive statistics are presented as percentages for categorical variables and as means for continuous variables. To evaluate the performance of each risk score, the area under the curve (AUC) (or C statistic) and 95% CI were extracted and compared for discriminative ability or their overall performance.

Quality and Risk of Bias Assessment
The risk of bias for all included studies was independently assessed by 2 investigators (A.M.L., K.P.), blind to one another, using the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies‐2 tool. Any disagreement was resolved by discussion and consensus with the addition of a third independent investigator (G.N.). As a part of quality and risk of bias assessment, studies were evaluated under 4 individual domains: patient selection, index test, reference standard, and flow and timing. All domains addressed the risk of bias, whereas the first 3 domains evaluated applicability. Quality assessment of individual studies (Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies‐2 tool) is detailed in Figure S2.

Results

Search Results
The literature search identified 8169 studies for review. After screening titles and abstracts, 73 studies were selected for full‐text evaluation. Ultimately, 11 studies evaluating 11 risk scores fulfilled the eligibility criteria and were included. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses flow diagram outlining the screening methodology is included in Figure S1.

Study and Population Characteristics
Overall, 11 studies with a total of 9984 patients were included in the systematic review. The characteristics of included studies are detailed in Table 1. The characteristics of the population included in each study are presented in Table 2. Mean age reported in 10 out of 11 studies ranged from 63.1 to 81.4 years, and men constituted 41.5% to 61.9% of the individual study populations. The definition of AF varied between individual studies. Although any AF was considered significant in some cohorts, others defined it as AF lasting >30 seconds or ≥30 seconds. The mode and duration of cardiac rhythm monitoring was largely variable between studies, including 24‐ to 48‐hour monitoring with a Holter or telemetry device, Holter device for up to 4 weeks, and implantable loop recorders. Similarly, there were large differences in the duration of follow‐up, ranging from 15 days to >5 years.
Characteristics of the Studies That Proposed the Risk Scores
Study	Year of publication	Study period	Study type	Stroke type	AF definition	Mode of ECG monitoring	Follow‐up period	 	ACTEL	2020	2007–2017	Retrospective	IS/CS	Any AF	Continuous ECG monitoring for ≥5 d	NA	 	AF‐ESUS	2020	NA	Retrospective	IS/CS	Any AF	Any ECG performed during the follow‐up period for any reason, including palpitations, irregular pulse on clinical examination, in‐hospital surveillance with Holter monitoring, or portable outpatient monitoring	>12 mo	 	Brown ESUS‐AF	2018	2013–2016	Retrospective	IS/CS	AF >30 s	24‐h continuous telemetry monitoring, 30‐d cardiac monitor, ILR	36 mo	 	Decryptoring score	2021	2019–2020	Prospective	IS/CS	AF >30 s	Continuous in‐hospital ECG monitoring ≥48 h and ambulatory Holter monitoring for 15 d	15 d	 	E2AF	2022	2017–2020	Retrospective	IS/CS	Any AF	ECG monitoring using a nonimplantable external event recorder for 2 wk	90 d	 	Graz AF	2021	2018–2019	Prospective	IS/CS	AF ≥30 s	Pulse control, in‐hospital continuous rhythm monitoring, ECG monitoring triggered by patient symptoms and/or clinical suspicion, ILR	>12 mo	 	HAVOC	2017	1995–2015	Retrospective	IS/TIA/CS	Any AF	NA	>5 y	 	NDAF	2013	2006–2007	Prospective	IS/TIA/CS	AF ≥30 s	Holter monitoring provoked by evaluation during outpatient visits, standard ECG during outpatient follow‐up visits at 6 mo, 12 mo, and annually	>2 y	 	PROACTIA	2022	2016–2018	Prospective	IS/CS	AF >30 s	Implantable cardiac monitors	833 (633–1028) d	 	SAFE	2022	2018–2021	Prospective	IS/TIA/CS	AF >30 s	In‐hospital telemetry monitoring, 28‐d Holter monitoring, routine visits	12 mo	 	STAF	2019	2014–2015	Retrospective	IS/CS	Any AF	12‐lead ECG, 24‐h continuous telemetry monitoring, Holter monitoring in the previous 3 mo	3 mo
ACTEL indicates Age, Cholesterol, Tricuspid, End diastolic volume, Left atrium; AF, atrial fibrillation; AF‐ESUS, Atrial Fibrillation in Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source; CS, cryptogenic stroke; ESUS, embolic stroke of undetermined source; E2AF, The Empoli ESUS Atrial Fibrillation; HAVOC, Hypertension, Age, Valvular heart disease, peripheral Vascular disease, Obesity, Congestive heart failure, Coronary artery disease; ILR, implantable loop recorder; IS, ischemic stroke; NA, not applicable; NDAF, newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation; PROACTIA, Prediction of occult atrial Fibrillation in patients after cryptogenic stroke and transient ischemic attack; SAFE, the screening for atrial fibrillation scale; STAF, Score for the Targeting of Atrial Fibrillation; and TIA, transient ischemic attack.
Characteristics of the Cohorts Used for the Development of the Risk Scores
Characteristic	ACTEL	AF‐ESUS	Brown ESUS‐AF	Decryptoring score	E2AF	Graz AF	HAVOC	NDAF	PROACTIA	SAFE, *	STAF	 	External validation	No	Yes	Yes	No	No	No	Yes	No	No	No	Yes	 	Size, n	110	839	298	63	82	150	7671	164	236	460	133	 	Age, mean±SD†	69.7±13.4	67±22.5	63.9±14.8	77.7±7.8	72±10	66.7±15.3	56.7%	65.4±15.1	68.6±12.5	65±13.4	63.1±15	 	Female sex, %	56.4	43.1%	47.3	55.6	58.5	43.3	49.9	48	38	33	45.1	 	Baseline NIHSS, mean±SD	6.7±6	6±10	3.6±4.3	NA	2.13±2.74	8.7±16.5	NA	3.3±4	NA	5±5.2	5.1±3.1	 	Baseline mRs, mean±SD	NA	NA	NA	NA	0	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	1.3±0.7	 	Hypertension, %	79.1	62.2	71.1	60.3	80.5	66.6	56.7	60	63.6	60	62.4	 	Dyslipidemia, %	72.7	65.9	52.7	60.3	NA	48.0	NA	35	NA	41.5	36.8	 	Diabetes, %	15.5	18.5	26.8	22.2	21.6	16.0	21.6	23	30	24.8	38.3	 	Smoking, %	23.6	38.6	24.8	17.5	NA	24.0	NA	25	28	52.2	15.8	 	Previous stroke/TIA, %	NA	16.9	30.2	NA	NA	10.6	NA	15	NA	13.5	24.8	 	Coronary artery disease, %	NA	15.2	16.8	NA	1.581	ΝΑ	1.581	16	NA	7.2	16.5	 	Chronic kidney disease, %	NA	NA	NA	NA	2.4	ΝΑ	2.4	24	NA	8.9	NA	 	Peripheral artery disease, %	NA	2.9	NA	NA	8.6	ΝΑ	8.6	8	NA	NA	0.8	 	Valvular heart disease, %	54.5 (MR), 33.6 (TR)	0.6	NA	NA	7.5	ΝΑ	7.5	0	NA	6.7	54.9 (ΜR), 23.3 (ΑΙ)	 	LA diameter, mm	41.0±6	NA	35.7±6.5	36.4±7.4	NA	ΝΑ	NA	35.8±5.8	NA	NA	NA
ACTEL indicates Age, Cholesterol, Tricuspid, End diastolic volume, Left atrium; AF, atrial fibrillation; AF‐ESUS, Atrial Fibrillation in Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source; AI, aortic insufficiency; ESUS, embolic stroke of undetermined source; E2AF, The Empoli ESUS Atrial Fibrillation; HAVOC, Hypertension, Age, Valvular heart disease, peripheral Vascular disease, Obesity, Congestive heart failure, Coronary artery disease; NA, not applicable; NDAF, newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation; NIHSS, National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale; PROACTIA, prediction of occult atrial fibrillation in patients after cryptogenic stroke and transient ischemic attack; SAFE, the screening for atrial fibrillation scale; STAF, Score for the Targeting of Atrial Fibrillation; MR, mitral valve regurgitation; mRs: modified Rankin scale; TIA, transient ischemic attack; and TR, tricuspid valve regurgitation.
The demographics from the SAFE study represent its entire study population, which includes patients who did not meet the criteria for ESUS.
All values indicate mean age, except the HAVOC score, which indicates percent of individuals >75 years old.

Components of the Risk Scores
The most frequent parameters used as components of the risk scores were echocardiographic markers including left atrial diameter, left atrial area ≥16 cm2, left atrial volume index, reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, valvular heart disease, left ventricular hypertrophy, left ventricular end‐diastolic volume <65 mL, left atrial conduit strain <10.4%, and left atrial reservoir strain <25.3%. Demographic characteristics such as age were included by all studies with the exception of the PROACTIA (Prediction of occult atrial fibrillation in patients after cryptogenic stroke and transient ischemic attack) score. Age categories considered to be significant varied between studies, ranging from ≥60 years to ≥75 years. Several comorbidities were incorporated in the scores, including hypertension, history of stroke, recurrent stroke on antiplatelets or multiterritory brain infarct, nonstenotic carotid plaque, coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease, congestive heart failure, obesity (body mass index >30 kg/m2), hypercholesterolemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or obstructive sleep apnea, and thyroid disease. Stroke characteristics that formed key components of the clinical risk prediction score included stroke severity assessed by the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score, absence of vascular cause of stroke, presence of intracranial large vessel occlusion, cortical stroke, subcortical infarct, and presence of a posterior lesion. Electrocardiographic parameters included in the scores were supraventricular extrasystoles, atrial runs, and P‐wave morphology and duration. Laboratory markers included were N‐terminal pro‐B‐type natriuretic peptide and troponin. The components of individual risk‐prediction scores are detailed in Table 3, and graphically represented as a Venn diagram in Figure 1.
Characteristics of the Risk Scores
Characteristic	ACTEL	AF‐ESUS	Brown ESUS‐AF	Decryptoring score	E2AF	Graz AF	HAVOC	NDAF	PROACTIA	SAFE	STAF	 	Range of the score	−1 to 4	−9 to 8	0 to 4	0 to 44	0 to 14	0 to 16	0 to 14	0 to 6	NA	0 to 10	0 to 8	 	Proposed threshold for clinical use	≥2	>0	NA	>10	>10	≥4	≥4	>1	NA	≥5	≥5	 	Variables included in the scores	AgeHypercholesterolemiaLA sizeLVEDVTricuspid regurgitation	AgeHypertensionLV hypertrophyLA diameterLVEFAny supraventricular extrasystoleSubcortical infarctNonstenotic carotid plaque	AgeModerate–severe LA enlargement	AgeHypertensionTroponin levelsNT‐proBNP levelsLA strain reservoirLA strain conduit	AgeNIHSSHypertensionCortical and/or subcortical lesionPosterior lesionLA enlargementCoronary artery disease and/or peripheral artery disease	AgePrior cortical/cerebellar infractionLVEFLA enlargementSupraventricular premature beats (baseline ECG)Atrial runNT‐proBNP levelsRecurrent stroke on antiplatelets or multiterritory brain infarct	AgeCoronary artery diseaseValvular heart diseaseHypertensionPeripheral artery diseaseObesityCongestive heart failure	AgeCoronary artery diseasePrevious strokeLA size	Atrial premature beatP‐wave morphologyLA volume indexP‐wave duration	AgeCOPD or OSAThyroid diseaseNT‐proBNP levelsLA enlargementCortical topography of strokeIntracranial large vessel occlusion	AgeNIHSSLA dilationAbsence of vascular cause
ACTEL indicates Age, Cholesterol, Tricuspid, End diastolic volume, Left atrium; AF, atrial fibrillation; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ESUS, embolic stroke of undetermined source; E2AF, The Empoli ESUS Atrial Fibrillation; HAVOC, Hypertension, Age, Valvular heart disease, Obesity, Congestive heart failure, Coronary artery disease; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; LVEDV, left ventricularle end‐diastolic volume; LVEF, left ventricularle ejection fraction; NA, not applicable; NIHSS, National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale; NT‐proBNP, N‐terminal pro‐B‐type natriuretic peptide; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea; PROACTIA, Prediction of occult atrial Fibrillation in patients after cryptogenic stroke and transient ischemic attack; SAFE, the screening for atrial fibrillation scale; and STAF, Score for the Targeting of Atrial Fibrillation.
Venn diagram of clinical risk score components.
The diagram presents the variable categories included by the clinical risk scores. The radius of each circle corresponds to the number of times the category is included by the risk scores. The union represents the overlap of these categories between studies. Demographics and comorbidities include age, coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease, heart failure, hypertension, valvular disease, obesity, hypercholesterolemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, obstructive sleep apnea, thyroid disease, and nonstenotic carotid plaque. Stroke characteristics include previous stroke, National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale, recurrent stroke on antiplatelets or multiterritory brain infarct, and vascular cause. Neuroimaging includes posterior or cortical and/or subcortical lesion, and intracranial large vessel occlusion. ECG includes supraventricular extrasystoles, P‐wave duration and/or morphology, and atrial runs. Laboratory markers include N‐terminal pro‐B‐type natriuretic peptide levels and troponin levels. Echocardiography includes LV ejection fraction, LA size, LV end‐diastolic volume, LV hypertrophy, LA strain conduct, LA strain reservoir, and LA volume index. ACTEL indicates Age, Cholesterol, Tricuspid, End diastolic volume, Left atrium; AF, atrial fibrillation; AF‐ESUS, Atrial Fibrillation in Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source; ESUS, embolic stroke of undetermined source; E2AF, The Empoli ESUS Atrial Fibrillation; HAVOC, Hypertension, Age, Valvular heart disease, Obesity, Congestive heart failure, Coronary artery disease; LA, left atrial; LV, left ventricular; NDAF, newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation; PROACTIA, Prediction of occult atrial fibrillation in patients after cryptogenic stroke and transient ischemic attack; SAFE, the screening for atrial fibrillation scale; and STAF, score for the targeting of atrial fibrillation.

Assessment of the Performance of the Risk Scores
Among the 11 risk scores, the Decryptoring, newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation (NDAF), and AF‐ESUS (Atrial Fibrillation in Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source) scores had the highest AUCs: 0.94 (95% CI, 0.88–1.00), 0.87 (95% CI, 0.79–0.94), and 0.85 (95% CI, 0.79–0.86), respectively. The performance of each risk score along with the cohorts in which they were evaluated is detailed in Table 4, and graphically represented as a forest plot in Figure 2.
Assessment of Performance of Clinical Risk Scores
Study	Derivation and validation	Cohort	Size (n)	C statistic AUC (95% CI)	Sensitivity/specificity at best thresholds	 	ACTEL	Derivation cohort (Muscari et al)	SOMH20	191	0.80 (0.73–0.87)	0.56/0.93	 	AF‐ESUS	Derivation cohort (Ntaios et al)	ASTRAL, ASR, LSR	839	0.85 (0.79–0.86)	0.95/NPV: 0.98	 	Internal validation (Ntaios et al)	ASTRAL, ASR, LSR	0.84 (0.8–0.87)	 	External validation (Kitsiou et al)	EKB	123	NA	For AF episodes >6 min: 0.77/ NPV: 0.65For AF episodes >6 h: 0.80/ NPV: 0.84For AF episodes >10 h: 1.00/ NPV: 1.00	 	Brown ESUS‐AF	Derivation cohort (Ricci et al)	WAMSBU	296	0.73 (NA)	0.63/0.71a	 	External validation cohort (Muscari et al)	SOMH20	191	0.70 (0.62–0.78)	NA	 	Decryptoring score	Derivation cohort (Vera et al)	HULP	63	0.94 (0.88–1.00)	0.83/0.66	 	E2AF	Derivation cohort (Grifoni et al)	SGH	82	0.75 (0.64–0.84)	0.75/0.70	 	Graz AF	Derivation cohort (Kneihsl et al)	GSU	854	0.85 (0.78–0.92)	0.92/0.67	 	HAVOC	Derivation cohort (Kwong et al)	STRIDE	7671	0.77 (NA)	0.55/0.82	 	Validation cohort (Zhao et al)	CRYSTAL AF	214	NA (NA)	0.35/0.83	 	Validation cohort (Ntaios et al)	ASTRAL, ASR, LSR	658	0.68 (0.62–0.73)	0.77/NA	 	NDAF	Derivation cohort (Bugnicourt et al)	AUH	166	0.87 (0.79–0.94)	NA	 	PROACTIA	Derivation cohort (Skrebelyte‐Strøm et al)	AkUH	236	0.79 (0.73–0.86)	NA	 	SAFE	Derivation cohort (Pascasio et al)	TUH	227	0.82 (NA)	0.83/0.80	 	STAF	Derivation cohort (Goksu et al)	ARTH	133	0.70 (0.59–0.80)	0.86/0.71	 	External validation cohort (Muscari et al)	SOMH20	191	0.71 (0.63–0.79)	NA
ACTEL, Age, Cholesterol, Tricuspid, End diastolic volume, Left atrium; AF, atrial fibrillation; AkUH, Akershus University Hospital; ARTH, Antalya Research Training Hospital; ASR, Athens Stroke Registry; ASTRAL, Acute Stroke Registry and Analysis of Lausanne; AUC, area under the curve; AUH, Amiens University Hospital; CRYSTAL‐AF, Cryptogenic Stroke and Underlying Atrial Fibrillation; EKB, Evangelisches Klinikum Bethel; ESUS, embolic stroke of undetermined source; E2AF, The Empoli ESUS Atrial Fibrillation; GSU, Graz Stroke Unit; HAVOC, Hypertension, Age, Valvular heart disease, Obesity, Congestive heart failure, Coronary artery disease; HULP, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa; LSR, Larissa Stroke Registry; NA, not applicable; NDAF, newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation; NPV, negative predictive value; SGH, San Giuseppe Hospital; PROACTIA, Prediction of occult atrial fibrillation in patients after cryptogenic stroke and transient ischemic attack; SAFE, the screening for atrial fibrillation scale; SOMH, Saint Orosola‐Meldipighi Hospital 2020; STAF, score for the targeting of atrial fibrillation; STRIDE, Stanford Translational Research Integrated Database Environment; TUH, Torrecárdenas University Hospital; and WAMSBU, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University.
For a score=2.
Areas under the curve of the risk scores for the prediction of AF.
The forest plot summarizes the performance of each risk score in predicting the likelihood of AF after ESUS using the calculated area under the curve and the corresponding 95% CI. ACTEL indicates Age, Cholesterol, Tricuspid, End diastolic volume, Left atrium; AF: atrial fibrillation; AF‐ESUS, Atrial Fibrillation in Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source; ESUS, embolic stroke of undetermined source; E2AF, The Empoli ESUS Atrial Fibrillation; PROACTIA, Prediction of occult atrial fibrillation in patients after cryptogenic stroke and transient ischemic attack; and STAF, score for the targeting of atrial fibrillation.

External Validation of the Risk Scores
Among the 11 risk scores, 4 were externally validated: the AF‐ESUS, Brown ESUS‐AF, STAF (Score for the Targeting of Atrial Fibrillation), and HAVOC (Hypertension, Age, Valvular heart disease, Obesity, Congestive heart failure, Coronary artery disease) scores. The AF‐ESUS score was externally validated in 123 patients with ESUS and had a sensitivity of 80% for the AF‐ESUS threshold ≤0 to detect AF episodes lasting >6 hours. Both Brown ESUS‐AF and STAF were validated in 191 patients with an AUC of 0.70 (95% CI, 0.62–0.78) and 0.71 (95% CI, 0.63–0.79), respectively. The HAVOC score was validated in 2 cohorts of 214 and 658 patients with an AUC of 0.68 (95% CI, 0.62–0.73) in the latter cohort.

Discussion
This systematic review identified 11 risk scores that have been proposed as a tool for the stratification of the likelihood of AF detection in patients with ESUS. We identified significant heterogeneity in the components of the risk scores, because 48 different parameters have been included overall. Also, we found heterogeneity in the extent of external validation, because only 4 risk scores were externally validated. Additionally, there was heterogeneity in the predictive performance of the scores, with an AUC range of between 0.70 and 0.94. The 3 scores with the highest AUC were the Decryptoring, NDAF, and the AF‐ESUS scores, of which only the latter was externally validated.
Almost every study included in this systematic review identified patient age as a powerful predictor of AF.
The NDAF score defined age ≥72 years as an independent predictive factor. HAVOC, ACTEL (Age, Cholesterol, Tricuspid, End diastolic volume, Left atrium), and the Decryptoring score used an age threshold of ≥75 years. Graz AF included age >75 years in its major criteria and age 60 to 75 years in its minor criteria. Additionally, the AF‐ESUS score used an age threshold of ≥60 years. Age ≥65 years was associated with a higher risk of AF also at the Empoli ESUS‐AF score, SAFE (the screening for atrial fibrillation scale) score, and Brown ESUS‐AF score. The STAF score adds 2 points to every patient >62 years old. PROACTIA was the only score that did not use age as a compound.
All scores excluded, except HAVOC, identified echocardiographic variables as some of the strongest predictors of AF. Left atrial size was the dominant covariate included in STAF, NDAF, Graz AF, AF‐ESUS, Brown ESUS‐AF, SAFE, and Decryptoring scores. Reduced left ventricular ejection fraction was also associated with higher risk of AF with varying thresholds; the Graz AF included left ventricular ejection fraction <40% among the major risk criteria and left ventricular ejection fraction 40% to 50% among the minor risk criteria, and the AF‐ESUS score set the threshold at left ventricular ejection fraction <35%. The Decryptoring score also used left atrial strain reservoir <25.3% and left atrial strain conduct <10.4%, which is in line with recent evidence showing that left atrial strain is a strong predictor at AF in patients with ESUS.

Atrial Fibrillation Is Frequently Detected Among Patients With ESUS
AF is a frequent finding in patients with ESUS, with the estimate ranging according to the intensity of cardiac rhythm monitoring. In the Athens Stroke Registry, AF was detected in 29.1% of all patients with ESUS. In the RE‐SPECT ESUS (Randomized, Double‐Blind, Evaluation in Secondary Stroke Prevention Comparing the Efficacy and Safety of the Oral Thrombin Inhibitor Dabigatran Etexilate Versus Acetylsalicylic Acid in Patients With Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source) trial, 7.5% of patients were found to develop AF reported as an adverse event or using cardiac monitoring per standard clinical care during a median follow‐up of 19 months. In a meta‐analysis of 47 studies and 8215 patients with ESUS or cryptogenic stroke, the rate of AF detection by implantable cardiac monitoring ranged between 2% at 1 week after stroke and 28.5% at 36 months.

AF Detected After ESUS: How Strong Is the Causal Association?
There is a growing amount of evidence that suggests that the causal association of AF detected after ESUS is weaker than initially considered. For example, in the ASSERT (Subclinical Atrial Fibrillation and the Risk of Stroke) and TRENDS (The Relationship Between Daily Atrial Tachyarrhythmia Burden From Implantable Device Diagnostics and Stroke Risk) studies, the majority of embolic events did not occur proximal to recent episodes of atrial tachycardia or fibrillation. In addition, the rate of AF detection was similar between patients with ESUS and non‐ESUS stroke in the AF‐Randomized study.
Moreover, the negative results of the NAVIGATE ESUS (Rivaroxaban for Stroke Prevention After Embolic Stroke of Undetermined Source) and RE‐SPECT ESUS trials, in which rivaroxaban and dabigatran, respectively, did not reduce stroke rates compared with aspirin, point to the same direction; if AF was a major cause of ESUS, it could be expected that they would show reduced stroke rates compared with aspirin in these 2 trials. Considering the striking benefit of apixaban in reducing the risk of stroke compared with aspirin in patients with AF in the AVERROES (Apixaban Versus Acetylsalicylic Acid to Prevent Stroke in Atrial Fibrillation Patients Who Have Failed or Are Unsuitable for Vitamin K Antagonist Treatment) trial, the results of NAVIGATE ESUS and RE‐SPECT ESUS do not support the hypothesis of strong causal association between AF and ESUS.
It is hypothesized that the more proximal an AF episode is to the index stroke, and the longer it lasts, the more likely it is that there is a causal association. On the other hand, episodes that are chronologically distant from the ESUS or are of short duration might be irrelevant in regard to cause. The hypothesis that AF episodes of shorter duration are only weakly associated with ESUS, if at all, is also supported by the results of the NOAH‐AFNET‐6 (Non vitamin K antagonist Oral anticoagulants in patients with Atrial High rate episodes) trial, which evaluated the potential benefit of oral anticoagulation in patients with atrial high‐rate episodes. The trial was terminated prematurely due to an observed trend toward futility for efficacy combined with expected safety concerns, which weakens the putative causal association of short episodes of AF with ESUS.

Should We Screen All Patients With ESUS for AF? Choosing the Right Candidate Wisely
Based on the aforementioned evidence and as suggested by current recommendations and consensus statements, a sequential stratified approach seems rational, in which prolonged cardiac rhythm monitoring is reserved only for a subgroup of patients with ESUS with specific characteristics that indicate a higher likelihood of covert AF. The use of risk scores in clinical practice to stratify the risk of covert AF of our patients with ESUS and select the best candidates for prolonged cardiac rhythm monitoring is a rational choice. The availability of several noninvasive and invasive modalities for AF screening, including patient‐initiated oscillometric blood pressure monitors, handheld devices, smartwatches, wearable nonadhesive dry‐electrode belts, adhesive patch devices, and implantable loop recorders, extends our ability to individualize further our approach in patients with ESUS.

Limitations
A limitation of this systematic review is the variety of definitions of AF used in the included studies. Five scores defined AF as any recorded episode, whereas the rest of the scores used a definition of continuous detected AF for ≥30 seconds or more. The methods for detection of AF also differed between the included studies. Holter monitoring, routine visits with ECGs, and implantable loop recorders were mainly used for AF detection with a follow‐up period range between 15 days and >5 years. Another limitation of this review is we do not have access to prognostic covariates at the level of individual patient data. Therefore, there is no accurate statistical method that can be used to examine the impact of each particular covariant.

Conclusions
This systematic review identified several risk scores that have been proposed as tools to stratify patients with ESUS according to their likelihood of AF detection. The 3 scores with the highest AUC were the Decryptoring, NDAF, and the AF‐ESUS scores, of which only the latter was externally validated. These tools can guide individualized clinical practice decisions about prolonged cardiac rhythm monitoring in patients with ESUS.

Sources of Funding
None.

Disclosures
Dr Ntaios served as speaker or on advisory boards for or received research support from Abbott, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Ferrer, Javelin, Novartis, and Sanofi outside of the submitted work. All fees were paid to his institution. The remaining authors have no disclosures to report.

Supporting information

References
Embolic stroke of undetermined source: a systematic review and clinical update
Embolic stroke of undetermined source: JACC review topic of the week
Antithrombotic treatment of embolic stroke of undetermined source: RE‐SPECT ESUS elderly and renally impaired subgroups
Embolic strokes of undetermined source in the Athens stroke registry: an outcome analysis
Review and update of the concept of embolic stroke of undetermined source
Integrated care for optimizing the management of stroke and associated heart disease: a position paper of the European Society of Cardiology Council on Stroke
Searching for atrial fibrillation poststroke: a white paper of the AF‐SCREEN international collaboration
Diagnostic challenges and uncertainties of embolic strokes of undetermined source in young adults
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Predictors of newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation in cryptogenic stroke: a cohort study
Usefulness of the ACTEL score to predict atrial fibrillation in patients with cryptogenic stroke
A clinical score for predicting atrial fibrillation in patients with cryptogenic stroke or transient ischemic attack
A simple score that predicts paroxysmal atrial fibrillation on outpatient cardiac monitoring after embolic stroke of unknown source
The value of STAF (score for the targeting of atrial fibrillation) in patients with cryptogenic embolic stroke
Predicting atrial fibrillation after cryptogenic stroke via a clinical risk score—a prospective observational study
A comprehensive model to predict atrial fibrillation in cryptogenic stroke: the Decryptoring score
Prediction of occult atrial fibrillation in patients after cryptogenic stroke and transient ischaemic attack: PROACTIA
Poststroke detection of subclinical paroxysmal atrial fibrillation in patients with embolic stroke of undetermined source in the real world practice: the Empoli ESUS atrial fibrillation (E2AF) study
Development of a score to predict the paroxysmal atrial fibrillation in stroke patients: the screening for atrial fibrillation scale
Supraventricular extrasystoles on standard 12‐lead electrocardiogram predict new incident atrial fibrillation after embolic stroke of undetermined source: the AF‐ESUS study
Potential embolic sources and outcomes in embolic stroke of undetermined source in the NAVIGATE‐ESUS trial
Identification of patients with embolic stroke of undetermined source and low risk of new incident atrial fibrillation: the AF‐ESUS score
Usefulness of the MrWALLETS scoring system to predict first diagnosed atrial fibrillation in patients with ischemic stroke
Validation of the AF‐ESUS score to identify patients with embolic stroke of undetermined source and low risk of device‐detected atrial fibrillation
Evaluation of a clinical score for predicting atrial fibrillation in cryptogenic stroke patients with insertable cardiac monitors: results from the CRYSTAL AF study
External performance of the HAVOC score for the prediction of new incident atrial fibrillation
Left atrial appendage strain predicts subclinical atrial fibrillation in embolic strokes of undetermined source
Predictors of atrial fibrillation development in patients with embolic stroke of undetermined source: an analysis of the RE‐SPECT ESUS trial
Temporal relationship between subclinical atrial fibrillation and embolic events
Temporal relationship of atrial tachyarrhythmias, cerebrovascular events, and systemic emboli based on stored device data: a subgroup analysis of TRENDS
Holter‐electrocardiogram‐monitoring in patients with acute ischaemic stroke (find‐AFRANDOMISED): an open‐label randomised controlled trial
Apixaban in patients with atrial fibrillation
Dabigatran for prevention of stroke after embolic stroke of undetermined source
Rivaroxaban for stroke prevention after embolic stroke of undetermined source
NOAH–AFNET 6 trial terminates ahead of time (NOAH AFNET 6 trial). Deutsches Zentrum für Herz‐Kreislaufforschung
2021 guideline for the prevention of stroke in patients with stroke and transient ischemic attack: a guideline from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association