Diagnosing Respiratory Long COVID
Long COVID or a post-COVID condition, defined as the persistence of symptoms at least 3 months after acute COVID-19 infection, is a novel condition in which a definitive diagnostic marker and treatment have yet to be found. This condition, which has been estimated to impact > 65 million individuals worldwide, manifests with multisystem involvement, most commonly presenting with fatigue, brain fog, dyspnea, cough, or a combination thereof. The burden of these symptoms can range from mild to severe, with many patients reporting an inability to return to usual activities. Herein, we present several hypothetical but clinically representative case reports to allow discussion around how we approach the diagnosis of respiratory symptoms of long COVID in those with and without chronic lung disease.
SARS-CoV-2 caused unprecedented disruptions worldwide, resulting in the COVID-19 pandemic declaration by the World Health Organization (WHO) from March 2020 through March 2023. One lasting complication from COVID-19 is the development of a unique form of postviral syndrome named by the patient community as long COVID. Long COVID is common, with worldwide estimations identifying a prevalence of 10% to 35% after infection. Further, long COVID often involves multiple organ systems, and many have different phenotypes based on the presenting symptoms.
Symptoms after COVID-19 associated with the respiratory tract—such as shortness of breath, cough (with or without sputum), chest tightness, wheezing, and chest pain—are common and estimated to occur in up to 30% to 80% of patients with long COVID and have been termed respiratory long COVID (RLC). The inability to provide a more precise RLC prevalence estimate is in part the result of significant heterogenicity regarding definitions. This variation impacts our ability to study, diagnose, and treat RLC.

Case Example 1
A 45-year-old woman, previously healthy, contracted SARS-CoV-2 infection on January 1, 2024. She had no prior pulmonary history. The acute infection was mild and did not require an emergency department visit or hospitalization. She had received 4 mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccine doses, the last of which was in fall 2023. Nine months after the acute infection, she continued to experience significant exertional limitations resulting from dyspnea, associated with chest pain, worsening fatigue, and brain fog. Her constellation of symptoms was triggered unpredictably by physical exertion (she reported good days when she could do more and bad days when she experienced dyspnea, even with talking) and improved with rest, although often it took hours to days to resolve fully back to the postinfection baseline. She used to work as a full-time gym teacher, but because of these symptoms was working part-time in a less physically active teaching position. Initial investigations revealed unremarkable chest radiography (CXR), pulmonary function testing (PFT), and ECG findings. Blood work showed normal troponin I and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels. Echocardiography revealed normal biventricular size and function with no valvular abnormalities. Six-minute walk testing (6MWT) demonstrated no significant oxygen desaturation (nadir peripheral capiliary oxygen saturation, 92% from baseline of 95%) with ambulation on room air. Baseline heart rate was 95 beats/min and the highest recorded during the test was 145 beats/min.

Challenge 1 in Diagnosing RLC: Ruling out Alternative Diagnoses
Summary of Available Guideline Recommendations for Respiratory Long COVID Testing
Guidelines	Recommended Testing	 	Pulmonary	Cardiac	Exertional Test	 	CXR	PFT	Chest CT Imaging	ABG	Troponin I	CPK-MB	BNP	ECHO	ECG	 	Korean Clinical Practice Guidelines	✓	✓									 	UK NICE Guidelines	✓						✓			✓	 	ESCMID Guidelines	✓	✓	✓a	✓b	✓	✓	✓	✓			 	Spanish Guidelines	✓	✓	✓	✓b	✓	✓	✓		✓	✓	 	CAN-PCC	✓	✓	✓c		✓		✓		✓	✓
ABG = arterial blood gas; BNP = brain natriuretic peptide; CAN-PCC = Canadian Guidelines for Post-COVID Condition; CPK-MB = creatine phosphokinase-MB; CXR = chest radiography; ECHO = echocardiography; ESCMID = European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Disease; NICE = National Institutes of Health and Care Excellence; PFT = pulmonary function testing.
Chest CT imaging only if PFT findings are abnormal.
ABG if resting pulse oximetry results are abnormal.
Chest CT imaging only if high risk (eg, hospitalized for acute COVID-19) or abnormal CXR or PFT results.
A key factor in determining if someone has RLC is ruling out alternative diagnoses or conditions that otherwise could explain the respiratory symptoms. More investigation may lead to a higher likelihood of finding an alternate diagnosis, so how much investigation should be done? Guidelines that have provided recommendations for individuals of average risk are summarized in Table 1. For example, the 2024 Korean clinical practice guidelines recommend an approach using CXR and PFT. The United Kingdom’s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidelines, updated in 2024, recommend testing for exertional desaturation (without comment on the testing method), CXR, and BNP measurement to rule out cardiac involvement after 12 weeks of persistent respiratory symptoms. The 2022 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases recommends measuring troponin, creatine phosphokinase-MB, and BNP and using echocardiography to rule out cardiac causes; arterial blood gas measurement if a reduction in oxygen saturation is noted; and PFT and CXR when symptoms have persisted beyond 12 weeks after infection. Chest CT imaging is recommended if abnormal PFT results are found, regardless of symptoms. The 2021 Spanish guidelines are consistent with the European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases recommendations and additionally recommend 6MWT in certain patient populations. Finally, the Canadian Guidelines for Post-COVID-19 Condition recommend CXR (conditional recommendation; very low-quality evidence); 6MWT (conditional recommendation; very low-quality evidence); and cardiac testing, including ECG (conditional recommendation; very low-quality evidence), BNP measurement (conditional recommendation; very low-quality evidence), and troponin I measurement (conditional recommendation; very low-quality evidence). Additionally, patients who are at high risk of pulmonary complications, defined as symptomatic individuals with an abnormal initial CXR or PFT findings, as well as those who were hospitalized for acute COVID-19 infection, should undergo chest CT imaging (conditional recommendation; very low-quality evidence).
Guidelines are helpful, but do not always include detail. For example, what constitutes abnormal CXR or PFT findings? Further, it is worth noting that some investigations may be more accessible in some places and by some patients than others.

How We Rule Out Alternative Diagnoses
In an otherwise previously healthy individual with respiratory symptoms of exertional dyspnea and dry cough associated with fatigue and brain fog lasting 3 months after acute COVID-19, resting peripheral capiliary oxygen saturation should remain > 90% to 92%. We will conduct 6MWT in those with unexplained exertional dyspnea and those whose resting saturations hover around the lower end of normal. However, before we carry out the test, we have an informed discussion with the patient about the risk of making the symptoms worse (ie, provoking a symptom crash or postexertion symptom exacerbation [PESE]). In such cases, a modified exertional test such as a 2-minute walk test is considered. It should be noted that abnormalities on cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET), such as reduced maximal oxygen uptake, dysfunctional breathing, chronotropic limitations, and defects in oxygen extraction and deconditioning, have been identified frequently in patients with long COVID demonstrating dyspnea. A meta-analysis of published literature found deconditioning to be the predominant abnormality in patients after hospitalization, after intensive care admission, or both for acute COVID-19, whereas peripheral and ventilatory inefficiency were the most common abnormalities found in the never-hospitalized population. Evidence is emerging that such ventilatory inefficiencies, manifesting in dysfunctional or dysregulated breathing, may be related to carotid chemoreflex sensitization resulting in relative resting hyperventilation made worse on exertion. Finally, defects in muscular or peripheral oxygen extraction, or both, also were noted commonly. Consequently, when taken together, CPET findings have provided valuable insight that the most common causes of exertional dyspnea in long COVID commonly are nonpulmonary, which may be a reassuring finding for respirologists and patients seeking to rule out definitively a pulmonary cause of symptoms. Thus, in certain populations with high suspicion for a cardiopulmonary cause of dyspnea, despite normal 6MWT results, CPET may be an appropriate rule-out test. As with 6MWT, a shared decision-making framework should be followed when balancing the need for clinical testing against the risk of patient harms because the risk of PESE would be far greater with CPET than with 6MWT.
CXR and full PFT with bronchodilation should be carried out to investigate pulmonary involvement. Formal high-resolution noncontrast chest CT imaging should be performed if significant reduction in total lung capacity is present with or without reduction in diffusion capacity or if a significant degree (particularly multilobar) of reticular changes is present on CXR. Troponin measurement, BNP measurement, ECG, and echocardiography should be carried out to rule out cardiac contributions to dyspnea.
In those with cough, further symptom inquiry around sputum production, amount, and color are important. Sputum microbiological testing may be of particular relevance to rule out superimposed bacterial pneumonia.
In those with overlapping dyspnea and fatigue, and in particular with resting oxygen saturation near the lower range of normal, we consider a level 3 sleep study to rule out sleep-disordered breathing contributing to daytime fatigue. If unexplained reduction in diffusion capacity is seen along with low to normal resting oxygen saturation, a / scan is reasonable to rule out chronic pulmonary embolism, given the evidence of the prothrombotic nature of COVID-19.

Could This Be Consistent With Long COVID?
Long COVID definitions are based on symptoms because no objective diagnostic biomarker exists to date. Consequently, much heterogeneity persists in the definition of long COVID. The most used definition, published in October 2021 by the WHO, defines a post-COVID-19 condition as the continuation or development of new symptoms with no other explanation within 3 months after SARS-CoV-2 infection, with those symptoms lasting for at least 2 months. In contrast, the National Institutes of Health-derived long COVID definition, using the term postacute sequalae of COVID-19 (PASC), is broader, including ongoing, relapsing, or new symptoms after COVID-19 at least 4 weeks after infection. More recently, some have proposed a seminal approach that uses a PASC-based multisystem symptom scoring approach to define long COVID, in which a symptom score of ≥ 12 is associated with a high likelihood of long COVID. Using this scoring system, the patient in this case has 13 points, and thus the reported symptoms reasonably may be explained by long COVID (note that the scoring system does not include dyspnea, and thus further work for defining RLC is needed).

Case Resolution
In this vignette, testing did not reveal an alternate diagnosis or condition responsible for the respiratory symptoms. Cardiopulmonary exercise was considered to rule out exercise cardiopulmonary abnormalities, but we were concerned that the harms of PEM or PESE symptom crash might outweigh the benefits because the patient experienced a significant relapse of long COVID symptoms for 1 week after 6MWT. At this point, recognizing that the dyspnea always occurred with, and never in the absence of, fatigue and brain fog, the clinical impression was that the dyspnea was related more to long COVID rather than to underlying cardiopulmonary disease. As such, the patient was encouraged to rest and pace herself to avoid symptom crash while working with the physiotherapist to design a regimen to improve conditioning in a manner that minimizes the risk of PESE. She was provided teaching around breathing retraining to address dysfunctional breathing patterns given existing CPET evidence of how common dysfunctional breathing and relative tachypnea is found in the long COVID population.

Case Example 2
A 35-year-old woman and mother of 2 young children with a history of well-controlled asthma requiring as-needed inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and long-acting β agonist (LABA) dual therapy, typically once per month, and with no prior history of hospitalization contracted COVID-19 on April 30, 2022. During the acute infection, she sought treatment at the emergency department and was found to be mildly hypoxemic requiring 3 to 4 L/min of supplemental oxygen. She was hospitalized and treated with dexamethasone 6 mg daily for 10 days and remdesivir 200 mg IV on day 1 and 100 mg daily for the next 4 days, along with short-acting β agonist and short acting muscarinic antagonist treatment. She improved without the need for ventilatory support. Four months after discharge, the patient continued to experience significant exertional dyspnea with associated chest tightness and wheeze far beyond the baseline before infection. Even after transitioning to high-dose ICS and LABA maintenance therapy, she was requiring as-needed reliever inhaler therapy 4 times/d. The burden of symptoms impacted her ability to care for her young children, and she had to rely on her partner and family for support. The symptoms were triggered by mental exertion, made worse when she tried to return to work in a noisy clinic as a medical administrator, and when she talked for 5 minutes. Initial investigations included CXR that revealed minor postinfectious scarring at the bases bilaterally (new compared with CXR performed before COVID-19). PFT revealed FEV1 of 70% predicted (less than the lower limit of normal and reduced from the baseline before COVID-19 of 80%), FVC of 95% predicted, FEV1 to FVC ratio of 0.6, and bronchodilator response of > 13%. Plethysmography revealed normal lung volumes. Diffusion capacity was mildly reduced at 70%. ECG and echocardiography findings were unremarkable. CBC count revealed no elevation of peripheral eosinophils, and IgE level was within normal limits.

Challenge 2 in Diagnosing RLC: Preexisting Pulmonary Conditions
We find the determination of RLC in those with preexisting pulmonary conditions challenging because existing definitions vary and are at times at odds with one another. By the WHO definition, individuals with preexisting chronic small airways lung disease are prone to symptom exacerbation triggered by viral infections of any kind, and thus would not be considered to have long COVID, but rather prolonged exacerbation of the underlying condition. Similarly, the PASC definition also refers to new symptoms after COVID-19. However, definitions of long COVID have evolved over time and have become more complicated when considering potential subtypes of long COVID, such as RLC. The most contemporary consensus definition was published by the National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine (NASEM) in 2024, defining long COVID as the persistence of symptoms for at least 3 months after infection with no other explanation, but adds that it is (1) a continuous, relapsing and remitting, or progressive disease that affects ≥ 1 organ systems and (2) can be continuous from the time of infection or new onset weeks or months after full recovery. The NASEM definition deviates from the WHO or PASC definitions in that it accepts long COVID as a condition that can exacerbate preexisting health conditions. This is particularly relevant when considering potential subtypes of long COVID like RLC. Under the NASEM definition, this patient would be deemed to have long COVID, despite not meeting the post-COVID-19 condition or PASC definitions of long COVID.
The concern about the stricter WHO and National Institutes of Health definitions is that long COVID could be underdiagnosed, leading to withholding of care or unintended insurance complications. The implications also are that, by definition, people with previous respiratory disease are not able have RLC, which seems unlikely. However, the more liberal NASEM definition risks inadequate focus on optimizing the underlying pulmonary comorbidity (ie, risk of missing an otherwise treatable condition).

How We Diagnose RLC in People With Preexisting Pulmonary Conditions
In patients with preexisting lung disease, in addition to the already discussed cardiopulmonary testing needed to support an RLC diagnosis, we compare PFT, CXR, and chest CT imaging findings with previous test results, if available. On imaging, we look for new fibrotic changes related to COVID-19 or progression of underlying lung disease. In general, we find the 6MWT and echocardiography to be of greater diagnostic yield in this population, given the reduced baseline from preexisting disease. If evidence of worsening pulmonary function or imaging results is identified, we take reasonable steps to optimize the underlying lung disease first, in accordance to the respective disease guidelines. If this is ineffective in improving symptoms, then RLC may be an appropriate diagnosis to make. Despite this approach, it may still be quite challenging to determine disease progression of certain conditions like interstitial lung disease vs overlapping RLC, and serial follow-up and imaging may be needed to allow for the full clinical picture to be clarified. In these situations, an open and honest dialog about the diagnostic uncertainty while providing symptomatic support and engagement with the patient is our approach.

Vignette Resolution
Comparing the current PFT findings with the previous baseline PFT findings before COVID-19 revealed a mild drop in FEV1. In combination with the noted bronchodilator response and the clinical symptoms suggestive of suboptimally controlled asthma, despite augmentation of inhaler therapy, a course of oral steroids 50 mg/d for 5 days was prescribed. The patient noted improvement in exertional dyspnea. She now receives maintenance treatment of ICS and LABA 2 puffs bid, but still occasionally experiences exertional dyspnea and requires as-needed ICS and LABA therapy.
Because the symptoms were exacerbated by mental exertion, a common trigger for long COVID symptom exacerbation but not a classical trigger for asthma, the patient was referred to the long COVID clinic. The patient received a diagnosis of RLC, and workplace accommodations and duty modifications were explored in consultation with an occupational medicine specialist. Ultimately, she needed to go on long-term disability to allow time away from triggers for convalescence.

Discussion
Flow diagram showing proposed workup and management of respiratory symptoms associated with long COVID. BNP = B-type natriuretic peptide; CXR = chest radiography; ECHO = echocardiography; ICS = inhaled corticosteroid; LABA = long-acting β agonist; PFT = pulmonary function testing; SABA = short-acting β agonist.
RLC is an increasingly common reason for referral to a respirologist. However, little understanding of its mechanism or the optimal workup and management exists. In this How I Do It article, we have shared our approach to challenges in diagnosing RLC: ruling out alternate diagnoses and exacerbation of underlying lung disease. A proposed approach to the workup of patients with respiratory symptoms after COVID-19 separated into those with vs without previous lung disease is described (Fig 1). Long COVID can be an isolating and worrying condition, given the lack of knowledge currently available for this disease, and the role of the respirologist is to provide support in ruling out alternative pulmonary diagnoses, to provide the opportunity to trial symptom-directed treatment as appropriate, and ultimately to provide support for patients afflicted by this possibly chronic condition.

Financial/Nonfinancial Disclosures
The authors have reported to CHEST the following: G. Y. L. has received research funding to her institution from Roche Diagnostics, Alberta Lung, and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and has received honoraria for educational activities from Boehringer Ingelheim, Alberta Lung, and /Respiplus. She is also on the steering committee of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research-funded national Long COVID Research and Clinical Care Network and of the Long COVID Web, serves on the Canadian Guidelines for Post-COVID-19 Condition guidelines committee, and is a co-chair of the Canadian Thoracic Society Respiratory Long COVID Guideline Panel. A. S. G. is a co-chair of the Canadian Thoracic Society Respiratory Long COVID Guideline Panel. None declared (D. F.).

References
How and why patients made Long Covid
Long COVID: major findings, mechanisms and recommendations
Updated clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of long COVID
ESCMID rapid guidelines for assessment and management of long COVID
Long covid-19: proposed primary care clinical guidelines for diagnosis and disease management
Canadian Guidelines for Post-COVID-19 Condition Guidelines. Canadian Guidelines for Post-COVID-19 Condition website
Persistent dyspnea after COVID-19 is not related to cardiopulmonary impairment; a cross-sectional study of persistently dyspneic COVID-19, non-dyspneic COVID-19 and controls
Persistent exertional intolerance after COVID-19: insights from invasive cardiopulmonary exercise testing
Cardiopulmonary exercise capacity and limitations 3 months after COVID-19 hospitalisation
Classification and occurrence of an abnormal breathing pattern during cardiopulmonary exercise testing in subjects with persistent symptoms following COVID-19 disease
Deconditioning as main mechanism of impaired exercise response in COVID-19 survivors
Use of cardiopulmonary exercise testing to evaluate long COVID-19 symptoms in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Carotid body dysregulation contributes to long COVID symptoms
Sex differences in venous thromboembolism after COVID-19 infection: a retrospective population-based matched cohort study
Generalisable long COVID subtypes: findings from the NIH N3C and RECOVER programmes
Development of a definition of postacute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection
Physical, cognitive, and social triggers of symptom fluctuations in people living with long COVID: an intensive longitudinal cohort study