Winning the battle of intestinal peace with Bacillus—a multifaceted approach to animal health, immunity, and future applications in monogastric livestock production
This review focuses on the application of Bacillus-based probiotics in livestock production, emphasizing their potential to enhance animal health, growth performance, and welfare through modulation of the gut microbiota, immune function, and nutrient absorption. Bacillus probiotics, particularly spore-forming strains, offer advantages such as stability during feed processing or the ability to survive gastrointestinal conditions, germinate and produce beneficial metabolites in the intestine. The mechanisms by which Bacillus probiotics exert their effects include influencing microbial communities, producing bioactive compounds, and strengthening gut barrier integrity, which together lead to improved digestive health and resistance to pathogens. Additionally, the challenges in standardizing their effects and identifying reliable biomarkers for evaluating probiotic efficacy or the axes with other organs are highlighted. Overall, Bacillus probiotics are seen as promising, sustainable alternatives to antibiotics with significant potential for future research to optimize their use and understand their mechanisms within the context of animal production and health.

Introduction
Probiotics are defined by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization (FAO/WHO) as “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host.” This definition allows for a broad range of microbes to be used in animal feed, as a means to improve animal health and performance.
The use of health-supporting feed additives such as probiotics has gained increasing interest in the poultry and swine industry and is driven by the challenge in livestock production to stimulate efficiency in raising high-performing animals while becoming less dependent on antimicrobials. Apart from preventing and treating diseases, veterinary drugs have been applied as antibiotic growth promoters. However, the increasing number of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, which are a danger to both animal and human health, has accelerated the quest for alternatives to antibiotics that are able to stimulate growth and to make the animal more resilient to production challenges. Probiotics came into the picture as a non-antimicrobial candidate to improve animal productivity, because evidence from human research had suggested that their mechanisms to improve gut health were conserved in production animals, and could be produced and applied in animal feed in a cost-effective way.
Although the most common probiotics are non-spore-forming strains like Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, spore-forming bacteria, like Bacillus subtilis and B. amyloliquefaciens, are now being utilized more frequently, due to several key advantages. Hence, in this review, we will first give an overview of commonly used probiotic bacteria in poultry and swine production. Secondly, we will focus on Bacillus-based probiotics, summarizing our current understanding of their underlying modes of action in pigs and poultry and describing the evidence for their potential role in contributing to the specific Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as established by the United Nations. Thirdly, research gaps and potential future research directions will be discussed.

Probiotics used in poultry and swine industry

Probiotics in poultry and swine production
Various dietary strategies have been applied as natural growth promoters in the poultry and swine industry, such as prebiotics, probiotics, enzymes, antimicrobial peptides (AMP), organic acids, bacteriophages, synbiotics, metal, clay, hyperimmune egg yolk IgY, phytogenics and most recently, postbiotics. Probiotics are, by definition, the opposite of antibiotics, as they rely on the growth of bacteria to exert a beneficial and revitalizing function in the digestive tract. When adequately consumed, these living microorganisms can modulate gut health, performance, and animals’ overall health. Benefits of dietary probiotic consumption therefore exceed the typical nutritional edge to go beyond to complicated interactions with gut microbiota, many metabolic processes, and immune responses, as explained below.

Probiotic genera
Selecting a microbial strain is the most critical task when developing a probiotic product. The taxonomic classification may already encompass information about physiology, ecological niche preference, and metabolic characteristics of that particular strain. These specific characteristics, together with the intended application of the probiotic product, will crucially dictate the choice of microbial strain. The most widely used probiotic genera in animal production consists of strains from bacterial and fungi genera (Figure 1).
Taxonomic classification of examples of bacterial genera used as probiotic in poultry and swine production. 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9; 10; 11; 12; 13; 14; 15; 16; 17; 18; 19.
Regardless of how the probiotic product will be applied, all candidate strains must be generally recognized as safe (GRAS), non-toxic, non-pathogenic, beneficial to the host and able to withstand gastrointestinal acid and bile salts.

Selecting probiotic strains
The targeted application method of a probiotic product has a critical impact on the choice of probiotic strains. A probiotic can be supplemented to the diet of poultry and swine throughout their entire production cycle. In that case, there is no need to select gut colonizing bacteria, which allows selection of strains that are not natural inhabitants of the chicken or swine gut, but have metabolic characteristics different from those of the endogenous microbiota.
The method of administration to the animal also has to be considered. Drinking water application is only possible if the probiotic product does not clog the nipples of the water line, and if bacterial overgrowth and biofilm formation in the drinking water lines are avoided. For liquid feed or mash feed, the product does not have to be heat-stable, but can have a fermentative effect. Probiotics that end up in pelleted feed, however, must be able to withstand higher temperatures and steam used in the pelleting process. Therefore, spore-forming bacteria are typically used for this purpose (Figure 2).
Fate of probiotic Bacillus spores and vegetative cells in the gastrointestinal tract. Spores are added to the feed and have to survive pelleting and proximal gastrointestinal tract conditions (such as low pH, digestive enzymes, bile acids) before they can germinate in the intestine. After germination, Bacillus can produce and secrete metabolites. Created in BioRender: https://BioRender.com/6b8zsaa.
Another factor to consider is the choice between a single probiotic strain or a mixture of several strains. Multi-strain products, which can be composed of different bacterial species, or a combination of bacteria and fungi can have, at least in theory, a broader activity range than a single-cell product. However, demonstrating an additive or synergic effect of the selected strains is challenging, as it requires a series of dose–response trials in vivo, with various levels of different strain combinations. Even when making use of only a single species, thorough in vitro and in vivo analyses are warranted, as strains from the same species can have vastly different metabolic activities.
Based on these selection criteria, certain bacterial genera have proven particularly well-suited for probiotic applications in animal nutrition. Among them, Bacillus species have received considerable attention and are discussed in more detail below.

Bacillus as probiotic
Bacillus species are one of those strains perfectly positioned as feed additives, mainly because of their stability as spore-forming bacteria. Sporulation is a process used by bacteria to protect themselves against environmentally dangerous and damaging factors, including heat, desiccation, and UV radiation. Hence, spores can tolerate different storage conditions, and they can withstand feed pelleting conditions and low gastric pH levels before they can germinate in the intestine to exert their beneficial functions (Figure 2).
The mode of action of Bacillus is based on different mechanisms, allowing a broad range of beneficial effects to the host. Once metabolically active in the intestine, Bacillus is able to produce several metabolites like enzymes, vitamins, and exopolysaccharides. Furthermore, Bacillus can secrete antimicrobial compounds as well as compete with pathogens for essential resources.
Using probiotics based on Bacillus has shown beneficial effects on young pigs’ growth performance, nutrient absorption, intestinal structure, and immune response. There are many studies reporting reduction in inflammatory responses under heat stress, improved tight junctions’ integrity and influences on intestinal microbiota composition as a result of dietary supplementation of Bacillus species-based probiotics. Also, in lipopolysaccharide-challenged broilers, B. pumilus TS1 attenuated the inflammatory response and alleviated inflammatory injury. Furthermore, it enhanced growth performance, improved the intestinal microbial composition, and restored villus morphology, resulting in increased villus length.
While Bacillus species are known for their growth-promoting and health-supporting properties, it is essential to recognize that probiotic effects are strain-specific. As such, referring to a Bacillus as a probiotic requires careful assessment at the strain level to ensure its efficacy and relevance in a given context.
In summary, the demonstrated benefits and robustness of Bacillus species provide a solid foundation for exploring in more detail the mechanisms through which these probiotics exert their positive effects on animal health and performance (Table 1).
Overview of Bacillus-based probiotic activities.
Sections	Bacillus based probiotic	Evidences	References	 	Bioactive molecules production	Enzymes	B. subtilis ED-3-7	In vitro		 	B. amyloliquefaciens AM0938, JD17B. subtilis AM1002	In vitro: 108 spores/g feed		 	B. subtilis ZJ12-1Ent. faecium NCIMB 10415	In vivo: 108 CFU/g feed		 	B. velenzensis YM1	In vitro		 	Antimicrobials	B. subtilis ATCC 6633	In vitro		 	B. subtilis ATCC 21332	In vitro		 	B. subtilis LYS1	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis ATCC 55422	In vitro		 	B. subtilis PS-216	In vitro	 and 	 	B. coagulansB. licheniformisB. pumilusB. subtilis	In vitro		 	B. subtilis ATCC 6633	In vitro		 	B. amyloliquefaciens DSM7T, PTA-6507, NRRL B-50104, NRRL B-50013	In vitro		 	Related to host metabolism and immune modulation	B. subtilus sp. suppress	In vitro		 	B. subtilis 3610, DS991	In vitro		 	B. subtilis Z15	In vitro		 	B. subtilis DSM 29784	In vivo: 107 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis ABP1	In vitro		 	B. subtilis 168	In vitro		 	Microbiota modulation	B. subtilis C-3102	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis DSM 29784	In vivo: 105 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis DSM 32540B. pumilus DSM 32539	In vivo: 5 × 105 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis DSM 32324, DSM 32325B. amyloliquifaciens DSM 25840	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilisB. licheniformisSaccharomyces cerevisiae	In vivo: 5 × 109 CFU/g;1010 CFU/g; 109 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilisB. licheniformis	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis HGCC-1	In vivo: 108 CFU/g feed		 	B. amyloliquefaciens DSM 25840B. subtilis DSM 25841	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis CSL2	In vivo: 107 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis DSM 32315	In vivo: 5 × 105 CFU/g feed		 	Gut-associated immune system	B. subtilis DSM 32315B. velezensis CECT 5940	Ex vivo		 	B. subtilis DSM 32315B. velezensis CECT 5940	Ex vivo		 	B. subtilis DSM 29784	In vitro: 107 CFU/mL		 	B. subtilis DSM 29784	In vitro: 107 CFU/ml		 	B. megaterium SF185	In vivo: 109 spores by gavage		 	B. subtilis DSM 29784	In vivo: 105 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis BG5, BYS2	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis HB3	In vivo: 109 CFU in 2 intramuscular injections		 	B. subtilis DSM 32540B. pumilus DSM 32539	In vivo: 102 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis HGCC-1	In vivo: 108 CFU/g feed		 	B. amyloliquefaciens DSM 25840B. subtilis DSM 25841	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis 14,823	In vivo: 106–7 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis B. 747, B. 1999	In vivo: 0.05%		 	B. subtilis	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	Extraintestinal effects	Gut-liver axis	B. licheniformis	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	Lactobacillus; Yeast; Bacillus	Fermented feed		 	Gut-lung axis	B. subtilis 597	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	6 B. subtilis strains	In vivo: 105 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis KC1	In vivo: 105 CFU/g feed		 	Gut-brain axis	B. velenzensis ADS024	In vitro, in vivo: 5 × 108 CFU by gavage		 	B. subtilis PXN21	In vivo: 108 CFU by gavage		 	B. licheniformis	In vivo		 	Bacillus clausii; Lactobacillus fermentum NMCC-14	In vivo: 1010 CFU/mL/day		 	Bacillus coagulans Unique IS-2	In vivo: 109 CFU/day		 	B. subtilis	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed		 	B. subtilis	In vivo: 106 CFU/g feed

Modes of action of Bacillus

Bioactive molecules produced by Bacillus
Bacillus can instigate a wide range of probiotic actions, which is rooted in the multifariousness of its metabolic activities. Bacillus spp. secretes a vast range of bioactive molecules, such as enzymes, antimicrobial peptides, vitamins, and exopolysaccharides (Figure 3).
Bacillus probiotics secrete molecules that underly their beneficial effect. Bacillus probiotics can exert their effect through spore-bound or secreted molecules. These molecules can affect the intestinal environment and extra-intestinal organs either directly or indirectly through the modulation of the gut microbiota. The responses triggered by these molecules can improve animal health and contribute to sustainable development goals. Created in BioRender: https://BioRender.com/6b8zsaa.
Being potent enzyme producers, Bacillus spp. secrete proteases, amylases, lipases, cellulases, and phytases. As feed materials for poultry and swine diets commonly include high levels of non-starch polysaccharides (NSP) and other antinutritional factors that are not efficiently digested by endogenous pancreatic enzymes, Bacillus-based products can be used to break down antinutritional compounds and enhance feed efficiency in animal nutrition. This can be achieved by applying Bacillus spp. directly to feed components, to pretreat raw materials like soybean meal, enhancing its nutritional profile and bioavailability. Fermentation of soybean meal has the additional advantage to be able to modulate the gut microbiota, leading to a decrease in cecal richness and diversity while promoting the growth of beneficial Lactobacillus populations. In addition, Bacillus spp. may modulate digestion in the intestinal tract by lowering digesta viscosity and restricting the amount of nutrients that are available for opportunistic pathogenic bacteria, such as Clostridium perfringens. Other Bacillus-derived enzymes will increase gut health by their detoxifying activity, such as zearalenone lactonase, which is capable of degrading mycotoxins from feed materials. Bacillus spp. also produce a diverse array of metabolites that contribute to their survival in their ecological niche, such as antimicrobial peptides like surfactin, bacillaene, macrolactin, bacilysin, and subtilosin A. These molecules can also have beneficial effects. Dietary supplementation of surfactin-producing B. subtilis LYS1, for example, has been shown to enhance growth performance and gut health in birds by promoting the development of intestinal villi. Similarly, bacillaene production by B. subtilis has been described to contribute to suppressing Salmonella growth and Campylobacter jejuni biofilm formation.
Beyond antimicrobial properties, Bacillus-derived compounds also play a crucial role in host metabolism and immune modulation. For instance, Bacillus exopolysaccharides enhance lipid metabolism, regulate blood glucose, and offer antioxidant benefits. They also exhibit immunomodulatory effects by promoting anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages, which inhibit CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
Additionally, Bacillus spp. produce gut-derived nutrients and vitamins, like niacin, pantothenate, and hypoxanthine, which have gut-protective effects, by reducing pro-inflammatory pathways (AP-1, NF-κB), enhancing mucin production (MUC2 expression), stimulating cell proliferation, and strengthening epithelial barrier integrity against inflammation.
Bacillus produce extracellular vesicles (EVs) that are cell-derived membrane-surrounded vesicles carrying bioactive molecules that play a role in bacterial competition, survival, and host interactions. These EVs are proposed to facilitate communication between probiotics and the mammalian gastrointestinal tract. Their involvement in these processes highlights the immunomodulatory potential of Gram-positive bacterial EVs, particularly those derived from Bacillus, which have been shown to modulate both innate and adaptive immune functions.
All these Bacillus-derived bioactive molecules can affect the gut microbiota, the intestinal epithelium, the gut-associated immune system, and extra-intestinal issues (described below), explaining the animal health and performance supporting effect of Bacillus-based probiotics. These bioactive molecules might contribute to animal health and performance through their modulation of the gut microbiota, the intestinal epithelium, the gut-associated immune system, and extra-intestinal tissues. The effect of Bacillus-based probiotics on these cells and tissues is described in more detail in the sections below.

Gut microbiota
Bacillus probiotics are widely studied for their effect on enhancing intestinal health through gut microbial modulation, by increasing beneficial bacteria, improving metabolite production, and reducing harmful microbial populations. More in detail, their effects on gut microbiota composition and diversity vary depending on study conditions, host species, and environmental factors.
In poultry raised under standard conditions, Bacillus supplementation has been linked to increased beneficial bacteria such as Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, Faecalibacterium and Lactobacillus while reducing potentially harmful Enterobacteriaceae as demonstrated for B. subtilis CGMCC1921 and B. subtilis DSM 29784. However, microbial diversity effects remain inconsistent, with some studies reporting increased richness, whereas others found no significant changes when using B. subtilis DSM 29784 or B. subtilis CSL2. Under pathogenic conditions, B. subtilis CSL2 has also been shown to protect against infections like Salmonella Gallinarum by promoting beneficial microbial shifts and enhancing gut integrity. Additionally, birds exhibited improved gut-associated energy supply mechanisms, with enhanced carbohydrate metabolism and gut integrity. This indicates that Bacillus spp. helps to maintain a stable microbiota under pathogenic stress. Apart from gut microbiota modulating effects, Bacillus spp. are also studied for their direct antimicrobial effects. For instance, certain strains of B. amyloliquefaciens, B. licheniformis or B. subtilis produce bioactive compounds capable of inhibiting pathogens such as Enterococcus cecorum, further contributing to its protective role in gut health.
In swine, B. subtilis alone or in combination with B. licheniformis exhibited varied effects on microbiota composition. The effects of Bacillus on microbial diversity appear to be context-dependent, with some studies reporting decreased species richness, while others find no significant changes. In standard conditions, the supplementation with B. subtilis has been reported to increase beneficial microbes such as Bifidobacteria, Ruminococcaceae, and Lactobacillaceae, particularly in the jejunum and colon in weaning and growing pigs. Interestingly, certain microbial shifts were associated with improved nutrient absorption and metabolic functions, highlighting the role of Bacillus-based probiotics in modulating gut homeostasis. Under challenging conditions, such as E. coli F4ac and F18 infection, B. subtilis strains such as DSM 25841 or DSM 32540 has been shown to reduce Enterobacteriaceae while promoting microbial stability.
In both poultry and swine, Bacillus-based probiotics spp. may exert cross-feeding effects and modulate hindgut fermentation processes, which can lead to increasing levels of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) while decreasing harmful metabolites such as ammonia and biogenic amines. Such a change in fermentation profile will support intestinal functions and reduce inflammation. These findings suggest that B. subtilis supplementation can support gut health by selectively enhancing beneficial bacteria and reducing pathogenic populations in both poultry and swine.

Gut epithelium
A good body of intestinal morphological traits, including villus height, crypt depth and villus-to-crypt ratio are considered markers of gut health. Better proliferation of enterocytes leads to longer villi and therefore to an increased intestinal surface area, which improves nutrient absorption, feed conversion ratio, and average daily gain in broilers. This is also confirmed by an enhanced better total tract digestibility of dry matter, organic matter, gross energy and crude protein, higher activities of digestive enzymes, including trypsin, amylase, lipase, and total protease. The use of Bacillus probiotics has been linked to a better-established intestinal morphology with longer villi and microvilli under standard production stress. Also in challenge conditions such as heat stress and subclinical necrotic enteritis challenge, dietary supplementation of Bacillus-based probiotics could partially restore challenge-related growth impairment of intestinal villi.
Apart from an active proliferation of gut epithelial enterocytes, it is crucial that these cells are tightly adhered to one another, to form a protective intestinal barrier that prevents the translocation of bacteria and toxins from the lumen to the bloodstream. Studies have shown that supplementing animals with Bacillus-based probiotics, either in combination (e.g., B. subtilis, B. licheniformis and Saccharomyces cerevisiae) or as a single strain such as B. subtilis DSM 29784 have resulted in an increased intestinal expression of tight junction-related genes, such as claudin-1 (CLDN1), occludin (OCLN) and Zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1), which leads to a better intestinal barrier function under normal and inflammatory conditions.
The number of goblet cells is also to be considered as a marker for gut function, as their abundance is a good indicator of intestinal activity, mainly due to their role in producing mucin, which in turn coats the inner surface of the lumen and restricts the adherence of pathogens. Dietary supplementation of Bacillus probiotics (such as B. coagulans) increased goblet cell numbers and mucin production, which might be linked to a higher release of prostaglandin.
So, it is imperative to note that dietary Bacillus-based probiotics supplementation has a significant role in contributing to a better development and function of the gut epithelium, resulting in better nutrient absorption and better defense against pathogens.

Gut-associated immune system
One of the mechanisms of action of Bacillus-based probiotics is their influence on mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), which includes the Harderian glands, bronchial-associated lymphoid tissue, nasopharyngeal lymphoid tissue, and gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT). Among these, GALT plays a crucial role in immune development, rapid pathogen response, and even endocrine and neural modulation.
GALT is a key component of the mucosal immune system, defending against pathogens entering via the gastrointestinal tract. Its primary structures include Peyer’s patches, cecal tonsils, mesenteric lymph nodes, and dispersed lymphocytes in the lamina propria and intestinal epithelium. While swine show well-developed lymph nodes and continuous ileal Peyer’s patches, chickens lack true lymph nodes and rely more heavily on cecal tonsils and the bursa of Fabricius. These anatomical distinctions reflect species-specific adaptations in mucosal immune function and lymphoid tissue development.
In vitro and ex vivo studies indicate that Bacillus strains directly interact with GALT-associated immune cells. B. subtilis DSM 32315 and B. velezensis CECT 5940 improve T cell activities: assessed by increased counts of activated T lymphocytes (CD4+ CD25+, CD8+ CD25+ and CD28+ phenotypes) and enhance interleukin-10 (IL-10) production, a key anti-inflammatory cytokine. These bacteria also promote dendritic cell and macrophages antigen presentation functions, fostering an efficient immune response. Additionally, treating Caco-2 cells with B. subtilis DSM 29784 or their secreted metabolites, whether in spore or vegetative form, can reduce NF-κB and AP-1 proinflammatory signaling pathways and IL-8 production in a strain-dependent manner, with vegetative cells exhibiting enhanced immunomodulatory activity. Although spores show lower activity, their effects may be attributed to bioactive proteins and enzymes present in the spore crust.
In monogastric animals, Bacillus probiotics can be triggered by direct immunomodulatory effects and indirect reshaping of the gut microbiota (see above). Hence, their supplementation in broilers is associated with increased caecal abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria and higher density of intraepithelial lymphocyte (IEL) populations. These anti-inflammatory effects are especially evident under pathogen challenges, such as with Salmonella or C. perfringens, where Bacillus supplementation mitigated acute inflammatory responses. It is noteworthy that these effects do not preclude immune activation. Bacillus spp. such as B. subtilis BG5 or BYS2 can simultaneously enhance IgA production, macrophage phagocytic activity, and nitric oxide synthesis. Despite the lack of literature on Bacillus species effects on swine GALT structures, multiple in vivo studies suggest a modulatory role in mucosal immunity. Strains of B. subtilis and B. licheniformis such as PB6 have been shown to downregulate pro-inflammatory biomarkers such as TNF-α, IL-6, and TLR-4 in ileal tissues and intestinal epithelial cells, contributing to a balanced mucosal immunity. Thus, the reductions in inflammatory markers and bacterial translocation to mesenteric lymph nodes in pigs challenged with E. coli F18 support the notion that Bacillus supplementation may influence GALT-related immune responses indirectly through mucosal signaling and immune cell recruitment as demonstrated for B. subtilis DSM 32540 and B. pumilus DSM 32539.
In summary, Bacillus-based probiotics modulate GALT through both direct immune cell interactions and indirect effects via microbiota regulation. These actions enhance the hosts’ immune competence by improving the immune response, regulating the inflammation, and supporting the mucosal protection against gastrointestinal pathogens.

Extra-intestinal effects
The physiological and microbiological processes occurring in the gut can affect the health and functions of organs outside the intestinal tract. This is obvious for pathogenic bacteria that translocate from the intestine to other organs and cause diseases, such as enterococcal spondylitis. However, over the last decades, it has become increasingly clear that, aside from these disease-related unidirectional effects, animal and human health depends on a more continuous and bidirectional communication setup between the digestive tract and several extra-intestinal organs. In the paragraphs below, we will briefly discuss the gut-liver, gut-lung, and gut-brain axes.

Gut-liver axis
The gut and liver communicate via the circulatory system, biliary tract, and the portal vein, which directly transports gut microbiota-derived nutrients, bacterial components, and metabolites to the liver, profoundly impacting hepatic function and metabolism. For instance, SCFA produced by hindgut bacteria can induce intestinal gluconeogenesis and trigger sensors in the portal vein, thereby regulating hepatic metabolism, fat storage, and insulin sensitivity.
The gut-liver axis is often studied under challenging conditions like ethanol exposure and heat stress. Heat stress in poultry and swine can compromise the intestinal barrier, allowing bacterial components like LPS and DNA to enter the portal vein, potentially overwhelming liver immune defenses and causing systemic endotoxemia. While Bacillus-based probiotics have been described to improve gut and liver health and affect behavior in heat-stressed broilers (section SDG 12 below), studies in challenged swine often focus on the gut and oxidative status, without addressing liver function.
Additionally, the gut-liver axis is studied in the context of fat metabolism in poultry, as the liver is the primary site of de novo lipogenesis. In older laying hens, gut dysbiosis can aggravate ageing-related liver fat accumulation, reduction of egg quality, and risk of steatohepatitis. Changes in the hen diet affecting gut bacteria have been suggested to regulate hepatic lipogenesis through metabolite-driven changes in gene expression. Probiotic interventions are therefore being explored to combat excessive liver fat deposition in poultry. For example, in ducks, fermented feed with Bacillus, Lactobacillus, and yeast altered the abundance of intestinal bacterial families like Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae, improving gut health and reducing hepatic fat storage.

Gut-lung axis
The proper maturation of gut microbiota is of prime importance to develop and control the gut-associated immune system. In addition, it becomes increasingly clear that intestinal bacteria can also modulate the natural defense systems of organs outside the digestive system, such as the lungs.
The existence of a functional gut-lung axis in swine is supported by studies showing that respiratory viral infections can affect the gut microbiome and vice versa. Probiotics can work via the gut-lung axis. For example dietary supplementation with B. subtilis 597 has been shown to reduce lung pathologies during influenza infection as well as in a co-infection model involving Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus (PRRSV) and Salmonella where a mixture of 6 B. subtilis strains improved outcomes.
Evidence for a functional gut-lung axis has been described in poultry as well. found evidence for the gut microbiota modulating pulmonary metabolite levels, immunity-related gene activity and antiviral mucosal responses against avian influenza. In a Mycoplasma gallisepticum challenge model, chickens receiving a dietary B. subtilis KC1 had less pathological lung lesions, and their gut microbial dysbiosis, disrupted indole levels and pro-inflammatory cytokine levels were restored.

Gut-brain axis
The gut-brain axis links the gastrointestinal tract with the central nervous system. The communication between these two organs relies on neural, endocrine, and immunity-associated pathways, as well as bacterial components and metabolites related to the gut microbiota. Therefore, dietary interventions such as probiotic supplementation have the potential, at least in theory, to modulate the brain and stress-related and other behaviors.
In rodent models of Parkinsons’s disease and neuroinflammation, Bacillus probiotics (e.g., B. velenzensis ADS024 or B. subtilis PXN21) have been described to improve gut microbial dysbiosis, neuronal function and survival and to modulate receptor expression of white blood cells. In rats and mice subjected to chronic mild stress, Bacillus probiotic strains have been reported to improve villi morphology, change the gut microbial composition and metabolite profile, stress hormones in the blood and neurotransmitter levels in the brain. These effects have been observed with probiotic products containing a mixture of 4 strains of B. clausii (SIN, T, O/C and N/R); B. licheniformis or B. coagulans IS-2.
Gut-brain research in livestock animals is less advanced, but in recent years, studies are being published demonstrating that in poultry, similar inter-organ communication mechanisms are conserved. For example, heat-stressed broilers supplemented with a mixture of three B. subtilis strains showed reduced levels of pro-inflammatory molecules in the hippocampus, or different bacilli, such as B. subtilis natto or B. licheniformis or B. cereus, were able to reduce heat stress-related behavioral responses while improving active foraging.
In summary, Bacillus strains can secrete bioactive molecules that modulate the function of both intestinal and extra-intestinal tissues, which can explain their potentially supporting effect on animal health and performance. In the following section, we will discuss how this can contribute both directly and indirectly to sustainable development.

Sustainable development challenges tackled with Bacillus
To explain how Bacillus-based probiotics can support various aspects of livestock production, their possible applications are discussed in the context of four out of the 17 sustainable development goals (SDGs), established by the United Nations in 2015.

SDG 2—zero hunger
About 8.9% of the world population suffered from hunger in 2022. Moreover, the rising global population will drive a greater demand for animal protein, necessitating increased livestock production. Poultry and pork are key contributors to global meat consumption, accounting for 40 and 34%, respectively, in 2022. Over the past three decades, both sectors have experienced significant growth, with pork consumption increasing by 77% and poultry by 287%. As demand continues to rise, both industries will play a crucial role in ensuring a sustainable and sufficient food supply. Hence, solutions to optimize animal performance, allowing optimal growth and high feed efficiency, are necessary to ensure achieving Sustainable Development Goal “Zero hunger.”
In swine the beneficial effects of Bacillus have been investigated, for instance, by, B. subtilis GCB-13-001 provided to weaned piglets resulted in significantly higher body weight at 7, 21 and 42 days after weaning. As average daily feed intake was not influenced by B. subtilis GCB-13-001 in this trial, the overall FCR was significantly improved. reported significant increased body weight, average daily gain, and FCR after supplementing weaned piglet diets with B. subtilis C-3102 spores. Also, in challenged conditions with E. coli, B. subtilis was able to significantly improve body weight of weaned piglets 28 days after weaning. Overall, feed intake was not influenced, resulting in a significant improvement in feed conversion ratio (FCR). A meta-analysis revealed that also in growing-finishing pigs average daily feed intake was not influenced by Bacillus spp. supplementation. Average daily gain tended to be increased and the FCR was significantly improved with Bacillus spp..
In broilers similar results have been obtained, for instance, reported significant increased final body weight and average daily weight gain over a 42-day trial period when Bacillus subtilis fmbJ was supplemented to the diet at three different dose levels. The two higher dose levels did not influence feed intake, whereas the lowest dose level significantly increased feed intake. Hence, FCR was only significantly improved with the two highest dose levels. Furthermore, significant improvements of meat quality parameters were found, which was in line with several other studies, but also in contrast to other research where no beneficial effects on meat quality could be observed after Bacillus supplementation. It should be noted that also contradictory results on performance have been found. Nevertheless, the meta-analysis conducted by revealed that feed intake was not significantly affected by Bacillus spp. supplementation; however, when the data was segregated by bird strain, feed intake was significantly improved for Cobb birds, but not for other breeds. FCR and average daily gain were both significantly improved compared to control which remained true when the data was segregated by breeds or Bacillus spp. This indicates that the results were not dependent on these specific parameters. The meta-analysis further substantiates the ability of Bacillus spp. to improve performance in poultry production.

SDG 3—health and well-being
High productivity demands of animals often result in increased risk of diseases and microbial infections. Antibiotics are generally used to cure animals, but with the high number of antibiotic-resistant bacteria alternative solutions must be found to guarantee both animal and human health. In weaned piglets, postweaning diarrhea, mainly caused by enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) is, for instance, commonly prevented and treated by antibiotics. However, supplementation of B. licheniformis PF9 showed to be able to significantly alleviate the severity of diarrhea induced by an ETEC challenge. Although antibiotics seem to cure diarrhea in piglets, the microbial composition remained close to the microbial profile of piglets with diarrhea. In contrast, supplying a mixture of three Bacillus strains cured diarrhea in piglets and restored the microbiota close to the composition of healthy animals, which is crucial to re-establish healthy conditions in piglets.
Another good example of a bacterial infection that is commonly treated with antibiotics is Lawsonia intracellularis, the causative agent of ileitis in pigs. B. licheniformis and B. pumilus were able to alleviate the macroscopic and microscopic lesions induced by a L. intracellularis challenge. Furthermore, these two strains were able to reduce intralesional L. intracellularis antigen levels and bacterial shedding. However, B. amyloliquefaciens was also evaluated in this trial, but it was not able to suppress the infection, indicating that there are strain-specific effects.
A big health threat to the global pig industry is caused by African swine fever virus (ASFV), with mortality rates close to 100% and no safe commercial vaccine nor antiviral drug available. It has been shown that B. subtilis can inhibit several viruses like influenza virus, porcine epidemic diarrhea virus and more recently, the potential effect against ASFV was investigated by. Challenged piglets with ASFV showed reduced morbidity and mortality when they were fed with liquid biologics or powders derived from B. subtilis. Small-molecule metabolites from B. subtilis arctiin and genistein, are likely related to the antiviral activity, as they showed to compete for ATP binding to the ATP-binding domain of ASFV, suppressing the ASFV proliferation.
In poultry, Bacillus-based probiotics have also shown considerable efficacy in reducing the colonization of intestinal pathogens such as Salmonella spp. and C. perfringens. For instance, B. coagulans supplementation in chicks significantly alleviated intestinal damage and inflammation caused by Salmonella Enteritidis, enhancing mucosal barrier integrity through goblet cell differentiation and upregulation of immune-related factors such as IgA and avian beta-defensins. Similarly, B. pumilus TS1 was found to protect broilers from Salmonella Enteritidis-induced oxidative and inflammatory damage by modulating stress proteins (e.g., HSP70, HIF-1α) and reducing pro-inflammatory cytokines like IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α.
In the context of necrotic enteritis caused by C. perfringens, Bacillus probiotics, especially B. subtilis, demonstrated strong preventive effects. A meta-analysis by confirmed that dietary supplementation with B. subtilis significantly reduced lesion scores and improved FCR in NE-challenged broilers. Consistently, strain-specific studies have shown that, for instance, B. subtilis DSM 29874 supplementation enhances growth performance and gut health while reducing intestinal damage in NE-challenged broilers through modulation of tight junction proteins, immune markers, and beneficial microbiota. supported these outcomes, highlighting that Bacillus species help to suppress C. perfringens growth, regulate inflammatory responses, and enhance tight junction protein expression, contributing to improved intestinal barrier function.
Beyond pathogen control, Bacillus probiotics also improved poultry welfare by mitigating clinical signs of enteric disease and related conditions. For example, supplementation with B. velezensis CE100 reduced Salmonella counts in the cecum and significantly lowered the incidence of pododermatitis, a key welfare concern in broiler production. This improvement was associated with better litter quality, reduced moisture content, and increased beneficial lactic acid bacteria, suggesting indirect benefits of Bacillus on the rearing environment. Taken together, these studies support the role of Bacillus spp. as multifunctional probiotics that not only control pathogens but also contribute to overall poultry health and well-being.

SDG 12—responsible consumption and production
Attention to animal welfare in livestock production is increasing as consumers are becoming more conscious of the origins of their food, driving demand for ethically produced animal products. In addition, improved welfare practices, including stress reduction, lead to healthier animals, better quality products, and can foster more responsible and sustainable production practices.
Probiotics can support welfare by reducing diseases and infections, or maximizing tissue and organ health, thereby increasing animal resistance to production stress. In addition, evidence suggests that health-supporting additives can also modify animal behavior in ways that do not involve disease prevention, and that arguably arose as a secondary effect to their ability to change the gut environment. Some examples of these effects are given below.
Certain C. perfringens strains induce enteritis in poultry, not only negatively affecting animal performance, but also triggering stress-related behaviors. As discussed, Bacillus-based probiotics can improve the clinical outcome of necrotic enteritis (see SDG 3—health and well-being) but was also reported to protect against C. perfringens-related brain damage and aggressive behavior such as feather-pecking.
Pododermatitis, a chicken footpad infection, causes pain and limits movement, eating, and drinking. It originates from small foot wounds exposed to bacteria and ammonia in wet and sticky litter. Bad litter quality is therefore an important predisposing factor for pododermatitis. Contributing factors include temperature and humidity in the poultry house, high stocking density, diet composition, and intestinal health issues. Bacillus probiotics can improve digestive health, thereby reducing litter moisture and the prevalence of pododermatitis, thereby enhancing broilers’ welfare.
During periods of heat stress, animals will be less active, as seen by a reduction in walking and foraging behavior. They will also spend more time drinking and trying to eliminate excessive body heat by spreading their wings, and panting. In heat-challenged broilers, supplementation of Bacillus probiotics has been reported to increase locomotor and foraging behavior. At the same time, it mitigated heat-induced rises in hepatic pro-inflammatory cytokines and caecal antibody concentrations.
Heat stress can also impair skeletal health. Bone strength is important for welfare in production animals, especially broilers, as their rapid growth and significant muscle mass predispose heavy birds to leg disorders and fractures. B. subtilis supplementation, however, can significantly improve tibial strength in broilers and turkeys. This effect was demonstrated on 3 isolates: two B. amyloliquefaciens and one B. subtilis resulting in better mineral absorption or control of heat-induced inflammation.
Pigs can exhibit behavioral problems as well, such as tail-biting due to production stress and the establishment of social hierarchies. Evidence for an effect of Bacillus probiotics on welfare is scarcer in swine as compared to poultry, but piglets challenged with Salmonella Typhimurium were reported to be less active, with a reduced explorative and eating behavior, which was attenuated when they were fed a diet containing a B. licheniformis probiotic.

SDG 13—climate action
Several measures can be taken to mitigate the negative consequences of livestock production on sustainability and climate change, including maximizing the efficient uptake and use of feed materials, as well as facilitating the use of alternative and more sustainable raw materials. As feed utilization is linked to animal performance, which is discussed above (section SDG 2), we focus here on reducing fecal ammonia. Ammonia can not only lead to odor problems and eye and respiratory tract irritation, it also can be converted to nitrous oxide, which is an important contributor to global warming.
In swine, probiotics are evaluated for their ammonia-reducing capacity in two ways: either as a product to be applied directly to the manure, or as a probiotic in the feed. Both approaches make use of the diverse metabolic activity of Bacillus species to induce chemical modification of nitrogen-containing compounds. Ammonium-tolerant strains can be screened for their ammonia-reducing activity in vitro, or evaluated when incubated with manure, which can result in a substantial reduction of ammonia and other volatile organic compounds. When applied as a dietary supplement in pig diets, different Bacillus-based probiotics can modulate the gut microbial composition, enhance nitrogen digestibility, increase fecal Lactobacillus counts and decrease methane and/or ammonia emission.
Although in poultry as well, Bacillus-based probiotics have been investigated as direct litter management tool, research mainly focused on its probiotic application to reduce fecal ammonia. Broilers fed with Bacillus probiotics (e.g., B. amyloliquefaciens KB3, B. subtilis C3102, or a combination of B. subtilis RX7 and B2A) were reported to have an improved nitrogen digestibility, resulting in reduced emissions of ammonia and other noxious compounds, such as hydrogen sulfide.
Interestingly, probiotics are also studied as a complementary strategy to other nutritional strategies aiming to reduce noxious gas emissions, such as lowering the dietary levels of metabolizable energy and crude protein in broilers or the use of alternative raw materials in feed. For example, the use of distillers dried grains with solubles (DGGS) had advantages in terms of sustainability, as it upcycles cheap byproducts of ethanol production. However, the use of DGGS can lead to increased methane and nitrogen-containing emissions. In laying hens, probiotic B. subtilis mitigated the DGGS supplementation-induced increase of nitrogen and phosphorous excretion.
These examples demonstrate that Bacillus-based probiotics can improve nitrogen retention and reduce ammonia emissions in swine and poultry, thereby helping in making animal production more sustainable and more climate-friendly.

Discussion and future research

Documentation mode of action
While the oral route remains the most common method for probiotic administration, alternative delivery strategies such as spray, litter, and in ovo methods are gaining attention. In ovo administration of B. subtilis has demonstrated benefits for immune function, metabolic efficiency, and bone development, while also reducing oxidative stress and improving liver function. Beyond gut health, different species of Bacillus, such as B. subtilis, B. licheniformis, and B. indicus are being explored for respiratory disease prevention, with spray delivery showing promise in strengthening immune defenses against avian influenza (H9N2).
Additionally, Bacillus spores function as vaccine adjuvants, enhancing immune responses through increased virus-specific IgG production and T-cell activation. Looking ahead, genetically engineered Bacillus strains could offer more targeted health benefits by enhancing antimicrobial activity, modulating immune responses, or serving as live vaccine vectors. Examples include B. subtilis expressing defensin to prevent Salmonella Infantis infection; engineered strains carrying antigens like the PCV2 capsid protein (B. subtilis-Cap, B. subtilis WB600/ZD), which has shown superior immunogenicity in piglets compared to traditional vaccines or carrying antimicrobial peptides such as cNK-2 against Eimeria.
These advances highlight the potential of Bacillus-based probiotics as a next-generation tool for disease prevention. However, to make stronger claims related to health promotion, a better understanding is needed of the potential probiotics have in commercial production systems, but also of their limitations. This will likely necessitate more comprehensive evaluations of the protective and restorative properties of probiotics under challenging yet commercially relevant conditions, moving beyond merely descriptive analyses of cellular and gut microbiota changes linked to dietary probiotic supplementation.

Germination and growth dynamics in the gut
Bacillus spores in feed must germinate in the animal’s gut to become active vegetative cells that produce beneficial metabolites. Germination is a complex process that depends on several signaling pathways and external factors, such as nutrient availability, temperature, pH level, water activity, and the Bacillus strain’s genetics. Bacillus spores have been demonstrated to germinate and multiply in the small intestine of mice and humans.
In day-old chicks orally gavaged with B. subtilis SC2362 or PHL-NP122, spore germination was detectable throughout the gastrointestinal tract within five to 24 h. However, in both studies, both spores and vegetative cells in the digestive tract declined to background levels by 120 h. These findings confirm that Bacillus does not colonize the intestinal tract and suggest that continuous supplementation of spores during the production cycle is required for sustained probiotic benefits. In chicks that were continuously fed Bacillus spores via sterilized feed, approximately 10% of the supplemented spores were recovered from the digesta of different gut segments, suggesting a germination rate of around 90%.
Similarly, in pigs, Bacillus spores were detected throughout the gastrointestinal system after two weeks of probiotic supplementation, with an estimated 70–90% of spore germination in the proximal part of the digestive tract. Upon withdrawal, fecal secretion of spores and vegetative cells decreased gradually to the background level within one week.
To investigate the germination characteristics of probiotics products, researchers often rely on in vitro experiments such as growth curve analyses or more sophisticated setups mimicking the gastrointestinal tract conditions. However, whether these models accurately predict the dynamics of probiotics in vivo, is far from clear. A validated in vitro model to describe Bacillus behavior in livestock would be invaluable to evaluate the potential of probiotics in livestock production, as slight variations in their genetics can have profound effects on vegetative cell growth and function. In addition, factors like feed composition, gut content viscosity, feed retention time and the intestinal levels of antimicrobial peptides and SCFA will likely have a strong impact on Bacillus spore germination, growth, and metabolite secretion, and need to be studied in more detail. There is a need to develop in vitro models that do not only more closely mimic the physiological conditions of specific gastrointestinal regions of chickens and swine, but that are also validated to correlate with in vivo results.
In addition, tools need to be developed to monitor the behavior of Bacillus strains in vivo in a variety of intestinal conditions. This will add understanding of their modes of action and will open the door to developing dietary and other interventions to maximize their efficacy in livestock production.

Need for biomarkers
Many biomarkers are commonly used to assess gut health, but they do not specifically capture the effects of Bacillus. For example, dysbiosis is assessed by measuring the microbiota diversity and/or the abundances of certain taxonomic groups related to pathological or beneficial process. An increase in Proteobacteria abundancies, for instance, is often linked to gut inflammation, while a reduction in butyrate-producing bacteria is associated with impaired gut health. Probiotic supplementation can result in mitigation of these microbiota imbalances, but the extent to which such changes in gut health biomarkers reflect direct or indirect effects of the probiotic products, often remains unclear.
Biomarker readouts that could be more directly related to the probiotic effect include pathogen suppression, such as the reduction of C. perfringens or Salmonella in feces and organs, as well as modulation of immune and barrier function responses, like villus height, crypt depth and the villus/crypt ratio, MUC2 expression, enhanced tight junction integrity, and downregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines.
More indirect biomarkers can arise from probiotic-triggered cross-feeding interactions, including gut microbial fermentation products (SCFAs, branched-chain fatty acids, biogenic amines), microbiota shifts as quantified by qPCR, e.g., Lactobacillus/Enterobacteriaceae ratio, or broader microbial modulation assessed through 16S rRNA sequencing. For example, the high levels of Faecalibacterium is often considered a positive biomarker of gut health. Additionally, it is crucial to consider that probiotic effects are strain-specific. The ability of Bacillus spp. to produce different metabolites and bioactive compounds varies by strain, influencing how they interact with the host and the microbiota. These strain-specific effects might also be one of the reasons why results in probiotic research lack consistency.
Given the diversity of Bacillus strains investigated and the broad spectrum of microbial and cellular effects they can induce, it is unlikely that a single readout or biomarker could fully capture the overall impact or elucidate the mechanisms of action of Bacillus-based probiotics.
Understanding probiotic mechanisms becomes even more challenging when multiple strains are combined, as their interactions may be synergistic, or antagonistic. Therefore, future research should focus more on exploring the mechanistic interactions among different probiotic strains and how these relationships influence host responses. In summary, despite promising insights, there is still a lack of standardization in biomarkers directly linked to Bacillus-based effects. A multi-faceted approach, combining metabolite profiling, microbiota assessment, and functional digestive markers, could provide a more comprehensive, dynamic and reliable evaluation of strain-specific probiotic benefits. Microbiome-based biomarkers represent promising non-invasive tools for assessing probiotic effects, given the microbiome’s pivotal role in maintaining health and influencing disease through its modulation of inflammatory and immune responses.

Extra-intestinal effects
Despite mounting evidence of endogenous and probiotic intestinal bacteria affecting the function of extra-intestinal organs, studying the communication axes the gut participates presents certain challenges. An important restriction in many studies describing probiotic-induced changes in the gut and in other organs, is the difficulty to separate causation and correlation in various signaling pathways. While it is reasonable to assume that the primary effects of in-feed supplemented probiotic spores are initiated in the gut, secondary mechanisms dependent on communication axes between the gut and extra-intestinal organs are multifaceted. These higher-order biological responses instigated by probiotics are therefore prone to considerable variation, as they depend on the physiological status, activity, and interconnectivity of other organs. This complexity makes it difficult to isolate, study and predict specific effects of probiotics outside the digestive tract.

Conclusion
The use of Bacillus-based probiotics in livestock production presents a promising avenue for enhancing animal health, growth performance, and welfare. Probiotic Bacillus strains have been shown to modulate nutrient absorption, gut microbiota, and immune function, with beneficial effects inside and outside the digestive tract of poultry and swine.
However, the current body of evidence is limited by notable heterogeneity. Differences in Bacillus strains, environmental and management conditions, and methodological factors such as sequencing platforms and statistical power complicate comparisons across studies. Addressing these limitations through standardized designs and improved reporting, along with the development of more representative in vitro models and reliable biomarkers to evaluate probiotic effects in vivo, will greatly strengthen future research.
Despite these challenges, the potential of incorporating Bacillus probiotics into livestock diets is becoming increasingly clear, making them a valuable tool for modern and more sustainable animal production practices.
Edited by: Yutaka Uyeno, Shinshu University, Japan
Reviewed by: Jianan Zhao, Temple University, United States
Jianwei Ren, Northeast Agricultural University, China
Abbreviations: AP-1, Activator protein-1; ASFV, African swine fever virus; CD4, CD25, CD28, Cluster of differentiation; DGGS, Distillers dried grains with soluble; ETEC, Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli; EV, Extracellular vesicles; FCR, Feed conversion ratio; GALT, Gut-associated lymphoid tissue; GRAS, Generally recognized as safe; IEL, Intra-epithelial lymphocyte; IL-10, Interleukin-10; MALT, Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue; MUC2, Mucin2; NF-κB, Nuclear factor-kappaB; PRRSV, Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus; SCFA, Short chain fatty acids; SDG, Sustainable Development Goals.

Author contributions
NV-S: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. OL: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. NE: Writing – original draft. WQ-F: Writing – original draft. AM: Writing – review & editing. JC: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. HY: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. TG: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Conflict of interest
NV-S, AM, and JC were employed by Adisseo France S.A.S. OL was employed by Adisseo NL B.V. NE and HY were employed by Adisseo USA Inc. WQ-F was employed by Adisseo Brasil Nutriçao Animal Ltda. TG was employed by Adisseo.

Generative AI statement
The authors declare that no Gen AI was used in the creation of this manuscript.
Any alternative text (alt text) provided alongside figures in this article has been generated by Frontiers with the support of artificial intelligence and reasonable efforts have been made to ensure accuracy, including review by the authors wherever possible. If you identify any issues, please contact us.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

References
Improving productive performance and mitigating harmful emissions from laying hen excreta via feeding on graded levels of corn DDGS with or without Bacillus subtilis probiotic
Probiotic bacteria maintain normal growth mechanisms of heat stressed broiler chickens
LPA3 agonist-producing Bacillus velezensis ADS024 is efficacious in multiple neuroinflammatory disease models
Effects of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens as a probiotic strain on growth performance, cecal microflora, and fecal noxious gas emissions of broiler chickens
The role of probiotics on animal health and nutrition
Microbial shifts associated with necrotic enteritis
Interaction of Bacillus species and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium in immune or inflammatory signaling from swine intestinal epithelial cells
Effect of indigenous probiotics lactic acid bacteria on the small intestinal histology structure and the expression of mucins in the ileum of broiler chickens
Current scenario and future directions for sustainable development goal 2: a roadmap to zero hunger
Supplemental effects of probiotic Bacillus subtilis fmbJ on growth performance, antioxidant capacity, and meat quality of broiler chickens
Response to a Salmonella Typhimurium challenge in piglets supplemented with protected sodium butyrate or Bacillus licheniformis: effects on performance, intestinal health and behavior,2
Performance and health parameters of sows and their litters using a probiotic supplement composed of Bacillus subtilis 541 and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens 516
Probiotic metabolites from Bacillus coagulans GanedenBC30™ support maturation of antigen-presenting cells in vitro
Importance of the gastrointestinal life cycle of Bacillus for probiotic functionality
Probiotic mixture (Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus licheniformis) a potential in-feed additive to improve broiler production efficiency, nutrient digestibility, caecal microflora, meat quality and to diminish hazardous odour emission
Extracellular vesicles: an emerging platform in gram-positive bacteria
Deconstruction of a multi-strain Bacillus-based probiotic used for poultry: an in vitro assessment of its individual components against C. perfringens
The identification of bacillaene, the product of the PksX megacomplex in Bacillus subtilis
Effect of Bacillus subtilis strain Z15 secondary metabolites on immune function in mice
Bacillus subtilis spores germinate in the chicken gastrointestinal tract
Locations of gut-associated lymphoid tissue in the 3-month-old chicken: a review
Bacillus probiotics: spore germination in the gastrointestinal tract
Overview of the antimicrobial compounds produced by members of the Bacillus subtilis group
Integrated metabolomic and transcriptomic analysis reveals potential gut-liver crosstalks in the lipogenesis of chicken
Bacillus subtilis KC1 prevents Mycoplasma gallisepticum-induced lung injury by enhancing intestinal Bifidobacterium animalis and regulating indole metabolism in chickens
Applications of a lipopeptide biosurfactant, surfactin, produced by microorganisms
The effects of Bacillus amyloliquefaciens SC06 on behavior and brain function in broilers infected by Clostridium perfringens
Bacillus subtilis 29784 as a feed additive for broilers shifts the intestinal microbial composition and supports the production of hypoxanthine and nicotinic acid
Presence and germination of the probiotic Bacillus subtilis DE111® in the human small intestinal tract: a randomized, crossover, double-blind, and placebo-controlled study
Influence of dietary probiotic inclusion on growth performance, blood parameters, and intestinal microflora of male broiler chickens exposed to posthatch holding time
The production of surfactin in batch culture by Bacillus subtilis ATCC 21332 is strongly influenced by the conditions of nitrogen metabolism
Probiotic effect of Pichia pastoris X-33 produced in parboiled rice effluent and YPD medium on broiler chickens
Microbiota-generated metabolites promote metabolic benefits via gut-brain neural circuits
Combining the dynamic TNO-gastrointestinal tract system with a Caco-2 cell culture model: application to the assessment of lycopene and alpha-tocopherol bioavailability from a whole food
Biological properties of exopolysaccharides produced by Bacillus spp
Transcytosis of Bacillus subtilis extracellular vesicles through an in vitro intestinal epithelial cell model
Biomarkers for monitoring intestinal health in poultry: present status and future perspectives
Baby-SPIME: a dynamic in vitro piglet model mimicking gut microbiota during the weaning process
The mycosubtilin synthetase of Bacillus subtilis ATCC6633: a multifunctional hybrid between a peptide synthetase, an amino transferase, and a fatty acid synthase
Physiological and immunological benefits of probiotics and their impacts in poultry productivity
Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a probiotic feed additive to non and pseudo-ruminant feeding: a review
Bacillaene mediates the inhibitory effect of Bacillus subtilis on Campylobacter jejuni biofilms
Probiotics in animal production: a review
Effects of dietary supplementation of postbiotic derived from Bacillus subtilis ACCC 11025 on growth performance, meat yield, meat quality, excreta bacteria, and excreta ammonia emission of broiler chicks
Crops and livestock products
Effects of dietary probiotic (Bacillus subtilis) supplementation on productive performance, immune response and egg quality characteristics in laying hens under high ambient temperature
Isolation and characterization of Bacillus velezensis YM1 and its mechanism for zearalenone degradation
Bacillus licheniformis prevents and reduces anxiety-like and depression-like behaviours
Research note: probiotic, Bacillus subtilis, alleviates neuroinflammation in the hippocampus via the gut microbiota-brain axis in heat-stressed chickens
Probiotics in man and animals
Efficacy of Bacillus subtilis probiotic in preventing necrotic enteritis in broilers: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Effect of polysaccharide from Bacillus subtilis sp. on cardiovascular diseases and atherogenic indices in diabetic rats
Effects of three probiotic Bacillus on growth performance, digestive enzyme activities, antioxidative capacity, serum immunity, and biochemical parameters in broilers
Effect of the inclusion of Bacillus spp. in growing-finishing pigs’ diets: a meta-analysis
Probiotic fermented feed alleviates liver fat deposition in Shaoxing ducks via modulating gut microbiota
High-throughput sequencing reveals the effect of Bacillus subtilis CGMCC 1.921 on the cecal microbiota and gene expression in ileum mucosa of laying hens
Gut microbiota is a potential biomarker in inflammatory bowel disease
Dietary administration of the Bacillus subtilis enhances immune responses and disease resistance in chickens
The role of goblet cells and mucus in intestinal homeostasis
An empirically derived method for measuring human gut microbiome alpha diversity: demonstrated utility in predicting health-related outcomes among a human clinical sample
Probiotics in poultry: a comprehensive review
Interactions between the cecal microbiota and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis using laying hens as the model
Dietary Bacillus spp. enhanced growth and disease resistance of weaned pigs by modulating intestinal microbiota and systemic immunity
Bacillus subtilis: a potential growth promoter in weaned pigs in comparison to carbadox
Effects of probiotics as antibiotics substitutes on growth performance, serum biochemical parameters, intestinal morphology, and barrier function of broilers
Expert consensus document. The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic
The use of bacterial spore formers as probiotics
Effect of Bacillus subtilis C-3102 spores as a probiotic feed supplement on growth performance, nutrient digestibility, diarrhea score, intestinal microbiota, and excreta odor contents in weanling piglets
Effects of feeding different postbiotics produced by Lactobacillus plantarum on growth performance, carcass yield, intestinal morphology, gut microbiota composition, immune status, and growth gene expression in broilers under heat stress
Impact of Bacillus subtilis on manure solids, odor, and microbiome
Bacillus subtilis 29784 induces a shift in broiler gut microbiome toward butyrate-producing bacteria and improves intestinal histomorphology and animal performance
Effect of different quality wheat dried distiller’s grain solubles (DDGS) in pig diets on composition of excreta and methane production from faeces and slurry
Effect of Bacillus subtilis C-3102 spores as a probiotic feed supplement on growth performance, noxious gas emission, and intestinal microflora in broilers
Bacillus subtilis-based probiotic improves skeletal health and immunity in broiler chickens exposed to heat stress
Dietary supplementation of Bacillus subtilis or antibiotics modified intestinal microbiome of weaned pigs under enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli infection
Why does the microbiome affect behaviour?
The porcine large intestine contains developmentally distinct submucosal lymphoid clusters and mucosal isolated lymphoid follicles
Effect of Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus licheniformis supplementation in diets with low- and high-protein content on ileal crude protein and amino acid digestibility and intestinal microbiota composition of growing pigs
Probiotic Bacillus subtilis 29,784 improved weight gain and enhanced gut health status of broilers under necrotic enteritis condition
Spores of Bacillus coagulans GBI-30, 6086 show high germination, survival and enzyme activity in a dynamic, computer-controlled in vitro model of the gastrointestinal tract
Salmonella Typhimurium infection disrupts but continuous feeding of Bacillus based probiotic restores gut microbiota in infected hens
Functional enrichment of gut microbiome by early supplementation of Bacillus based probiotic in cage free hens: a field study
Probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics: an overview of their delivery routes and effects on growth and health of broiler chickens
Effects of dietary Bacillus subtilis 14823 on growth performance, gut barrier integrity and inflammatory response of broilers raised in a stressful tropical environment
Invited review—current status of global pig production: an overview and research trends
Fiber and nonstarch polysaccharide content and variation in common crops used in broiler diets
Editorial: gut health: the new paradigm in food animal production
Mechanisms and applications of bacterial sporulation and germination in the intestine
Strain-specific quantification of probiotic Bacillus subtilis in feed by imaging high-performance thin-layer chromatography
Effects of the probiotic activity of Bacillus subtilis DSM 29784 in cultures and feeding stuff
Bacillus subtilis spores in probiotic feed quantified via bacterial metabolite using planar chromatography
Probiotics as alternatives to antibiotics for the prevention and control of necrotic enteritis in chickens
16,16-dimethyl prostaglandin E2 inhibits indomethacin-induced small intestinal lesions through EP3 and EP4 receptors
Application of Bacillus sp. TAT105 to reduce ammonia emissions during pilot-scale composting of swine manure
Utilization of Bacillus sp. strain TAT105 as a biological additive to reduce ammonia emissions during composting of swine feces
Multi-strain probiotics: synergy among isolates enhances biological activities
Effects of Bacillus licheniformis and Bacillus subtilis complex on growth performance and faecal noxious gas emissions in growing-finishing pigs
In vitro assessment of the immunomodulatory effects of probiotic Bacillus strains on chicken PBMCs
Probiotic Bacillus strains enhance T cell responses in chicken
Evaluation of germination, distribution, and persistence of Bacillus subtilis spores through the gastrointestinal tract of chickens
Selection of Bacillus spp. for cellulase and xylanase production as direct-fed microbials to reduce digesta viscosity and Clostridium perfringens proliferation using an in vitro digestive model in different poultry diets
Evaluation and selection of Bacillus species based on enzyme production, antimicrobial activity, and biofilm synthesis as direct-fed microbial candidates for poultry
Characterization of Bacillus probiotics available for human use
The fermented product of high-yield surfactin strain Bacillus subtilis LYS1 improves the growth performance and intestinal villi morphology in broilers
Bacillus subtilis spores as adjuvants against avian influenza H9N2 induce antigen-specific antibody and T cell responses in White Leghorn chickens
Germination and outgrowth of Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus licheniformis spores in the gastrointestinal tract of pigs
Bacillus subtilis HGCC-1 improves growth performance and liver health via regulating gut microbiota in golden pompano
Effects of Clostridium butyricum on growth performance, antioxidation, and immune function of broilers
Using probiotics to improve swine gut health and nutrient utilization
Growth-promoting factors produced by microorganisms
Dietary supplementation with Bacillus subtilis PB6 alleviates diarrhea and improves growth performance and immune function in weaned piglets fed a high-protein diet
Bacillus pumilus TS1 alleviates Salmonella enteritidis-induced intestinal injury in broilers
Anaerobic fermentation of soybean meal by Bacillus subtilis ED-3-7 and its effect on the intestinal microbial community of chicken
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii: from microbiology to diagnostics and prognostics
Nutrient L-alanine-induced germination of Bacillus improves proliferation of spores and exerts probiotic effects in vitro and in vivo
Bacillus sp. probiotic supplementation diminish the Escherichia coli F4ac infection in susceptible weaned pigs by influencing the intestinal immune response, intestinal microbiota and blood metabolomics
Bacillus spp. probiotic strains as a potential tool for limiting the use of antibiotics, and improving the growth and health of pigs and chickens
Bacillus subtilis partially inhibits African swine fever virus infection in vivo and in vitro based on its metabolites arctiin and genistein interfering with the function of viral topoisomerase II
Microfold (M) cells: important immunosurveillance posts in the intestinal epithelium
A decrease of the butyrate-producing species Roseburia hominis and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii defines dysbiosis in patients with ulcerative colitis
Reduced diversity of faecal microbiota in Crohn’s disease revealed by a metagenomic approach
Faecalibacterium: a bacterial genus with promising human health applications
Bacillus megaterium SF185 spores exert protective effects against oxidative stress in vivo and in vitro
In vitro inhibition of avian pathogenic Enterococcus cecorum isolates by probiotic Bacillus strains
Chicken gut microbiota responses to dietary Bacillus subtilis probiotic in the presence and absence of Eimeria infection
Effects of dietary supplementation of a probiotic (Bacillus subtilis) on bone mass and meat quality of broiler chickens
In vitro assessment of probiotic bacteria: from survival to functionality
Impact of Escherichia coli probiotic strains ED1a and Nissle 1917 on the excretion and gut carriage of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing E. coli in pigs
Effects of Bacillus-based probiotics on growth performance, nutrient digestibility, and intestinal health of weaned pigs
Role of the microbiome in swine respiratory disease
Greenhouse gas and air pollutant emissions from composting
Meat consumption
Meta-analysis of the potential of dietary Bacillus spp. in improving growth performance traits in broiler chickens
Effects of Bacillus subtilis CSL2 on the composition and functional diversity of the faecal microbiota of broiler chickens challenged with Salmonella Gallinarum
The effect of Bacillus subtilis and its delivery route on hatch and growth performance, blood biochemistry, immune status, gut morphology, and microbiota of broiler chickens
Bacillus pumilus probiotic feed supplementation mitigates Lawsonia intracellularis shedding and lesions
Research note: a mixture of Bacteroides spp. and other probiotic intestinal anaerobes reduces colonization by pathogenic E. coli strain O78:H4-ST117 in newly hatched chickens
The effects of the supplementation of Bacillus subtilis RX7 and B2A strains on the performance, blood profiles, intestinal Salmonella concentration, noxious gas emission, organ weight and breast meat quality of broiler challenged with Salmonella Typhimurium
Effect of dietary metallo-protease and Bacillus velezensis CE 100 supplementations on growth performance, footpad dermatitis and manure odor in broiler chickens
Bacillaene, a novel inhibitor of procaryotic protein synthesis produced by Bacillus subtilis: production, taxonomy, isolation, physico-chemical characterization and biological activity
Effects of a multi-strain Bacillus spp. direct-fed microbial and a protease enzyme on growth performance, nutrient digestibility, blood characteristics, fecal microbiota, and noxious gas emissions of grower pigs fed corn-soybean-meal-based diets-A meta-analysis
Exopolysaccharide from Bacillus subtilis induces anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages that prevent T cell-mediated disease
Can probiotics improve the environmental microbiome and resistome of commercial poultry production?
Evaluation of antiviral activity of Bacillus licheniformis-fermented products against porcine epidemic diarrhea virus
High-level expression, purification and characterisation of porcine β-defensin 2 in Pichia pastoris and its potential as a cost-efficient growth promoter in porcine feed
Modulation of immunity and inflammatory gene expression in the gut, in inflammatory diseases of the gut and in the liver by probiotics
Nutrient availability and biofilm polysaccharide shape the bacillaene-dependent antagonism of Bacillus subtilis against Salmonella Typhimurium
The effects of probiotic Bacillus subtilis on the cytotoxicity of Clostridium perfringens type a in Caco-2 cell culture
A review of the effects and production of spore-forming probiotics for poultry
Effect of Bacillus spp. direct-fed microbial on slurry characteristics and gaseous emissions in growing pigs fed with high fibre-based diets
Microbiota, natural products, and human health: exploring interactions for therapeutic insights
Effects of probiotics and enzymes on growth performance and haematobiochemical parameters in broilers
The beneficial effects of spraying of probiotic Bacillus and Lactobacillus bacteria on broiler chickens experimentally infected with avian influenza virus H9N2
Drivers of microbiome biodiversity: a review of general rules, feces, and ignorance
Probiotics (Bacillus clausii and Lactobacillus fermentum NMCC-14) ameliorate stress behavior in mice by increasing monoamine levels and mRNA expression of dopamine receptors (D1 and D2) and Synaptophysin
Bacillus subtilis strain specificity affects performance improvement in broilers
Effect of Bacillus subtilis strains on intestinal barrier function and inflammatory response
Heat stress in pigs and broilers: role of gut dysbiosis in the impairment of the gut-liver axis and restoration of these effects by probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics
Neuroprotective effect of Bacillus subtilis in haloperidol induced rat model, targeting the microbiota-gut-brain axis
Broiler performance correlates with gut morphology and intestinal inflammation under field conditions
An intelligent procedure for the detection and classification of chickens infected by Clostridium perfringens based on their vocalization
The gut microbiota and its metabolite butyrate shape metabolism and antiviral immunity along the gut-lung axis in the chicken
Uncovering the core principles of the gut-lung axis to enhance innate immunity in the chicken
Control of brain development, function, and behavior by the microbiome
Toxicity and applications of surfactin for health and environmental biotechnology
Anxiolytic- and antidepressant-like effects of Bacillus coagulans unique IS-2 mediate via reshaping of microbiome gut-brain axis in rats
Direct-fed microbials in animal production
Spores of Bacillus subtilis: their resistance to and killing by radiation, heat and chemicals
Germination of spores of Bacillus species: what we know and do not know
Isolation and application of pH- and salt-resistant Bacillus strains to reduce ammonia emission from pig manure during the storage period
Solid-state fermentation of corn-soybean meal mixed feed with Bacillus subtilis and Enterococcus faecium for degrading antinutritional factors and enhancing nutritional value
A novel zearalenone lactonase can effectively mitigate zearalenone-induced reproductive toxicity in gilts
Anti-influenza activity of a Bacillus subtilis probiotic strain
A Bacillus subtilis xylanase improves nutrient digestibility, intestinal health and growth performance of broiler chickens undergoing an intestinal challenge
Effect of Bacillus-direct-fed microbial on leaky gut, serum peptide YY concentration, bone mineralization, and ammonia excretion in neonatal female Turkey poults fed with a rye-based diet
Aetiology of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD): role of intestinal microbiota and gut-associated lymphoid tissue immune response
Monostrain, multistrain and multispecies probiotics - a comparison of functionality and efficacy
Emissions of greenhouse gases, ammonia, and hydrogen sulfide from pigs fed standard diets and diets supplemented with dried distillers grains with solubles
Effects of inclusion of Bacillus subtilis (Gallipro) to energy- and protein-reduced diet on growth performance, nutrient digestibility, and meat quality and gas emission in broilers
Editorial: alternative and novel livestock feed: reducing environmental impact
Immunomodulatory properties of Bacillus subtilis extracellular vesicles on rainbow trout intestinal cells and splenic leukocytes
Unraveling the benefits of Bacillus subtilis DSM 29784 poultry probiotic through its secreted metabolites: an in vitro approach
Probiotic micro-organisms: 100 years of innovation and efficacy; modes of action
Intestinal crosstalk between bile acids and microbiota and its impact on host metabolism
Assessment of probiotic properties of Lactobacillus salivarius isolated from chickens as feed additives
Influence of Bacillus subtilis GCB-13-001 on growth performance, nutrient digestibility, blood characteristics, faecal microbiota and faecal score in weanling pigs
Effect of Lactylate and Bacillus subtilis on growth performance, peripheral blood cell profile, and gut microbiota of nursery pigs
Supplementation of Bacillus subtilis-based probiotic reduces heat stress-related behaviors and inflammatory response in broiler chickens
The impact of Bacillus subtilis DSM 32315 on the pathology, performance, and intestinal microbiome of broiler chickens in a necrotic enteritis challenge
Orally delivered Bacillus subtilis expressing chicken NK-2 peptide stabilizes gut microbiota and enhances intestinal health and local immunity in coccidiosis-infected broiler chickens
Bacterial chondronecrosis with osteomyelitis and lameness in broilers: a review
A wire-flooring model1 for inducing lameness in broilers: evaluation of probiotics as a prophylactic treatment
Bacillus subtilis-597 induces changes in lung pathology and inflammation during influenza A virus infection in pigs
Probiotic Bacillus licheniformis DSMZ 28710 improves sow milk microbiota and enhances piglet health outcomes
Probiotic Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 protect chicks from damage caused by Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis colonization
Bacillus coagulans protect against Salmonella enteritidis-induced intestinal mucosal damage in young chickens by inducing the differentiation of goblet cells
Functional evaluation of Bacillus licheniformis PF9 for its potential in controlling enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli in weaned piglets
Bacillus subtilis-based probiotic promotes bone growth by inhibition of inflammation in broilers subjected to cyclic heating episodes
The use of lactic acid bacteria as a probiotic in swine diets
Surfactin inhibits membrane fusion during invasion of epithelial cells by enveloped viruses
Curing piglets from diarrhea and preparation of a healthy microbiome with Bacillus treatment for industrial animal breeding
Recent progress in proteins regulating the germination of Bacillus subtilis spores
Immune response in piglets orally immunized with recombinant Bacillus subtilis expressing the capsid protein of porcine circovirus type 2
Mechanisms and applications of probiotics in prevention and treatment of swine diseases
Effects of β-glucan and Bacillus subtilis on growth performance, blood profiles, relative organ weight and meat quality in broilers fed maize–soybean meal based diets
Effects of Bacillus-based inoculum on odor emissions co-regulation, nutrient element transformations and microbial community tropological structures during chicken manure and sawdust composting
Damage to intestinal barrier integrity in piglets caused by porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus infection
Effect of dietary Bacillus coagulans supplementation on growth performance and immune responses of broiler chickens challenged by Salmonella enteritidis
Effect of dietary probiotic, Bacillus coagulans, on growth performance, chemical composition, and meat quality of Guangxi Yellow chicken
Mechanisms of probiotic Bacillus against enteric bacterial infections
Probiotics-live biotherapeutics: a story of success, limitations, and future prospects-not only for humans
Bacillus-based direct-fed microbial reduces the pathogenic synergy of a coinfection with Salmonella enterica Serovar Choleraesuis and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus