Recent Scenario of Diagnostic and Prognostic Biomarkers of Sepsis in Clinical Practice and the Role of Multi-marker Approach: An Update
Despite extensive work done in the field of sepsis biomarkers; still, there is no consensus on which parameter could be considered as an ideal biomarker for sepsis diagnosis. This review aims to look into the existing biomarkers of clinical utility which are currently being used for sepsis diagnostics along with their advantages and disadvantages. We also provide an insight into the usefulness of a multi-marker approach to diagnosing sepsis and what could be the future direction. A literature review was conducted and four search engines such as PubMed, Scopus, Google Scholar, and Research Gate were used for data mining. Three clinically relevant markers for sepsis diagnosis such as procalcitonin (PCT), prespsin, and pentraxin-3 reviewed critically. Articles were also reviewed for the assessment of a multi-marker approach. Overall more than 100 research papers were found to be eligible for this review. Currently, most of the studies are using a chemiluminescent immunoassay-based PCT as a diagnostic method for sepsis. This method has been standardized all over the world, along with traditional markers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and highly sensitive-CRP. But now, studies are also being conducted on presepsin and pentraxin-3 which are more sensitive and specific for early diagnosis of sepsis. Despite there being literature on presepsin and pentraxin-3, but due to a lack of standardization for assay methods and the costs involved, both parameters are still a long way in finding space in the routine clinical practice. More efforts should be made to combine several markers and develop an algorithm which can overcome the shortcomings of these markers.

INTRODUCTION
Sepsis is a life-threatening organ dysfunction, caused by a dysregulated host response to infection. It is one of the most common causes of intensive care admissions worldwide. Recently, many studies have reported a surge of sepsis cases. Most sepsis epidemiologic data have come from Western literature, which revealed more than 30 million new cases and 6 million deaths due to sepsis annually. However, data from India are significantly less because most of the Indian data focuses on the epidemiology of infection rather than on etiology and pathogenesis of sepsis.
A recent study has shown that 34% of sepsis patients in India die in the intensive care unit (ICU). Higher numbers are reserved for patients with severe sepsis or septic shock, making the mortality rate as high as 40% to 60%. The elderly have the highest mortality rates. Newborns and pediatric patients with sepsis were noted to have a 9% to 36% mortality rate. The high death toll in India may be due to a lack of preparedness for sepsis cases. The risk of mortality is in direct relation to how fast the diagnosis is made and treatment initiated. If left untreated, the disease can cause several fatal complications.
It is well known that microbial cultures take time and have a lower positive predictive value. Furthermore, cultures have been found to be nonspecific for systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Further, delay in culture reports has an impact on the timely and effective management of the disease. In this situation, biomarkers play an important role. So in contrast to microbial culture, biomarkers, primarily from the blood increase in the early stage of the inflammatory response and show different expressions between noninfectious inflammation and sepsis. There have been several biomarkers studied in detail for the diagnosis of sepsis, but still, there is no ideal marker associated with sepsis diagnosis. The aim of the present study was to review the clinically relevant and potential biomarkers in the diagnosis and prognosis of sepsis and the role of a multi-marker approach for sepsis.

METHODS

Literature search
We initiated the systematic retrieval of data from PubMed and Google Scholar from January 2020. The basic data retrieval criteria included key search keywords: “sepsis” and “diagnosis” and “multi-marker.” Then, we excluded “erratum,” “editorial,” and “letter” from the retrieval results. More emphasis was given to recently published articles and references from relevant articles were also consulted.

Study selection
A study was considered suitable and eligible for this review if it was a clinical study conducted in patients diagnosed with sepsis (including severe sepsis and septic shock) according to the sepsis definition and estimating procalcitonin (PCT), presepsin, and pentraxin-3. Furthermore, other review articles and meta-analysis elaborating the role of these parameters in sepsis diagnosis, prognosis, or response to therapy, and multi-marker approaches to sepsis diagnosis were considered. More than 100 articles were found, but those articles published in the last two decades screened for the present review. Out of those, 61 research articles consulted for this critical review [Figure 1].
Flowchart of the study selection process

DISCUSSION
In 2016, several national societies organized a task force conclave, including the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. A new definition of sepsis was proposed, termed as sepsis-3. According to the new proposal, sepsis was defined as a life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection. The new definition abandoned the use of host systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) in the identification of sepsis and eliminated the term severe sepsis. Previously in 1991, a sepsis definition was developed in which SIRS criteria were established. Four SIRS criteria were defined, namely tachycardia (heart rate >90 beats/min), tachypnea (respiratory rate >20 breaths/min), fever or hypothermia (temperature >38 or <36°C), and leukocytosis, leukopenia, or bandemia (white blood cells >12000/mm3, <4000/mm3, or bandemia ≥10%). Patients who met two or more of these criteria were categorized as having SIRS. Subsequently, sepsis was defined as infection or any suspected infection which may lead to the onset of SIRS. Historically, several parameters were initially used for diagnosing sepsis. These included total leukocyte count (TLC), C-reactive protein (CRP), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). TLC and the dependence on the presence of immature cells have already been found to be of meager predictive value. As expertise in dealing with sepsis grew, it became clear that not only the direct pathogen but also an overactive inflammatory response of the host was also responsible for the harmful clinical and deranged laboratory parameters. Since sepsis induces a systemic host response to involve hundreds of mediators, each of these mediators could potentially be used as biomarkers for both diagnosis and prognosis. In a review published in 2010, a detailed discussion was done on around 180 markers including Interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-8, lactate, soluble triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-1 (sTREM-1), and PCT. Figure 2 shows a flow diagram of various biomarkers with their role in sepsis pathogenesis and impact on various systems and their clinical utility.
Flow diagram of various biomarkers with their role in sepsis pathogenesis, impact on various systems, and their clinical utility for diagnosis. PAMPS = Pathogen-associated molecular pattern, DAMPS = Danger-associated molecular pattern, sTREM-1 = Soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor
India, with a population of more than 1.3 billion, is one of the countries with the highest infectious disease burdens in the world. There is a huge variability in the availability of diagnostic assays in India, making the diagnosis of common infections tougher. Due to this reason, the field of sepsis biomarkers attracts a lot of attention, enabling rapid diagnosis of bacterial infections. In addition, rising antibiotic resistance on the Indian subcontinent also beckons the search for biomarkers that would play a role in antibiotic stewardship, thus enabling us to fight this worrisome menace.

C-reactive proteins and highly sensitive-C-reactive protein
Historically, CRP or highly sensitive-CRP (Hs-CRP) has been extensively used as a sepsis biomarker. CRP is an acute-phase reactant produced by the hepatocytes in response to inflammation and tissue damage. It has been seen that the values of CRP can be increased to more than 100 times during any acute injury, including sepsis. The liver begins synthesis of CRP rapidly after a stimulus within 6 h, reaching a peak in about 48 h and having a plasma half-life of approximately 19 h. Since the half-life is constant under all conditions, the serum concentration is mainly determined by the synthesis in the liver. However, there have been concerns regarding its specificity, but there have been several studies where the utility of CRP in the pediatric population has been evaluated with great interest. Sugitharini et al. concluded that the CRP levels were elevated substantially in neonates with sepsis in comparison to those without sepsis. CRP gene polymorphisms have been documented in the European population, with a study evaluating genetic variants in Indian patients also. Generally, hs-CRP which has a maximum analytical sensitivity (<1 mg/L) is used along with other markers like PCT to determine the severity of sepsis and response to treatment. The hs-CRP assays were developed to detect low-grade inflammation which could not be otherwise detected by traditional CRP assay. There is abundant literature in support of hs-CRP’s role in risk stratification in cardiovascular diseases. Even though hs-CRP is an easily measurable analyte, the exact role of hsCRP in the pathophysiology of cardiovascular disorders is unknown. Only a few studies on animal models are available which illustrate this fact. There have been numerous studies which have tried to highlight the fact that increased hs-CRP is inversely correlated with patient outcomes. In the REGARDS (Reasons for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke) trial in America, it was found that high values of hs-CRP are associated with increased risk of sepsis and mortality. It has been shown that hs-CRP has a role in complement activation, inducing a prothrombotic state and increasing inflammatory mediator expression.

Limitations of C-reactive protein and highly sensitive-C-reactive protein
They are nonspecific parameters. Both are expected to be elevated in any inflammatory condition. They have to be interpreted along with other more specific parameters and clinical conditions. Traditional CRP assays had poorer sensitivity which was overcome by the use of hs-CRP. In a study conducted by Bogaty et al., it was demonstrated that more variation in hs-CRP is seen in patients having longer follow-ups. It is widely acknowledged that single or two values of hs-CRP would correctly characterize the underlying inflammatory state.

Procalcitonin
Procalcitonin was first introduced as a potential biomarker for diagnosing sepsis and infection in 1993. PCT is a prohormone consisting of 116 amino acids. It is composed of three constituent peptides: An amino terminus having a 57 amino acid sequence, a terminal glycine containing centrally positioned immature carboxyl-terminus (CT), and a 21-amino acid CT peptide-I. Compared to calcitonin (10 min), PCT has a longer half-life (25–30 h). PCT is synthesized by the parafollicular cells (C-cells) of the thyroid. Apart from the thyroid, it is also synthesized by the neuroendocrine cells of the lung and the intestine. The gene coding for PCT (calcitonin-1 gene) is situated on chromosome 11. There is an increased expression of calcitonin-1 gene in the extrathyroidal tissues throughout the body during bacterial infections. When there is no infection, this overexpression of CALC-1 gene is suppressed. To conclude, the PCT which can be estimated in plasma during infection is not produced by the C-cells of the thyroid and rather by the extrathyroidal tissues. PCT first appears within 2–4 h after a triggering event, reaching a peak value in 12–24 h. After reaching peak levels, the circulating PCT begins to decrease and reaches 50% of its peak value within 1–1½ days. The primary pathological trigger for PCT elevation has been found to be infection. Investigators have identified PCT as a part of the dynamic pro-inflammatory response of the human innate immune system. It was shown that PCT is a potent multiplier of the inflammatory cascade. It has been demonstrated that it induces the expression of surface markers on neutrophils and lymphocytes, increases the production of leukocyte-derived cytokines, and augments the production of nitric oxide (an increased level corresponds with the severity of inflammation). It was believed that compared to any other available sepsis marker, PCT had merits to differentiate between infectious and noninfectious inflammation. Interestingly, PCT also appears to have some merits in differentiating between viral and bacterial infections. Elevated PCT in viral infections may indicate toward the presence of bacterial superinfection in patients.
Resistance to antimicrobials has emerged as a significant factor affecting patient outcomes and overall resources. This calls for strict measures to prevent antibiotic overuse. The potential use of PCT in assisting decision-making about the initiation and duration of antibiotic therapy (antibiotic stewardship) was prospectively studied in many randomized controlled studies. These trials concluded that there was a reduction of prescription of antibiotics ranging from 11% to 74% and the number of days of use of antibiotics was also reduced from 12% to 55%. All published studies on antibiotic stewardship have been found to use similar clinical algorithms, with recommendations based on PCT cutoff ranges.

Limitations of procalcitonin
Surprisingly, nonspecific elevation of PCT has been seen in common noninfectious conditions such as stress, trauma post-surgery, and carcinogenic shock. For this reason, the ability of PCT to differentiate between sepsis and sterile inflammation is better for medical rather than surgical patients. Only scarce and conflicting results related to the value of PCT in systemic fungal infections have been reported. Hence, the importance of PCT being used for the diagnosis of fungal infection is debatable.

Presepsin
CD14 is known to be the receptor of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (complexes. Using the inositol lipid structure, CD14’s CT enables it to attach to the cell membrane. It uses the Toll-like receptor 4 to send the endotoxin signals into the cell nucleus. A cascade of downstream signaling is initiated through the tyrosine-protein kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinases. These enzymes subsequently produce several nuclear transcription factors like nuclear factor-κB, resulting in the release of cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-α and interferon-gamma. A secondary inflammatory cascade is also activated, resulting in stimulation of mononuclear macrophages, neutrophils, and endothelial cells to release more cytokines and cell adhesion molecules. This results in the intensification of the inflammatory response leading to SIRS, disseminated intravascular coagulation, or multiple organ dysfunction syndromes.
There are two forms of CD14, i.e. a membrane-bound form designated by mCD14 and soluble form sCD14. The membrane-bound form has a greater affinity to the lipopolysaccharide present on the cell membrane of monocytes/macrophages and neutrophils. The soluble form is seen in plasma and is produced by cell secretion. The soluble form is further isolated into two types which can be detected in the plasma of healthy individuals in small amounts. They are a 49kD fraction and a 55kD fragment. Soluble CD14 has been shown to play a key role in mediating the immune responses to lipopolysaccharide of CD14-negative cells, e.g. endothelial cells and epithelial cells. The soluble form is broken down by cathepsin D and other proteases in plasma, and the generated N-terminal fragments form the sCD14 subtype (sCD14-ST) is rechristened as presepsin.
Clinical studies have shown that quantitatively sCD14-ST increased significantly in patients with sepsis and septic shock when compared with healthy people, and the change positively correlated with the severity and disease prognosis. It is believed that presepsin is produced in response to bacterial infection, but the exact source of presepsin is still unknown. In comparison to other markers, presepsin appeared to have greater sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of sepsis. Literature also indicates that the levels of presepsin was significantly higher in patients having some sort of infection than in others. According to the data published by Shozushima et al., the levels of presepsin were significantly higher in the severe sepsis group. This value decreased constantly as the infection got milder. From the above data, it can be easily appreciated that there is a gradual increase in presepsin values in each subgroup. When the receiver operator analysis was used to evaluate the value of the four markers (PCT, IL-6, CRP, and presepsin) in diagnosing sepsis, the area under the curve (AUC) of presepsin was substantially higher in comparison to other parameters. With a value of 399 pg/mL of presepsin kept as a cutoff value, the sensitivity of the diagnosis of sepsis was found to be 80.3%, and the specificity was 78.5%. When the cutoff was increased 600 pg/mL, the sensitivity for the diagnosis of sepsis rose to 87.8% and the specificity increased to 81.4%. Even the positive predictive value, 88.6% was significantly high. This fact was further substantiated by Spanuth et al. who estimated the concentration of presepsin in emergency patients at the time of admission. They found that the presepsin values were significantly higher in sepsis and severe sepsis patients. Moreover, the concentration of presepsin positively correlated with the APACHE II and SOFA scores and the results suggested that presepsin may be more useful in the diagnosis of sepsis. Presepsin begins to rise 2 h after the onset of infection and peaks at around 3 h and begins to decline 4–5 h later. This can result in the early administration of antibiotics.
Presepsin has found utility not only as an early marker for diagnosis of sepsis but also for the assessment of sepsis severity and prognosis. In the ALBIOS trial, 100 patients suffering from severe sepsis and septic shock were evaluated and their concentrations of presepsin and PCT were compared. It was found that the median concentration of presepsin (2268 [1145–4305] pg/mL) in nonsurvived cases on the day 1 of admission was significantly higher than in surviving patients. Also from the 7th day onward, the presepsin level of the surviving patients declined significantly. The level of presepsin also correlated with the SOFA score and hemodynamic stability. The 90-day mortality was found to be higher in patients with a high level of presepsin. Presepsin was found to be superior to PCT in the assessment of prognosis using the ROC. Presepsin was found to be better than the currently used markers in assessing mortality risk up to 30 days after the beginning of sepsis.
In cases of neonatal sepsis, it has been documented that conventionally used biomarkers such as PCT and CRP were found to be inadequate; therefore, there is still scope for the introduction of an ideal biomarker. Presepsin has been recently described as having a higher diagnostic accuracy, in terms of AUC value, than PCT and CRP, resulting in more sensitivity in detecting neonatal sepsis, suggesting that presepsin could be a better biomarker in diagnosing early onset sepsis in high-risk neonatal populations.

Limitations of presepsin
The specificity of presepsin was low, as their levels were found to significantly increased in patients with coronary heart disease, heart failure, liver cirrhosis, etc. Since presepsin is associated with LPS present in Gram-negative bacteria, the sensitivity and specificity in Gram-positive bacterial infection are also questionable. Even though presepsin is raised in fungal infection, it was found not to be raised in viral infections.

Pentraxin-3
Pentraxin-3 (PTX3) belongs to the class of acute-phase proteins and is a member of the pentraxin family. This family also contains CRP also known as PTX1 and serum amyloid P also known as PTX2. Even though these biomarkers belong to the same family, there are contrasting structural and functional differences. Compared to short pentraxins such as CRP and serum amyloid P, PTX3 is called long pentraxin. The structure of PTX3 during the entire course of evolution has been highly conserved and is believed to be similar to antibodies that identify and kill pathogens by activating the direct humoral and cellular immune response. Interestingly, it has been found that PTX3 has both pro- and anti-inflammatory properties. PTX3 can either be synthesized by neutrophils once they are stimulated by inflammatory stimulus or can also be synthesized de novo in other cells. In comparison, CRP is produced in the liver through the stimulation of IL-6. PTX3 peak values (200–800 ng/ml) can be reached within 6–8 h, whereas CRP reaches its peak concentration within 2–48 h. In contrast to CRP, PTX3 is not routinely used in daily practice, because it is still awaiting validation in clinical set up and there is a scarcity of availability for routine clinical laboratories.
During the extensive studies done on PTX3, a link between sepsis and increased PTX3 levels has been described by different authors. Using pentraxin, Bastrup-Birk et al. demonstrated that it is possible to differentiate patients with SIRS from healthy controls with high sensitivity and specificity. PTX3 values decrease over time, even in cases with severe sepsis. Jaillon et al. highlighted that not only the absolute serum levels of pentraxin reflect disease severity but also the rate of the decline of the serum levels. To summarize this, it can be said that in patients with severe sepsis, PTX3 serum levels decline slower than in those without severe sepsis. However, opposite to this, in a study conducted by Staubli et al., it was found that there was no clear correlation between disease severity and incidence of SIRS with increased PTX3 levels. If we analyze the literature, it can be highlighted that the performance of PTX3 to predict SIRS and disease severity was weak. This fact makes us wonder whether the value of PTX3 as a marker and predictor of SIRS and disease severity was overestimated by other studies. Since the amount of reliable data appearing for PCT, presepsin, and pentraxin-3 are enough, but still, apart from PCT, the other two parameters are still not used in routine clinical practices [Table 1].
Summary of studies included and their outcomes
Study	Population (number and age)	Objective	Results	Remarks (diagnostics/prognostics)	 	W. Karzai et al. (1997)	n=79 Pediatric group (age not specified)	Assessment of usefulness of PCT in sepsis	PCT values in SIRS (ng/mL): 1.3±0.2 Sepsis (ng/mL): 2.0±0.0 Severe sepsis (ng/mL): 8.7±2.5 Septic shock (ng/mL): 38.6±5.9	PCT appeared to be better than IL-6 and CRP for sepsis diagnosis as it remains elevated for a longer duration	 	DN Gilbert et al. (2014)	n=63 Adult population (age not specified)	Assessment of the usefulness of PCT in comparison to CRP and the role of PCT in assessing patient response to antimicrobial therapy	Viral infection without bacterial infection PCT 0.76±2.3 ng/mL Mixed infection PCT (n=34): 2±5 ng/mL Bacteremic infection PCT (n=9): 19±26 ng/mL	A rapid decrease in PCT level a useful marker in modulating antibiotic therapy and hence preventing the development of resistance	 	Shin Ahn et al. (2011)	n=60 (males) Mean age: 49.4±18.9 years	Comparison of sensitivity and specificity of PCT and CRP in identifying mixed LRTI	Mixed pneumonia PCT and CRP: 3.45 and 14.8 Viral pneumonia PCT and CRP: 0.15 and 4.6 Sensitivity and specificity of CRP >10 mg/dL: 69% and 63% PCT >1.5 ng/mL: 56% and 84% PCT and CRP combine: 50% and 93%	PCT with a lower cutoff was better in differentiating mixed cases of pneumonia	 	C. Clec’h et al. (2006)	n=143 Surgical group (age): 63±14 years Medical group (age): 57±14 years	To assess whether different diagnostic and prognostic cut-off values of PCT should be considered in surgical and in medical patients with septic shock	Surgical group (survivors vs. nonsurvivors) PCT versus Medical group, PCT: 34 and 8.4 ng/mL Surgical patients (best diagnostic cut-off value 9.70 ng/mL): 91.7% sensitivity and 74.2% specificity Medical patients (best diagnostic cutoff value 1.00 ng/mL): 80% sensitivity and 94% specificity	The diagnostic cutoff value of PCT was higher in surgical than in medical patients. Early PCT was of prognostic interest in medical patients	 	S Endo et al. (2012)	n=38, median age: 76 yearsn=77, median age: 75 yearsn=70, median age: 66 years	The clinical usefulness of presepsin for discriminating between bacterial and nonbacterial infections was studied and compared with PCT and IL-6	Presepsin (pg/mL) versus PCT (ng/mL) Systemic bacterial infection: 1579 versus 15.7 Localized bacterial infection: 1168 versus 3.36 Noninfectious disease: 312 versus 0.02	The sensitivity of presepsin was maximum in comparison to PCT and IL-6	 	Shozushima et al. (2011)	n=41 (25 men and 16 women) Median age: 62±19 years	Comparison of presepsin and PCT in local infection, SIRS and severe sepsis	Presepsin (pg/mL) values in Localized infection: 721.0±611.3 SIRS: 333.5±130.6 Sepsis: 817.9±572.7 Severe sepsis: 1992.9±1509.2 ROC analysis AUC of presepsin: 0.845 AUC of PCT (PCT, 0.652), C-reactive protein (CRP, 0.815), and interleukin 6 (IL6, 0.672) At cut-off 415 pg/mL presepsin sensitivity and specificity 80.1% and 81%	A higher value of presepsin is associated with a greater sepsis severity	 	Spanuth et al. (2011)	n=140 (49 females, 91 males) Mean age: 68 years	On admission evaluation of presepsin in healthy patients and comparison of levels in sepsis and severe sepsis	Presepsin in SIRS: 2516.4 pg/mL Sepsis: 2866.7 pg/mL Septic shock: 3167.1 ng/mL ROC comparison of PCT/presepsin with AUC is 0.6/0.8 with sensitivity and specificity 93.3/72.5%–60/80%	Presepsin significantly high in septic patients. With increase in sepsis severity, higher the presepsin vaue	 	ALBIOS Trial (2013)	n=997	Assessment of presepsin as a prognostic marker in comparison to PCT	Median presepsin values of patients at day-1 of Nonsurvived: 2268 pg/mL Survived: 1184 pg/mL and values declined subsequently, The values in survived patients declined on day 7 and the values correlated with the SOFA score	Prespsin was better for prognostication	 	Raija Uusitalo-Seppala (2013)	n=537 emergency room patients divided into five groups Median age: 64 years	The usefulness of PTX3 in diagnosis and risk stratification of sepsis in emergency	Nonseptic patients (n=59): PTX3: 2.6 ng/mL Bacterial infection “+,” SIRS negative (n=67): PTX3: 4.4 ng/mL SIRS present, bacterial infection absent (n=54): PTX3: 5.0 ng/mL Sepsis (n=308): PTX3: 6.1 ng/mL Severe sepsis (n=49): PTX3: 16.7 ng/mL: PTX3 AUC of ROC analysis severe sepsis: 0.73 (95% CI 0.66–0.81, P 0.001) PTX3 at a cut-off level 14.1 ng/mL (optimal cut-off value for severe sepsis) 63% sensitivity and 80% specificity. At a cut-off level 7.7 ng/mL (optimal cut-off value for case fatality) 70% sensitivity and 63% specificity in predicting case fatality on day 28	A high PTX3 level on hospital admission predicts severe sepsis and case fatality in patients with suspected infection.	 	Kim et al. (2017)	n=157 Median age: 70	Assessment of multimarker approach for sepsis diagnosis	AUC for multi maker approach (95% CI), 0.769 (0.695–0.833) versus 0.615 (0.535–0.692) individual markers	Multi-marker approach could be beneficial for optimised management of patients with sepsis	 	Lars Ljungstrom et al. (2017)	n=1572 Age: >18 years	Studied use of a combination of biomarkers with their individual performances in sepsis	Diagnosis of bacterial sepsis based on sepsis-3 criteria, the AUC for PCT (0.68; 95% CI 0.65–0.71) was comparable to the AUCs for the composite biomarkers	Composite parameters showed greater sensitivity than individual markers	 	Mohmmad Basri et al. (2016)	n=239	The purpose of the study was to quantify the ability of PCT and IL-6 to differentiate noninfectious SIRS and sepsis and to predict hospital mortality	68% of patients were having sepsis. Dynamic measurement of PCT and IL6 on days 1, 2 and 3 of ICU admission Value of PCT at the time of admission in the diagnosis of sepsis (AUC of 0.63 [0.55–0.71]), and value of IL-6 for predicting of mortality, had an AUC of 0.70 [0.62–0.78]) Kaplan Meier survival analysis Highest 30 day mortality in third quartile (PCT N 22.1 ng/mL and IL-6 N 1442 pg/mL) and lowest quartile (PCT b 2.83 ng/mL and IL-6 b 194 pg/mL	Value of PCT measured on ICU admission diagnostic of sepsis, and IL-6 predict mortality
PCT=Procalcitonin, IL-6=Interleukin-6, SIRS=Systemic inflammatory response syndrome, ICU=Intensive care unit, AUC=Area under the curve, CRP=C-reactive protein, PTX3=Pentraxin-3, CI=Confidence interval, ROC=Receiver operating characteristic, LRTI=Lower respiratory tract infection

Limitations of pentraxin-3
Pentraxin-3 belongs to the family of long pentraxin including CRP. These are acute phase reactants which can be elevated in any acute inflammatory condition and hence is nonspecific. In a study conducted by Siguan Liu et al., it was found that pentraxin-3 was not found to be elevated in culture-negative sepsis.

Multi-marker approach
Since there have been plenty of markers that have been evaluated, a multi-marker approach toward diagnosis is the way forward. In a study conducted by Kim et al., they hypothesized that using multiple markers together would predict mortality. They studied PCT, presepsin, and galectin-3. In this study, they highlighted the prognostic utility of PCT, presepsin, galectin-3, and their utility in combinations in sepsis patients. They also tried combining these biomarkers with clinical variables, like the SOFA score. It was found that if the collective score cutoff values of these parameters increased from 0 to 5, the 30-day mortality increased sequentially. Hence, they concluded that the multi-marker approach using PCT, presepsin, and galectin-3 is useful for the prognosis and prediction in septic patients. In another study done by Lars Ljungstrom et al., the usefulness of diagnostic accuracy of PCT, neutrophil-lymphocyte count ratio (NLCR), CRP, and lactate used in combination was used in patients with suspected bacterial sepsis. Using discriminant analysis, two groups of biomarkers consisting of combinations of conventionally used biomarkers were established. One group included three biomarkers (NLCR, CRP, and lactate), and another included four (PCT, NLCR, CRP, and lactate). The diagnostic performances of the composite biomarkers and the individual biomarkers were compared using receiver operator analysis. The results showed that for diagnosis of severe bacterial sepsis or septic shock based on the Sepsis-2 criteria, the AUCs for both sets of composite biomarkers were significantly greater than those of the single biomarkers. Mohd Basri Mat Nor et al. concluded that PCT measured on ICU admission was diagnostic of sepsis, and IL-6 was predictive of mortality. Artificial intelligence-based algorithms have been found to be more robust in comparison to traditional scoring systems in risk assessment and outcome prediction.

Limitations of the study
We have mainly focussed on three parameters (PCT, presepsin, and PTX3) that have been current favorites in use for sepsis diagnosis, so other parameters and molecular markers have not been discussed in detail.

Concluding remarks and future perspectives
There have been numerous markers that have been studied for their utility in diagnosis and to predict outcomes in sepsis patients only a few like PCT have actually made an impact. A lot of the biomarkers are not considered due to a lack of sensitivity and method automation, which will speed up the process and play a key role in sepsis diagnosis. Theoretically, a multi-marker approach appears to be very useful, but still, a lot of work needs to be done to come up with a panel of such parameters. Artificial intelligence-based algorithms could play important role in risk assessment and outcome prediction in sepsis. In future scenarios, omics-based technologies may hold the key to sepsis diagnosis. They provide more accurate pathophysiological insights by studying the structure, function, and dynamics of the genome, transcriptome, metabolome, and proteome within different individuals which is unique and enable us to provide more precise individualized treatment.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
Epidemiology of adult-population sepsis in India: A single center 5 year experience
Severe sepsis epidemiology: Sampling, selection, and society
Epidemiology of severe sepsis in the United States: Analysis of incidence, outcome, and associated costs of care
Adult-population incidence of severe sepsis in Australian and New Zealand intensive care units
Epidemiology of sepsis and infection in ICU patients from an international multicentre cohort study
The epidemiology of severe sepsis in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, 1996 to 2004: Secondary analysis of a high quality clinical database, the ICNARC case mix programme database
Sepsis in European intensive care units: Results of the SOAP study
Epidemiology of infections in a medical ICU in India
Epidemiology, risk factors and outcome of nosocomial infections in a Respiratory Intensive Care Unit in North India
Epidemiological study of prevalence, determinants, and outcomes of infections in medical ICU at a tertiary care hospital in India
Nosocomial infections in the medical ICU: A retrospective study highlighting their prevalence, microbiological profile and impact on ICU stay and mortality
Sepsis in India: A Major Threat to Public Health
SIRS, qSOFA and new sepsis definition
Biomarkers for sepsis: A review with special attention to India
Sepsis biomarkers: A review
Census of India Website: Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India
Blood culture in India: A proposal for a national programme for early detection of sepsis
Metabolic and scintigraphic studies of radioiodinated human C-reactive protein in health and disease
Inflammatory mediators of systemic inflammation in neonatal sepsis
Common variants in CRP and LEPR influence high sensitivity C-reactive protein levels in North Indians
The clinical utility of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein in cardiovascular disease and the potential implication of JUPITER on current practice guidelines
High-sensitivity C-reactive protein and risk of sepsis
Time variability of C-reactive protein: Implications for clinical risk stratification
High serum procalcitonin concentrations in patients with sepsis and infection
Procalcitonin – A new indicator of the systemic response to severe infections
Ubiquitous expression of the calcitonin-i gene in multiple tissues in response to sepsis
Physiology and genetics of procalcitonin
Update on procalcitonin measurements
Procalcitonin as a biomarker in respiratory tract infection
Procalcitonin in sepsis and systemic inflammation: A harmful biomarker and a therapeutic target
Role of procalcitonin and C-reactive protein in differentiation of mixed bacterial infection from 2009 H1N1 viral pneumonia
Procalcitonin algorithms for antibiotic therapy decisions: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials and recommendations for clinical algorithms
Procalcitonin for diagnosis of infection and guide to antibiotic decisions: Past, present and future
Differential diagnostic value of procalcitonin in surgical and medical patients with septic shock
Could procalcitonin be a predictive biological marker in systemic fungal infections? Study of 14 cases
New approaches to sepsis: Molecular diagnostics and biomarkers
Structure, function and modulation of actin-related protein 2/3 complex
p38 MAPK signal is necessary for TNF-alpha gene expression in RAW cells
Characterization of cytokine/chemokine profiles of severe acute respiratory syndrome
Presepsin (sCD14-ST): Development and evaluation of one-step ELISA with a new standard that is similar to the form of presepsin in septic patients
Soluble CD14 subtype presepsin (sCD14-ST) and lipopolysaccharide binding protein (LBP) in neonatal sepsis: New clinical and analytical perspectives for two old biomarkers
Parameters influencing membrane CD14 expression and soluble CD14 levels in sepsis
TLR2, TLR4, CD14, CD11B, and CD11C expressions on monocytes surface and cytokine production in patients with sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock
Usefulness of presepsin in the diagnosis of sepsis in a multicenter prospective study
Principal results of the Japanese trial to assess optimal systolic blood pressure in elderly hypertensive patients (JATOS)
Usefulness of presepsin (sCD14-ST) measurements as a marker for the diagnosis and severity of sepsis that satisfied diagnostic criteria of systemic inflammatory response syndrome
Diagnostic and prognostic performance of PATHFAST Presepsin in patients with SIRS and early sepsis
Presepsin as a novel sepsis biomarker
Presepsin (sCD14-ST) in preoperative diagnosis of abdominal sepsis
Diagnostic value and prognostic evaluation of Presepsin for sepsis in an emergency department
C-reactive protein (CRP) as a single biomarker for diagnosis of neonatal sepsis: A comprehensive meta-analysis
The diagnostic accuracy of presepsin in neonatal sepsis: A meta-analysis
Long pentraxins: An emerging group of proteins with diverse functions
Pentraxins in humoral innate immunity
The dual complexity of PTX3 in health and disease: A balancing act?
The humoral pattern recognition receptor PTX3 is stored in neutrophil granules and localizes in extracellular traps
PTX3, a prototypical long pentraxin, is an early indicator of acute myocardial infarction in humans
Pentraxin-3 serum levels are associated with disease severity and mortality in patients with systemic inflammatory response syndrome
The role of CRP and Pentraxin 3 in the prediction of systemic inflammatory response syndrome and death in acute pancreatitis
Pentraxin 3 (PTX3) is associated with severe sepsis and fatal disease in emergency room patients with suspected infection: A prospective cohort study
Pentraxin 3 as a prognostic biomarker in patients with systemic inflammation or infection
Multi-marker approach using procalcitonin, presepsin, galectin-3, and soluble suppression of tumorigenicity 2 for the prediction of mortality in sepsis
Diagnostic accuracy of procalcitonin, neutrophil-lymphocyte count ratio, C-reactive protein, and lactate in patients with suspected bacterial sepsis
The diagnostic ability of procalcitonin and interleukin-6 to differentiate infectious from noninfectious systemic inflammatory response syndrome and to predict mortality
Precision medicine for the treatment of sepsis: Recent advances and future prospects
Circulating presepsin (soluble CD14 subtype) as a marker of host response in patients with severe sepsis or septic shock: data from the multicenter, randomized ALBIOS trial